ISSN 1096-8857 © CNS
Cognitive Neuroscience Society, c/o Center for Mind and Brain, University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616

Table of Contents
CNS Committees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Schedule Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Federal Funding Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Poster Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Awards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Graduate Students Present . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
CNS Student Association Social Night . . . . . . . . . . 8
General Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Exhibitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Symposium Sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Slide Sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Poster Session A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Poster Session B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Poster Session C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
Poster Session D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
Poster Session E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
Poster Session F . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
Poster Session G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 203
Poster Session H . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
Poster Session I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 260
Author Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 288
Floor Plans. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302
Advertisers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 304

The CNS Program Committee reserves the right to change the meeting program at any time without notice.
This program was correct at the time of print.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society
2010 Committees
Governing Board
Carol Colby, Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh
Marta Kutas, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego
Helen Neville, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Michael I. Posner, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D.,
University of California, Santa Barbara (ex officio)
George R. Mangun, Ph.D.,
University of California, Davis (ex officio)
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D.,
University of Michigan (ex officio)

Program Committee
Chair: Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Randy L. Buckner, Ph.D., Harvard University
Peter Hagoort, Ph.D., University of Nijmegen
Liz Phelps, Ph.D., New York University
Lorraine K. Tyler, Ph.D., University of Cambridge
Anthony Wagner, Ph.D., Stanford University

Poster Committee
Chair: Reiko Graham, Ph.D., Texas State University
Nadine Gaab, Ph.D., Harvard Medical School
Fumiko Hoeft, Ph.D., Stanford University
Irene Kan, Ph.D., Villanova University
Jonathan Fugelsang, Ph.D., University of Waterloo
Chris Westbury, Ph.D., University of Alberta
Stephanie Ortigue, Ph.D., Syracuse University
Jelena Ristic, Ph.D., McGill University
Dante Picchioni, Ph.D,
Walter Reed Army Institute for Research
Xu Ciu, Ph.D., Stanford University

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Slide Session Committee
Chair: Roberto Cabeza, Ph.D., Duke University
Silvia Bunge, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley
Marty Woldorff, Ph.D., Duke University
Kevin Oschner, Ph.D., Columbia University
Tamara Swaab, Ph.D., University of California, Davis
Kevin Wilson, Ph.D., Gettysburg College
Kalina Christoff, Ph.D., University of British Columbia

Young Investigator Awards Committee
Chair: Charan Ranganath, Ph.D.,
University of California, Davis
Sabine Kastner, Ph.D., Princeton University
Silvia Bunge, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley
Roberto Cabeza, Ph.D., Duke University
Karl Friston, Ph.D., University College London
Steve Petersen, Ph.D., Washington University

Founding Committee (1994)
Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D.,
University of California, Santa Barbara
George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California, Davis
Steven Pinker, Ph.D., Harvard University
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Art Shimamura, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley

CNS Staff
Kate Tretheway, Executive Director
Sangay Wangmo, Administrative Assistant
James Elliot, Onsite Membership

TM Events, Inc., Meeting Staff
Tara Miller, Event Director
Joan Carole, Exhibits Manager
Linda Hacker, Onsite Manager
Ariana Luchsinger, Monitoring Manager
Brenna Miller, Volunteer Manager
Renee Smith, Registration Manager
Shauney Wilson, Submissions Manager
Jeff Wilson, Website & Program Manager

1

Saturday, April 17, 2010
8:30 am - 4:45 pm
12:00 - 5:00 pm
1:00 - 4:00 pm
2:30 - 7:30 pm
2:30 - 7:30 pm
3:00 - 5:00 pm
5:00 - 6:00 pm
5:00 - 7:30 pm
5:30 - 7:30 pm
7:30 pm

Satellite Meeting "Prevention of Neurodegenerative Disease:
Recent Findings and Future Directions," Salon Le Portage (Lobby Level)
Exhibitor Check-In, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
Satellite Meeting "Brain - Computer Interface Workshop," Fundy Room
Pre-Paid Registration Check-In, Salon La Verriere (Lobby Level)
Onsite Registration, Registration Counter (Convention Level)
Slide session 1, Westmount Ballroom
Slide Session 2, Outremont Ballroom
Welcome Reception, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
Exhibits on Display, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
Poster Session A, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
CNS Student Association Social Night, Hilton Hotel Bar - Bistro Bar Le Belvedere

Sunday, April 18, 2010
7:30 am - 7:00 pm
8:00 - 8:30 am
8:00 - 10:00 am
8:00 am - 7:00 pm
9:00 - 9:40 am
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
12:00 - 1:00 pm
1:00 - 3:00 pm
2:30 - 3:00 pm
3:00 - 4:00 pm
4:00 - 5:00 pm
5:00 - 7:00 pm

2

Onsite & Pre-Paid Registration Check-In, Registration Counter (Convention Level)
Continental Breakfast, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
Poster Session B, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
Exhibits on Display, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
YIA Special Lecture 1: Lila Davachi, Westmount Ballroom
Symposium Session 1, Westmount Ballroom
Slide Session 3, Outremont Ballroom
Lunch Break
Poster Session C, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
Coffee Service, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
Announcement of the Young Investigator Awards, Montréal Ballroom
George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience: Dr. Steven Pinker, Montréal Ballroom
GAM Reception, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
Poster Session D, Fontaine Exhibit Hall

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Schedule Overview

Monday, April 19, 2010
7:30 am - 7:00 pm
8:00 - 8:30 am
8:00 - 10:00 am
8:00 am - 7:00 pm
9:00 - 9:40 am
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
12:00 - 1:00 pm
1:00 - 3:00 pm
2:30 - 3:00 pm
3:00 - 5:00 pm
5:00 - 7:00 pm

Onsite & Pre-Paid Registration Check-In, Registration Counter (Convention Level)
Continental Breakfast, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
Poster Session E, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
Exhibits on Display, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
YIA Special Lecture 2: Kara Federmeier, Westmount Ballroom
Symposium Session 2, Westmount Ballroom
Slide Session 4, Outremont Ballroom
Lunch Break
Federal Funding Opportunities, Westmount Ballroom (see below)
Poster Session F, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
Coffee Service, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
Symposium Session 3, Westmount Ballroom
Slide Presentation 5, Outremont Ballroom
Poster Session G, Fontaine Exhibit Hall

Tuesday, April 20, 2010
8:00 am - 5:00 pm
8:00 - 8:30 am
8:00 - 10:00 am
8:00 am - 5:00 pm
9:00 - 9:40 am
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
12:00 - 1:00 pm
1:00 - 3:00 pm
2:30 - 3:00 pm
3:00 - 5:00 pm

Onsite & Pre-Paid Registration Check-In, Registration Counter (Convention Level)
Continental Breakfast, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
Poster Session H, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
Exhibits on Display, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
YIA Special Lecture 3: Adam Anderson, Westmount Ballroom
Symposium Session 4, Westmount Ballroom
Slide Session 6, Outremont Ballroom
Lunch Break
Symposium Session 5, Westmount Ballroom
Slide Session 7, Outremont Ballroom
Coffee Service, Fontaine Exhibit Hall
Poster Session I, Fontaine Exhibit Hall

Federal Funding Opportunities
Federal Funding: Training and Research Grant Opportunities
Monday, April 19, 12:00 - 1:00 pm, Westmount Ballroom
Kathy Mann Keopke, NICHD/NIH; Kathy Anderson NIMH/NIH; Lynne Bernstein, NSF
This presentation will highlight current federal training, career development, and research
funding opportunities available to CNS investigators. Program Directors representing the
NIH and NSF will present an overview of relevant funding opportunities at each agency, as
well as a brief overview of the grant application, review, and funding processes, providing
hints for successful grant writing along the way. Come learn how to advance your research
with federal support!

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

3

Poster Schedule

to you at the scheduled time. The doors will close and lock
for the evening at 7:45 pm on Saturday, 7:30 pm on Sunday and Monday, and 5:15 pm on Tuesday. There is no reentry after this time. Do not leave personal items in the
poster room.

Poster sessions are scheduled on Saturday, April 17th,
Sunday, April 18th, Monday, April 19th, and Tuesday,
April 20th. The presenting author should be present at
least one full hour during the assigned session and the
other authors should be present during the remaining
time to be available to answer any questions.
The poster sessions are in the Fontaine Exhibit Hall on the
Convention Level of Hilton Montréal Bonaventure Hotel.
Badges are required in the Exhibit Hall at all times. The
doors to the poster room will open at 5:00 pm on Saturday
and at 7:30 am on Sunday - Tuesday for poster presenters
only; you may post your materials on the board assigned
Poster
Date &
Session Time

4

The following times indicate when you are expected to
set-up and take-down your poster. Note that we are asking you to leave your poster up for longer than the formal
session. This will allow people to look at your poster for
an extended time period. You should plan to be at your
poster from the start until the end of your formal session.
Please note that any posters not removed by "Take-down
Ends" time will be discarded.

Set-up
Begins

Session
Begins

Session
Ends

Takedown
Ends

Topics Being Presented

A

Saturday,
April 17

5:00 pm

5:30 pm

7:30 pm

7:45 pm

Emotion & Social: Person Perception
Emotion & Social: Self Perception
Language: Lexicon
Long-Term Memory: Other
Long-Term Memory: Semantic

B

Sunday,
April 18

7:30 am

8:00 am

10:00 am

11:30 am

Attention: Auditory
Attention: Development & Aging
Attention: Multisensory
Emotion & Social: Development & Aging
Emotion & Social: Other
Executive Processes: Development & Aging
Executive Processes: Goal Maintenance & Switching
Executive Processes: Other

C

Sunday,
April 18

11:30 am

1:00 pm

3:00 pm

3:30 pm

Attention: Spatial
Emotion & Social: Development & Aging
Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions
Perception & Action: Multisensory

D

Sunday,
April 18

3:30 pm

5:00 pm

7:00 pm

7:30 pm

Language: Other
Perception & Action: Audition
Thinking: Decision Making

E

Monday,
April 19

7:30 am

8:00 am

10:00 am

11:30 am

Emotion & Social: Emotional Responding
Executive Processes: Monitoring & Inhibitory Control
Executive Processes: Working Memory
Language: Other

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Schedule
Poster
Date &
Session Time

Set-up
Begins

Session
Begins

Session
Ends

Takedown
Ends

Topics Being Presented

F

Monday,
April 19

11:30 am

1:00 pm

3:00 pm

3:30 pm

Executive Processes: Monitoring & Inhibitory Control
Executive Processes: Other
Long-Term Memory: Episodic
Long-Term Memory: Skill Learning
METHODS: Neuroimaging
METHODS: Other
Neuroanatomy
Other
Perception & Action: Motor Control
Thinking: Other
Thinking: Problem Solving

G

Monday,
April 19

3:30 pm

5:00 pm

7:00 pm

7:30 pm

Emotion & Social: Development & Aging
Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions
Language: Semantic
METHODS: Electrophysiology
Perception & Action: Development & Aging
Thinking: Development & Aging
Thinking: Other
Thinking: Problem Solving

H

Tuesday,
April 20

7:30 am

8:00 am

10:00 am

12:30 pm

Attention: Nonspatial
Attention: Other
Executive Processes: Development & Aging
Executive Processes: Monitoring & Inhibitory Control
Long-Term Memory: Development & Aging
Perception & Action: Vision
Thinking: Reasoning

I

Tuesday,
April 20

12:30 pm

3:00 pm

5:00 pm

5:15 pm

Language: Development & Aging
Language: Syntax
Long-Term Memory: Episodic
Perception & Action: Other
Perception & Action: Vision

Save the Date
CNS 2011
will be held
April 2-5, 2011
in San Francisco, California

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

5

16th Annual George A. Miller Prize
in Cognitive Neuroscience

Young Investigator Award
in Cognitive Neuroscience

Sunday, April 18, 3:00 - 4:00 pm, Montréal Ballroom
Reception to follow, 4:00 - 5:00 pm, Fontaine Exhibit Hall

Sunday, April 18, 2010, 3:00 - 4:00 pm, Montréal Ballroom
Immediately prior to the George A. Miller Award in Cognitive Neuroscience Lecture.

The Cognitive Neuroscience Society is pleased to
announce the recipient of the 2010 George A. Miller Prize
in Cognitive Neuroscience:

Dr. Steven Pinker, Harvard University
“Language as a Window into Human Nature”
The George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience was
established in 1995 by the Cognitive Neuroscience Society
and the James S. McDonnell Foundation to honor the
career contributions of George A. Miller to cognitive neuroscience. The first 10 years of the prize were funded by
generous support from the James S. McDonnell Foundation.
The prize is awarded to the nominee whose career is characterized by distinguished and sustained scholarship and
research at the cutting-edge of cognitive neuroscience.
Extraordinary innovation and high impact on international scientific thinking should be a hallmark of the recipient's work.
Each year a call for nominations for the George A. Miller
Prize is made to the membership of the society. The recipient is selected by a committee with the approval of the
society. The prize winner attends the annual meeting of
the Cognitive Neuroscience Society and delivers the
George A. Miller Lecture.

6

The Cognitive Neuroscience Society is pleased to
announce the recipients of the 2010 Young Investigator
Awards:

Kara Federmeier, University of Illinois
Adam Anderson, University of Toronto
The Young Investigator Awards in Cognitive Neuroscience recognizes outstanding contributions by scientists
early in their careers. Two awardees are named each year
by the Award Committee, and are honored at the Annual
meeting of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society. Each
award includes $500 to be used by the awardees toward
travel costs to the meeting, or for any other purpose. YIA
awardees give a 30 minute talk at the CNS meeting.
A third YIA Special Lecture has been scheduled this year
to allow Lila Davachi to speak. Lila was one of last year's
YIA winners, but was unable to attend the 2009 meeting.

YIA Special Lecture 1: Lila Davachi, New York University
(2009 YIA Winner)
Sunday, April 18, 9:00 - 9:40 am, Westmount Ballroom

Associative Memory Formation and Consolidation
How is experience transformed into memory? And how
do memories stabilize over time? I will present evidence
that elements of our experience become rapidly integrated
into memories through processes supported by the hippocampal system. Evidence suggests that these initial
memory traces subsequently become integrated into a distributed cortical system both during offline rest and
online task performance. Further, hippocampal-cortical
interactions during post- encoding awake rest and during
conscious reactivation predict later associative memory
performance, suggesting not only that memories become

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Awards

distributed over time but that this transformation is beneficial to memory stability.

YIA Special Lecture 3: Adam Anderson, University of
Toronto

YIA Special Lecture 2: Kara Federmeier, University of
Illinois

Tuesday, April 20, 9:00 - 9:40 am, Westmount Ballroom

Monday, April 19, 9:00 - 9:40 am, Westmount Ballroom

A (micro)volt of comprehension: What electrophysiology
reveals about the processing of meaning
In only hundreds of milliseconds, the brain of an experienced language user can analyze a complex, often ambiguous perceptual stimulus -- that is, a spoken, written, or
signed word -- and link that stimulus to meaning.
Although a long-standing view in psycholinguistics posits
that word recognition is largely feed-forward and impervious to context, our work has shown instead that the
comprehension system uses context information to predict semantic and even perceptual features of likely
upcoming words. The fact that some of its features may be
active before a word actually appears is likely an important part of what allows meaning processing to be as fast
and effective as it usually is. However, prediction also
appears susceptible to age- related deterioration and,
when incorrect, can have processing consequences.
Intriguingly, our research suggests that the brain might
use both predictive and more bottom-up processing strategies in parallel, distributed across the left and right cerebral hemispheres. In particular, we have shown that
whereas the right hemisphere processes language inputs
in a feedforward manner, the left is more likely to generate predictions, perhaps because left hemisphere comprehension mechanisms are integrated with language
production mechanisms. Overall, electrophysiological
data suggest that meaning is accessed through a stimuluselicited, temporally-delimited process that binds neural
activity across a distributed, multimodal brain network,
and that there are multiple pathways to comprehension.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotions enhance the vividness of perception and memory
Highly emotional events are thought to enhance memory
consolidation, resulting in enhanced subjective vividness
in later memory. A series of convergent psychophysical,
electrophysiological, and functional magnetic resonance
imaging investigations examined whether this enhanced
mnemonic vividness reflects in part a special vividness
during initial perceptual experience. Using a psychophysical magnitude estimation procedure, we found that with
increasing emotional arousal, images were perceived as
increasingly perceptually vivid, despite equivalence in
computational metrics of bottom up physical salience as
well as after controlling for eye movements as a measure
of overt attention. Enhanced perceptual vividness was
associated with enhanced electrophysiological activity
over the occipital cortex within 200 ms of stimulus onset.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging revealed a potential site of this electrophysiological activity, with
enhanced BOLD response in the lateral occipital cortex
(LOC) associated with more arousing and vividly perceived images. The left dorsal amygdala- substantia
innominata (SI) correlated specifically with perceptual
vividness related to subjective-emotional but not objective-physical salience. Finally, memory vividness in a 1week delayed recognition test was similarly mediated by
amygdala-SI and LOC recruitment, with additional
engagement of the hippocampus. These findings suggest
that the "flash" of highly emotional 'flashbulb memories'
reflects their phenomenological salience. This phenomenological salience is related to a perceptual cortical-motivational subcortical circuit that casts perceptual and
mnemonic experience in a special light.

7

GSP Awards

2010 Award Recipients

Seven abstracts are chosen each year to receive the Graduate Students Present (GSP) award. Winners are awarded a
$500 travel award and identified as GSP winners in the
meeting program.

Congratulations to the following winners of the 2010 GSP
Award.

GSP presentations are specially-recognized slide presentations that are scheduled and presented with the topically
organized slide sessions. As with standard slide presentations, each GSP student first author is given 15 minutes to
present and discuss his or her research findings.

Molly Crockett, University of Cambridge, UK
Category: Emotion & Social

Stephen M. Emrich, University of Toronto, Canada
Category: Attention

Evelien Heyselaar, Queen's University, Canada
Category: Executive Processes

Carolyn Parkinson, Dartmouth College, USA
Category: Thinking

John Rudoy, Northwestern University, USA
Category: Long-Term Memory

Kristof Strijkers, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Spain
Category: Language

Sara Fabbri, University of Trento, Italy
Category: Perception & Action

CNS Students Association Social Night
Saturday, April 17, 7:30 pm, Hilton Hotel Bar - Bistro Bar Le Belvedere
Come and meet other students from the Cognitive Neuroscience Society and let's explore the city!
All students of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society are welcome to join us at the Hilton Hotel Bar - Bistro Bar Le
Belvedere at 7:30 pm on Saturday, April 17th (after the poster session). Please wear your name-tags so other students can easily identify you. We will introduce everyone to each other and get acquainted, and around 8:30 pm
we will head out to a local bar/restaurant.
Please note that this is not a funded event and although there is no entrance fee for any of the places we are going
to, you will have to pay for your own drinks and/or dinner.
Looking forward to you meeting you in Montréal!
CNSSA Executives
Sign up for the CNSSA Facebook Group at http://www.facebook.com/#!/group.php?gid=47806251696

8

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Abstract Book

Business Center

You will find the abstract book in your bag. One copy of
the printed program is available to each attendee. Please
check in with the Registration Counter on the convention
floor of the hotel if you would like a second copy.

The Business Center is self-serve, 24hr, credit card operated (with access using your hotel room key), and is
located in the Lobby next to the front desk. It offers full
business services including fax, copying, computer and
Internet access.

The program was assembled from a total of 1193 submissions. Presented are 5 symposia, 7 graduate student presentation awards, 49 slides and 1130 posters.
Every endeavor has been made to produce an accurate
program. If you are presenting at the conference, please
confirm your presentation times as contained within this
program.

Catering
Catering will be available during the conference and is
included in the registration fee. Please refer to the table
below for the catering times. All food events are in the
Fontaine Exhibit Hall.

Audiovisual Equipment for Talks
LCD projectors (e.g., for PowerPoint presentations) will
be provided in all rooms where spoken sessions are
scheduled; however, computers will NOT be provided.
Presenters must bring their own computers and set them
up BEFORE the start of the session in which they are presenting. Facilities will be provided to allow several computers to be connected to the LCD projector in a room.
Presenters are strongly encouraged to arrive in their
scheduled symposium room a minimum of 30 minutes
before their talks so that they know how to set up their
equipment.

Automatic Teller Machines (ATM) & Banks
An ATM is located in the hotel lobby near the gift shop.
Foreign currency is available through the front desk while
full banking facilities can be found at Place Ville-Marie
(underground access).

Baggage Check
For those staying at the Hilton Montréal Bonaventure
Hotel, assistance with luggage, packages and other carryon's, is located with the Concierge, next to the front desk.

Receptions

Saturday
April 17

Sunday
April 18

Welcome
Reception
5:00 pm 6:00 pm

GAM
Reception
4:00 pm 5:00 pm

Monday
April 19

Tuesday
April 20

Breakfasts

8:00 am 8:30 am

8:00 am 8:30 am

8:00 am 8:30 am

Coffee
Breaks

2:30 pm 3:00 pm

2:30 pm 3:00 pm

2:30 pm 3:00 pm

Certificate of Attendance
To receive a Certificate of Attendance please visit the registration desk. If you require any amendments, we will be
happy to email/mail a copy after the meeting. See also
Receipts.

Chair People
Please ensure that you are available in your presentation
room at least thirty minutes before the start of the session.
Persons chairing sessions are asked to keep the talks on
time.

A coat check will also available on the convention floor, in
front of the Mont-Royal room, for a small fee.
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

9

General Information

Concierge

Hotel Restaurants

The Hilton Montréal Bonaventure Hotel Concierge is
located in the Lobby next to the front desk. The concierge
can assist you with car rentals, information about the
Montréal Underground, maps, restaurant reservations,
flight schedule confirmation, taxi and shuttle service,
tourist attractions, and theater, concert, and event tickets.

Disclaimer
The Convention Committee reserves the right to change
the meeting program at any time without notice. Please
note this program is correct at time of print.

Duplication/Recording
Photography, audiotaping, video recording, digital taping
or any other form of duplication is strictly prohibited in
the sessions and poster areas.

Exhibit Hall
The Conference Exhibit is located in Fontaine Exhibit Hall
on the Convention Level of the Hilton Montréal Bonaventure Hotel. Located in this room are the posters, exhibit
booths, and catering. The Exhibit Hall is open at the following times:
Saturday, April 17
Sunday, April 18
Monday, April 19
Tuesday, April 20

5:00-7:30 pm
8:00 am - 7:00 pm
8:00 am - 7:00 pm
8:00 am - 5:00 pm

The exhibit hall will be locked promptly at the end of each
day. There is no admittance until the following day.

Future Meetings
Please join us for the 2011 annual meeting in San Francisco, April 2nd-5th. We welcome ideas for the location of
the 2012 meeting.

Hotel
The Hilton Montréal Bonaventure Hotel is our exclusive
Hotel for the CNS 2010 Annual Meeting and where all
CNS 2010 meeting events will be held.
Hilton Montréal Bonaventure Hotel, 900 de La Gauchetière Ouest (West), Montréal, Canada H5A 1E4
With 2.5 acres of landscaped gardens, stream and brook,
Hilton Montréal Bonaventure Hotel is a unique urban
resort hotel in downtown Montréal, Canada. Free WiFi
internet service is available in the Lobby. The hotel is
directly connected to the underground city and subway.

10

Le Castillon, one of Montréal's fine dining institutions, is
located off the hotel lobby. Breakfast is served daily from
6:30 - 11:00 am, Monday-Saturday or 6:30 - 10:00 am on
Sunday. Brunch is served on Sunday from 11:00 am - 3:00
pm. Lunch is served daily from noon to 2:00 pm.
Le Belvedere Bistro Bar is nestled in the lobby center.
Ideal location to meet with friends or colleagues for cocktail hour or a light meal from the a la carte menu. Open
daily from noon to midnight.

Hilton Fitness Center
The center is open to hotel guests 24 hours a day with
state-of-the-art Precor fitness equipment. For those who
prefer a more relaxed physical activity, a private yoga
room is available. Or take a leisurely stroll through the 2.5
acres of rooftop green space.
The fabulous outdoor rooftop heated pool of the Hilton
Montréal Bonaventure Hotel is open 365 days a year.

Internet Café/Wireless Connection
WiFi internet access is available in the lobby and will also
be available in the Meeting Space for the conference.
An Internet Café will be located under the escalator near
the Registration Counter (Inscription Desk) on the convention floor. The Internet Café is available free of charge
to attendees, exhibitors, and speakers, and will be open
during Registration hours on Saturday, April 17 through
Tuesday, April 20 (when not needed for onsite registration purposes). If you are registering onsite, you may
speed up the process by completing the onsite registration
form under the "meeting" tab at www.cnsmeeting.org.
Saturday, April 17
Sunday, April 18
Monday, April 19
Tuesday, April 20

2:30 - 7:30 pm
7:30 am - 7:00 pm
7:30 am - 7:00 pm
8:00 am - 5:00 pm

Lost & Found
Lost and Found is located at the Registration Counter on
the convention floor of the hotel.

Meeting Rooms
The meeting rooms for symposia, slides, and special sessions are on the Convention Level of the Hilton Montréal
Bonaventure Hotel.

Message Center
Messages for meeting registrants can be left and retrieved
at the Registration Counter on the convention floor of the
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

General Information

hotel. A bulletin board will be available for announcements and job postings.

and one from PayPal for payment. See also Certificate of
Attendance.

Mobile Phones

Receptions

Attendees are asked to silence their mobile phones when
in sessions.

The Welcome Reception will be held in Fontaine Exhibit
Hall, from 5:00 - 6:00 pm on Saturday, April 17, directly
following the first slide sessions. Join us on Sunday, April
18, from 4:00 - 5:00 pm in the Fontaine Exhibit Hall, for a
reception honoring Dr. Steven Pinker, winner of the 16th
Annual George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience
directly following his talk.

Name Badges
The Hilton Montréal Bonaventure Hotel and Convention
Center is open to public access. For security purposes,
attendees, speakers and exhibitors are asked to wear their
name badges to all sessions and social functions.
Entrance into sessions is restricted to registered attendees
only. Entrance to the Exhibition will be limited to badge
holders only. If you misplace your name badge, please go
to the Registration Counter on the convention floor of the
hotel for a replacement.

Parking
The Hilton Montréal Bonaventure Hotel offers secured
and covered parking. Parking rates are currently $18.00/
24 hour (self park), or $25.00/24 hour for Valet parking.

Poster Sessions
Poster sessions are scheduled on Saturday, April 17th,
Sunday, April 18th, Monday, April 19th, and Tuesday,
April 20th. The presenting author should be present at
least one full hour during the assigned session and the
other authors should be present during the remaining
time to be available to answer any questions. The poster
sessions are in the Fontaine Exhibit Hall on the Convention Level of Hilton Montréal Bonaventure Hotel. Badges
are required in the Exhibit Hall at all times. The doors to
the poster room will open at 5:00 pm on Saturday and at
7:30 am on Sunday - Tuesday for poster presenters only;
you may post your materials on the board assigned to you
at the scheduled time. The doors will close and lock for
the evening at 7:45 pm on Saturday, 7:30 pm on Sunday
and Monday, and 5:15 pm on Tuesday. There is no reentry after this time. Do not leave personal items in the
poster room.
Please see the Poster Schedule chapter for set-up and takedown times.

Receipts
A receipt is located on the back of your name badge. CNS
does not mail badges, so the badge acts as both the receipt
and assurance of attendance. You will also receive two
receipts online, one from CNS Meeting for registration

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Registration
Pre-Paid Registration (badge pickup) will be held in Salon
La Verriere on the Lobby level of the Hilton Montréal
Bonaventure Hotel on the first day of the conference, Saturday, April 17. To pick up your badge on Sunday-Tuesday, go to the Registration Counter (Inscription Desk,
Convention Level).
Onsite Registration will be at Registration Counter
(Inscription Desk) located at the base of the elevator on
the convention floor. If you are registering onsite, you
must first complete the registration submission form
online at www.cnsmeeting.org.

Registration Hours
Saturday, April 17*
Sunday, April 18
Monday, April 19
Tuesday, April 20

2:30 - 7:30 pm
7:30 am - 7:00 pm
7:30 am - 7:00 pm
8:00 am - 5:00 pm

*Pre-Paid Registration badges are located in Salon La Verriere
(Lobby Level) on Saturday only; Onsite Registration badges can
be purchased at the Registration Counter (Convention Level).

Scientific Sessions
Scientific sessions will take place from 3:00 pm on Saturday, April 17 until 5:00 pm on Tuesday, April 20, 2010.

Smoking
Smoking is not permitted in or outside any of the meeting
rooms or the exhibition hall.

Speakers
All speakers must register and wear name badge to
present. Please ensure that you are available in your presentation room at least thirty minutes before the start of
the session. See also Audiovisual Equipment for Talks.

11

General Information

Special Dietary Requirements
If you have advised us of special dietary requirements,
please speak to a member of the catering staff. The catering staff will have a full list of attendees with special
dietary requirements.

Taxes
The goods and services tax/harmonized sales tax (GST/
HST) may apply to various goods and services you purchase during your stay in Canada. The GST rate is 5%, and
the HST rate is 13%.
The Government of Canada has eliminated the GST/HST
Visitor Rebate Program and announced the introduction
of the Foreign Convention and Tour Incentive Program.
For more information, visit Questions and Answers on the
Cancellation of the Visitor Rebate Program, and the

Implementation of the New Foreign Convention and Tour
Incentive Program at http://www.cra-arc.gc.ca/E/pub/
gi/notice221/README.html.

Transportation
Taxis - There is a taxis stand at the front of the Hotel. Montréal-Trudeau International Airport (YUL), formerly Montréal-Dorval international Airport, is 20 km (about 20
minutes) from the hotel. Fixed fares for taxis and limousines are $38.00 CAD and $49.50 CAD, respectively.
Bus or Shuttle - L'Aérobus, operated by Groupe La Québécoise, provides an efficient connection by motor bus
between Montréal-Trudeau airport and downtown Montréal. One-way adult fare is $16.00 CAD.
Regional shuttle, Mont-Tremblant Shuttle, and City Buses
(STM) are also available.

CNS 2010 Exhibitors
Visit our exhibitors in the Fontaine Exhibit Hall
on the Convention Level of the Hilton Montréal
Bonaventure Hotel. The Exhibit Hall is open at the
following times:
Saturday, April 17
Sunday, April 18
Monday, April 19
Tuesday, April 20

5:00 - 7:30 pm
8:00 am - 7:00 pm
8:00 am - 7:00 pm
8:00 am - 5:00 pm

Exhibiting companies:

ANT-Advanced Neuro Technology
BIOPAC Systems, Inc.
Brain Vision LLC
Cedrus Corporation
Compumedics USA
Cortech Solutions, Inc.
Electrical Geodesics, Inc.
Electrode Arrays/JNetDirect Biosciences
Elsevier
Harvard Apparatus Canada

12

Hitachi Medical Corporation
ISS
MEGIS Software GmbH
The MIT Press
NITRC: Neuroimaging Informatics Tools
and Resources Clearinghouse
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Northern Digital Inc.
Oxford University Press
Psychology Press
Psychology Software Tools, Inc.
Rogue Research, Inc.
Sensorium, Inc.
Sinauer Associates, Inc., Publishers
SR Research
University of Maryland
Wiley-Blackwell
W. W. Norton, Inc.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Symposium Session 1
Sunday, April 18, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Westmount Ballroom
TOWARDS A CUMULATIVE SCIENCE OF HUMAN BRAIN
FUNCTION
Sunday, April 18, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Westmount Ballroom
Chair: Tal Yarkoni, Columbia University, University of Colorado at Boulder
Speakers: Tal Yarkoni, David Van Essen, Tor Wager, Russell Poldrack
This symposium is designed to promote development of a cumulative
science of human brain function that advances knowledge through formal synthesis of the rapidly growing functional neuroimaging literature.
The first speaker (Tal Yarkoni) will motivate the need for a cumulative
approach by highlighting several limitations of individual studies that
can only be overcome by synthesizing the results of multiple studies.
The second speaker (David Van Essen) will discuss the basic tools
required in order to support formal synthesis of multiple studies, focusing particular attention on SumsDB, a massive database of functional
neuroimaging data that can support sophisticated search and visualization queries. The third and fourth speakers will discuss two different
approaches to combining and filtering results from multiple studies. Tor
Wager will review state-of-the-art approaches to meta-analysis of fMRI
data, providing empirical examples of the power of meta-analysis to
both validate and disconfirm widely held views of brain organization.
Russell Poldrack will discuss a novel taxonomic approach that uses collaboratively annotated meta-data to develop formal ontologies of brain
function. Collectively, these four complementary talks will familiarize
the audience with (a) the importance of adopting cumulative approaches
to functional neuroimaging data; (b) currently available tools for accessing and retrieving information from multiple studies; and (c) state-ofthe-art techniques for synthesizing the results of different functional
neuroimaging studies into an integrated whole.
ABSTRACTS

MOTIVATING A CUMULATIVE COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

Tal
Yarkoni1,2; 1Columbia University, 2University of Colorado at Boulder — Thousands of functional neuroimaging studies are published every year. Only
a small fraction of these studies explicitly attempt a formal synthesis of
previous findings. In this talk, I argue for an increased emphasis on
cumulative approaches to the study of brain function that aim to synthesize and distill the results of previous studies. Three different motives for
such an approach are discussed, including (a) the need to distinguish
real findings from false alarms; (b) the desire to organize both cognitive
tasks and brain activations into coherent ontologies; and (c) the high likelihood that many fMRI studies are underpowered and consequently produce distorted results. I focus primarily on the last of these points, using
simulations and empirical analyses to demonstrate that the results of
many individual fMRI studies are likely to appear considerably stronger
and more selective than they actually are. I conclude by arguing that

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

these limitations are difficult or impossible to overcome in individual
studies, necessitating a stronger focus on consensus building at the disciplinary level.

LOST IN LOCALIZATION – BUT FOUND WITH FOCI! David Van Essen1;
1Washington University in St. Louis — More

than 50,000 studies related to
functional imaging of the human brain have been published in recent
decades. Of these, more than 10,000 report key experimental data (centers of fMRI activation foci, etc.) in tables of stereotaxic coordinates
(‘foci’) in one or another standardized atlas space. To aid in mining this
extensive literature, we developed the the SumsDB database (http://
sumsdb.wustl.edu/sums/), which supports storage, visualization, and
searching of many types of neuroimaging data. SumsDB includes a Foci
Library that currently contains >40,000 foci from ~1,400 published studies. This includes comprehensive coverage of five major journals and
almost 15% of the relevant literature. Foci searches can be based on many
criteria (e.g., cortical area or region, spatial coordinates, functional criteria, or disease condition). Search results can be viewed online (WebCaret) or downloaded for offline visualization and analysis using Caret
sofware. As the Foci Library continues to expand, through contributions
from curators and volunteers alike, it will become increasingly valuable
as a way to efficiently access the burgeoning neuroimaging literature.

CONSENSUS-BUILDING AND BRAIN-BASED TAXONOMIES USING METAANALYSIS Tor Wager1; 1University of Colorado at Boulder — Much of cognitive and affective neuroscience has centered on identifying particular
brain regions or circuits with categories of psychological processes.
Properly synthesized, the accumulation of knowledge can aid in this
goal. However, without synthesis, more information is not necessarily
better, as it may be difficult to separate truly activated brain regions
from spurious or idiosyncratic findings. Meta-analysis of neuroimaging
data provides a potential solution to this problem. I will present methods
and findings from meta-analyses of both cognitive control and emotion.
Meta-analyses of cognitive control reveal a consensus on the prefrontal
cortical networks involved in cognitive control processes, and a complexity-dependent posterior-anterior hierarchy of prefrontal activity that
complements recent findings on prefrontal organization. Conversely,
meta-analyses of emotion argue against several long-standing principles
of organization of the emotional brain, paving the way for the development of new models. These findings illustrate the utility of meta-analysis
in developing taxonomies of psychological processes based on the patterns of brain activity they elicit rather than folk psychological categorization schemes. I will close the talk by presenting a brain-based
classification of psychological tasks that suggests that different quadrants of the brain respect different organizational schemes.

ONTOLOGIES FOR COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE
1

Russell

Poldrack1;

University of Texas at Austin — The stated goal of cognitive neuroscience is
to understand how mental function is enabled by the brain. An unstated
assumption is that we understand the mental processes that are being
mapped onto the brain, but in reality there is little agreement on the
structure of mental processes and how they are measured. For this reason, most meta-analyses are focused on comparisons of tasks rather than
13

Symposium Sessions
the underlying mental processes. I will argue that the systematic mapping of mental processes onto brain systems will require the development of a formal ontology of mental function. Using databases of
neuroimaging data that are annotated according to such an ontology, it
is possible to determine which brain systems are associated with particular mental processes, and also to determine which mental processes can
be distinguished from one another according to their associated neural
activity patterns. I will provide examples of this approach using both
whole-brain fMRI data and results from the BrainMap database.

Symposium Session 2
Monday, April 19, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Westmount Ballroom
PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND PERCEPTUAL DECISION MAKING
Monday, April 19, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Westmount Ballroom
Chair: Hakwan Lau, Columbia University
Speakers: John Serences, Hakwan Lau, Hauke Heekeren, Christopher
Summerfield
Formal analysis has shown that the prefrontal cortex is anatomically the
final converging point of the dorsal and ventral stream of visual processing. However, empirical investigation of visual perception is often
focused on posterior areas of the brain. This bias is recently beginning to
be rectified, partly due to new data collected with whole-brain methods
such as fMRI in human subjects. These new findings call for new ideas
regarding what role the prefrontal cortex plays in visual processing. We
review the latest work on this issue, and specifically focus on formal
models of perceptual decision making (e.g. probabilistic models of evidence accumulation). The speakers will present new ideas that may help
to resolve apparent conflicts in recently reported results.
ABSTRACTS

NEURAL MECHANISMS OF VALUE AND EVIDENCE BASED DECISION
MAKING John Serences1; 1University of California San Diego — I will discuss studies examining the neural mechanisms that support decisions
that are based on either the quality of sensory evidence or the probability
of reward. Formal models are used to reveal the latent variables that
govern choice behaviour in order to guide theoretically motivated investigations into the neural mechanisms of decision making. In the first set
of studies, I will argue that the subjective value of a stimulus biases the
overall magnitude of cortical responses in early sensory areas (e.g. V1).
Moreover, the use of high-resolution fMRI and feature selective voxel
tuning functions suggests that value also influences the precision of sensory responses so as to enhance the distinctiveness of valuable objects.
Next, I will present data that employs accumulator models of perceptual
decision making to investigate the higher-order mechanisms that integrate evidence about low-level stimulus features from early areas of sensory cortex. By combining the predictions of these models with
simulations of the BOLD response, predictions about the timecourse and
amplitude of activation changes reveal both task specific and task general sites of evidence accumulation in human cortex. Together, these
findings suggest that top-down factors like subjective value influence the
quality of the sensory representations that form the input to the downstream decision mechanisms that ultimately guide motor interactions
with objects in the environment.

THE ROLE OF THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN MAKING SUBJECTIVE
RATINGS OF PERCEPTUAL CERTAINTY AND VISIBILITY Hakwan Lau1,2;
1

Columbia University, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior,
Netherlands — When making perceptual decisions, humans, monkeys, as
well as non-primate subjects can give subjective reports such as confidence or visibility ratings. We developed psychophysical paradigms
under which the subjective ratings can be dissociated from the objectively measured capacity for perceptual processing (e.g. d' in signal

14

Symposium Session 2
detection theoretic terms) - subjects claimed that they saw more or were
more certain of their decisions in some conditions even when the performance was the same. Using fMRI, we showed that when perceptual
capacity was matched, activity in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
reflects the subjective ratings. Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)
to this regions impaired subject's ability to report their ratings properly.
Formal comparison of computational models suggests that subjective
ratings depend on a late stage of information processing in a hierarchy
(instead of depending on a separate channel, or the same information
that drives the perceptual decision). We argue that the prefrontal cortex
supports self-monitoring processes at this late stage.

NEURAL MECHANISMS OF REWARD RATE OPTIMIZATION IN
PERCEPTUAL DECISION MAKING Hauke Heekeren1; 1Max Planck Institute
for Human Development, Germany — Decision makers determine perceptual decisions by collecting evidence until reaching a point of choice.
They can either make decisions quickly, thereby risking more errors, or
make decisions carefully, thereby risking to have fewer opportunities for
being maximally rewarded. Single unit recording studies in monkeys
have shown that prefrontal (DLPFC) and striatal brain regions are
involved in this Speed Accuracy Tradeoff, however their interaction
remains unclear. Computational network models suggest a modulation
of the connectivity (synaptic efficiency) between striatal and cortical neurons as the neurobiological mechanism by which decision makers adapt
their behavior and thereby optimize their reward rate. We used fMRI to
investigate this connectivity hypothesis. Participants performed a
motion direction discrimination task, in which rewards emphasized
either accuracy, or speed, or both. Hence participants had to trade off
speed and accuracy depending on the reward condition to maximize
reward. Behaviorally, subjects appear to maximize their overall task
reward by adjusting the amount of evidence required before making a
decision. In a conjunction analysis over all task conditions our neuroimaging results reveal significant activation in the bilateral dorsolateral
prefrontal cortical regions of the brain. We used these DLPFC regions as
seeds in a subsequent Psychophysiological Interaction analysis to investigate the connectivity hypothesis. We found a significant modulation of
the coupling of the Basal Ganglia System to DLPFC seed regions when
comparing the different reward conditions. The results suggest that
depending on the prevailing optimal strategy, reward optimization is
achieved by way of modulating the coupling between cortical and striatal regions.

THE ECONOMICS OF VISUAL CATEGORISATION Christopher
Summerfield1; 1University of Oxford — Visual category judgements have
been successfully described by quantitative models which evisage the
decision process as an accumulation of evidence towards a criterial
threshold (or ‘bound’). These ‘bounded accumulator’ models are supported by evidence from single-cell recordings in the parietal and prefrontal cortices. However, visual detection and discrimination can be
biased by information concerning the relative costs or benefits associated
with each categorical alternative, and by estimates of their probability of
occurrence. My talk will address how visual category judgements are
biased within the framework of the bounded accumulator model.
Rewards bias fast decisions more than slow decisions, a phenomenon
that can be modelled by a shift in prior estimates of perceptual evidence,
and estimates of prior evidence may correlate with fMRI signals in the
lateral parietal and orbitofrontal cortices. Secondly, I will discuss how
ongoing estimates of the dispersion and volatiliy associated with a visual
category influence perceptual decision-making. Although humans may
learn optimally about the variance of two visual categories, discrimination decisions are biased towards ‘confirming’ that discriminanda come
from the category with least variance. This effect is also associated with
brain structures involved in the processing of expectations about
reward.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Symposium Session 3

Symposium Sessions

Symposium Session 3

functional specializations across different cortical areas, and how neural
coherence between cortical areas is involved in behaviors such as making a decision and coordination. These studies illustrate how investigations of neural dynamics can help us understand the relationship
between the activity of distributed cortical networks and behavior.

Monday, April 19, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
Westmount Ballroom
BRAIN OSCILLATIONS, DYNAMIC SYNCHRONY, AND
COGNITION
Monday, April 19, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Westmount Ballroom
Chair: Michael Cohen, University of Amsterdam
Speakers: Michael Cohen, Bijan Pesaran, Nancy Kopell, Jean-Marc Fellous
Paramount among brain functions is interpreting the sensory world and
producing appropriate responses. Because the brain comprises specialized processing areas for sensory decoding, integration, memory, and
motor generation, spatially disparate and functionally divergent brain
regions need to form functionally unified neural networks. And because
the world can change so quickly, interactions among brain regions must
be extremely temporally precise (milliseconds to tens of milliseconds).
Recording electrophysiological signals such as action potentials and
local field potentials provide sub-millisecond-resolution windows into
the timing of activity within and across neural networks. Cognitive processes elicit idiosyncratic spatio-temporal profiles of activity, which
often have strong oscillatory components, and involve multiple spatial
and temporal scales. These interactions may be the basis of neural information coding and transfer schemes. This symposium will highlight
recent advances in our understanding of the dynamics of how neural
networks form from synchronized electrophysiological activity, and the
implications of these dynamics for the functional and cognitive architecture of the brain. Topics will span perception, learning, and decisionmaking, and from rat, monkey, human, and modeling approaches.
ABSTRACTS

SYNCHRONIZED NEURAL OSCILLATIONS SUPPORT COGNITIVE CONTROL
AND REINFORCEMENT LEARNING Michael Cohen1; 1Dept of psychology,
University of Amsterdam — The medial prefrontal cortex (MFC) is critical
for our ability to flexibly adapt our behavior according to rules that
we’ve learned or have been told. But the MFC cannot act alone; rapidly
and flexibly assessing and responding to the environment requires the
MFC to interact with multiple sensory and motor systems with millisecond temporal precision. I will review recent evidence that the human
MFC uses long-range oscillatory synchrony (1) to receive information
from sensory and motor systems (“bottom-up”) about possible conflicts
or errors, and (2) to direct sensory, motor, and motivation systems (“topdown”) to improve current and future performance. MFC-centric, spatially disparate, but functionally linked neural networks are activated
during conflicts or errors, predict performance adjustments, and occur
independent of conscious awareness. Further, the dynamics of these
rapid inter-regional communications are often not mirrored in the amplitude of activity of any isolated brain region, demonstrating that precise
timing within and among brain networks provides novel insights into
brain function. Evidence will be presented from healthy students,
patients with simultaneous nucleus accumbens-MFC recordings, and
healthy ageing.

NEURAL DYNAMICS, DECISIONS AND ACTIONS

Bijan Pesaran1;

1New

York University — Cerebral cortex contains a mosaic of brain areas that are
connected to form distributed networks. Before each movement we
decide to make, multiple areas contain specific patterns of neural activity
which can be used to predict what we will do. This talk will present our
investigations into dynamics of neuronal activity that seek to understand
how interactions between brain areas guide sensory-motor behavior. We
have been focusing on parietal area LIP which guides saccadic eye
movements together with the Parietal Reach Region (PRR) and dorsal
premotor cortex (PMd) which guide arm movements. I will present studies in the monkey that examine how neural dynamics are reflected in the
activity of single cells and field potentials, how these dynamics exhibit
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

RHYTHMS, CELL ASSEMBLIES AND BINDING IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM:
FROM PHYSIOLOGY TO FUNCTION Nancy Kopell1; 1Boston University — It
has been known for a long time that the brain can produce rhythmic patterns of electrical activity, and that these can be associated with cognitive
activity. However, it remains controversial whether these rhythms participate in cognition, or simply reflect processes that happen during cognition. To make the case that rhythms are functionally important, it is
necessary to understand the mechanisms by which the rhythms alter
processing in the nervous system. This line of research is still in its
infancy, but there is enough to see how such arguments might work.
This talk focuses on the gamma (35 -90 Hz) and beta (12-30 Hz) frequency bands, using models to show how the differences in physiology
underlying at least some versions of those brain rhythms have different
and complementary properties with respect to the creation and interaction of cell assemblies, providing a framework for understanding a variety of data, including some on decision-making.

KEEP IT IN MIND: REACTIVATION IN THE VENTRAL TEGMENTAL AREA OF
THE RODENT Jean-Marc Fellous1; 1University of Arizona — In a rest period
immediately after a learning task, neurons in hippocampus, neocortex
and striatum become active in spatiotemporal patterns resembling those
during the task. This reactivation consists in a precise, millisecond-scale
replay of bouts of neural activity and has been proposed as a neurophysiological substrate for memory consolidation. It is still unknown why
some memory items are consolidated and others are not. We provide
evidence that rodent Ventral Tegmental Area (VTA) neurons are selective for different types of rewards and that reward sensitive neurons
strongly reactivate during the rest period following a task that involved
rewards. Non-reward sensitive neurons exhibited significant reactivation only if the task involved a substantial motor component. The VTA is
a pivotal structure involved in the coding of reward and stimulus
salience, and is a key neuromodulatory system involved in synaptic
plasticity. The reactivation of this neural population in the rat suggest a
new way in which memory consolidation in cognitive structures such as
the hippocampus and cortex can be modulated by the affective significance of the items to remember.

Symposium Session 4
Tuesday, April 20, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Westmount Ballroom
DOPAMINE AND ADAPTIVE MEMORY
Tuesday, April 20, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Westmount Ballroom
Chair: Daphna Shohamy, Columbia University
Co-Chair: Alison Adcock, Duke University
Speakers: Emrah Duzel, Alison Adcock, Daphna Shohamy, Nathaniel Daw
The aim of this symposium is to highlight recent advances in understanding the role of episodic memory in decision making and adaptive
behavior, with a focus on how dopamine and the hippocampus support
these processes. It is widely recognized that dopamine contributes to a
specialized system for gradual, feedback-based learning in the striatum.
However, emerging evidence suggests that dopamine plays a much
broader role in learning and memory. In particular, it is now clear that
dopamine also contributes to hippocampal function and is a critical
determinant of successful memory formation. The talks in this symposium bring together converging evidence from multiple levels of analysis, including human neuroimaging, computational models and patient
research. Together, these different perspectives argue for a framework in

15

Symposium Sessions
which dopamine helps create enriched mnemonic representations of the
environment to support adaptive behavior in novel situations.
ABSTRACTS

NOVELTY-RELATED MOTIVATION OF ANTICIPATION AND EXPLORATION
BY DOPAMINE Emrah Duzel1; 1University College London — Studies
in
humans and animals show that dopaminergic neuromodulation originating from the substantia nigra/ventral tegmental area (SN/VTA) of
the midbrain enhances hippocampal synaptic plasticity for novel events
and has a motivationally energizing effect on actions through striatal
mechanisms. In this talk, I will discuss how these mechanisms of dopaminergic neuromodulation connect to the behavioural and functional consequences that age-related structural degeneration of the SN/VTA exerts
on declarative memory. A framework model called ‘NOvelty-related
Motivation of Anticipation and exploration by Dopamine’ (NOMAD) is
proposed which merges existing links between novelty, dopamine, longterm memory, plasticity, energization and their relation to aging. The
model captures how maintaining mobility and exploration of novel environments could be useful to slow age-related decline of memory. Furthermore, components of the model have potential relevance for
optimizing memory strategies in both healthy and memory-impaired
individuals.

MEMORY IN SERVICE OF GOALS: AFFECTIVE NEUROMODULATION AND
MNEMONIC SALIENCE MAPS Alison Adcock1; 1Duke University — A little
information has the potential to radically change behavior. Information
that we encode and remember - declarative memory - is built from autobiographical episodes into narratives and multi-dimensional representations of relationships that define the environment. These narratives, the
lessons we derive from them, and the environments that evoke them can
alter behavior immediately and persistently. For better and worse, such
memories are not veridical records of reality, but rather over-represent
information that matters to us. I will discuss emerging fMRI data suggesting that dopaminergic neuromodulation allows motivation and
expectation to influence memory encoding for upcoming events, and
behavioral data suggesting that motivational states influence both what
is encoded and how it is represented in memory. In this framework,
approach motivation engages a predictive neuromodulatory system centered around mesolimbic dopamine projections. This system primes the
medial temporal lobe memory system to record memories of upcoming
events and contexts, creating mnemonic ‘salience maps’. Recent evidence from my laboratory, together with other findings, suggests that
dopaminergic modulation promotes processing and plasticity in the hippocampus, resulting in detailed, specific representations well-suited to
supporting flexible navigation required for acquisition. This effect differs
from modulation during avoidance motivation, which appears to promote predominant processing and plasticity in medial temporal cortex,
resulting in unitized representations well-suited to eliciting stereotyped
behaviors like freezing. Our data suggest that dopamine tailors both the
content and the form of declarative mnemonic representations to support future adaptive behavioral responses consistent with the motivational state at the time of encoding.

LEARNING
TO
PREDICT
OUTCOMES:
EVIDENCE
FROM
NEUROPSYCHOLOGY AND NEUROIMAGING IN HUMANS Daphna

Shohamy1; 1Columbia University — Rewards powerfully affect learning.
This can be adaptive, allowing organisms to learn to obtain food, money
and other important rewards. Rewards that are too powerful, however,
can be maladaptive, creating strong habits that are hard to break. Recent
research on reward and learning has focused on the role of the striatum
and midbrain dopamine regions in habitual learning of stimulus-reward
associations. However, emerging evidence suggests that the hippocampus – widely known for its role in episodic or relational learning – is also
modulated by reward and is substantially innervated by dopamine. This
raises important questions regarding the role of the hippocampus in
learning, the unique contributions of the hippocampus and the striatum
to learning, and the nature of the relationship between them. I will talk
16

Symposium Session 5
about recent studies that address these questions using functional imaging (fMRI) and patient studies in humans. Converging data from these
two approaches suggests that both the striatum and the hippocampus
contribute to learning, with distinct implications for how learned information is used. In particular, I will present data suggesting that the striatum guides behavior when choice options are repeated, while the
hippocampus builds flexible memories that support transfer of learned
knowledge to novel situations. I will discuss the implications of these
results for understanding how multiple brain systems contribute to
adaptive learning processes.

REINFORCEMENT LEARNING: BEYOND REINFORCEMENT Nathaniel
Daw1; 1New York University — The spiking of dopamine neurons in animals,
and apparently analogous BOLD signals at dopaminergic targets in
humans, appear to report predictions of future reward. Although prominent computational theories of reinforcement learning suggest that these
responses support and reflect learning about decisions based on simple
associations with past rewards, it has long been known, behaviorally,
that beyond this Thorndikian principle of reinforcement, animals and
humans can make decisions drawing on other sorts of knowledge about
task structure and contingencies. I first discuss how these additional
influences – e.g., simulation or “mental time travel” based on cognitive
maps or declarative knowledge – can be incorporated in the framework
of reinforcement learning theories, via algorithms for “model-based”
learning. These considerations extend learned decision making beyond
its home territory in striatum, suggesting interactions with regions
involved in declarative and episodic learning. Next, I discuss experiments designed to characterize these influences on decision behavior
and associated neural signals. By fitting computational models to human
decision behavior and BOLD signals, we demonstrate that neither
choices nor putatively dopaminergic signals in striatum can be explained
by past reinforcement alone, but instead that both reflect additional
declarative learning about task structure and contingencies. Further
analyses and experiments seeking trial-by-trial correlates of this structural learning point to regions in the medial temporal lobe and prefrontal cortex. I consider the ramifications of these results for the interactions
between procedural and declarative memory systems.

Symposium Session 5
Tuesday, April 20, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Westmount Ballroom
WHAT CONTROLS EXECUTIVE CONTROL? THE INFLUENCE OF
'CONTROL CONTEXT'
Tuesday, April 20, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Westmount Ballroom
Chair: Amishi Jha, University of Pennsylvania
Speakers: Tobias Egner, Amishi Jha, Jonas Perrson, Michael Inzlicht
Executive control functions (EF) refer to a family of processes needed to
successfully perform complex tasks, particularly in rapidly-changing or
demanding situations. Yet, very little is known about the reciprocal
influence that situational demands, themselves, may have on executive
control. Rather than implicating a homunculus, who sits patiently deciding if control should be up- or down-regulated, a comprehensive
account of EF must clarify which factors influence the dynamic engagement or withdrawal of specific control functions. Past studies using
response conflict tasks find that when prior control demands are high,
subsequent performance improves relative to when prior demands were
low. Are these patterns exclusive to conflict tasks, or are they observable
across a variety of EF contexts? In studies investigating cognitive fatigue,
continued use of specific control processes leads to subsequent performance failures on EF tasks engaging those processes. How might fatigue
effects differ for management of ‘cold’ vs 'hot' demands? We investigate
these questions across several EF tasks. Our behavioral, fMRI, and ERP
results collectively suggest that the ‘control context’, which we character-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Symposium Session 5
ize as the type, level, and duration of prior demands on executive control, significantly influences subsequent deployment of EF across a
variety of task contexts.
ABSTRACTS

CONFLICT-SPECIFIC ADAPTATION PROCESSES IN THE HUMAN BRAIN
Tobias Egner1; 1Duke University — Cognitive control describes the ability to

flexibly configure, maintain, and adjust sets of processing strategies
(task-sets) in the pursuit of internal goals. This ability has traditionally
been ascribed to a central executive resource that can orchestrate mnemonic, attentive, sensory, and motor processes in line with task
demands. More recently, researchers have begun to fractionate this
monolithic entity, to replace this quasi-homunculus with a collection of
explicitly defined component processes or mechanisms that, in collaboration, may give rise to behavioral flexibility. One such component is a
conflict-driven regulatory mechanism for task-set maintenance (conflict
adaptation) that employs processing conflicts as a signal for reinforcing
the top-down biasing processes that comprise a current task-set. I will
discuss the cognitive and neuroanatomical architecture of conflict adaptation in human subjects. I will present evidence that, rather than being a
single, domain-general mechanism, conflict adaptation represents a collection of multiple independent conflict-control loops that resolve different types of conflict.

WORKING MEMORY DEMANDS TRIGGER DYNAMIC ADJUSTMENTS IN
EXECUTIVE CONTROL Amishi Jha1, Anastasia Kiyonaga1; 1University of
Pennsylvania — Dynamic adjustments in executive control are well-documented in ‘conflict’ tasks, wherein competition from irrelevant stimulus
attributes intensifies selection demands and leads to subsequent performance benefits. We investigated if mnemonic demands, in a working
memory (WM) task, could similarly drive online control modifications.
Demand levels (High vs. Low) of WM maintenance (memory load of 2
items vs. 1) and delay-spanning distractor interference (confusable vs.
not confusable with memoranda) were manipulated using a factorial
design during a WM delayed-recognition task. In young adults, performance was best subsequent to trials in which both maintenance and distractor interference demands were high, followed by trials with high
demand in either one of these two control domains, and worst following
trials with low demand in both domains. FMRI results revealed that
activity within subregions of prefrontal cortex (PFC) was sensitive to
demand levels for both the previous and current trial. Since age-related
changes in PFC are well-documented, we investigated if performance
patterns vary over the lifespan. Indeed, demand-triggered benefits in
task performance became more robust from late adolescence into young
adulthood, and degraded with advancing age. In adolescents, greater
context-sensitive adjustments corresponded with better academic
achievement. Thus, behavioral and neural measures, as well as realworld performance outcomes, suggest that dynamic adjustments in
executive control may be a potent mechanism by which the WM system
configures itself for successful task performance.

Symposium Sessions
demands in a prior task immediately preceding it in time. This suggests
that interference control is a finite resource that can be temporarily
depleted. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to
elucidate the mechanisms associated with decreasing efficiency or
resource depletion of the interference control process. Along with
reduced performance, fMRI indicates negative transfer is associated with
reduced process-specific activation, and increased homologous activation that may be compensatory. In sum, this suggests that interference
control is an executive function that is both resource limited and plastic
making it possible for training to alter its efficiency.

REGULATORY FATIGUE: NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE THAT
FATIGUE AFFECTS EXECUTIVE CONTROL AND EMOTIONAL
RESPONDING Michael Inzlicht1, Jennifer Gutsell1; 1University of Toronto —
Past research indicates cognitive control is limited, depleting quickly
after initial exertions. Here, we examine the why and how of fatigue by
examining its neurocognitive and emotional/motivational sequelae. In
Study 1, participants watched an emotional movie while instructed to
either suppress their emotions or watch normally, and then completed
an ostensibly unrelated Stroop task while EEG was recorded. Results
indicate that emotional suppression impaired Stroop reaction-time performance, an effect mediated by a lower error-related negativity
(ERN)—a neural waveform generated by the anterior cingulate cortex
and thought to index aspects of the conflict monitoring system. In Study
2, participants watched a video of a person being interviewed while distracting words appeared at the bottom of the screen; participants were
instructed to ignore the words or to watch normally. They then viewed
positive, negative, and neutral IAPS images within which were embedded 50 ms startle auditory probes while their startle-blink response was
measured with EMG. Results suggest that cognitive suppression dampened both the strength of subsequent emotional reactions and emotional
differentiation due to valence. Taken together, the results of both studies
offer a neural mechanism for cognitive fatigue and suggest an important
place for emotion in executive control.

TRAINING AND DEPLETION OF EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS: THE CASE OF
INTERFERENCE CONTROL Jonas Perrson1, Patricia Reuter-Lorenz2;
1

Stockholm University, 2University of Michigan — Brain imaging reveals
overlapping sites of prefrontal activation for different cognitive tasks
suggesting they may share core executive processes. We tested this
hypothesis by measuring behavioral interactions between memory tasks
presumed to require interference control - a putative executive process
that mediates selection from competing representations. Behavioral data
show that different training regimens produce either negative or positive
transfer from working memory to semantic and episodic memory task
performance. We show that eight days of training on high interference
versions of three different working memory tasks increased the efficiency of interference control on the training tasks and on untrained
tasks in new memory domains. In contrast we have also demonstrated
negative transfer and process-specific “fatigue” effects indicating that
control efficiency in a second task is diminished by high control

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

17

Slide Session 1
Saturday, April 17, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
Westmount Ballroom
EMOTION AND SOCIAL COGNITION
Chair: Kevin Ochsner, Columbia University
Speakers: Joshua M. Susskind, Mara Mather, Julie L. Hall, Hedy Kober,
Jennifer S. Rabin, Grit Hein, Molly Crockett, Bradley Thomas
ABSTRACTS

OPPONENT CODING OF EMOTIONAL FACIAL CATEGORIES Joshua M.
Susskind1, Adam K. Anderson1; 1University of Toronto — Following Darwin’s
early observations (Darwin, 1872), it is now widely thought that facial
expressions are recognized in relation to one of six or more independent
prototypes, with cross cultural, neuroimaging, and neuropsychological
studies supporting these prototypes as the fundamental building blocks
of emotional representation. However, Darwin’s original thesis was that
emotional expressions are not distinct but rather are derived from
opposing pairs for efficient social transmission. Here we provide evidence for such an opponent coding model of facial expression appearance and perception. Employing a computational model to form a
multidimensional face space representing contrasting facial actions, we
examine both behavioral and neural indices of opponent coding predicted by the model. First we examine model and human emotion judgments and demonstrate that visual-statistical opposites of expressions
(i.e., emotional anti-faces) signal opposing emotions. Second we show
that contrasting emotional expressions cancel each other’s appearance,
nullifying subjective intensity judgments and objective discrimination
measures of expression perception. Third we show that comparing physically opposing emotional expressions enhances discrimination. Finally,
we examine neural indices of opponent coding and show that adapting
to an expression results in opposing afterimages in an identical test stimulus, biasing perception of the center of expression space toward its
opposite. These converging sources of evidence suggest that facial
expressions are not distinct, but rest upon underlying opposing contrasts
encoded via opponent neural representations, similar to that of basic
perceptual attributes such as color and motion, serving to enhance detection of deviations from neutral states.

STRESSED MEN AND WOMEN PROCESS FACES DIFFERENTLY Mara

Mather1, Nichole R. Lighthall1, Lin Nga1, Marissa A. Gorlick1; 1University of
Southern California — Under stress, men tend to withdraw socially while

women seek social support. In the current study, we examined whether
these sex differences in social behavior under stress extend to one of the
most basic social transactions: face processing. Participants assigned to
the stress group were asked to hold their hand in ice water for three minutes (control participants held their hand in warm water). This stress
manipulation increased cortisol levels. During the period of post-stress
elevated cortisol, we conducted a 3 T functional magnetic resonance
imaging scan of participants while they viewed angry and neutral faces.

18

Participants also completed a separate face localizer scan. We found that
fusiform face area (FFA) response to faces was diminished by acute
stress in males but increased by stress in females. Furthermore, in
stressed males looking at angry faces, the insula showed reduced coordination with the FFA and the amygdala, but the inverse was true in
stressed females. The insula plays a key role in mirroring the emotions of
others and helps us understand what others feel. Thus, our findings that
stress reduces insula involvement in brain networks that process emotional expressions in males but increases insula involvement in those
same networks in females have important implications for social interactions and empathy under stress.

UNCONSCIOUS AFFECT AND ECONOMICS BEHAVIOR: FMRI EVIDENCE
FOR STRONGER UNCONSCIOUS THAN CONSCIOUS AFFECTIVE
INFLUENCES ON FINANCIAL CHOICES Julie L. Hall1, Richard Gonzalez1,

Chandra Sripada1, Oliver C. Schultheiss2; 1University of Michigan, 2FriedrichAlexander University — Traditionally, the dominant method of measuring
affect in psychological research has been through the use of explicit, selfreport measures. More recently, implicit, unconscious measures have
been developed to assess emotions that respondents may not be consciously aware of or able to report. The current study provides evidence
for stronger unconscious than conscious affective influences on financial
choices. Using fMRI, 24 participants viewed happy, angry, and neutral
affective primes presented under subliminal and supraliminal conditions followed by an investment task where they had to decide between
risky, high-payoff stocks and safe, low-payoff bonds. Our results indicate that both subliminal and supraliminal presentations of affective
primes influence financial investment decisions and anticipatory neural
activation in the nucleus accumbens. As predicted, participants showed
greater nucleus accumbens activation and made more risky investment
decisions after happy versus neutral face primes, an effect that was significantly stronger for subliminal versus supraliminal primes. Furthermore, implicit measures of positive affect were associated with more
nucleus accumbens activation and risky investment decisions and
implicit measures of negative affect were associated with more safe bond
choices; on the other hand, explicit measures of positive and negative
affect had no effect on financial choices or anticipatory neural activation.
In conclusion, our results demonstrate that affect influences financial
investment decisions and neural markers of anticipatory arousal, particularly at an unconscious level.

PREFRONTAL-SUBCORTICAL PATHWAYS MEDIATING SUCCESSFUL
REGULATION OF CRAVING IN CIGARETTE SMOKERS Hedy
Kober1,2,

Peter Mende-Siedlecki3, Ethan Kross4, Jochen Weber2, Walter Mischel2, Carl
Hart2,5, Kevin Ochsner2; 1Yale University, 2Columbia University, 3Princeton
University, 4University of Michigan, 5New York State Psychiatric Institute —

Substance use disorders are chronic relapsing conditions that represent a
societal problem with staggering social costs. Drug craving has long
been considered a primary contributor to drug use, and the inability to
regulate it is thought to be at the root of compulsive drug-taking behavior. Although the neural systems underlying drug craving have been
described, this work has yet to make contact with research on the neural

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Slide Session 1
systems supporting the ability to regulate emotion. We bridged this
knowledge gap to examine neural activity in the most prevalent substance abusing population in the US – cigarette smokers – as they used
cognitive strategies to regulate craving for cigarettes and food. We previously reported that the cognitive down-regulation of craving was associated with activity in regions previously associated with regulating
negative emotion including dorsomedial, dorsolateral, and ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex. This was accompanied by decreased activity in regions
previously associated with craving, including the ventral striatum (VS),
subgenual cingulate, amygdala, and ventral tegmental area. Here we
report that decreases in craving correlated with decreases in VS activity
and increases in DLPFC activity. Importantly, VS activity fully mediated
the relationship between dlPFC and reported craving. These results provide insight into the mechanisms that enable cognitive strategies to effectively regulate craving, suggesting that it involves neural dynamics
parallel to those involved in regulating other emotions. In so doing, this
study provides a methodological tool and conceptual foundation for
studying this ability across substance abusing populations and developing more effective treatments for substance use disorders.

DEGREE OF FAMILIARITY WITH SITUATIONS AND PEOPLE INFLUENCES
THE FUNCTIONAL OVERLAP BETWEEN THEORY OF MIND AND
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY. Jennifer S. Rabin1, R. Shayna

Rosenbaum1,2; 1York University, 2Rotman Research Institute — Neuroimag-

ing studies find that overlapping and unique brain regions underlie
autobiographical memory (AM) and theory of mind (ToM). Investigations of people who lack AM but have intact ToM suggest a dissociation
between these abilities; however, this is based on standard ToM tasks
that may not induce simulation processes due to their impersonal
nature. Greater functional overlap is expected between AM and ToM in
known situations involving familiar people that may facilitate simulation of another’s mental state. Here, we aimed to clarify the functional
relationship between AM and ToM by varying the degree of personal
experience with the protagonist in the ToM condition. Participants were
scanned as they remembered past experiences in response to personal
photos (AM condition) and imagined others’ experiences in response to
photos of personally familiar (friends and relatives, i.e., personal ToM
condition; pToM) and unfamiliar people (i.e., impersonal ToM condition; iToM). Analyses revealed common activity within bilateral medialtemporal lobes, medial prefrontal cortex (PFC), posterior cingulate/retrosplenial cortex, left ventrolateral PFC, and left middle temporal gyrus
in all three conditions. Functional overlap was greatest during AM and
pToM. Furthermore, AM and pToM elicited greater activation of medial
PFC and posterior regions relative to iToM, whereas pToM and iToM
elicited greater activation of lateral temporal, left ventrolateral PFC, and
temporal-parietal regions relative to AM. These data suggest that ToM
tasks involving familiar people may induce simulation processes that
draw on the same neural network as AM and that disruption to this network may lead to both AM and ToM compromise.

INGROUP BIAS IN NEURAL EMPATHY PREDICTS INGROUP FAVORITISM
IN COSTLY HELPING Grit Hein1, Giorgia Silani1, Kerstin Preuschoff1, Daniel
C. Batson2, Tania Singer1; 1Laboratory for Social and Neural Systems
Research, University of Zürich, 2Department of Psychology, University of
Kansas — Often, people are more willing to engage in prosocial behavior

towards “their people” than members of a different group, causing serious social conflicts. Here, we provide a neurobiological mechanism for
ingroup favoritism in helping behavior. We measured the brain
responses of soccer fans while they watched either a fan of their own
favorite team (ingroup member) or a fan of a rival team (outgroup member) suffering pain. In a second session, scanned participants were given
the opportunity to decide, among other options, whether to help the
ingroup and outgroup member by opting to endure half of their pain
themselves. Thus, helping was costly because it entailed receiving a
moderately painful shock. Participants’ empathic brain responses in left
anterior insula were greater when they saw an ingroup, as compared to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Slide Sessions
an outgroup, member suffering. The extent of this ingroup bias in
empathic brain responses predicted participants’ degree of ingroup
favoritism in subsequent helping. Moreover, participants with a negative impression of the outgroup member showed nucleus accumbens
(NAcc) activation instead of empathic responses in anterior insula, when
they saw an outgroup member in pain. The strength of the signal in
NAcc -previously linked to Schadenfreude- was correlated with reduced
helping of the outgroup member. These findings stress the importance of
cultivating empathy for outgroup members in order to counteract
ingroup favoritism and to promote prosocial behavior towards all
human beings.

NEUROCHEMICAL MODULATION OF HUMAN PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR
AND MORAL JUDGMENT (GSP WINNER) Molly Crockett1, Luke Clark1,

Marc Hauser2, Trevor Robbins1; 1University of Cambridge, 2Harvard
University — Studies on the neural basis of human morality suggest that

our ability to “know” right from wrong arises from mechanisms distinct
from those that enable us to “feel” right from wrong and guide our social
behavior appropriately. In the current study, we differentially manipulated moral judgment and prosocial behavior in healthy volunteers by
altering neurotransmitter function with citalopram, which boosts serotonin function, and atomoxetine, which augments prefrontal noradrenaline and dopamine function. We administered citalopram, atomoxetine,
and placebo on three separate occasions to 30 healthy volunteers in a
double-blind, placebo-controlled, fully counterbalanced crossover
design. Ninety minutes following drug administration, volunteers
played several one-shot ultimatum games, in which they decided
whether to accept or reject fair or unfair monetary offers from another
player, and judged a standard set of moral dilemmas that included emotion-provoking ‘personal’ moral scenarios, less emotional ‘impersonal’
moral scenarios, and non-moral control scenarios. Citalopram increased
prosocial behaviour in the ultimatum game, relative to both atomoxetine
and placebo, but atomoxetine had no effect on prosocial behaviour.
Meanwhile, atomoxetine and citalopram had distinct effects on moral
judgment: relative to placebo, atomoxetine reduced the likelihood of
judging both personal and impersonal harms as permissible, while citalopram reduced only the likelihood of judging personal moral harms as
permissible. Finally, across individuals the tendency to reject unfair
offers in the ultimatum game was significantly correlated with the tendency to judge personal, but not impersonal harms as permissible. These
results support the notion of distinct neural mechanisms for moral judgment and prosocial behaviour.

Bradley Thomas1, Daniel Tranel1,
Michael Alvarez , Kyle Mattes , Ralph Adolphs2, Michael Spezio2; 1University
of Iowa, 2Caltech — Social judgments made solely on the basis of a candi-

THE INSULA IN POLITICAL JUDGMENT
2

1

date’s visual appearance correlate with real-world election outcomes
(Todorov et al., 2005). We previously showed that this effect is associated
with regional activation of the insula during such judgments, and in particular that the insula is more activated when viewing people who lost
real elections, especially when participants are primed to process threatrelated information (Spezio et al., 2008). Here we investigated the causal
role of the insula with a lesion study. Using the same stimuli and tasks as
in our prior study (Spezio et al., 2008), we tested 12 individuals with
focal lesions to the insula. The insula-lesioned group showed normal age
judgments of the faces that were associated with real-world election
wins, as is the case in healthy individuals (t=2.6; p<0.02). They also
showed a trend association with real-world elections when asked to
carry out a simulated vote (t=1.5, p=0.08). However, whereas healthy
individuals show a robust association of real-world election outcomes
with ratings of competence (positively) and threat (negatively), the
insula-lesioned group showed neither effect (t=-0.67, p=0.3 for threat;
t=0.54, p=0.3 for competence). The findings suggest that the insula is
required for threat-related cues from a candidate’s appearance to influence election outcomes.

19

Slide Sessions

Slide Session 2
Saturday, April 17, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
Outremont Ballroom
THINKING & DECISION MAKING
Chair: Kalina Christoff, University of British Columbia
Speakers: Carolyn Parkinson, Vinod Venkatraman, Stephen Fleming, Roi
Cohen Kadosh, Rachael Grazioplene, Melissa Ellamil, Rebecca Charlton, R.
Nathan Spreng
ABSTRACTS

IS MORALITY UNIFIED? THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF DIFFERENT KINDS
OF MORAL JUDGMENTS (GSP WINNER) Carolyn Parkinson1, Walter

Sinnott-Armstrong1, Thalia Wheatley1; 1Dartmouth College — Researchers
have recently begun to investigate moral judgment using neuroscientific
techniques. By and large, these studies have been designed assuming
that morality is sufficiently unified to be studied as a single kind of judgment. However, scholars in other fields (e.g., philosophy, anthropology)
have posited that there are multiple distinct domains of morality. The
current study used functional imaging to examine the neural correlates
of the judgment of 3 categories of moral transgressions: dishonest, disgusting and harmful acts. 40 naïve, right-handed adults were scanned in
a 3.0-Tesla Phillips scanner. While in the scanner, subjects read 14 morally ambiguous scenarios from each of 3 moral categories (disgust, dishonesty, harm), as well as 14 neutral scenarios. After reading each
scenario, subjects used a button press to indicate whether the act
described was morally ‘wrong’ or ‘not wrong.’ Judgments of moral
transgressions that evoked disgust elicited increased activity in the
insula, amygdala, and cingulate cortices. The judgment of dishonest acts
was correlated with increased bilateral activity in the temporoparietal
junction, while judgment of physically harmful acts was correlated with
increased activity in the inferior parietal lobule, insula, precuneus and
posterior cingulate. These results contrast with those of past studies that
have lumped so-called ‘moral judgments’ together, and suggest that
judgments of moral scenarios involving different kinds of transgressions
draw on disparate neural and cognitive mechanisms. Thus, future studies should differentiate between subsets of moral judgments, and identify factors that unify and distinguish them from one another.

MECHANISMS UNDERLYING STRATEGIC VARIABILITY IN ECONOMIC
DECISION MAKING Vinod Venkatraman1, John W. Payne1, Michael W.L.

Chee2, Scott A. Huettel1; 1Duke University, 2Duke-NUS Graduate Medical
School, Singapore — Adaptive decision making involves the use of multiple strategies that vary with decision context, both within and across
individuals. In a series of behavioral, eye-tracking and fMRI experiments
using an economic decision-making task, we sought to understand the
mechanisms underlying strategic variability in risky choice. In each trial,
participants were provided with a three- or five-outcome mixed gamble
consisting of at least one monetary gain, one monetary loss and one
intermediate outcome that was typically $0 or slightly negative. They
could make three types of choices: gain-maximizing (increasing the magnitude of largest gain), loss-minimizing (decreasing the magnitude of
worst loss) or probability-maximizing (increasing overall probability of
winning by modifying valence of intermediate outcome). Across multiple studies, we demonstrated a systematic bias towards probability-maximizing choices. Individual differences in the extent of this bias
correlated positively with a satisficing trait, negatively with a sadness
trait, and could be predicted using patterns by which information about
the gambles was acquired (indexed using eye positions). We also show
that strategic preferences can be modified using subtle variations in the
decision context, as well as following 24 hours of total sleep deprivation.
Finally, using fMRI, we demonstrate that distinct neural systems were
associated with choices and with strategic preferences across individuals. Moreover, changes in these neural systems predicted an increased

20

Slide Session 2
bias toward gain-maximizing choices following sleep deprivation. Our
findings highlight individual variability in strategic preferences as a key
direction through which neuroscience data can influence models of risky
choice.

CIRCUITS FOR OVERCOMING DECISION INERTIA IN THE HUMAN
BRAIN Stephen Fleming1, Charlotte Thomas2, Raymond Dolan1; 1University

College London, 2University of Bristol — Humans often accept the status

quo, or default, when faced with conflicting choice alternatives. However, it is unclear how neural pathways linking cognition and action contribute to such decision inertia. To examine this question, we used a
visual detection task where decision difficulty and the default response
option were systematically and independently manipulated within a factorial design. We show that subjects tend to accept a default when making difficult, but not easy, decisions. This bias was suboptimal in that
more errors were made when the default was accepted. Using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) we show that an interaction
between decision conflict and default acceptance was uniquely
expressed in enhanced activity in bilateral regions that encompass the
subthalamic nuclei (STN). These findings suggest a specific role for STN
activity in overcoming conflict-induced decision inertia. Consequently,
to reveal the mechanism driving this effect we employed an effective
connectivity analysis to show that right inferior frontal cortex is both
sensitive to conflict and modulates the STN, contributing to decision
inertia. Importantly, a driving influence of right inferior frontal cortex on
the STN was increased during rejection of the default, supporting a role
for this pathway in overcoming a status quo bias. We conclude that overcoming inertia during difficult decisions invokes specific neural dynamics within prefrontal-basal ganglia circuitry, suggesting commonalities
between the neural mediation of the status quo bias in healthy individuals and decision inertia induced by pathologies of movement.

BRAIN STIMULATION TO THE PARIETAL AND DORSOLATERAL
PREFRONTAL CORTICES REVEALS DOUBLE DISSOCIATION BETWEEN
LEARNING AND AUTOMATICITY Roi Cohen Kadosh1, Sonja Soskic2, Teresa

Iuculano2, Ryota Kanai2, Vincent Walsh2; 1University of Oxford, 2University
College London — How do we learn to encode and represent numerical

information? What are the necessary brain mechanisms underlying such
abilities? Cognitive, neuropsychological, and anthropological studies
show that intact and proficient numerical representation is characterised
by: 1) automatic retrieval of numerical quantity, and 2) interactions
between number and space, such as for example accurate mapping of
numbers on a physical line. We examined here how non-invasive brain
stimulation (transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)) of the right
dorsolateral prefrontal (DLPFC) and the right posterior parietal (PPC)
cortices over 6 days of numerical learning affects: 1) the efficiency of
learning of a new numerical system, 2) the development of its automaticity, and 3) the interaction between newly learnt numbers and space. The
current results revealed a double dissociation between the DLPFC and
the PPC. The DLPFC was crucial for numerical learning, while the PPC
was necessary for the acquisition of automatic numerical quantity and its
interaction with space. These effects were specific to the learning of a
new numerical system as brain stimulation did not affect the automaticity and the mapping of numbers into space of everyday digits. These
results challenge the idea that automaticity is a result of effective skill
acquisition. Furthermore, they question the necessity of the DLPFC in
symbolic numerical representation, and have implications for models of
typical and atypical numerical development.

CRITICAL CONNECTIVITY: A NEUROBIOLOGICAL THRESHOLD EFFECT
FOR CREATIVE ABILITY Rachael Grazioplene1, Robert S. Chavez1, Alison

Marshall1, Ranee A. Flores1, Rex E. Jung1; 1The Mind Research Network — The

threshold theory of creativity posits that intelligence predicts performance on divergent thinking tasks, but only up to an IQ of about 120
(Runco and Albert, 1986). However, a meta-analysis casts doubt on the
validity of the threshold effect (Kim, 2005). These contradictory behavioral findings might be refined if we understand the relationship

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Slide Session 3
between brain architecture and creativity measures at different IQ levels.
Therefore, we hypothesized differential white matter-behavior relationships in subjects below an IQ of 120 compared to those above 120. A
group of healthy normal volunteers (n=100, ages 18-29) underwent cognitive testing and structural MRI scanning at 3 Tesla. Based on the mean
Full-Scale Intelligence Quotient (FSIQ) of 119, the sample was split into 2
groups for analysis (Lower Group<120, n=47; Higher Group>=120,
n=53). Behaviorally, FSIQ conformed to a linear relationship with divergent thinking scores in the Lower FSIQ Group (r=0.32, p<0.05), but not in
the Higher FSIQ Group. Voxel-wise cross-subject statistical analyses
showed a strong inverse correlation between frontal white matter fractional anisotropy (FA) and composite divergent thinking scores in the
Higher FSIQ Group (clusters significant at p=0.01-0.001); no such relationship approached significance in the Lower Group. This finding suggests that lower white matter coherence in frontal thalamo-cortical white
matter may confer cognitive advantages for divergent thinking abilities,
but only in conjunction with intelligence levels in the superior range and
higher (FSIQ >120).

SPONTANEOUS AND DELIBERATE MODES OF THOUGHT DURING THE
CREATIVE PROCESS Melissa Ellamil1, Charles Dobson2, Mark Beeman3,
Kalina Christoff1; 1University of British Columbia, 2Emily Carr University of Art
and Design, 3Northwestern University — Until recently, neuroscientific

investigations of human thought equated it with only the deliberate,
goal-directed mental processes that occur during problem solving, while
spontaneous mental processes (e.g., mind wandering) occurring without
direct control have been overlooked. The creative process appears to
combine both modes of thinking: the generation of novel ideas is facilitated by low cognitive control and defocused attention that characterize
spontaneous thought, while the evaluation of those ideas is aided by
high cognitive control and focused attention that characterize deliberate
thought. Deliberate thought has been linked to the brain’s executive network, while spontaneous thought seems to activate the default network.
However, both modes of thought have so far not been examined within
the same study, and their neural correlates remain unclear. The study
used a creativity task during functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) to examine neural recruitment during spontaneous and deliberate modes of thought in the context of creative production. Using an
fMRI scanner-compatible drawing tablet, students from a local arts college alternated between generating ideas for a book cover, evaluating the
ideas generated, and tracing over lines that appeared on the screen
(baseline). Generation was associated with activations in the default
(parahippocampus) and executive (ventrolateral prefrontal cortex [PFC])
networks. Evaluation was also associated with activations in the default
(medial PFC, posterior cingulate cortex/precuneus) and executive
(dorso/rostrolateral PFC, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex) networks.
Thus, in the context of creative production, spontaneous and deliberate
modes of thought demonstrate parallel recruitment of two neural networks thought to work in opposition.

WHITE MATTER PATHWAYS ASSOCIATED WITH VERBAL EPISODIC AND
WORKING MEMORY, MEASURED USING TRACT-BASED SPATIAL
STATISTICS IN NORMAL AGING Rebecca Charlton1, Thomas Barrick1,

Hugh Markus1, Robin Morris2; 1St George's University of London, 2Institute of
Psychiatry, King's College London — Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is sen-

sitive to loss of white matter integrity in normal aging. Using whole
brain measurements and large regions of interest, DTI has been shown to
correlate with both verbal working (WkM) and episodic memory (EM).
The impact of changes in white matter integrity on the networks that
support these functions remains unclear. It has been suggested that these
memory abilities utilise common frontal grey matter regions, but also
unique grey matter in the parietal (WkM) and temporal (EM) lobes. To
explore this further tract based spatial statistics (TBSS), which allows 3D
investigation of white matter tracts, was performed on 98 middle-aged
and older adults. White matter tracts were identified that were associated with variations in WkM and EM in the frontal lobes bilaterally. In

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Slide Sessions
addition, verbal WkM was associated with white matter pathways in the
left parietal lobe, whereas verbal EM was associated with bilateral temporal pathways. The results support the notion that damage to certain
white matter pathways may have widespread effects on different cognitive abilities by causing disruption to multiple distributed networks. In
addition, certain abilities may be more affected by damage to specific
tracts, because tract disruption has specific effects on a unique network.

LEVELS OF DIFFICULTY IN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL AND VISUOSPATIAL
PLANNING DIFFERENTIALLY MODULATE CORE, DORSAL ATTENTION AND
CONTROL NETWORK ACTIVITY R. Nathan Spreng1, Adrian W. Gilmore1,

Daniel L. Schacter1; 1Harvard University — Planning is an adaptive function

that guides complex everyday behavior. We recently reported a novel
autobiographical planning (AP) task where participants were given a
goal state and integrated three component steps into a personal plan to
fulfill that goal. We found that AP engaged the core network, including
frontal and posterior midline structures, medial and lateral temporal
lobes and posterior inferior parietal cortex. Visuospatial planning, as
measured by the Tower of London (TOL) task, engaged the dorsal attention network, including dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, frontal eye fields,
intraparietal sulcus, and ventral occipital cortex. Relative to a counting
task, both planning tasks engaged the frontoparietal control network
(FPCN), including rostrolateral prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, and
anterior inferior parietal cortex. To assess the impact of task demands on
this pattern of activity, we examined changes in BOLD signal, using
fMRI in 25 participants, associated with parametrically modulating the
difficulty of both autobiographical and TOL planning. Compared with
easy trials, difficult AP trials required the integration of more steps and
difficult TOL trials required more moves to reach a solution. Easier AP
elicited greater activity in the core network than difficult AP. TOL difficulty modulated the magnitude of dorsal attention network activity,
consistent with previous reports. The FPCN was engaged in both planning tasks. However, easier AP engaged the FPCN less than difficult AP.
TOL task difficulty did not modulate FPCN activity. These findings
expand our understanding of the functional interaction between the
FPCN and the core and dorsal networks related to task demands.

Slide Session 3
Sunday, April 18, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Outremont Ballroom
LANGUAGE
Chair: Tamara Swaab, University of California, Davis
Speakers: Kristof Strijkers, Kalinka Timmer, Karin Harman James, Marina
Bedny, Jeremy Skipper, Amit Almor, Chantel Prat, Raymond Mar
ABSTRACTS

TEMPORAL ERP EVIDENCE FOR AN EARLY DISSOCIATION BETWEEN
SEMANTIC AND LEXICAL REPRESENTATIONS IN FUNCTION OF TASK
DEMANDS (GSP WINNER) Kristof Strijkers1,2, Phillip Holcomb3, Albert

Costa2; 1Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Spain, 2Universitat de Barcelona, Spain,
3
Tufts University — Most models on object processing and naming posit

that activation automatically cascades from semantic processing to lexico-semantic and, according to some, word form representations. Given
this continuous transmission of information, top-down processing in
function of task demands and context should at some point in time gate
the flow of activation towards those representations relevant for
response execution. However, very little is known about how and especially when top-down task demands affect bottom-up object processing.
Based on recent findings showing early lexical ERP modulations (~ 175 –
200 ms) in overt naming tasks (Strijkers et al., 2009; Costa et al., in press),
we compared the time-course of processing during overt picture naming
(experiment 1) with that of go/no-go semantic categorization (experiment 2), assuming that only naming requires fast lexical activation. In

21

Slide Sessions
order to obtain a reliable measure of access to the object’s name, lexical
frequency was manipulated. During overt naming, low frequency ERPs
diverged from high frequency ERPs very early on (~ 175 ms), replicating
recent findings. Importantly, during semantic categorization of the same
objects, low frequency and high frequency ERPs did not yield any early
modulations. These results offer strong additional evidence that the
brain rapidly accesses the lexical system after perceiving a picture; however, the fast lexical engagement only occurs when actual naming is
required. This is the first direct on-line demonstration for an early functional dissociation between the semantic and lexical systems, with topdown task demands shaping bottom-up activation earlier as expected by
most theories.

THE TIME COURSE OF ORTHOGRAPHY AND PHONOLOGY DURING
READING ALOUD IN A SECOND LANGUAGE: EVIDENCE FROM AN ERP
STUDY Kalinka Timmer1,2, Niels O. Schiller1,2; 1Leiden University, 2Leiden
Institute for Brain and Cognition — This study confirmed that the Masked
Onset Priming Effect (MOPE), which is often found in primary language
usage, can also be observed in a second language. Bilingual DutchEnglish participants read aloud English words starting with phonologically ambiguous letters (e.g. /c/, carpet or cigar) or with phonemes that
have multiple orthographies (e.g. /f/, phase or fellow) in a masked
priming experiment to separate the contribution of orthographical and
phonological activation in reading aloud. Orthographical priming was
found in early time windows of event-related potentials (ERPs), even if it
did not affect the overall reaction times. Phonological priming, on the
other hand, shortened the response time and was weakly indicated in
later time windows of ERPs. Both the orthographic and phonological
priming effects were present first for unambiguous onset words and
later for ambiguous onset words, where the onset has multiple phonemic possibilities. These results show that non-native speakers, even if
they speak with an accent (as they are accustomed to a different phonetic
system) and even if they are less familiar to the orthography of their second language, behave in a similar way as native speakers.

THE EMERGENCE OF SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATIONS IN THE
DEVELOPING BRAIN DURING LANGUAGE PROCESSING Karin Harman

James1, Shelley Swain1, Harinder Kaur1; 1Indiana University — In adults, verb
perception recruits motor systems – we have recently shown that motor
systems are also active when preschool children perceive verbs.
Although the assumption is that our history of actions leads to this activation, until now, there has been no empirical evidence to support this
claim. The present research uncovers experiences that are required for
this motor recruitment to occur. Twelve children, aged 5-7 years, learned
novel labels (‘made-up’ verbs) for actions performed with novel objects.
Half of these labels were learned during ‘active’ interaction – the children manipulated the objects while the verb label was given, the other
labels were learned ‘passively’ - while the children watched the experimenter demonstrate the actions. Subsequent to this experience, children
heard all the novel verbs while BOLD activation was measured using
fMRI. Results demonstrated that motor systems were recruited during
‘verb’ perception only after the participants learned the labels during
active exploration. In contrast, no motor activation emerged when labels
were learned by passively watching the experimenter during learning.
These results demonstrate that verb perception recruits motor systems
due to active involvement with objects. Language learning through
active interaction with the environment results in representations that
incorporate both motor and sensory systems in the developing brain.

LEFT OCCIPITAL CORTEX OF CONGENITALLY BLIND ADULTS RESPONDS
TO GRAMMATICAL STRUCTURE Marina Bedny1,2, David Feder1, Evelina
Fedorenko1, Elizabeth Hawkins1, Nancy Kanwisher1, Alvaro Pascual-Leone2,
Saxe Rebecca1; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Berenson-Allen
Center for Noninvasive Brain Stimulation, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Harvard Medical School — In typically developing adults, language

processing is supported by left prefrontal and lateral temporal cortices.
In addition, to these brain regions, congenitally blind individuals acti-

22

Slide Session 3
vate parts of the left occipital cortex, including the primary visual cortices, during language tasks. The role of left occipital cortex in language
processing is unclear. We studied the function of the left occipital cortices in three experiments with congenitally blind adults and sighted controls. In Experiment 1 congenitally blind and sighted participants
listened to stories and answered true/false questions about them. In a
control task, participants made a match/non-match judgment with backwards speech sounds. We found that the left occipital cortex responded
more to sentences than backwards speech, despite the greater difficulty
of the backwards speech task as measured by reaction time and accuracy. Experiment 2 showed that that left occipital cortex is not involved
in retrieving word meanings: left occipital activity was not observed
during a single-word comprehension task. Experiment 3 further examined the role of the left occipital cortex computing grammatical structure
by comparing sentences, word lists, Jabberwocky sentences, lists of nonwords and backwards speech. We found that left occipital cortex
responded more to sentences than all other conditions and more to Jabberwocky sentences than to word lists, non-word lists and backwards
speech. Word-lists, non-word lists and backwards speech conditions
were not different from each other. We conclude that the left occipital
cortices of congenitally blind adults are involved in constructing syntactic, sentence-level representations.

HOW THE BRAIN PREDICTS FORTHCOMING WORDS DURING SENTENCE
LISTENING Jeremy Skipper1, Jason Zevin1; 1Sackler Institute for
Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University — In
natural settings, listeners use sentence context to predict forthcoming
discourse content. We propose that hypotheses about upcoming words
are specified as motor commands that would be used to produce those
words and that efference copy from the motor system predicts the occurrence of actual words. We tested this model using fMRI while participants listened to sentences that varied in final word predictability. High
and low-predictability sentences were composed of a sentence frame, a
filled pause of variable duration, and a final word. If listeners use sentence context to predict words, we expected "repetition suppression" of
activity during the final word relative to the pause for high-predictability sentences in language comprehension areas. Indeed, anterior superior temporal cortex and the pars triangularis showed repetition
suppression. Additionally, the spatial pattern of activity during the highpredictability pause was most correlated with the pattern of activity for
the low-predictability final word in anterior superior temporal cortex
only. Finally, if words were activated through efference copy from the
motor system then activity during the high-predictability pause should
occur in speech production areas. Indeed, inferior parietal, insula, and
premotor cortex showed greater activity during the high compared to
the low-predictability pause. Results suggest that the brain uses knowledge and expectations about sentence context to activate forthcoming
words through efference copy from areas of cortex involved in speech
production. We suggest that this predictive mechanism constrains interpretation and allows the brain to expend less time processing incoming
sensory information, allowing resources to be allocated elsewhere.

THE NEURAL BASIS OF DEFINITE REFERENCE IN DISCOURSE – AN FMRI
STUDY Amit Almor1, Timothy Boiteau1; 1University of South Carolina —
Anaphoric reference is an important part of coherent discourse but very
little is known about the brain basis of processing discourse anaphors.
Much research in Linguistics and Psycholinguistics has indicated that
anaphoric references to salient antecedents tend to employ more general
expressions than the antecedent, often a pronominal form, but sometimes also a general category term. One intriguing finding about category anaphor processing is the Inverse Typicality Effect, which is the
slower reading of a category anaphor (e.g., the bird) when referring to a
salient antecedent, when that antecedent is a typical member of the category (e.g., robin) rather than an atypical one (e.g., chicken). This effect
was previously argued to reflect increased working memory load caused
by interference between the semantic representations of the category
anaphor and of the salient typical member antecedent (Almor, 1999).

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Slide Session 4
Here we used fMRI to test this claim by examining the brain regions that
are differentially activated by discourses with category anaphors with
salient typical antecedents, salient atypical antecedents, and non salient
typical antecedents. We found that category anaphors with salient antecedents elicited greater activation with typical antecedents than with
atypical antecedents in IFG bilaterally and in LH Fusiform Gyrus. The
IFG activations are consistent with a WM involvement in the Inverse
Typicality Effect while the Fusiform activations suggest that this effect
also involves activations of lexical representation. The lack of activation
differences between the conditions in other temporal regions suggests
that the representations involved in this effect are lexical-semantic rather
than conceptual-semantic.

A DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING INVESTIGATION OF INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES IN WHITE MATTER MICROSTRUCTURE AS A FUNCTION OF
READING SKILL AND WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY Chantel
Prat1,
Sarah Schipul1, Timothy Keller1, Marcel Just1; 1Carnegie Mellon University —

This study used diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to investigate individual
differences in the organization of white matter microstructure as a function of two behavioral measures of language ability. Associations of fractional anisotropy (FA) with indices of reading skill (Nelson-Denny
Reading Test) and working memory capacity (Reading Span) were
examined in a voxel-based multiple regression analysis of 73 healthy
adults (40 males, aged 18-31). Both reading skill and working memory
capacity (which were not correlated with one another) were positively
correlated with FA, suggesting increased microstructural organization in
higher-skilled and higher-capacity individuals. Higher reading skill was
associated with increased FA in left hemisphere (LH) regions of superior
longitudinal and inferior fronto-occipital fasciculi (connecting Broca’s
and Wernicke’s areas) and in the anterior thalamic radiation (connecting
thalamus to medial prefrontal regions). Higher working memory capacity was associated with increased FA in the forceps minor (connecting
LH and RH frontal regions) and the cingulum (connecting the frontal,
parietal, and temporal lobes). Increased FA in the LH of skilled readers
may reflect increased myelination arising from more reading practice.
Previous research has demonstrated such an increase in LH FA with
intensive reading exposure (Keller & Just, in press). Increased FA in
high-capacity individuals may speed information transfer between the
frontal lobes, which are important for working memory and cognitive
control, and the rest of the cortex, facilitating higher-level cognitive processes. These results show that systematic structural connectivity variations can be observed in healthy adults as a function of individual
differences in cognition.

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN STORY COMPREHENSION AND SOCIAL
COMPREHENSION: QUANTITATIVE META-ANALYSES USING ACTIVATION
LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION Raymond Mar1; 1York University — While initial neuroimaging investigations of language focused on lower-level
word and syntactical representations, there has been a growing interest
in investigating language at the level of discourse, particularly with
respect to stories. One major question that has emerged is the relationship between story comprehension and social comprehension, with
some hypothesizing that mental-inference processes are engaged while
readers read about story characters and their interactions. Although
some recent reviews have noted that the network of brain regions implicated during story comprehension resembles the social cognitive network, no review has directly compared the meta-analytic results for
these two processes. Two quantitative meta-analyses were undertaken,
employing the activation likelihood estimation (ALE) approach, for
fMRI and PET studies of both narrative comprehension and mental
inference. A total of 18 narrative comprehension articles were entered
into the analysis, representing 22 samples, 293 participants, and 203 foci.
For mental inference, 54 articles provided 55 samples, 712 participants,
and 440 foci. Mental inference studies were further divided into those
that employed stories as stimuli, and those that did not, with separate
ALE meta-analyses performed for each group. Identifying the core social
cognitive network was achieved by examining the overlap of these two

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Slide Sessions
groups, implicating the mPFC, bilateral TPJ, bilateral STS, posterior cingulate, and left IFG. The results for narrative comprehension overlapped
with all of these areas, except for the posterior cingulate. While these
results are consistent with the idea that mental inference is employed
during narrative comprehension, other possibilities will be discussed.

Slide Session 4
Monday, April 19, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Outremont Ballroom
LONG-TERM MEMORY
Chair: Roberto Cabeza, Duke University
Speakers: Nina S. Hsu, W. Dale Stevens, Sarah Zweynert, Bradley Lega, MarieFrance Marin, John Rudoy, Rebecca Spencer, David Maillet
ABSTRACTS

FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (FMRI) EVIDENCE FOR
MULTIPLE COLOR KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATIONS INFLUENCED BY
CONTEXT AND COGNITIVE STYLE Nina S. Hsu1, David J.M. Kraemer1,

Robyn T. Oliver2, Margaret L. Schlichting1, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill1;
1
University of Pennsylvania, 2Roosevelt University — Numerous neuroimag-

ing studies have supported sensorimotor theories of semantic memory
by demonstrating overlap or proximity of brain regions sensitive to perception and knowledge retrieval. However, particularly within the
domain of color knowledge, we hypothesize that some of the differences
in results across studies may be due to the existence of multiple types of
color knowledge representations. Moreover, retrieval of these representations can be influenced by both context and individual differences in
cognitive style. In Experiment 1, we provide fMRI evidence for multiple
representations of object color knowledge by having subjects perform a
verbal task, in which context encouraged subjects to retrieve high- or
low-resolution information about the colors of named common objects in
a blocked experimental design. In the left fusiform, we found more activity during retrieval of high- versus low-resolution color knowledge. We
also assessed preference for verbal or visual cognitive style, finding that
brain activity in the left lingual gyrus significantly correlated with preference for a visual cognitive style. To eliminate the possibility that strategy accounts for the results, we conducted Experiment 2, which had a
randomized design and quicker trials. We also removed the possibility
of differential visual system engagement during viewing of written stimuli by presenting auditory stimuli instead. Experiment 2 replicated many
of the findings of Experiment 1. Overall, these findings suggest the existence of multiple types of color knowledge representations that are based
on resolution of detail, and that retrieval of these representations can be
influenced by context and individual preferences in cognitive style.

ASYMMETRICAL RESTING-STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF
PARAHIPPOCAMPAL CORTEX IS ASSOCIATED WITH LATERALITY
DIFFERENCES FOR FORM-SPECIFIC VS. FORM-ABSTRACT REPETITION
PRIMING OF SCENES W. Dale Stevens1,2, Randy L. Buckner1,2,3, Daniel L.

Schacter1,2; 1Harvard University, 2Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical
Imaging, 3Howard Hughes Medical Institute — Behavioral priming refers to
an improvement in performance upon successive encounters with the
same or related stimuli, and is typically accompanied by reduced neural
activity in specific cortical regions (neural priming). Neural priming
reflects category-specificity, e.g., in bilateral scene-preferential parahippocampal cortex (SP-PHC) for repeated scenes. We recently reported
functional asymmetry within SP-PHC: form-specific vs. form-abstract
priming were lateralized within the right vs. left hemispheres, respectively, paralleling previous findings in other category-preferential visual
regions, e.g., fusiform cortex for object-priming. Here, we tested the
hypothesis that right/left differences are associated with differential
functional connectivity of these regions with large-scale perceptual vs.
conceptual networks, respectively. Bilateral SP-PHC regions were indi-

23

Slide Sessions
vidually defined in healthy adults using independent functional localizers. Using resting-state functional connectivity analysis of fMRI data (rsfcMRI) with a priori seed regions in middle occipital gyrus (MOG) and
posterior inferior frontal gyrus (pIFG), we replicated two large-scale networks associated with perceptual- and conceptual-priming, respectively,
as previously identified (Wig et al., 2009). We observed relatively
increased correlation of right SP-PHC with the MOG/perceptual network, and of left SP-PHC with the pIFG/conceptual network. Wholebrain voxelwise analyses further demonstrated functionally-specific differential rs-fcMRI: Correlations were relatively higher for right SP-PHC
with posterior and ventral visual regions and aspects of the dorsal attention network; and higher for left SP-PHC with regions of the default and
frontoparietal control networks. Our results provide novel evidence that
right/left form-specific vs. form-abstract priming asymmetry may be
related to specialized differential functional connectivity of these regions
with perceptual vs. conceptual large-scale networks, respectively.

EMOTIONAL SALIENCE DIFFERENTIALLY MODULATES REPETITION
SUPPRESSION IN THE LATERAL AND MEDIAL VENTRAL VISUAL
STREAM Sarah Zweynert1,2, Torsten Wüstenberg2, Kerstin Krauel3,

Constanze Seidenbecher1, Emrah Düzel3,4, Björn Schott1,2,3; 1Leibniz Institute
for Neurobiology, Magdeburg, Germany, 2Charité University Hospital, Berlin,
Germany, 3Otto von Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany, 4University
College London, London, UK — Repetiton suppression (RS) describes a

decreasing neural response to stimuli as a function of their repeated presentation. Evidence from studies using faces as stimuli suggests that
emotional salience modulates repetition effects in stimulus-related brain
regions. Here we investigated the functional neuroanatomy of repetition
effects and their emotional modulation in brain regions of the ventral
visual stream using event-related functional MRI. 28 young healthy participants performed a simple visual working memory task in which targets and distracters (visual scenes) were presented repeatedly. Targets
and distracters could either be neutral images or scenes with negative
emotional (aversive) content. We hypothesized that in stimulus-related
brain regions (e.g. Amygdala, parahippocampal place area (PPA), fusiform gyrus (FG)) repetition suppression would be stronger for emotional
compared to neutral scenes. Both target pictures and task-irrelevant distracter pictures elicited a reliable repetition suppression response (1st –
3rd presentation) in ventral visual stream structures. Within these
regions, we identified two separable patterns. In the amygdala and in the
lateral fusiform cortex, emotional scenes showed significantly stronger
initial brain responses and enhanced repetition suppression. In contrast,
in the PPA, in the medial FG, and in the anterior hippocampus, repetition suppression was equally pronounced for emotional and neutral
items. Our results suggest the presence of two distinct patterns of repetition suppression in the ventral visual stream, with a lateral portion
showing emotional modulation of repetition effects and a medial portion
that shows emotion-independent responses to repeated stimuli.

HUMAN HIPPOCAMPAL THETA OSCILLATIONS AND THE FORMATION OF
EPISODIC MEMORIES Bradley Lega1, Joshua Jacobs1, Michael Kahana1;
1

University of Pennsylvania — Using data from neurosurgical patients
undergoing invasive monitoring, investigators have demonstrated the
functional importance of gamma oscillations in the cortex and hippocampus. Evidence for the importance of theta oscillations has been limited mostly to cortex. Select studies from the human literature suggest
that the human correlate of the theta oscillation may be centered below 4
Hz. We present data from the largest existing database of patients with
hippocampal depth electrodes performing free recall tasks. 33 patients
with a total of 237 depth electrodes are included in this study. We
employ a novel oscillation detection algorithm to identify theta oscillations. We identify an oscillation between 2.5 and 5 Hz and another
located between 7.5 and 10 Hz. The lower frequency oscillation bears
properties more in line with animal evidence of theta band activity.
Using a subsequent memory effect analysis, we show that higher power
in this frequency band is correlated with successful encoding of episodic

24

Slide Session 4
memories. The effect matches the magnitude of the effect in the gamma
band which has been previously documented. We note a concomitant
negative SME, in which power during encoding is decreased for words
that are subsequently recalled. The low theta SME was more specific in
the dominant hemisphere and persisted throughout the 2 second encoding period. Low theta oscillatory activity also increases in the time window that precedes vocalization of a recalled word. Our data locate a
human hippocampal theta oscillation between 2.5 and 5 Hz, and couple
this oscillation to a specific SME.

MODULATION OF STRESS HORMONE LEVELS AT THE TIME OF MEMORY
REACTIVATION: AN OPPORTUNITY TO CHANGE PREVIOUSLY ACQUIRED
MEMORIES Marie-France Marin1,2,3, Sonia J. Lupien1,2,3; 1Center for

Studies on Human Stress, 2Fernand-Seguin Research Center, Louis-H.
Lafontaine Hospital, 3Université de Montréal — Glucocorticoids (GCs) are a
major class of stress hormones known to modulate different memory
processes. In general, high levels of GCs enhance memory consolidation
whereas both low and high levels impair retrieval. Other studies show
that the process of retrieval serves as a reactivation mechanism whereby
the memory that is reactivated during the retrieval process is once again
sensitive to modifications by environmental manipulations. Therefore,
Study 1 investigated the immediate and long-term effects of a stressor on
a reactivated memory. Thirty-two healthy participants (16 men) encoded
a movie containing neutral and emotional slides. Two days later, they
recalled the movie. Half were then exposed to the Trier Social Stress Test,
a validated psychosocial stressor, whereas the others read magazines
(controls). Memory was re-assessed after stress and five days later. The
stressed group recalled significantly more emotional material after stress
compared to controls. Moreover, this enhanced emotional memory trace
was maintained five days later. Study 2 investigated whether pharmacologically lowering GC levels at the time of reactivation would impact the
memory trace in a temporary or a long-lasting manner. Twenty-two
healthy men encoded the movie. Three days later, they were assigned to
a metyrapone (an inhibitor of GC synthesis) or a placebo condition.
Memory was assessed after drug administration and four days later. At
both time points, the metyrapone group recalled less emotional material
compared to controls. These experiments suggest that variations in GC
levels at the time of reactivation can modulate the strength of an emotional memory trace.

CHANGING THE COURSE OF MEMORY CONSOLIDATION THROUGH
REACTIVATION DURING SLEEP (GSP WINNER) John Rudoy1, Joel Voss1,2,

Carmen Westerberg1, Ken Paller1; 1Northwestern University, 2University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Initially fragile memories can gain stability

via consolidation, but the manner in which sleep contributes to this process is unresolved. Reinstating a learning context during slow-wave
sleep enhances retrieval of spatial information learned in that context
(Rasch et al., 2007), but it remains unclear whether exposure during
sleep to cues associated with newly learned information can selectively
enhance the storage of individual memories. In our study, subjects
learned to associate each of 50 unique object images with a location on a
computer screen prior to a nap. During learning, each object was paired
with a characteristic sound cue delivered over a speaker (e.g., cat/meow,
kettle/whistle). During non-REM sleep in a subsequent nap, the sound
cues for 25 of the objects were presented. After waking, individuals
viewed all 50 objects and attempted to position each one in its original
location. Accuracy was greater for objects cued during the nap than for
those not cued. Additionally, EEG responses to sound cues were sorted
into two conditions via a median split on the difference between preand post-nap accuracy. Average EEG amplitudes measured over the
interval from 600-1000 ms after sound onset were greater for cues associated with less forgetting. Thus, the degree of recall improvement or
decline was apparently influenced by sound-induced memory processing during sleep, as indexed by brain potentials. These results show that
memory processing during sleep can be highly specific, and that audi-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Slide Session 5
tory reminders during sleep can be used to target the reactivation and
strengthening of individual memories.

ROLE OF EMOTION IN SLEEP-DEPENDENT MODULATION OF
FORGETTING Rebecca Spencer1,2, Sam Bromfield1, Bengi Baran1;
1

Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst,
& Behavior Program, University of Massachusetts, Amherst —

2Neuroscience

Sleep enhances memory consolidation. However, a long-standing proposal (Crick & Mitchinson, Nature, 1983), suggests that sleep also
increases forgetting of conflicting information. Similarly, a more recent
hypothesis, the Synaptic Homeostasis Hypothesis (e.g., Gilestro, Tononi,
& Cirelli, Science, 2009), implies that weaker memories from the day are
forgotten over sleep through global synaptic downscaling. We examined
off-line changes in forgetting using the retrieval induced forgetting paradigm. Participants studied 240 word pairs formed from 40 cues, each of
which was affiliated with 6 targets. Following the study phase, participants practiced retrieval of a subset of pairs, consisting of 20 cues and 3
of their affiliated targets. Following a break either with or without sleep,
recall of all 240 pairs was tested. Consistent with previous reports, learning of the practiced pairs was greater following a break with sleep relative to an equivalent interval spent awake. Counter to previous
hypotheses, competitive forgetting was greater over the interval spent
awake relative to the interval containing sleep. Moreover, forgetting was
modulated by REM sleep while memory consolidation of practiced pairs
was associated with slow wave sleep. In a second study, we found that
sleep-dependent consolidation of practiced pairs was similar for emotionally positive, negative, and neutral stimuli, however forgetting was
uniquely modulated by the emotional valence. Together, these results
suggest that sleep may play a dual-role in memory processing, reducing
forgetting of weak memories during REM while consolidating stronger
memories during slow wave sleep.

MULTIVARIATE SPATIO-TEMPORAL PARTIAL LEAST SQUARES ANALYSIS
OF AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN BRAIN ACTIVITY DURING CONTEXT
MEMORY ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL David Maillet1, Maria Natasha

Rajah1; 1McGill University — Compared to healthy young adults, healthy

older adults exhibit intact item memory, but impaired memory for spatial and temporal context/source. Neuroimaging studies suggest that
age-related functional changes in pre-frontal cortex (PFC) and medial
temporal lobes may underlie this impairment. In the present study, we
examined brain activity during the encoding and retrieval of item, spatial and temporal contextual memory tasks using face stimuli, in both the
young (n=25) and the elderly (n=26). Our goal was to identify the similarities and differences in brain activation during recognition and context tasks between young and elderly, using non-rotated multivariate
spatio-temporal partial least squares analysis (PLS; Rajah & McIntosh,
2008). Behavioural results showed that older adults performed as well as
young on item recognition, but performed worse than young on both
context tasks. The PLS analysis identified a significant latent variable
(LV) representing a task main effect of context versus recognition tasks
at retrieval, but not at encoding, in both age groups. Specifically, both
groups activated left dorsolateral PFC (Brodmann area [BA] 9), left BA
47 and left parahippocampal gyrus to a greater degree during context
versus item retrieval. We found a significant LV representing group by
task interactions within retrieval, but not encoding tasks. Specifically,
left hippocampus was preferentially used by the young during context
retrieval, while the elderly used it preferentially during recognition.
Finally, we observed group differences in left BA 44 during encoding (all
tasks) versus retrieval (all tasks). Young activated this region preferentially at encoding, and the elderly at retrieval.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Slide Sessions

Slide Session 5
Monday, April 19, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
Outremont Ballroom
WORKING MEMORY AND EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS
Chair: Silvia Bunge, University of California, Berkeley
Speakers: Evelien Heyselaar, Anne Sophie Champod, Evan Gordon, Ilke
Öztekin, Petroc Sumner, Frederick Verbruggen, Ignacio Obeso, Miriam
Beauchamp
ABSTRACTS

THE CAPACITY LIMIT OF VISUAL WORKING MEMORY IN THE MACAQUE
MONKEY (GSP WINNER) Evelien Heyselaar1, Kevin Johnston1, Martin

Paré1; 1Queen's University Canada — Working memory is a limited capacity system that allows the temporary retention of information to guide
future behavior. The human visual working memory capacity has been
estimated using the sequential comparison task. This limit is approximately 3 items, with values as low as 1.5 in some individuals. However,
similar limits have not yet been systemically investigated in other animals, which is necessary toward development of an animal model for
investigation of the neural basis of this facet of cognitive function. We
estimated the visual working memory capacity of the macaque monkey
using the same procedure as human studies. In this task, the animal was
first presented with a memory array consisting of a varying number (set
size) of highly discriminable color stimuli. The offset of the memory
array was followed by a retention interval, during which the animal was
required to maintain fixation. Following this, a test array was presented
in which the color of one of the stimuli had changed. The animal was
required to identify which stimulus had changed by making a single saccadic eye movement to its location. Animals’ ability to detect a color
change declined with increases in the set size and duration over which
they were retained in working memory. From the relationship between
performance and set size, we estimated that visual working memory in
the macaque monkey has a capacity limit that exceeds two memoranda.
This limit is comparable to that of humans, suggesting a shared neural
substrate for this aspect of executive function.

DISSOCIATION WITHIN THE FRONTO-PARIETAL NETWORK IN VERBAL
WORKING MEMORY: A PARAMETRIC FMRI STUDY Anne
Sophie
Champod1, Michael Petrides1; 1Montréal Neurological Institute, McGill
University — Concomitant increase in activity within the mid-dorsolateral

prefrontal cortex (MDLFC) and the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) is
observed in most functional neuroimaging studies of working memory.
Despite broad consensus on the importance of these two brain regions in
working memory, the unique contribution of the PPC remains a matter
of heated debate. The main objective of the present parametric eventrelated functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study was to
examine the hypothesis that the cortex in the intraparietal sulcal (IPS)
region in the PPC is involved in the manipulation (i.e. rearrangement) of
verbal information in working memory and to dissociate the involvement of this brain region from the known involvement of the MDLFC in
the monitoring of information in working memory. The results demonstrated a linear increase in activity within the MDLFC during the manipulation and monitoring of a linearly increasing number of words in
working memory. In sharp contrast, there was a linear increase in activity within the PPC during the manipulation, but not the monitoring of a
linearly increasing number of words. This study provides the first parametric dissociation of activation in these two cortical regions, indicating
a crucial role of the PPC in the manipulation of information in working
memory, with the MDLFC playing a major role in monitoring this information.

25

Slide Sessions

FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN NETWORKS UNDERLYING
WORKING MEMORY IS MODULATED BY DOPAMINE-REGULATING GENES
COMT AND DAT Evan Gordon1, Melanie Stollstorff2, Priyanka Salona2,

Chandan Vaidya2,3; 1Georgetown University Medical Center, 2Georgetown
University, 3Children's National Medical Center — Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) reveals that some regions are activated (task-positive network - TPN) whereas others are deactivated (default mode
network - DMN) during working memory (WM) performance. Studies
have reported that these networks are negatively correlated; however,
the nature of DMN-TPN connectivity varies across individuals. We
examined whether DMN-TPN connectivity differed by genotype for the
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) and dopamine transporter (DAT)
genes, which induce individual variation in synaptic levels of dopamine.
FMRI was performed on 40 subjects during rest and during performance
of a WM task. For each subject, we identified peak voxels of deactivation
during WM within the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), a DMN region,
and used those as seeds for functional connectivity analysis after regressing out signal from ventricles. We observed a COMTxDAT interaction in
PCC connectivity with right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (a TPN
region) during WM. Post-hoc analyses indicated that only 9/10 Met/Met
subjects demonstrated negative connectivity, suggesting that differences
in dopamine levels modulated the direction of the DMN-TPN relationship. We subsequently examined whether the individual differences in
the DMN-TPN relationship observed during WM were also present at
rest. The COMTxDAT interaction was not observed during rest, and furthermore, DMN-TPN connectivity during WM only correlated with connectivity during rest after accounting for effects of genotype on WM
connectivity (residual r=.459, p<.005). This result suggests that “intrinsic” DMN-TPN connectivity observed during rest is altered due to
effects of dopamine release during WM, which is affected in turn by
COMT and DAT genotype.

CHANGES IN DISTRIBUTED PATTERNS OF NEURAL ACTIVATION
ASSOCIATED WITH PROACTIVE INTERFERENCE RESOLUTION IN
WORKING MEMORY Ilke Öztekin1, David Badre1; 1Brown University — An
obstacle to successful retrieval is the presence of interference during the
retrieval attempt. Proactive interference (PI), which arises from a prior
learning event, is a major cause of forgetting. In this study, we sought to
identify distributed patterns of neural activity that mark the retrieval of
irrelevant information. This irrelevant information causes PI and leads to
forgetting in working memory. Participants were scanned using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while performing a shortterm item recognition task. Trials consisted of a 5-item study list and
then a recognition probe following a distractor period. To induce PI,
three consecutive study lists were constructed from the same semantic
category (e.g., animals), and then the category was switched (e.g., fruits)
on the subsequent trial. Recognition performance decreased across successive lists of the same category, consistent with the buildup of PI. We
employed a multi-voxel pattern classifier approach to track distributed
patterns of brain activity that mark the retrieval of each category. Classifier success indexed the strength of the representation of each category in
the brain, independent of behavioral success. Classifier success for the
common category increased across the lists, consistent with the category
information becoming increasingly elicited during retrieval. Critically,
this increase was correlated with behavioral measures of forgetting, suggesting that the representation of non-diagnostic category information
leads to a decline in memory performance. Conversely, classifier success
was negatively correlated with neural activation in the left ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex, consistent with this region’s hypothesized role in successfully resolving competition during memory retrieval.

MORE GABA, LESS DISTRACTION: A NEUROCHEMICAL CORRELATE OF
VARIABILITY IN HUMAN EYE MOVEMENT CONTROL Petroc
Sumner1,

Richard Edden2, Aline Bompas1, Krish Singh1; 1Cardiff University, 2Johns
Hopkins University — Every researcher of human behaviour knows that

Slide Session 5
situations involving the fundamentals of simple actions. Yet, although
stimulating growing interest, the reasons for such differences are generally unknown. Here we show that differences in basic performance can
correlate tightly with subtle neurochemical differences in relevant brain
regions. We investigate the ability to inhibit an irrelevant distractor
when making eye movements, and find that it is well predicted by the
concentration of GABA – the main inhibitory neurotransmitter – measured by magnetic resonance spectroscopy in a region including human
frontal eye field (FEF), but not in a control region. Moreover, by employing a model that distinguishes three types of motor inhibition, we can
specifically associate GABA variation in the FEF region with just one of
them – top-down reactive inhibition.

DISSOCIABLE CONTRIBUTIONS OF HUMAN PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN
DYNAMICALLY UPDATING BEHAVIOR Frederick Verbruggen1, Adam

Aron2, Michael Stevens1, Christopher Chambers3; 1Ghent University, 2UCSD,
3
Cardiff University — The human cognitive control system supports flexible and goal-directed behavior by updating actions in response to
changes in the environment. Cognitive psychologists have shown that
dynamic updating of behavior depends on fast-acting control mechanisms that stop or change responses when they become irrelevant or
inappropriate. It is currently intensely debated which regions in human
prefrontal cortex support stopping and updating of behavior, and competing accounts need to be reconciled. We investigated the functional
specificity of lateral prefrontal cortex in updating behavior by combining
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) with a novel behavioral paradigm, in which subjects had to stop or update responses on a minority of
the trials. The results show that one region of lateral prefrontal cortex,
the right inferior frontal junction is crucial for updating the attentional
focus when an infrequent signal occurs, whereas a different region, the
right inferior frontal gyrus is crucial for updating action plans in
response to this signal. These findings shed new light on the role of lateral prefrontal cortex in stopping and updating behavior. In particular,
the idea that right inferior frontal gyrus implements control by updating
action plans reconciles recent controversial and conflicting findings
about its functional role.

THETA BURST STIMULATION OVER THE PRE-SMA IMPROVED RESPONSE
INHIBITION ON A CONDITIONAL STOP SIGNAL REACTION TIME TASK
Ignacio Obeso1, Leonora Wilkinson1, Teo James1, Talleli Penelope1, John
Rothwell1, Marjan Jahanshahi1; 1UCL Institute of Neurology, London,UK —

Introduction: Volitional control over our actions often necessitates inhibition of ongoing responses. This has been investigated with the stop signal reaction time task (SSRTT). Imaging showed activation of right
inferior cortex (IFC), pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA) and subthalamic nucleus (STN) during the SSRTT (Aron et al, 2007; Li et al,
2008). There is no consensus about their specific roles, some suggesting
that the IFC and STN are involved in inhibition, while pre-SMA mediates conflict monitoring/resolution (Aron et al, 2007). Others attribute an
inhibitory role to both the IFC and pre-SMA (Li et, 2008). We used the
conditional SSRTT (cSSRTT) and measured inhibition and conflict
induced slowing to determine if continuous theta burst stimulation
(cTBS) over the IFC and pre-SMA would produce similar or dissociable
effects on these measures. Methods: In a within-subjects design, fourteen
volunteers performed the cSSRTT on three days (weekly intervals) after
‘offline’ continuous cTBS over the right IFC, pre-SMA or sham M1, with
order randomized. We measured the stop signal reaction time (SSRT)
and conflict induced slowing (CIS). Results: Relative to sham TBS, cTBS
over pre-SMA resulted in significantly shorter SSRTs. This effect was
specific to the SSRT and not observed for CIS or any other RT measures
or errors. cTBS over the right IFC had no effect on any RT or error measures. Discussion: The unexpected significant shortening of SSRT with
cTBS over the pre-SMA suggests that the pre-SMA made a critical contribution to volitional inhibition on the cSSRTT but did not influence conflict monitoring/resolution.

people perform differently, and this remains true even in the most basic

26

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Slide Session 6

ADOLESCENT EXECUTIVE FUNCTION AND BRAIN STRUCTURE
FOLLOWING CHILDHOOD TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Miriam

Beauchamp1,2, Cathy Catroppa2,3,4, Celia Godfrey2, Sue Morse3, Jeffery
Rosenfeld5,6, Vicki Anderson2,3,4; 1Department of Psychology, University of
Montréal, Canada, 2Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, 3Royal
Children's Hospital, Melbourne, 4School of Behavioural Sciences, University of
Melbourne, 5Department of Surgery, Monash University, 6Department of
Neurosurgery, The Alfred Hospital, Melbourne — The impact of brain injury
on skills that allow individuals to engage in purposeful, goal-directed
and appropriate behaviour, commonly conceptualized as executive
functions, has been a focal point of research into the cognitive outcomes
of paediatric traumatic brain injury (TBI). However, few studies have
addressed the long-term evolution of executive deficits in patients
injured during childhood. Forty children with TBI were followed longitudinally and assessed ten years post-injury (25 male, mean age at injury
= 2.0, SD = 2.7, mean age at follow-up = 14.7, SD = 0.7) and compared to
nineteen healthy developing children (12 male, mean age at follow-up =
14.2, SD = 2.3) on a battery of tests measuring a range of executive functions including attentional control, inhibition, cognitive flexibility, planning, goal setting, problems solving and abstract reasoning. Results
revealed that patients with mild and moderate injuries performed at ageexpected levels on all tests; however severely injured patients demonstrated significant deficits particularly on complex executive functions
such as planning [(F(2, 54) = 3.3, p =.02)], problem solving [F(3, 55) = 3.4,
p = .02], and abstract reasoning [F(48, 3) = 5.1, p = .004]. These findings
highlight the lasting effects of childhood brain injury on complex executive skills and suggest that severely injured children may require ongoing intervention and support for cognitive deficits into adolescence and
early adulthood.

Slide Session 6
Tuesday, April 20, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Outremont Ballroom
ATTENTION
Chair: Marty Woldorff, Duke University
Speakers: Sabine Heim, Stephen M. Emrich, Elana Zion Golumbic, Alexandra
Woolgar, Antoni Valero-Cabre, Ana Chica, Vicki Chanon, Thomas Espeseth
ABSTRACTS

COMPETITION FOR COGNITIVE RESOURCES DURING RAPID SERIAL
PROCESSING: CHANGES ACROSS CHILDHOOD Sabine Heim1, Nadine

Wirth2, Andreas Keil3; 1German Institute for International Educational
Research (DIPF), 2Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim, 3University of
Florida — Changes in the strategic control of attentional resource alloca-

tion play an important role for the development of complex cognitive
skills and academic achievement. We examined such changes in a crosssectional design, using the attentional-blink (AB) paradigm. The AB is an
impairment of T2 report, which occurs when a first (T1) and second target (T2) embedded in a rapid stimulus sequence appear within 500 ms of
each other. Two groups of children (6 to 7 year-olds and 10 to 11 yearolds; ns = 21 and 24, respectively) worked on two AB tasks (symbols in
experiment 1; letters or words in experiment 2), identifying green targets
in an 8.7 Hz stream. The temporal distance between T1 and T2 varied
between no intervening distractor (lag 1) up to 7 intervening distractors
(lag 8). Both experiments showed that older children performed more
accurately overall. In the symbol task, younger children linearly
increased T2 performance with increasing lag, whereas older children
displayed a quadratic pattern as typically seen in adults, with a slight
performance gain for the lag-1 condition. In the verbal task, younger
individuals again exhibited cost effects for lag 1, whereas the older
showed sparing. Impairment of T2 report at lag 1 in the younger children was not related to complementing T1 effects: they displayed greater

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Slide Sessions
T1 performance problems at lag 1 than older participants. Taken
together, this pattern of results suggests that strategic control of temporal attention resources is a skill that emerges during primary school age.

VISUAL WORKING MEMORY MEDIATES VISUAL SEARCH EFFICIENCY
(GSP WINNER) Stephen M. Emrich1, Naseem Al-Aidroos1, Jay Pratt1,

Susanne Ferber1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute,
Baycrest — Visual search requires the maintenance of previously
searched distractors to bias selection towards novel items. It is unclear,
however, which memory system supports the indexing of these old
items. Interestingly, tasks that depend on visual working memory
(VWM), a capacity-limited short-term visual store, elicit an event-related
potential (ERP) contralateral to the attended memory items known as the
contralateral delay activity (CDA). Accordingly, in the present study we
tested whether VWM supports the inhibition of old items by testing for
the presence of the CDA during visual search. Our results demonstrate
that a lateralized search task elicited activity contralateral to the attended
search array that was indistinguishable in mean and peak amplitude
from the CDA observed during a four-item change-detection task. The
change in amplitude of this contralateral search activity (CSA) over time
was strongly correlated with VWM capacity, suggesting that this activity
reflects VWM processing. Furthermore, behavioral measures of search
efficiency were strongly correlated with changes in CSA amplitude, as
well as with an independent measure of VWM capacity. That is, the
more items that could be stored in memory, the faster the search target
was found. These findings indicate that VWM likely supports the inhibition of previously searched distractors, and consequently, that visual
search efficiency is closely linked to individual VWM capacity.

NEURONAL OSCILLATIONS AS A TOOL FOR ATTENTIONAL SELECTION IN
THE COCKTAIL PARTY EFFECT: INSIGHTS FROM INTRACRANIAL EEG IN
HUMANS Elana Zion Golumbic1,2, Julien Besle1, Ashesh Mehta3, Catherine
Schevon1, Ronald Emerson1, David Poeppel4, Charles Schroeder1,2; 1Columbia
University, 2Nathan Klein Institute for Psychiatric Research, New York, 3Long
Island Jewish Hostpital, New York, 4New York University — Our ability to

attend to a particular conversation amidst competing input stream, epitomized by the “cocktail party” effect, is remarkable. Yet, the neural
mechanisms involved in segregating, selecting and attending to one
stream of conversation are not well understood. Here we tested the idea
that such selection is brought about by adjusting the phase of ongoing
neuronal oscillations in auditory cortex to entrain to the temporal envelope of the attended speech stream. We recorded intracranial EEG in
patients undergoing electrode implantation for clinical purposes, while
participants listened to segments of natural speech. We simulated a
“cocktail party” by playing two conversations concurrently (male and
female speakers) and instructed participants on each trial to attend to
one speaker and ignore the other. In a control block the same speech segments were presented alone. In each condition, we analyzed the consistency of phases across trials (phase-locking, PL) between 1-50Hz in
electrodes over auditory cortex. In the cocktail-party conditions, despite
the identical physical stimulus, the PL pattern was modulated as a function of attention. Specifically, the PL pattern elicited when attending to a
particular segment was highly correlated with the PL pattern elicited
when listening to that segment alone (in the control condition). In addition, similarities were observed between the PL pattern and the spectrotemporal structure of the speech envelope. The results strongly support
the idea that the brain entrains its internal neuronal oscillations to the
rhythmic structure of an input, and that this mechanism is utilized as a
tool for selective attention.

ADAPTIVE REPRESENTATION OF TASK-RELEVANT INFORMATION IN
FRONTOPARIETAL CORTEX Alexandra Woolgar1, John Duncan1; 1Medical
Research Council - Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit — In human functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), a characteristic pattern of frontal
and parietal activity is produced by many different cognitive demands.
These ‘multiple-demand’ regions are thought to be critical for flexible
goal-directed behavior. The adaptive coding hypothesis posits that they
27

Slide Sessions
achieve cognitive control by the adaptive representation of task-relevant
information. We used multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) of human
fMRI data to demonstrate adaptive coding of stimulus, rule and
response information in a visual stimulus-response task. When the perceptual difficulty of the task was increased, frontoparietal regions
showed significantly increased coding of perceptual information. At the
same time, low-level visual areas showed significantly weakened coding
of perceptual information, in line with the physical change in the visual
stimulus. These changes occurred dynamically, across short alternating
blocks of high and low perceptual difficulty. Coding of other task-features was concurrently redistributed across the multiple-demand system, such that together the frontoparietal regions continued to represent
all the information needed for the task. The results are consistent with
the conception of the frontoparietal multiple-demand regions as a flexible neural system that exerts cognitive control in a wide range of tasks by
adaptively representing the task-features that are relevant for successful
goal-directed behavior.

AREAS UNDERLYING THE DEPLOYMENT OF SPATIAL ATTENTION IN THE
HUMAN BRAIN: A ¨BLIND¨ TMS MAPPING OF PARIETAL AND FRONTAL
REGIONS Antoni Valero-Cabre1,2, Claudia Peschke3, Kurtev Stoyan3,

Roxana Voitcu3, Yu Jin3, Richard Rushmore2, Claus Hilgetag3,4; 1CNRS UMR
5105-INSERM S975, Paris, France, 2Boston University School of Medicine,
3
Jacobs University Bremen, Germany, 4Boston University — Prior TMS studies
have suggested that a myriad of distinct regions in the human brain contribute to the processing of spatial attention. We used a basic visual
detection/localization task and applied TMS to systematically map, in
an anatomically “blind” manner, the right and left parietal and frontal
subregions likely to generate significant visuo-spatial biases. Two
groups of 8 adult subjects executed a task based on the detection of black
dots on light-gray background. Targets were displayed unilaterally or
bilaterally for 40 ms, at 25o with a back-projection system. In two independent experiments, a 9 (3x3) stimulation sites grid was anchored lateral to P3 and P4 EEG coordinates for the parietal mapping and 2 cm
rostral to M1 for the frontal mapping. Three pulses of real or sham 10 Hz
TMS were delivered on each grid location 50 ms post target onset to
interfere with the ongoing stimulus processing. In the parietal mapping,
real TMS on the right and left IPS region, 2 cm ventral to IPS, and slightly
above TPJ induced mirror-symmetric ipsilateral spatial biases. In the
frontal mapping, significant reductions in detection rates for contralateral stimuli and increased detection performance for ipsilateral targets
were observed for the region anatomically associated with right FEF,
while TMS of left frontal sites yielded spatially non-selective results. We
conclude that the effects of TMS on a simple spatial localization task for
which a well-balanced deployment of attention is required, are exquisitely spatially selective, and mostly noted in specific right parietal and
frontal regions.

THE CAUSAL ROLES OF THE DORSAL AND VENTRAL FRONTO-PARIETAL
NETWORKS IN ORIENTING SPATIAL ATTENTION Ana Chica1, Antoni

Valero1,2, Paolo Bartolomeo1,3,4; 1INSERM-UPMC UMR-S 975, Paris, France,
CNRS-UMR 5105, Paris, France, 3AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière,
Fédération de Neurologie, Paris, France, 4Catholic University, Milan, Italy —
2

Attention can be spatially oriented in a top-down or bottom-up manner.
Corbetta et al. (2008) have proposed that a dorsal network (including the
Intra-Parietal Sulcus –IPS, and the Frontal Eye Field –FEF) is mostly
involved in attentional orienting (both bottom-up and top-down), while
a ventral network (including the Temporo-Parietal Junction –TPJ, and
the Inferior Frontal Gyrus –IFG) is not related to the orienting of attention but is key in re-orienting attention to unexpected events. We tested
the causal roles of the right IPS and TPJ during bottom-up orienting of
spatial attention using Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS). Participants were presented with a spatially non-informative peripheral cue
that preceded the to-be-discriminated target by either 200 or 800 ms.
Two TMS pulses were delivered 50 ms post-cue presentation to interfere
within a 100 ms time window. Attentional effects for cues presented ipsi-

28

Slide Session 6
laterally to the stimulation side were as expected, showing facilitation at
the short interval, and inhibition at the longer one. Importantly, for contralateral cues, a dissociation was observed when TMS was applied to
IPS and TPJ. TMS pulses on IPS abolished the orienting of attention
while TMS on TPJ produced a facilitatory effect even at the long SOA,
where inhibition was expected. Our results indicate that both the dorsal
and the ventral network play a causal role in orienting attention,
although their effects are clearly dissociable. The abnormal facilitation
observed after TPJ stimulation mimics the characteristic attentional deficits observed in patients with right hemisphere damage suffering from
neglect (Bartolomeo & Chokron, 2002).

NEURAL CORRELATES OF ATTENTIONAL BIAS TOWARD CIGARETTE CUES
IN ACTIVE SMOKERS Vicki Chanon1, Charlotte Boettiger1; 1University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill — Data suggest that craving triggered by
drug cue exposure results in part from abnormal allocation of attention
to drug cues in substance-dependent individuals (SDIs). The importance
of investigating the neural bases of such bias is highlighted by evidence
that its strength predicts risk of relapse. Little is known about the neural
correlates of addiction-related attentional bias. To address this issue, we
tested active smokers (AS, n=12) and non-smokers (NS, n=11) using
fMRI with a spatial cuing paradigm designed to measure attentional bias
toward smoking-related images. Behavioral measures revealed a bias
toward smoking cues in AS. We also observed selective enhancement of
activity in the Inferior Frontal Gyrus in response to smoking cues, specific to the AS group. We speculate that this reflects a need for increased
inhibitory control in AS when the salient, yet irrelevant smoking cues
were present. In addition, we observed enhanced activity, specific to AS,
in response to targets congruent with a smoking cue (relative to incongruent) in a constellation of areas implicated in attention and cognitive
control, including the inferior frontal junction, orbitofrontal cortex
(OFC), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), temporoparietal junction, and
precuneus, as well as the right caudal hippocampus. Abnormalities in
the OFC and ACC are implicated in executive dysfunction among SDIs.
Moreover, the ACC projects throughout the frontoparietal attention system. Our data suggest that the ACC biases this system to attend to smoking stimuli. Identifying these biomarkers of addiction-related attentional
bias provides new putative targets for development of therapeutic interventions for addictive disorders.

NICOTINIC RECEPTOR GENE CHRNA4 INTERACTS WITH PROCESSING
LOAD IN ATTENTION Thomas Espeseth1, Markus Sneve1, Helge Rootwelt2,

Bruno Laeng1; 1University of Oslo, Norway, 2University Hospital of Oslo,
Norway — Pharmacological studies have suggested that cholinergic neurotransmission mediates increases in attentional effort in response to
high processing load in attention demanding tasks (Sarter et al. 2006). In
the present study we tested whether individual variation in CHRNA4, a
gene coding for a subcomponents in the alpha4beta2 nicotinic receptors
in the human brain, interacted with processing load in a multiple object
tracking task (MOT) and a visual search task (VS). We hypothesized that
genotype would predict performance in both tasks under high load, but
not low load. One hundred forty six healthy persons (age range=39 – 77,
mean=55.6, sd=9.0) performed the MOT task in which twelve identical
circular objects moved about the display in a random manner. Two to six
objects were targets and the remaining objects were distractors. The
same observers also performed a visual search for a target letter (i.e. X or
Z) presented together with five non-targets while ignoring centrally presented distractors (i.e. X, Z, or L). Targets differed from non-targets by a
unique feature in the low load condition, whereas they shared features
in the high load condition. CHRNA4 genotype interacted with processing load in both tasks. Homozygotes for the T allele (N=48) had better
tracking capacity in the MOT task and identified targets faster in the VS
task, and these differences occurred only in high load conditions. The
results support the hypothesis that the cholinergic system modulates
attentional effort, and that common genetic variation can be used to
study the molecular biology of cognition.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Slide Session 7

Slide Session 7
Tuesday, April 20, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Outremont Ballroom
PERCEPTION & ACTION
Chair: Kevin Wilson, Gettysburg College
Speakers: Corianne Rogalsky, Sara Fabbri, Aline Bompas, Sander Daselaar,
Frank Scharnowski, Nathan Parks, Simon Davis, Andrew C. Connolly
ABSTRACTS

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SPEECH PERCEPTION AND THE HUMAN
"MIRROR SYSTEM": EVIDENCE FROM LESION CASE-STUDIES

Corianne Rogalsky1, Tracy Love2, David Driscoll3, Steven Anderson3, Gregory
Hickok4; 1University of Southern California, 2San Diego State University /
University of California, San Diego, 3University of Iowa, 4University of
California, Irvine — The discovery of mirror neurons in macaque has led to
a resurrection of motor theories of speech perception. In particular, it has
been proposed that the “human mirror system”, which prominently
includes Broca’s area, is the neurophysiological substrate of speech perception. Although numerous studies have demonstrated a tight link
between sensory and motor speech processes, few have directly assessed
the critical prediction of mirror neuron theories of speech perception,
namely that damage to the human mirror system should cause severe
deficits in speech perception. The present study tested this prediction by
measuring speech perception abilities of subjects with lesions involving
motor regions in the posterior frontal lobe and/or the left inferior parietal lobule (i.e. the proposed human "mirror system"). A subset of subjects had lesions that also included temporal regions. Subjects completed
a psycholinguistic battery to assess their phonological, lexical, and sentence-level speech comprehension and production abilities. Signal detection analyses indicate that performance was near ceiling in the word
comprehension and discrimination tasks for patients with damage to the
“human mirror system". Perceptual deficits were evident only when the
lesion encroached on auditory regions in the temporal lobe. Perceptual
deficits in patients with temporal lobe involvement were particularly
evident on non-word stimuli compared to word stimuli even when stimuli were equated for phonological neighborhood density and phonotactic frequency. These results suggest that damage to the human "mirror
system" does not disrupt speech perception and argue instead that auditory systems are the primary substrate for speech perception. Supported
by NIH-DC03681.

ABSTRACT CODING OF MOVEMENT DIRECTION IN HUMAN SUPERIOR
PARIETAL CORTEX (GSP WINNER) Sara Fabbri1, Alfonso Caramazza1,2,

in
Angelika Lingnau1; 1University of Trento, 2Harvard University — Neurons
monkey motor cortex are broadly tuned for movement direction: activity
of a neuron is highest for the preferred movement direction and
decreases gradually with increasing angular difference between the preferred and non-preferred direction. Here we aimed to identify areas with
similar properties in the human brain. In particular, we asked if there
exists an abstract representation of movement direction that remains
invariant despite changes in low-level parameters, like the type of motor
act (to grasp vs to press). Using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) adaptation, we identified several areas within the human visuomotor system whose blood-oxygen level dependent (BOLD) activity was
modulated by the angular difference between adapted and test hand
movement directions. In particular, right superior parietal lobe (SPL)
showed pronounced directional tuning that was not affected by the type
of motor act (to press vs to grasp). Most other regions in the dorsal pathway showed directional tuning that was significantly modulated by the
type of motor act. In contrast, the BOLD response in left and right cerebellum was modulated by movement direction and type of motor act,
but not by their interaction. These results suggest that the control of
directional movements in the human brain relies on a network of areas

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Slide Sessions
selective for movement direction at different levels of abstractness. Such
an abstract representation of movement direction might play an important role for the dynamic control of movement direction irrespective of
changes in low-level muscle parameters as well as for transformations
from visual to motor coordinates.

MEG SIGNATURES OF SACCADIC CHOICE AND SPEED DIFFER: A
CRITICAL TEST FOR DECISION MODELS Aline Bompas1, Iain Gilchrist2,

Suresh Muthukumaraswamy1, Krish Singh1, Petroc Sumner1; 1Cardiff
University, CUBRIC - School of Psychology, 2Bristol University — A fundamental prediction of all accumulator models of decision is that choice and
latency are related, because latency to one visual target and choice
between two possible targets are determined by the same factor – how
soon activity for a particular response reaches threshold in an action
planning area. We used magnetoencephalography (MEG) to design a
critical test for this attractive though unchallenged assumption. Participants made saccades to onset targets (left or right), and on one third of
the trials had to choose freely between two simultaneous targets (left and
right). We split these bilateral trials according to the choice made (left
versus right) and compared the MEG activity during the 200 ms before
the stimulus onset (baseline). Similarly in single target trials, we compared the baseline MEG activity preceding fast and slow saccades. While
choice was predicted by frontal differences in the alpha frequency band
(5-15Hz), speed was predicted by non-lateralised occipital differences in
the alpha and beta bands (5-30Hz), the two signatures showing no similarities, even at the sub-significant level. Our results suggest that different baseline settings specifically modulate choice and speed, in contrast
with the central assumption of accumulator models.

MODALITY-SPECIFIC AND MODALITY-INDEPENDENT COMPONENTS OF
THE HUMAN IMAGERY SYSTEM Sander Daselaar1, Yuval Porat1, Willem

Huijbers1, Cyriel Pennartz1; 1University of Amsterdam — Imagery

research
typically deals with the commonalities and differences between imagery
and perception. As such, it is usually confined to one specific modality.
Yet, it is likely that some of the underlying processes are shared between
different sensory modalities while others are modality-specific. In this
fMRI study, we used a balanced design that allowed for a direct comparison between imagery and perception in visual and auditory modalities,
and also for a link between subjective imagery experience and brain activation. Results indicated a selective role for the “default mode network”
as a modality-independent “core” imagery network. This finding supports the idea of a general role of the DMN in rich mental imagery
involving multiple sensory components. In addition, results identified
areas in the visual and auditory association cortices that contributed to
mental imagery in a modality-specific fashion. The finding of shared
imagery-related and perception-related activity in VA and AA within
one single task suggests that, even though these regions are processing
different features of imagined objects, they share a common processing
level situated at an advanced stage in the hierarchy of the human sensory system. Interestingly during mental imagery, primary visual and
auditory cortices showed modality-specific suppression of activity. Suppression of primary sensory regions may help the processing of internally-generated images or sounds by shielding the associative sensory
regions from external perceptual input processed by primary regions.
This is the first fMRI study to characterize both modality-specific and
modality-independent components of the human imagery system.

MANIPULATING VISUAL PERCEPTION WITH REAL-TIME FMRI-BASED
NEUROFEEDBACK TRAINING Frank Scharnowski1, Chloe Hutton1, Oliver

Josephs1, Nikolaus Weiskopf1, Geraint Rees1; 1University College London
(UCL) — Spontaneous fluctuations of ongoing brain activity have a profound impact on perception. For example, human observers are more
likely to perceive a visual stimulus if baseline activation in visual cortex
at the time of presentation is higher. Here, we used real-time fMRI-based
neurofeedback to train participants to voluntarily regulate the ongoing
brain activation of circumscribed areas in their early visual cortex. We
then tested how such self-regulated activation influenced subsequent

29

Slide Sessions
processing of a visual stimulus presented near threshold. We found that
the level of activation within early visual cortex directly influenced
objective detection thresholds, i.e. when the participants increased activation they became better at detecting a visual stimulus. A control group
who received feedback from a non-visual brain region did not learn to
control visual cortex activation and did not show changes in visual sensitivity. Hence, with real-time fMRI-based neurofeedback it is possible to
learn voluntary control over visual cortex activation and thereby to
improve visual sensitivity. This new approach allows us to now study
perception as a variable which is dependent on self-regulated brain activation, and therefore to investigate causal links between brain activation
and percfeption.

NEURAL CORRELATES OF SHORT-TERM VISUAL PLASTICITY AND
CORTICAL DISINHIBITION IN HUMANS Nathan Parks1, Paul Corballis2;

1Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Georgia
Institute of Technology — Restricting visual input from a circumscribed

region of space induces representational plasticity within retinotopically
organized visual areas such that deafferented cortex begins to represent
new spatial locations. The extent of such plasticity is most compelling
over the long-term but functional changes begin within seconds of retinal deafferentation. The neural mechanism proposed to underlie shortterm visual plasticity is one of disinhibition whereby a reduction of local
inhibition within deafferented areas renders them more sensitive to
inputs from surrounding cortex. We investigated the neural mechanisms
of short-term visual plasticity and disinhibition in humans using a stimulus-induced analog of retinal deafferentation known as an artificial
scotoma – a uniform area stabilized upon a dynamically changing background. Artificial scotomas provide a useful model of short-term visual
plasticity as they temporarily mimic the perceptual and neural changes
that accompany a true retinal scotoma (pseudo-deafferentation). In a
series of studies we measured contrast response functions and visual
evoked potentials (VEPs) from within the boundaries of an artificial
scotoma (scotoma condition). In comparison to a closely matched control
(sham condition), psychophysical functions exhibited contrast-dependent effects indicative of increased spatial integration but decreased
stimulus selectivity. VEPs elicited from within the boundaries of an artificial scotoma exhibited enhanced amplitude of early sensory components, indicating that reduced stimulus selectivity is associated with
increased neural gain in pseudo-deafferented visual cortical areas.
Results follow the predictions of disinhibition and suggest that shortterm visual cortical deafferentation is associated with increased spatial
integration as well as a nonselective increase in neural response gain.

Slide Session 7
hemispheric transfer and behavioral performance (#1). The results are
also consistent with the notion that greater communication between the
hemispheres engenders more efficient processing in response to
increased task demands, and that older adults show greater reliance on a
bilaterally distributed network, possibly reflecting functional compensation.

MULTI-VOXEL SIMILARITY STRUCTURE ANALYSIS REVEALS TAXONOMY
OF ANIMAL SPECIES IN HUMAN VENTRAL TEMPORAL CORTEX Andrew

C. Connolly1, James V. Haxby1; 1Dartmouth College — Our goal is to develop
a detailed account of the structure of the representation of living things
in the brain and how this structure emerges in the object vision pathway,
investigating three regions: medial occipital (MO), inferior occipital (IO),
and ventral temporal cortex (VT). Our approach is based on the analysis
of similarity structure for multi-voxel patterns defined by responses to a
variety of animate categories using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). During fMRI scanning, subjects (N=12) viewed photographs
of six animal species—two species each of insects, birds, and primates.
Pair-wise distances between condition patterns were used to construct
15-dimensional neural similarity spaces, where each dimension corresponds to the distance between a species pair. The similarity structures
revealed how categorical representations take shape along the visual
processing pathway. Patterns in early visual cortex (MO) are less differentiated in general than in IO and VT, and without clear category structure. In IO, there is strong differentiation between the vertebrates and
the insects, while in VT each intermediate-level category becomes clearly
defined. Similarity structures are highly stable and replicable both
within and between subjects—especially in VT with an average betweensubject correlation of r=.91, which is higher than that for regions earlier
in the visual processing stream: IO, r=.75; MO, r=.65. Similarity-based
multi-voxel pattern analysis reveals a categorical structure in ventral
temporal cortex that mirrors our knowledge about animal species, providing a window into the structure of neural representations that form
the basis of our categorical knowledge of the living world.

THE COGNITIVE, FUNCTIONAL, AND STRUCTURAL ARCHITECTURE OF
CROSS-HEMISPHERIC COMMUNICATION IN YOUNGER AND OLDER
ADULTS Simon Davis1, James Kragel1, David Madden1, Roberto Cabeza1;
1

Duke University — In order to investigate the neural mechanisms of crosshemispheric communication and how they change as a function of
aging, we (1) assessed cross-hemispheric transfer using bilateral-unilateral matching task, (2) linked behavioral results in this task to fMRI connectivity (FC) between homologous regions across hemispheres, and (3)
linked FC to DTI measures of white matter integrity in the corresponding cross-hemispheric tracts. (1) Replicating previous research, we
observed that (a) matching was faster for bilateral than unilateral trials
(bilateral processing advantage), (b) that this effect increased with
matching difficulty, and (c) occurred a lower difficulty levels for older
than younger adults. (2) FC was greater at higher levels of task difficulty
between homologous regions in frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes;
older adults showed a similar pattern but in a greater number of homologous regions. (3) Finally, FC in several pairs of homologous regions was
significantly correlated with white matter integrity (fractional anisotropy) in the corresponding tracts; white matter integrity was also correlated with the bilateral processing advantage. These effects were
stronger in older than younger adults. Taken together, the findings support a hypothetical causal chain whereby changes in white matter integrity (#3) modulate changes in FC (#2) which in turn modulate cross-

30

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Person Perception
A1

THE DEVELOPMENT OF CATEGORY-CONTINGENT FACE PROTOTYPES: AN
EXAMINATION OF OPPOSING ATTRACTIVENESS AFTEREFFECTS IN FIVEYEAR-OLD CHILDREN Lindsey Short1, Catherine Mondloch1; 1Brock
University — Simple aftereffects provide evidence that adults process individual faces in reference to a prototype that is continuously updated by
experience. Following repeated exposure to faces distorted in one direction (e.g., compressed features), adults rate similarly distorted faces as
more normal and more attractive. Opposing aftereffects provide evidence that adults have multiple face prototypes (e.g., male/female; Caucasian/Chinese) that are processed by dissociable neural populations
(e.g., Jaquet, Rhodes, & Hayward, 2008). Following adaptation to two
face categories that are distorted in opposite directions (e.g., compressed
Chinese faces and expanded Caucasian faces), adults’ judgments of
attractiveness and normality shift in opposite directions. Here we used a
child-friendly method to examine whether 5-year-olds show simple and
opposing aftereffects. In Experiment 1, 5-year-olds read a storybook in
which all faces were distorted in one direction (e.g., compressed). Like
adults and 8-year-olds, 5-year-olds’ attractiveness preferences shifted in
the direction of adaptation, p < .05. In Experiment 2, 5-year-olds read a
storybook in which Caucasian and Chinese faces were distorted in opposite directions. Unlike adults and 8-year-olds, 5-year-olds’ attractiveness
preferences did not shift in opposite directions, p > .10. The lack of
opposing aftereffects for race of face may indicate that 5-year-olds reference all faces to a single prototype. Alternatively, 5-year-olds may have
multiple prototypes for only a subset of face categories. To examine
whether children process boy versus girl faces with dissociable neural
populations, we are currently investigating opposing aftereffects for sex
of face in 5-year-olds—a category that is highly salient to young children.

A2

MIRRORING OF PAIN FACES, EMOTIONAL CONTAGION, AND
EMPATHY Adrienne Moore1, Paul Ruvolo1, Megan O'Rorke1, Tingfan Wu1,
Andrea Chiba1, Gwen Littlewort1, Javier Movellan1, Marian Stewart-Bartlett1;
University of California, San Diego — Social cognition relies heavily on pro-

1

cessing the emotional facial expressions of people in our environments.
Mirroring, or mirror neuron system based activity, has been suggested
as a mechanism for inferring from external facial displays of emotion
how others feel internally. The goal of this study was to investigate the
role of mirroring in response to faces expressing pain, the role of emotional contagion in response to faces expressing pain, and the relationship between mirroring, emotional contagion and empathy. Mirroring in
the form of facial mimicry was indexed using the Computer Expression
Recognition Toolbox, CERT, to quantify the facial muscle movement of
subjects as they observed video stimuli of confederates performing real
and fake cold pressor pain tasks. Specifically, mimcry was indexed as
correlations between muscle activity of the subjects’ faces and of the pain
faces they observed. Emotional contagion was assessed by measuring

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

autonomic nervous system mediated physiological changes, specifically,
heart rate, heart rate variability, and respiratory rate. Trait empathy was
measured using the Interpersonal Reactivity Index questionnaire, and
empathic accuracy was measured using the task of distinguishing real
from fake expressions of pain. The results of this study show that facial
mimicry behavior does occur when observing pain faces and also predicts aspects of trait empathy and empathic accuracy. This study motivates a follow-up study using EEG to assess whether the mu rhythm,
said to reflect mirror neuron system activity, is involved in these effects.

A3

DISTINCT EARLY CORTICAL ROUTES FOR THE STRUCTURAL AND
EXPRESSIVE ASPECTS OF HUMAN BODY PERCEPTION, AN MEG
STUDY Hanneke Meeren1, Nouchine Hadjikhani2,3,4, Seppo Ahlfors2,3, Matti

Hämäläinen2,3, Beatrice de Gelder1,2,3; 1Tilburg University, Netherlands,
A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, MGH/MIT/Harvard
Medical School, 3Harvard-MIT Health Sciences and Technology, 4Brain Mind
Institute, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland — The perceptual processing of fear2Athinoula

ful expressions in the face may already be initiated around 100-120-ms
after stimulus presentation, demonstrating that emotional information of
a face can be encoded before the identity of the face is fully recognized.
Recent findings indicate that the same may be true for emotions
expressed by the human body. The neural basis of this proposed early
stage of emotion analysis is however poorly understood. To address this
question we used magnetoencephalography (MEG) and anatomicallyconstrained distributed source modeling to monitor brain activity with
millisecond-resolution while subjects viewed still images of whole
human bodies in a neutral and a fearful expression. In addition, an MEG
experiment was performed to study the dynamic functional mapping of
body-selectivity. Significant emotion effects were found from 80 ms after
stimulus onset in areas outside the body-selective areas. Fearful body
expression did not modulate the prominent responses in the well-established body-selective area of the EBA. In contrast, the responses in fusiform gyrus, which did not show any body-selectivity before 500 ms
poststimulus, were strongly boosted by the expression of fear around
230 ms. Later in time, the two aspects of body processing converged in
the orbitofrontal area, showing strong body-selectivity and a sustained
emotion effect between 300-700 ms after picture onset. Our results suggest that structural body encoding and body-expression are processed
by separate cortical routes early in the processing stream, and converge
in the orbitofrontal region after 300 ms poststimulus.

A4

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN PERCEIVING THREAT FROM DYNAMIC
FACES AND BODIES Mariska Kret1,2, Johan Denollet2, Beatrice de

Gelder1,3; 1Cognitive and Affective Neurosciences Laboratory, Tilburg
University, the Netherlands, 2CoRPS - Center of Research on Psychology in
Somatic diseases, Tilburg University, the Netherlands, 3Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Charlestown, MA — We express and communicate our emotional
states and action tendencies with our bodies of which facial expressions
are an integral part. A growing literature demonstrates that different

31

Poster Session A
personality traits are associated with specific coping styles which translate to unique activity patterns in the brain. Two functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiments investigated how areas involved in
processing social signals are activated more by threatening signals (fear
and anger) from facial and bodily expressions and how this relates to a
distressed personality, characterized by high emotional distress (negative affectivity) which is consciously suppressed (social inhibition). A
negative correlation was observed between negative affectivity and activation in brain areas commonly involved in emotional processes:
amygdala (AMG), fusiform gyrus (FG), insula, superior temporal sulcus
(STS) and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) (Brodmann area 45). Furthermore,
increased activation was observed in the secondary somatosensory cortex (SII), anterior intraparietal sulcus, left temporo-parietal junction (TPJ)
and left OFC with more social inhibition following threat. The results
suggest that people with high scores on social inhibition rely more on the
conceptual knowledge they have about emotion, imagining themselves
in the perceived state, whereas people without these personality traits
activate the well-known emotion areas. Our findings demonstrate the
striking effects of personality in a non-clinical population, and show
how this can distinguish the neural coding of anger and fear signals.

A5

MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER BIASES THE RECOGNITION OF
EMOTIONAL PROSODY Julie Peron1,2,3, Sarah El Tamer1, Didier

Grandjean2, David Travers1,4, Dominique Drapier1,5, Marc Vérin1,2, Bruno
Millet1,5; 1Université Rennes, Hôpital Pontchaillou, CHU de Rennes, Rennes,
France, 2Clinique Neurologique, Hôpital Pontchaillou, CHU de Rennes,
Rennes, France, 3Neuropsychology of Emotion and Affective Dynamics lab,
Swiss Center for Affective Sciences, Geneva, Switzerland, University of Geneva,
4Service des Urgences, Hôpital Pontchaillou, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France,
5
S.H.U. Psychiatrie Adulte, CH Guillaume Régnier — Major depressive disorder patients presented biased interpretation of facial expressions toward
negative emotion but also away from positive one suggesting that
responsiveness to positive emotional stimuli would be blunted in
depression. Nevertheless, the question as to whether these emotional
biases induced by depression are modality-specific has yet to be
answered. The objective of this study was therefore to examine the
effects of depression on the recognition of emotional prosody using a
paradigm which are ill-suited to capture subtle effects of biases in information processing. An original emotional prosody paradigm using different kinds of pseudowords produced by 12 actors with 5 emotional
prosody judged on continuous scales was administered to 21 major
depressive disorder patients, and 21 controls matched for sociodemographical variables. As compared to control, depressed patients displayed significant recognition of emotional prosody impairment for fear,
happiness, and sadness; furthermore, they also rated the fear scale significantly more intensely when they listened to anger stimuli. Similarly,
the depressed patients were biased on the rating of the surprise scale,
rating this scale significantly more intensely when they listened to sad or
fearful utterances. Furthermore, these contrasts revealed that when they
listened to happiness, depressed patients rated negative scales more
intensely as compared to control. These results suggest the impaired recognition of emotional expressions is not specific to the visual modality
and that major depressive disorder biases the recognition of emotional
prosody toward negative emotional stimuli but also that the blunting of
positive one would not be specific to the visual modality.

A6

THE INFLUENCE OF CONTEXT ON EMOTIONAL FACE PROCESSING

Charlotte B. A. Sinke1,2, Jan Van den Stock1, Rainer Goebel2, Beatrice de
Gelder1,3; 1Cognitive and Affective Neurosciences Laboratory, University of
Tilburg, the Netherlands, 2University of Maastricht, the Netherlands, 3Martinos
Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, MA — Humans rapidly recognize and understand facial
expressions of others, as shown by numerous behavioral and neuroimaging studies. An important factor that may influence this recognition

32

Emotion & Social: Person Perception
process is the context in which the face is perceived. Affective scenes
have already shown to influence an ERP component (the N170) of facial
expressions, indicating that the face is already at an early stage encoded
differently in an affective context. Using functional magnetic resonance
imaging, we tried to investigate the influence of an emotional scene on
the neuronal processing of fearful and neutral faces. Fourteen participants were being scanned while they were shown photographs (248 trials) of either a fearful, neutral or no face in a fearful, neutral or scrambled
scene. To stay focused, they had to respond to an oddball. The experiment consisted of four runs of 31 blocks. Eight stimuli were presented
per block for 800 ms with an interval of 350 ms. Also, a functional localizer for the perception of faces, bodies, houses and tools was used. Our
main results replicate previous findings that fusiform and occipital face
areas are modulated by facial emotion. In addition, activity in right fusiform gyrus increases for fearful faces when they are in a fearful scene.
Occipital face area shows less activation for a neutral face when it is presented in a fearful versus a neutral scene. Parahippocampal place area
and retrosplenial cortex show less activation for a scene when it is fearful.

A7

SOCIAL APPRAISAL: THE APPRAISAL OF OTHERS INFLUENCES OUR
PERCEPTION OF FACIAL EXPRESSIONS OF EMOTION Christian

Mumenthaler1,2, David Sander1,2; 1Laboratory for the Study of Emotion
Elicitation and Expression, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Swiss
Center for Affective Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland — The

concept of appraisal plays a central role in various theories of emotion.
Although the number, definition, and order of appearance of appraisals
vary between theories, so-called “appraisal theories” of emotion, all
agree on the notion that emotions are elicited by subjective evaluations
(appraisals) of events and situations. Even if the causes and social functions of emotions are generally recognized by the literature, appraisal
processes have in general been studied independently of the social context. However, the concept of « social appraisal » proposes that the
appraisal of an emotional event made by an individual is influenced by
the appraisal that other individuals make of the very same event. We
tested this proposal by asking participants to identify a dynamic facial
expression of emotion that was presented at the centre of the screen
while another face, which appeared simultaneously in the periphery of
the screen, was expressing an emotion. We also manipulated the gaze
direction of the face in the periphery to differentiate the effect of the
“social appraisal” from the effect of general background information.
Our results suggest that appraisal made by others affect our perception
of facial expressions of emotion. We found that "social appraisal" facilitates the categorization of facial expressions of anger, joy and fear when
the context was expressing the same emotion. It also allowed a better categorisation of facial expression of fear when the context was expressing
anger and vice versa. Importantly, the effect of "social appraisal” differed from the effect of general background information.

A8

NEURAL BASES OF EMOTION PERCEPTION REFLECT RELATIVE RELIANCE
ON NONVERBAL AND CONTEXTUAL SOCIAL CUES Jamil Zaki1, Kelly

Hennigan2, Jochen Weber1, Kevin Ochsner1; 1Columbia University, 2Stanford
University — Every day, individuals must make decisions about how others are feeling, based on complex, sometimes contradictory nonverbal
and contextual social cues. However, extant research on the neural bases
of social cognition has often used simplified stimuli that do not approximate real-world social information. This work has identified two dissociable neural systems involved in processing different types of social
information: the mirror neuron system, which supports deciphering of
action intentions based mainly on nonverbal behavior, and the mentalizing system, which supports explicit appraisals of internal states based
mainly on contextual information. Nonetheless, the way these systems
interact during processing of realistic social cues remains unclear. In this
study, we collected whole-brain fMRI data while participants watched

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Person Perception
silent videos of social targets describing emotional experiences (nonverbal social cues), read sentences describing targets’ emotional experiences
(contextual social cues), or saw both videos and sentences concurrently
(multimodal social cues); when multimodal cues were presented, videos
and sentences were sometimes congruent in valence, and sometimes
incongruent. In all cases, participants rated the emotion they believed
targets were experiencing. Nonverbal social cues selectively engaged the
mirror neuron system, whereas contextual cues selectively engaged the
mentalizing system. When multimodal cues were presented, and suggested incongruent affective valence, engagement of the mirror neuron
system predicted perceivers’ reliance on nonverbal information in making their subsequent rating, and engagement of the mentalizing system
predicted their reliance on contextual information. These results represent a step towards understanding the ways that multiple neural systems contribute to decisions about realistic, complex social information.

A9

HOW MUCH CAN I TRUST YOU? AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF THE NEURAL
MECHANISMS UNDERLYING THE IMPACT OF SOCIAL INTERACTIONS ON
DECISION MAKING Sophie Flor-Henry1, Keen Sung1, Ekaterina Denkova1,

Sanda Dolcos1, Florin Dolcos1; 1University of Alberta — The “friend or foe”
judgements, which are important for survival, are often based on first
impressions, which in turn may affect our social and financial decisions.
In the present study, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data
were recorded while participants viewed and rated videos of guest-host
interactions in a business setting. The host displayed behaviors that
either encouraged (Approach condition) or discouraged (Avoid condition) further social interactions. Analyses of behavioural data (N=29)
showed that the Avoid trials were associated with lower host trustworthiness and competence scores, as well as with subjects’ decreased willingness to engage in business interactions with the host. Preliminary
analyses of the fMRI data (N=8) identified enhanced activity in the superior temporal sulcus [STS] (a part of the brain’s “social cognition network”) to both the Approach and Avoid trials, compared to a no-social
interaction condition, while also showing greater sensitivity to the Avoid
condition. Furthermore, STS activity for the Avoid condition was also
positively correlated with participants’ trustworthiness ratings. In addition, there was also a negative correlation between the trustworthiness
ratings and activity in the amygdala [AMY] (a brain region associated
with emotion processing) in Avoid trials. These findings suggest that
STS and AMY activity index processing of behavioral cues that allow
discrimination of foes from friends. These findings have relevance for
understanding the neural substrates of the impact of affective non-verbal
communication on social interactions, and for understanding clinical
conditions in which the impact of emotional content of social situations
is altered (e.g., autism, social phobia).
A10

SOCIAL IDENTITY ORGANIZES FACE PERCEPTION: THE FUSIFORM FACE
AREA RESPONDS PREFERENTIALLY TO MEMBERS OF AN
EXPERIMENTALLY CREATED INGROUP Jay Van Bavel1, Dominic Packer2,

William Cunningham3; 1New York University, 2Lehigh University, 3The Ohio
State University — There has been extensive research on a region of the

fusiform gyrus critical for recognizing faces – termed the fusiform face
area (FFA). However, it remains an open question whether the FFA is
sensitive to shifting social dynamics. One possibility is that facial processing in the FFA may be relatively invariant and other neural systems
may be recruited to imbue faces with social meaning. Another possibility
is that social context may provide a direct, top-down influence on representations in the FFA. The current fMRI study explored the sensitivity of
the FFA to an experimentally created social identity. We assigned participants to one of two arbitrary groups, then had them visually identify
ingroup and outgroup faces and complete a FFA localizer during neuroimaging. The FFA was selectively engaged during presentation of
experimentally created ingroup (> outgroup) faces, even when the intergroup distinction was random, there were no visual cues to distinguish

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session A
group membership, and exposure to the faces was equivalent, brief (~15
minutes) and recent. The results suggest that a currently salient group
membership – however arbitrary – may recruit the FFA to visually identify fellow group members in the absence of long-term experience with
that category. Although these results are consistent with models suggesting that the FFA plays a general role in subordinate processing of stimuli
within a category (Palmeri & Gauthier, 2004), our data suggest that longterm experience is not necessary to engage these processes. Instead, topdown influences like social identity can influence FFA activity in a
dynamic fashion.

A11

REAL DUMMY MAY SHED LIGHT ON FUNCTIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF
TOM-RELATED BRAIN ACTIVITIES J. Bruno Debruille1, Mathieu Brodeur1,

Ursula Hess2; 1McGill University, 2Université du Québec à Montréal — As they
resemble real persons, dummies’ faces are likely to trigger the automatic
attribution of mental states during early automatic processes. Accordingly, our first hypothesis was that the early posterior negativities, that
is, the EPN of the event-related potentials (ERPs) they evoke could be
similar to those elicited by a real face. However, because dummies are
objects and thus things to which no mental state should be attributed,
this mental state processing could stop later. Accordingly, greater anterior N2-400s to the dummy’s face could be predicted following previous
works that suggested that such activities could index down regulations
of the amygdala by the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC). Nevertheless, an opposite prediction could be made following the greater N2400 found in a theory of mind (ToM) task than in control task, namely,
that the N2-400 could be absent for stimuli for which no mental state
should be attributed. To test which of these last two hypotheses is correct; ERPs elicited by the face of a dummy sitting in front of the participant were compared to those elicited by the face of a real person in the
same position. Control ERPs elicited by the photos of these two stimuli
were also recorded. The four stimuli were found to elicit similar EPNs,
suggesting that they all triggered similar automatic attributions of mental states. In accordance with the first hypothesis, the face of the real
dummy was found to elicit larger anterior N2-N400s than the three other
stimuli.

A12

EFFECTS OF CHRONIC PAIN AND PAIN BEHAVIORS ON THE SENSITIVITY
TO THE PAIN OF OTHERS Etienne Vachon-Presseau1, Marc-Olivier Martel2,

Mathieu Roy3, Micheal Sullivan2, Jackson Philip4, Rainville Pierre1; 1Université
de Montréal, 2McGill University, 3Columbia University, 4Université Laval —
Empathy for pain is a complex process in which the observer’s knowledge and experience of pain is combined to a cognitive evaluation of
another person’s feelings. The purpose of the present study was to examine if chronic pain patients varying in their tendency to display pain
behaviors are more sensitive to others’ pain. Patients with idiopathic
back pain (n=21) classified as «high» or «low» pain expressers based on a
standardized task, and matched for pain duration, age and sex, were
compared to 21 age- and sex-matched pain-free participants. Subjects
rated the intensity of the pain represented in 2s pictures of hand (n=16),
foot (n=16) and face (n=16) displaying neutral (50%) or painful (50%) situations/expressions. Ratings of the pain stimuli showed no effect of category (hand, foot, face; p=0.13) or interaction group*category (p=0.78),
but revealed a significant difference between the 3 groups (main effect,
p=0.038; high > control, p=0.012; high > low, p=0.067). In addition, a
Pearson correlation revealed a significant linear relation between the
patients’ pain-behavior scores and ratings of the pain observed (r = 0.52;
p = 0.016). These results suggest that patients with a stronger tendency to
display pain behaviors are more sensitive to stimuli signaling pain in
others. However, this effect is not specific to pain communicative signals
(face) and may reflect a generalized hypervigilance to environmental
cues signaling potential injury or pain-related situations.

33

Poster Session A

Emotion & Social: Person Perception

A13

A15

Barbey1,
Jordan Grafman1; 1Cognitive Neuroscience Section, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health — Cognitive

BRINGING REAL SOCIAL LIFE IN THE LABORATORY : EEG
HYPERSCANNING OF JOINT ATTENTION Fanny Lachat1,2,3, Laurence

THE NEURAL ARCHITECTURE OF SOCIAL ATTRIBUTION Aron

neuroscience has made considerable progress in understanding the
involvement of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) in social cognition. Accumulating evidence demonstrates that representations within the lateral PFC
(lPFC) enable people to orchestrate their thoughts and actions in concert
with their intentions to support goal-directed social behavior. Despite
the pivotal role of this region in guiding social interactions, remarkably
little is known about the functional organization and forms of social
knowledge mediated by the lPFC. We develop an integrative cognitive
neuroscience framework for understanding the social functions of the
lPFC, drawing upon recent theoretical developments in evolutionary
psychology and emerging evidence from the social and decision neuroscience literatures demonstrating the importance of this region for
orchestrating behavior on the basis of evolutionarily adaptive neural
mechanisms for social attribution. We propose that the lPFC mediates
central elements of social attribution, including (1) inferring causal relationships, (2) productively applying this knowledge to predict and
explain social interactions, and (3) utilizing both forms of knowledge to
navigate the social world. These forms of social inference are functionally organized along the dorso-ventral axis of the lateral PFC, whereby
the process of inferring the cause(s) of social behavior recruits the dorsolateral PFC, and applying this knowledge to predict and explain social
interactions engages the ventrolateral PFC. Adaptive behavior guided by
both categories of inference recruits the anterolateral PFC, which represents the highest level of a rostro-caudal hierarchy characterized by multiple forms of social inference. We review a broad range of neuroscience
evidence to support this proposal.

A14

THE MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS: THE
ROLE OF SOCIO-EMOTIONAL CONTEXT Peter Enticott1, Hayley Rhook1,

Nicole Rinehart1, Bruce Tonge1, John Bradshaw1, Paul Fitzgerald1; 1Monash
University, Australia — Impairments in social relating are the hallmark of

autism spectrum disorders (ASD). An increasingly prominent explanatory model suggests that reduced activity within the mirror neuron system (MNS) might precipitate these social impairments. When
considering the clinical profile of autism, our understanding of the role
of the MNS in ASD might be enhanced by examining mirror neuron
activity that occurs whilst viewing socio-emotional behaviour. Individuals with ASD and matched healthy controls underwent a transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) experiment designed to measure mirror
neuron activation. TMS was administered to the primary motor cortex
while participants viewed stimuli depicting static or active human
hands. Motor-evoked potentials (reflecting cortical excitability) were
recorded from the contralateral first dorsal interosseus. Visual stimuli
designed to elicit a mirror neuron response involved intransitive movements, transitive movements, and movements with an implied socioemotional context. Participants with ASD displayed reduced cortical
excitability when viewing transitive movements, but seemingly appropriate cortical excitability when viewing socio-emotional movements.
Thus, although some mirror neuron impairments were evident in ASD, a
socio-emotional component appeared to promote a substantial mirror
neuron response in each group. The link between mirror neuron activation and aspects of autism (both social and non-social) appears to be
extremely complex, and there may be broader neurocognitive and neurophysiological processes involved. These findings have implications for
our understanding of the neuropathophysiology of ASD, particularly in
terms of motor resonance and the subsequent impact on social cognition
and empathy.

34

Conty4,5, Laurent Hugeville1,2,3, Guillaume Dumas1,2,3, Jacques Martinerie1,2,3,
Nathalie George1,2,3; 1Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, Centre de
Recherche de l’Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, UMR-S975, Paris,
France, 2Cnrs, UMR 7225, CRICM, Paris, France, 3Inserm, U 975, CRICM,
Paris, France, 4Inserm, U 960, Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives, Paris,
France, 5Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France — Gaze is a key element of
interpersonal interaction. In everyday social situations, we dynamically
follow the gaze of others as well as attract their look onto objects of interest. This phenomenon is called joint or shared attention. It has typically
been studied in laboratory setting using on-screen face display with Posner like attention orienting paradigm. However, real life situation and
physical presence may be an essential component of joint attention. Furthermore, joint attention may be reflected in the synchronization of
endogenous oscillators in the subjects’ brain. Our aim was to create a real
life situation in the laboratory room. Specifically, we aimed at 1) evaluating gaze-induced attention orienting in real life setting; 2) recording electrical brain activity of participants’ couples during different events of
joint, anti joint attention, and mutual gaze. Subjects placed face-to-face
had to look at each other and to gaze at either same or different diodes
placed between them in successive trials. The EEG signals of subjects’
couples were recorded simultaneously (EEG hyperscanning). Our
results first show that real gaze induces robust attention orienting: participants were 17 ms faster (p<.02) at detecting diode colour change
under joint relative to anti-joint attention condition. We will also present
preliminary EEG results, comprising time-frequency analysis of intra- as
well as inter-individual synchronization. We expect that joint attention
induces synchronization between parts of the brain both intra- and interindividually. Our results show the feasibility of bringing everyday
human interaction into the lab. It offers new exciting prospects for social
neuroscience.

A16

YOU DON'T LOOK HAPPY, JUST SILLY! ERPS TO PROTOTYPICAL AND
NON-PROTOTYPICAL FACES Silke Paulmann1,2, Marc D. Pell2; 1University

of Essex, Colchester, UK, 2McGill University, Montréal, Canada — Many previous studies have examined event-related brain potential (ERP) correlates
of processes acting on emotional and non-emotional (i.e., neutral) faces.
These studies, which assume that differential brain responses reflect
direct differences in neural processes subserving face processing, have
identified how and when information about prototypical (or “basic”)
emotion displays is processed in the face. However, in “real-life” situations we often encounter socially-relevant facial expressions that do not
correspond to specific emotion prototypes, for example when someone
grimaces or “pulls a face”. The question arises whether these non-prototypical facial expressions follow similar processing stages as prototypical
emotion displays and/or neutral facial expressions, which was
addressed by the present study. We compared ERPs elicited by faces
conveying prototypical affective expressions, non-prototypical affective
expressions, and neutral faces to further specify the time course of (emotional) face processing. Results showed that prototypical and non-prototypical facial expressions could each be differentiated from neutral
expressions in three different ERP component amplitudes (P200, early
negativity, and N400), which are believed to index distinct processing
stages in facial expression decoding. Based on the distribution of effects,
our results suggest that early processing is mediated by shared neural
generators for prototypical and non-prototypical facial expressions;
however, later processing stages appear to engage distinct sub-systems
for the three facial expression types investigated according to their emotionality and meaning status.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Person Perception
A17

IMPAIRED SOCIAL INFERENCE IN PEOPLE WITH UNILATERAL TEMPORAL
LOBE DAMAGE Melanie Cohn1,2, Darlene Floden3, MaryPat McAndrews1,2;
1Krembil Neuroscience Centre, 2University of Toronto, 3Cleveland Clinic — Evi-

dence from neuroimaging and lesion studies suggests that the temporal
lobes are implicated in social cognition. For instance, people with bilateral or right-sided damage to the amygdala have difficulties identifying
facial emotions. However, few studies have investigated other aspects of
social perception in such individuals. Our goal was to examine social
inference abilities in people who underwent unilateral right or left temporal lobe excisions (TLE; including the amygdala, hippocampus, and
varying extents of anterolateral neocortex) for the treatment of intractable epilepsy. We used The Awareness of Social Inference Test (TASIT),
which consists of video clips depicting sincere, sarcastic and deceitful
exchanges followed by yes/no inference questions pertaining to the
actions, verbal statements, feelings and beliefs of the characters. Both left
and right TLE groups performed within the normal range of ability on
questions pertaining to the sincere clips, suggesting intact comprehension and short-term retention of the exchanges. However, both groups
performed poorly on items pertaining to the sarcastic and deceitful
exchanges. These results confirm the involvement of the temporal lobes
in social inference abilities. Clinically, our results also raise the possibility that a neurologically-based deficit in social perception may contribute
to the psychosocial difficulties experienced by people with unilateral
temporal lobe damage.

A18

IS IT OUR PROBLEM OR YOURS? COOPERATION INCREASES
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES TO OBSERVED ERRORS Leonie

Koban1, Gilles Pourtois2, Roland Vocat1, Patrik Vuilleumier1; 1University of
Geneva, 2University of Gent — Monitoring one’s own actions and errors is a
fundamental ability to guide and improve behavior, with specific neural
substrates in the anterior cingulate cortex. Similarly, we can also monitor
others’ actions and learn by observing their errors. Multiple mirror neuron systems were proposed to subserve this formation of shared representations for self-generated and observed actions, and recent research
suggests that monitoring mechanisms also react to observed errors.
However, it remains unknown how these responses are modified by a
divergence between the observer’s and the actor’s intentions and factors
of interpersonal relationship. To investigate whether differences in social
context can influence brain response to observed action errors, we
manipulated competition versus cooperation between two participants
taking turns in a speeded Go/No-Go task. Event-related potentials
simultaneously recorded from both participants showed a typical negativity over frontocentral regions to self-generated errors, irrespective of
interpersonal context; but early differential responses to other-generated
errors only during cooperation. Competition produced a distinct errorrelated negativity at later latencies. These differential effects correlated
with perceived closeness and rivalry, but not with empathy or perspective taking. We conclude that error monitoring for others’ actions
depends on their congruence with personal goals and the interpersonal
relationship, and recruits brain systems involved in self-referential processing specifically during cooperation.

A19

JUDGING AGGRESSIVENESS BASED ON FACIAL STRUCTURE:
SENSITIVITY TO FACIAL WIDTH-TO-HEIGHT RATIO IN OWN-VERSUS
OTHER-RACE FACES Catherine Mondloch1, Cheryl McCormick1, Justin

Carré1, Genyue Fu2, Daisy Ma2, Kang Lee3; 1Brock University, 2Zhejiang Normal
University, 3University of Toronto — Facial width-to-height ratio in male
faces is significantly correlated with laboratory measures of reactive
aggression and penalty minutes received by hockey players (Carré &
McCormick, 2008). Adults’ judgements of aggressiveness are correlated
with the width-to-height ratio of the stimulus faces and with actual
aggression of the men, suggesting that this ratio may be used as an ‘honest signal’ advertising propensity for aggression (Carré et al., 2009). Here

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session A
we compared adults’ sensitivity to width-to-height ratio in own- versus
other-race faces. Caucasian and Chinese adults (n = 60 per group) rated
aggression for Caucasian and Chinese faces (n = 24 faces per race). For
each participant we calculated the correlation between aggression ratings and width-to-height ratio for each face set. Single sample t-tests
revealed above-chance performance for own- and other-race faces, ps <
.001. A 2 (participant race) x 2 (race of face) ANOVA indicated that Caucasian participants performed better overall, p < .001 and revealed a Participant Race x Race of Face interaction, p < .05. For Caucasian
participants the mean correlation was higher for Caucasian faces (M =
.396) than Chinese faces (M = .320), p < .05; the reverse was observed for
Chinese participants (Ms = .265 and .210 for Chinese and Caucasian
faces, respectively), p = .08. These data suggest that differential sensitivity to spatial differences among own- versus other-race faces extends
beyond judgements of identity (Rhodes et al., 2006) to judgments of
aggression and support that the facial ratio may be an “honest signal”
irrespective of race.

A20

THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF STIGMA FOR PHYSICAL DIFFERENCES

Sook-Lei Liew1,2, Tong Sheng1,3, Lisa Aziz-Zadeh1,2,3; 1The Brain and Creativity
Institute, University of Southern California, 2The Division of Occupational
Science & Occupational Therapy, USC, 3The Neuroscience Graduate Program,
USC — The stigmatizing effects of a physical difference can negatively
impact one’s psychological experiences and social functioning. While
prior research suggests that observations of socially-stigmatized individuals (e.g., transsexuals) yields increased activity in regions associated
with fear and disgust, little attention has been paid to the stigma of physical differences (PD). Additionally, it is unknown how observations of
individuals with PD affect activity in the mirror neuron system (MNS),
an action-understanding network hypothesized to encode the goals of an
action even when the body parts used differ. Using fMRI, we scanned
typically-developed participants as they observed actions performed by
a woman without arms (PD) and women with intact limbs (controls).
When observing PD perform actions versus controls, there was
increased activity only in visual regions, whereas observations of controls versus PD generated increased activity in sensorimotor, visual, and
mentalizing regions. When specifically observing PD perform actions
with her stump versus controls performing hand actions, participants
had greater activity in regions previously associated with social stigma,
emotions, perspective-taking, and visual processing. In contrast, when
observing controls perform hand actions versus PD, increased activity
was found in frontoparietal regions of the MNS. These results suggest
that stigma for physical differences may include regions associated with
social stigma along with increased visual activity. Additionally, MNS
activity was present only for controls but not for PD, suggesting that
there is increased motor resonance with those more physically similar to
oneself and that there may be a disruption of this goal-matching system
when observing differently-bodied individuals.

A21

NUCLEUS ACCUMBENS AND PREFRONTAL CORTEX ARE RECRUITED
WHEN WOMEN VIEW SEXUALLY ATTRACTIVE FACES Kristina Caudle1,

Rebecca Boswell1, Krista DeStasio1,2, Jane Tucker1, Katie Von Holzen1,3, Todd
Heatherton1, William Kelley1; 1Dartmouth College, 2York College, 3University of
Wisconsin - Green Bay — Men and women show different neural responses
when rating opposite-sex faces on attractiveness (Cloutier et al., 2008).
Men recruit both the nucleus accumbens (NAcc), involved in automatic
processing of rewarding or motivating stimuli, and the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), perhaps reflecting more explicit evaluation. Women show
only an increase in NAcc activity. However, it is unknown whether this
difference is attributable purely to sex differences, or if the difference in
activation patterns reflect differences in the way men and women naturally judge attractiveness. Whereas men may consider sexual appeal
when judging attractiveness, women may default to a more aesthetic
consideration of physical features. Here, we attempted to disambiguate

35

Poster Session A
earlier findings by explicitly directing participants to use each of two
scales: a pure “aesthetic attractiveness” dimension, and a separate “sexual attractiveness” scale. Specifically, female participants were imaged
using fMRI while rating male faces on a three-point scale. For half of the
faces, subjects made physical attractiveness judgments; for the remaining half, subjects made sexual desirability judgments. Results revealed
that women recruit both NAcc and prefrontal regions when making sexual judgments, suggesting that women can and do recruit similar brain
regions as men, but only when explicitly instructed to consider sexual
desirability. This suggests that sex differences in neural responses to
attractive faces may be driven, in part, by different default definitions of
“attractiveness” between men and women.

A22

DISENTANGLING
PSYCHOPATHIC
STATUS
FROM
GENERAL
INCARCERATION STATUS IN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL RESPONSES TO
EMOTIONAL FACES Meghan J. Weissflog1, Sidney J. Segalowitz1, Gillian E.

S. Munro1, Jane Dywan1; 1Brock University, St. Catharines, ON, Canada —
Emotion recognition deficits, particularly for fearful expressions, have
been consistently reported in both clinical and subclinical populations
high in psychopathic traits. Similarly, recent neuroimaging data suggest
there may be functional differences in the way psychopaths process
emotion. However, most such research compares incarcerated psychopaths to a community sample control. The current study examines the
stimulus-locked P2 and N2 event-related potential responses to emotional face stimuli observed during a face flanker task in a sample of both
psychopathic and nonpsychopathic offenders and normative controls.
For both the P2 and N2 components, the offender group differed significantly from the control group, such that the offenders produced larger
average amplitudes when compared to controls at sites P3 (p = .001) and
P4 (p = .001) for the P2 component and sites FCz (p = .004) and Fz (p <
.001) for the N2 component. However, within the offender group, psychopaths and nonpsychopaths were on the whole similar, with the
exception that nonpsychopaths differed from normative controls more
than the psychopaths in general. Thus, previous studies reporting emotional face processing differences amongst psychopaths may have confounded the factor of incarceration.

A23

UNDERSTANDING FICTIONAL MINDS: WATCHING A MOVIE RECRUITS
BRAIN REGIONS INVOLVED IN MENTALIZING Dylan D. Wagner1, Todd F.

Heatherton1; 1Dartmouth College — For many people, a large portion of

their free time is spent watching fictional characters interacting with one
another in films and television. This rich natural stimulus affords an
excellent opportunity to examine the conditions under which people
spontaneously recruit brain regions involved in mental state reasoning
(e.g. mentalizing). Prior research on natural film viewing has largely
ignored the question of whether viewing social interactions in films
recruits the same brain regions as explicit mentalizing tasks (for an
exception see Mar, Kelley, Heatherton & Macrae, 2006). In the present
study, 39 participants watched the first 30 minutes of a popular Hollywood film. Scenes were coded for the presence of a single character, two
characters engaged in a social interaction or for scenes without people
(e.g. landscapes). Results revealed that brain regions involved in mental
state attribution (e.g. DMPFC, TPJ, Temporal poles) were spontaneously
recruited when participants watched on-screen social interactions. During scenes in which the protagonist was alone on-screen, activity was
observed only in visual regions involved in face processing and animate
motion (e.g. FFA & STS). Taken together, these findings argue that when
viewing fictional social interactions people recruit the same neural
machinery they use for explicit mental state reasoning. Moreover, it
appears that activity in DMPFC and TPJ is preferentially tuned to social
interactions and is less responsive to watching intentional, but nonsocial, behavior.

36

Emotion & Social: Person Perception
A24

THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF EMOTION PERCEPTION IN ADOLESCENTS
WITH ASD Daniel O'Young1, Jasmin Cloutier1, Elizabeth Redcay1, Tom

Meagher1, Penelope Mavros1, Joe Moran1, Vanessa Vogel-Farley2, Charles
Nelson2, John Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Children’s
Hospital Boston — Abnormal brain activation when processing informa-

tion from faces has been identified in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD).
These atypical neural responses to faces are believed to be part of the
social impairments of ASD individuals. Indeed, the many social cues
that can be extracted from faces can convey a wealth of social communicative information, particularly through facial expression. As such, face
processing has been used to probe into the neural circuitry underlying
abnormal social processing in ASD individuals. More specifically, atypical amygdala activation has been hypothesized to underlie some of these
deficits. Nevertheless, to date, the results of investigations into the neural responses to facial expressions in ASD have been inconsistent. To better characterize the neural responses to facial expressions in ASD
individuals, we collected functional MRI data from typically developing
and ASD adolescents. For this purpose we used a blocked design functional imaging paradigm during which participants viewed pictures of
neutral, angry and fearful faces, as well as houses. Eye-tracking data was
also collected in a separate session to ensure that participants were looking at the eye region of the face. Participants were all male and between
14 to 20 years of age. Compared to typically developing adolescents, the
results suggest that ASD adolescent may have atypical amygdala
responses to neutral and angry faces. These results confirm that
amygdala activity might underlie abnormal person perception in ASD
individuals.

A25

INTEGRATION OF FACE AND VOICE OCCURS ONLY AT THE LATER STAGES
OF IDENTITY PROCESSING Aida Owlia1, Heather Jordan1; 1School of
Kinesiology and Health Sciences, Centre for Vision Research, York University —
Social information associated with a specific individual is considered to
be hierarchically organized (Bellin et al., 2004). General information e.g.
age and gender is extracted before more specific aspects e.g. identity.
Identifying an individual can occur through the visual (e.g. photograph)
and/or auditory (e.g. telephone) modality, and in practice both types of
information are often present. Combining information across perceptual
modalities would seem optimal. The neural basis for integrating identifying information across perceptual modalities is poorly understood.
Perceptual adaptation effects have been reported for social information
within the visual and the auditory domain. Prolonged exposure to male
faces changes the observer’s percept of a subsequent gender-neutral
stimulus so that it appears more female (Webster et al., 2004). Similarly,
listening to male voices subsequently alters judgments of gender-neutral
voices (Schweinberger et al., 2008). Cross-modality adaptation has not
been reported, raising the possibility that adaptation of social information may be domain-specific perceptual information. To test this hypothesis, observers were exposed to visual (pictures of faces), auditory
(voices) and visual+auditory (simultaneous faces and voices) adapters
before judging morphed test faces based on gender (exp. 1) or identity
(exp. 2). Adaptation effects were never observed when voices (Auditory)
were used as adapting stimuli. Early stages of identification processing
i.e. gender were found to rely on domain-specific input. Higher-level
processing (identity) utilized only integrated perceptual information.
Cross-modal integration of social information only occurs at the later
stages of processing. Physiological correlates of category-specific adaptation effects will be presented.

A26

TOP-DOWN MODULATION OF SOCIAL PERCEPTION BY MENTAL-STATE
ATTRIBUTION Christoph Teufel1, Paul Fletcher1, Nicola Clayton1, Dean

Alexis1, Greg Davis1; 1University of Cambridge — Extensive neuronal networks in the human brain are specialized for perceiving and processing
complex social information allowing us to make inferences about
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Person Perception
another person’s mental states. Observed gaze direction is a particularly
important cue in this respect. Single-unit recordings in macaques and
gaze-adaptation experiments in humans have critically furthered our
understanding of the gaze-processing system by revealing distinct populations of neurons responsible for coding specific directions of another
person’s gaze direction. However, our understanding of the influence of
high-level Theory of Mind mechanisms on these processes is still rudimentary. Here we show that the attribution of a mental state to another
person determines the way in which the human brain codes observed
gaze direction. Specifically, we adopted a gaze-adaptation paradigm
which exploits systematic distortions in perception following prolonged
exposure to gaze stimuli in order to study the gaze-processing system.
We convinced observers that prerecorded video sequences of an experimenter gazing left or right were a live video link to an adjacent room. An
elaborate deception procedure guaranteed that observers believed that
the person in the videos was either able or unable to see. The results
show that the effects of adaptation were enhanced under the former condition relative to the latter, indicating that high-level mental-state attribution shapes and modulates sensory coding of observed gaze direction.
These findings have important implications for our understanding of the
healthy social brain and may explain how aberrant mental-state attribution in psychopathology contributes to the persistence of delusions
despite contrary sensory evidence.

A27

MY TEAM IS “30 MS” FASTER THAN YOUR TEAM OR HOW INTER-GROUP
RIVALRY CHANGES THE PERCEPTION OF ACTION Pascal Molenberghs1,

Veronika Halász1, Jason Mattingley1, Eric Vanman1, Ross Cunnington1; 1The
University of Queensland — People have a tendency to see members of their

own team more favorably than members of another team. For example,
while watching our favorite sport team most of us tend to see our own
team’s players in a better light compared to the opponents. Here we use
psychophysics and fMRI in an action perception task to show that participants who are arbitrarily divided into two groups (a red team and blue
team) see the movements of their own team members on average 30 ms
faster than the equivalent movements of opposing team members. fMRI
results show that all the people who show a bias in favor of their own
team perceive the actions of their team differently than actions from the
other team with the inferior parietal lobule in a crucial role. Implicit
group identification measures confirmed that participants identified
more with their own team than with the other team. Our results show
that, in a competitive situation, group membership changes objective
judgment in favor of in-group members because people perceive actions
of own team members differently. This study brings together research in
perception of actions and inter-group bias and may explain why supporters often feel that their team has been mistreated by an objective referee during sport competitions.

A28

TRIANGLES HAVE GOALS TOO
1

Richard Ramsey1, Antonia Hamilton1;

University of Nottingham, UK — A striking feature of human cognition is
the liberal way thoughts, feelings and intentions are attributed to human
and non-human entities. Current models distinguish two brain networks
involved in this process. A ‘mentalising’ network is responsive when
one attributes mental states, such as beliefs and desires, to people and
animate shapes. A ‘mirror neuron system’ responds to the observation of
simple, goal-directed hand actions and is associated with goal understanding. However, this dichotomy does not predict what brain and cognitive processes might be involved when humans ascribe simple goals to
non-human shapes that do not have bodies. Using functional magnetic
resonance imaging, we report that anterior intraparietal sulcus, a brain
region known to represent goals of human actions, also encodes the
goals of non-human shapes, such as triangles. This result suggests that
the division of the social brain into a ‘mirror neuron – simulation’ network and a ‘mentalising – inference’ network is too simplistic. Simulation mechanisms are unlikely to allow goal-inference for triangles that
have no human form or motion, but our data show that part of the simuCognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session A
lation network represents these goals. We suggest that a conceptual
approach to social cognition may be more informative. Under this framework, anterior intraparietal sulcus may provide an abstract representation the goal ‘take-object’, whether performed by a human actor or by a
non-human shape. Moreover, the division between 'mirroring’ and
‘mentalising’ would parallel the distinction between the concept of a
simple object-goal and the concept of a belief or social intention.

A29

NEURAL ACTIVITY DURING FACIAL AFFECT RECOGNITION: MEN VS.
WOMEN Jessica Devitt1, Garrett Hosack2, Stephen Lewis1,2; 1University of

New Mexico Health Sciences Center, 2New Mexico Veteran’s Health Care
Center, Clinical Neuroscience Research Program — Goal: Females (F) iden-

tify facial affects with greater accuracy than males (M), yet no clear neurologic explanation for these findings has been established 1,2. We
sought to identify differences in neural activity between males and
females during affect recognition. Methods: Subjects (F; N=5, M; N=5
underwent magnetoencephalography (MEG) during presentation of 6
different facial affects (anger, sadness, disgust, fear, happy, neutral, and
a non-face control). Responses of the fusiform gyrus (FFG) cortex were
collected at ~170ms for each condition. Data were analyzed to investigate the relationship between gender and response amplitude. Using the
novel source-analysis VEctor-based Spatial-Temporal Analysis (VESTAL) 3, MEG data was coalesced with sMRI data to localize activity on
the 3-D brain. Data were also averaged according to gender, creating
both a male and female average brain and comparing FFG activity
between the two. Results: Males had lower MEG amplitudes than
females. The mean for males was 3.05 (95% CI 1.97 - 4.14) while the mean
for females was 6.13 (95% CI 5.05 - 7.22), p = 0.0001. VESTAL results suggest more lateralization of responses in males than in females. Conclusion: We have demonstrated a difference in FFG activity between male
and female subjects in strength and lateralization of responses to facial
affect. References: 1. Hall, J.A. (1978) Psychol. Bull. 85(4): pp. 845–857; 2.
Miura, M. (1993) Shinrigaku Kenkyu. 63(6): pp. 409–413; 3. Huang, M.X.,
et. al. (2006) Neuroimage. 31: pp.1025-1037.

A30

THE EFFECTS OF VALENCE AND AROUSAL ON HEMISPHERIC
ASYMMETRY OF EMOTION: EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS Jing Zhang1, Renlai Zhou*1,2,3, Tian P. S. Oei4; 1State Key
Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University,
Beijing, China, 2Key Laboratory of Child Development and Learning Science,
Southeast University, Nanjing, China, 3Beijing Key Lab of Applied Experimental
Psychology, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China, 4School of Psychology,
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia — The independent influence
of valence and arousal on emotional hemispheric brain asymmetry was
investigated to inform the debate over three contrasting hypotheses: the
right dominance hypothesis, the valence hypothesis, and the integrative
hypothesis. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded while participants (N = 20) viewed positive high arousal, positive low arousal, negative high arousal and negative low arousal pictures, following a baseline
measure of ERPs while viewing gray squares. Self-ratings of emotional
state in terms of valence and arousal were taken after each of the four
emotion blocks. Valence and arousal effects on hemispheric asymmetry
were analyzed for the time windows 130-170 ms, 170-280 ms, 280-450
ms, 450-600 ms. Results indicated that the arousal dimension of emotion
interacted with the valence dimension in modulating the anterior hemispheric asymmetry of emotion, associated with right dominance on N2
during negative high arousal and left dominance on P3 and LPC during
negative low arousal in the anterior lobe. The result also suggested that
the dimension of arousal played a main role in the posterior hemisphere
asymmetry, with right dominance on P2, P3 and LPC in the posterior
lobes during high arousal. Our result partly supported the right hemisphere hypothesis and the integrative hypothesis in the posterior lobe,
and did not provide evidence for valence hypothesis. *corresponding
author rlzhou@bnu.edu.cn 1. Supported by Program for Changjiang

37

Poster Session A
Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University, “PCSIRT”, (code:
IRT0710). 2. Supported by Program for Innovative Research Team,
Beijing Normal University.

A31

TRAINING EFFECTS ON NEURAL CORRELATES OF THE OWN-RACE
BIAS Johanna Stahl1, Holger Wiese1, Stefan R. Schweinberger1; 1Friedrich
Schiller University of Jena — People are generally better at recognizing
faces from their own ethnic group as compared to faces from another
ethnicity. This so-called own-race bias has been attributed to perceptual
learning and lifetime expertise with faces of one´s own ethnicity. The
current study aimed at simulating expertise with other-race faces by
training naïve Caucasian participants to individuate own-race (Caucasian) and other-race (Asian) faces. Following extensive multi-session
training, a comparison of recognition performance for own- and otherrace faces indicated a general attenuation of the own-race bias from pretraining to post-training, a finding which was largely due to decreased
recognition performance for Caucasian faces. Furthermore, event-related
potentials to own- and other-race faces revealed effects of training on
early components. Whereas N170 was delayed and increased to Asian as
compared to Caucasian faces, training induced a general N170 latency
decrease. More importantly, specific and ethnicity-dependent effects of
training were evident in the occipito-temporal P2 component, which initially exhibited more positive amplitudes to Caucasian faces than to
Asian faces. Whereas this effect was visible over both hemispheres
before training, the P2 amplitude difference between Caucasian and
Asian faces disappeared over the left hemisphere following training.
This result demonstrates training-induced changes in early face encoding processes. Taken together with a lowered own-race bias after training, the P2 effects may reflect changes in an expertise-dependent system
that represents individual faces and is capable of adapting and responding to perceptual training.

A32

THE EFFECTS OF STATUS ON THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF PERSON
PERCEPTION: A DISSOCIATION OF MORAL AND HIERARCHIC STATUS
INFORMATION Thomas Meagher1, Jasmin Cloutier1,2, Nalini Ambady2, John

Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Tufts University — The
identification and evaluation of status information is of great importance
to all social animals. In humans, the construal of social status is more
flexible than in other animals and varies across numerous dimensions.
For example, some individuals obtain a high social status due to their
financial accomplishments, others because of their perceived moral
accomplishments. The current study examines the effect of different
types of status information on the neural substrates of person perception. In an event-related fMRI experiment, participants were presented
with the faces preceded by either low or high hierarchic status information (e.g., “earns $25 000” or “earns $350 000”) or low or high moral status information (e.g., “is a tobacco company executive” or “is a cancer
researcher”). Subjects were asked to form an impression of the targets
using the information available about them. Based on previous findings,
regions of interest analyses were performed for brain regions we
expected to be more sensitive to the hierarchic status of the presented
faces (i.e., IPS) as well as brain regions we expected to be more sensitive
to the moral status of the presented faces (i.e., ventromedial prefrontal
cortex). The results reveal a neural dissociation between the effects of
these different social status cues on person perception.
A33

THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF PERSON PERCEPTION IN ADOLESCENTS
WITH ASD: THE INFLUENCE OF LIKABILITY AND DOMINANCE Jasmin

Cloutier1,2, Daniel O’Young1, Tom Meagher1, Eliabeth Redcay1, Joe Moran1,
Nalini Ambady2, John Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Tufts
University — Abnormal ability to extract social information from faces is

linked with some of the social impairments of individuals with Autism
Spectrum Disorder (ASD). A wealth of social information can efficiently
be inferred from facial cues. The neural substrates underlying these

38

Emotion & Social: Person Perception
social inferences from faces involve a network of brain regions supporting social cognitive abilities. Atypical recruitment of some of these brain
regions is suggested to underlie the social communicative deficits of
ASD individuals. For example, atypical amygdala activation has been
hypothesized to be involved in some of these deficits. Few brain-imaging
investigations of person perception in ASD have focused on identifying
the neural responses to the different social cues that can be inferred from
faces. To further characterize the neural substrates of person perception
in ASD individuals, we collected functional MRI data from typically
developing and ASD adolescents while they were presented with faces
varying on likability and dominance. Specifically, we used an eventrelated fMRI design during which participants performed a one-back
task on a series of faces preselected to vary on these social dimensions.
Following the scanning session, all participants rated the previously presented faces on likability and dominance. These ratings were subsequently used to identify components of the so-called social brain that
displayed differential activation to faces judged to vary on likability or
dominance. Difference patterns of brain responses were observed in
ASD and typically developing adolescents, particularly in the amygdala
and superior temporal sulcus. Amongst these results, ASD individuals
displayed greater amygdala activity to liked faces.

A34

ADAPTATION TO VOICE CARICATURES AND ANTI-VOICES REVEALED
Latinus1,
PROTOTYPE-BASED CODING OF VOICE IDENTITY Marianne

Pascal Belin1; 1Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging CCNi and Department of
Psychology, Universty of Glasgow — Although a speaker never utters the
same sound twice, normal listeners are efficient in extracting voice
invariants and using them to recognize a speaker in novel utterances.
Yet, the way voice identity is represented in the brain remains poorly
understood. We present two adaptation experiments that used novel
stimuli generated by auditory morphing of natural voice recordings—
voice ‘caricatures’ and ‘anti-voices’— to test specific hypotheses on the
representation of voice identity. Experiment 1 provides first evidence for
auditory aftereffects in voice identity perception: even brief exposure to
a given voice was found to shift identity perception away from that particular voice. This effect was of similar magnitude for caricatures and
original voices, suggesting a representation independent of acoustical
properties. Experiment 2 reveals for the first time the importance of the
average voice in the representation of voice identity. The perceptual shift
following adaptation was greater for ‘anti-voice’ adaptors, i.e. natural
voices generated by extrapolation of the average voice in relation to the
original voices, than for non-opposite adaptors. These findings provide
new insight into the way voice identity is coded in the brain. Prior exposure to different voices shifts the perceptual boundaries previously utilised to define a certain identity. Furthermore, this adaptation effect is
not dependent on the voice’s acoustical features but on its position relative to a ‘prototype’ defined by the population average voice.

A35

ADAPTATION REVEALS HIERARCHICAL PROCESSING OF VOICE
GENDER Ian Charest1, Cyril Pernet2, Pascal Belin1,3; 1Centre for Cognitive

Neuroimaging, University of Glasgow, 2SFC Brain Imaging Research Center,
University of Edinburgh, 3International Laboratory for Brain, Music and Sound
Research, Université de Montréal and McGill University — Previous studies
identified different brain regions for male and female voices. A more
physiologically plausible result of a single brain region decoding for
male and female voices was never reported. One possible explanation is
the overlap of neuronal populations contributing to gender representation in the Temporal Voice Areas (TVA). Adapting voice gender selective neuronal populations from several presentations of the same gender
will allow us to visualise overlapping neuronal populations if they exist.
In order to parametrically manipulate the extent of adaptation, a continuous carry-over design with each stimulus being the next one’s adaptor
was used. BOLD signal was measured in Twenty healthy subjects (10
females). Stimuli consisted of 15 % morph steps from 9 male-female

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Person Perception
voice continua that were generated using STRAIGHT under Matlab.
From the stimulation sequence, a physical value regressor (physical
position in its continuum), a physical difference regressor (distance
between 2 following stimuli) and a perceptual difference regressor (gender classification distance between 2 following stimuli) were calculated.
These regressors were used in a parametric regression approach. A functional localizer of the temporal voice areas was also conducted for each
subject. We observed an effect of physical difference in male and female
voices in the middle and anterior parts of the superior temporal sulcus in
the TVA. Most importantly, we reveal hierarchical processing of voice
gender recognition with more abstract representations (effect of perceptual difference) of voice gender in the inferior frontal gyrus, bilaterally.

A36

MODULATION OF MOTOR AREA ACTIVITY DURING OBSERVATION OF
HUMAN AND ROBOT ACTIONS Sotaro Shimada1; 1Meiji University — The
mirror neuron system (MNS), which is activated when an individual
observes the actions of others, as well as when they perform the same
action themselves, consists of several sensorimotor areas and plays a crucial role in social cognition. While robot is becoming popular in media
entertainment as well as in industrial application, whether the MNS
responds similarly to robotic actions compared with human actions is
still controversial. The present study investigated whether and how the
MNS activity is influenced by appearance and/or kinematics of the
observed human and robot action. The left motor area centered at C3 of
the 10/20 international system (9 × 9 square cm) was measured using
near-infrared spectroscopy NIRS apparatus (OMM-3000, Shimazu). A 2
(appearance: human vs. robot) × 2 (kinematics: human vs. robot)
ANOVA showed that there was a strong interaction between these factors, revealing strong deactivations in motor areas when the subject saw
a human agent performing robotic actions, whereas the motor area
showed positive responses when observing the human agent acting
humanly and the robot agent performing robotic actions. These results
indicate that MNS activity is sensitive to congruency between the
appearance and kinematics of the agent, regardless of whether the agent
is human or robot. We suggest that MNS sensitivity to observed action is
not innately determined but is acquired through the individual’s experiences.

A37

MU SUPPRESSION FOR ACTION OBSERVATION IS CORRELATED WITH
EMPATHIC PERSPECTIVE TAKING ABILITIES Jared Hopkins1, C. Chad

Woodruff1; 1Northern Arizona University — Past research suggests the existence of a mirror neuron system (MNS) in humans that may play a role in
understanding social interactions (Gallese, et al., 2005). For example,
using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Schülte-Ruther et al.
(2007) found putative MNS activity in premotor cortex was correlated
with empathic abilities of participants. In electroencephalography (EEG),
mirror neuron activity is believed to be reflected in the suppression of
mu rhythm (8 – 13Hz) typically associated with the sensorimotor cortex
(Pineda, 2005; Ulloa & Pineda, 2007). We therefore hypothesized that mu
suppression should correlate with a multidimensional empathy questionnaire. We recorded mu suppression from 25 healthy, adult participants during tasks involving action observation and execution of hand
gestures, modeled after Oberman et al. (2005). Participants also completed four subscales of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI; Davis,
1983). Mu suppression values for the action observation task were significantly and positively correlated with the perspective taking subscale of
the IRI (r = .40, p = .04), while mu suppression for the action execution
task was significantly and negatively correlated with the personal distress subscale (r = -.45, p = .02). The theoretical significance of the negative correlation between mu suppression and personal distress is
unclear, but the finding of a correlation between action observation and
perspective taking is consistent with other cognitive neuroscience findings of MN activation and empathic processing (e.g. Schülte-Ruther et al,
2007) and provides further support for a role of the MN system in empathy.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session A
A38

INFLUENCE OF STATISTICAL REGULARITIES ON EARLY VISUAL
MAGNETIC RESPONSE TO FACES Lucile
Gamond1,2,3,
Nathalie

George1,2,3, Jean-Didier Lemaréchal1,2,3, Catherine Tallon-Baudry1,2,3,4;
1
Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, Centre de Recherche de l’Institut du
Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, UMR-S975, Paris, France, 2Cnrs, Umr 7225,
Paris, France, 3Inserm, U 975, Paris, France, 4Cenir, Paris, France — Our perception of the world is continuously structured according to current
input information as well as prior experiences. In particular, the brain
seems very efficient at extracting statistical regularities and this may constitute a general mechanism for the identification of diagnostic stimulus
features and the creation of categories (Barlow, 2001; Sloutsky, 2003).
Unconsciously recorded regularities seem to influence early visual
responses (e.g. Chaumon, Drouet, & Tallon-Baudry, 2008). Our goal was
to verify that statistical regularities allows the brain extracting diagnostic
features and to investigate at which stage of processing these regularities
modulate magnetoencephalographic (MEG) responses to faces. We constructed two face sets that differed only in inter-eyes distance (IED)
(small/large). Subjects categorized these faces as flexible or determined.
A feed-back was introduced to make the inter-eyes distance diagnostic
for this categorization task: the small/large inter-eyes distance faces
were consistently associated with the flexible or determined response
(counterbalanced across subjects). Subjects were not aware of this statistical regularity and their brain signals were continuously recorded with
MEG during pre- and post-feedback phases. The MEG results show that
the diagnostic feature of inter-eyes distance has been unconsciously
detected. After the feedback phase, there is an amplitude difference in
evoked magnetic responses depending on the inter-eyes distance, as
soon as 60-85 ms after the face onset. This difference was absent before
the feedback phase. This study shows a very early influence of acquired
knowledge (here, a co-occurrence between a physical trait and a
response) on the visual responses to faces.

A39

THE REAL-TIME LINK BETWEEN PERSON PERCEPTION AND ACTION:
BRAIN POTENTIAL EVIDENCE FOR DYNAMIC CONTINUITY Jonathan

Freeman1, Nalini Ambady1, Katherine Midgley1, Phillip Holcomb1; 1Tufts
University — Much research shows that social perceptions can influence
downstream behavior; for instance, priming the category, Elder, leads
people to walk slowly. But how does more immediate behavior result
from person perception, such as that occurring in social interaction? For
instance, how does the perception of a friend’s angry face translate into
relevant actions across just hundreds of milliseconds? The way the brain
extracts information from another’s face and then tells the body to react
to that information in real-time remains unknown. We investigated this
using event-related brain potentials. In Study 1, participants made
between-hand sex categorizations of sex-typical and sex-atypical faces.
Relative to sex-typical faces, sex-atypical faces evoked negativity
between 250-550 ms (N300/N400 effects), reflecting the integration of
accumulating sex-category knowledge into a coherent sex-category
interpretation. Additionally, the lateralized readiness potential (LRP)
revealed that the motor cortex began preparing for a correct hand
response while social category knowledge was still gradually evolving
in parallel. In Study 2, participants made between-hand eye-color categorizations as part of go/no-go trials that were contingent on target sex.
On no-go trials, although the hand did not actually move, information
about eye color partially prepared the motor cortex to move the hand
before perception of sex had finalized. Together, these findings demonstrate the dynamic continuity between person perception and action,
such that partial, ongoing results from face processing continuously cascade into action. The brain starts preparing for action based on tentative
perceptions of another’s face well before it has completely finished interpreting what it just saw.

39

Poster Session A

Emotion & Social: Person Perception

A40

A43

PERCEIVING AGE AND GENDER IN UNFAMILIAR FACES: AN FMRI STUDY
ON FACE CATEGORIZATION Nadine Kloth1, Holger Wiese1, Daniel

WHEN IT'S WRONG NOT TO ACT: HOW THE BRAIN PROCESSES HARMFUL
OMISSIONS Fiery Cushman1, Shauna Gordon-McKeon1, Dylan Murray1,

Güllmar2, Jürgen R. Reichenbach2, Stefan R. Schweinberger1; 1Cognitive
Neuroscience, University of Jena, Germany, 2Medical Physics Group, Jena
University Hospital, Germany — Whereas the processing of familiar faces is

Sophie Wharton1, Joshua Greene1; 1Harvard University — People consider it

usually characterized by individual identification, efficient processing of
unfamiliar faces typically involves categorization (e.g., into old vs.
young or male vs. female). However, age and gender categorization
tasks may pose different perceptual demands on the face processing system, and thus the underlying neural processes may at least partly differ.
In line with this idea, recent evidence from event-related brain potentials
(ERPs; Wiese et al., 2008, Psychophysiology) suggests that age but not
gender categorization occurs relatively automatically and independent
of the task at hand, and may thus need fewer neural resources. In the
present study, we employed functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) to compare the activity evoked during age vs. gender categorization of unfamiliar faces. In different blocks, participants were asked to
perform age and gender classifications for old or young unfamiliar faces
(50% old, and 50% female within each age group). Both tasks elicited
activations in a network of regions known to be related to face processing. These included the bilateral fusiform gyrus (fusiform face area, FFA)
and bilateral regions at the junction of the occipital and ventral temporal
cortex (occipital face area, OFA). Most importantly, and in line with our
earlier ERP study, gender categorization as compared to age categorization evoked stronger activation – particularly so in the right FFA and the
left OFA. This suggests that gender compared to age categorization
imposes higher perceptual demands on the face processing network and
thus requires enhanced neural processing.

worse to actively cause harm than to fail to prevent harm. Past research
suggests that active harm triggers rapid, automatic moral condemnation.
We tested the hypothesis that moral condemnation of harmful omissions
relies preferentially on controlled cognitive processes enabled by the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). Subjects undergoing functional
neuroimaging responded to scenarios describing harmful actions (e.g.
pushing somebody off a boat to prevent it from sinking) and harmful
omissions (e.g. failing to pull somebody onto a boat to prevent it from
sinking). As expected, subjects judged harmful actions to be morally
worse than harmful omissions. Despite this, a large network of brain
regions responded preferentially to omissions. These include regions
implicated in representing others’ thoughts and behavior (e.g. inferior
parietal lobe) as well as regions of DLPFC associated with cognitive control. These effects were often most pronounced among subjects who
rated harmful omissions as being comparably bad to harmful actions.
This suggests that the condemnation of harmful omissions depends on
controlled processes that operate over robust representations of mental
states, where the latter reflect the deliberate withholding of aid. Subjects
also responded to non-harmful actions (e.g. pushing a barrel off a boat)
and non-harmful omissions (e.g. failing to retrieve a barrel). Here, several of the same regions responded more strongly to non-harmful omissions (vs. actions), suggesting that the additional cognitive demands
associated with evaluating omissions are not specific to moral judgment.
These additional demands may explain why omissions typically receive
lesser moral condemnation than actions.

A42

A44

EXPLORING THE NEURAL ARCHITECTURE OF THE SIMILARITY BIAS IN
CULTURAL IMITATIVE LEARNING Elizabeth Losin1, Marco Iacoboni1,

Mirella Dapretto1; 1University of California, Los Angeles — Imitation is widespread, emerges early in development, and is the means by which we
learn critical skills and information such as culturally appropriate behavior and social norms. Imitative learning is biased towards self-similar
individuals, likely increasing the adaptive value of learned information,
yet the neural underpinnings of imitative learning biases remain unexplored. Two neural systems that may underlie the similarity bias in imitative learning are the mirror neuron system (MNS), which performs
perception-action matching, and the medial fronto-parietal system
(mFPS), often active during self-referential tasks. In this study, 20 European Americans underwent fMRI while observing and imitating individuals of three ethnicities (European American, Chinese, or African
American) and two genders (male or female) performing novel hand
actions. We found that higher-order motor regions involved in imitative
behavior, including the pre-supplementary motor area and the frontoparietal components of the MNS, were more active when individuals
observed still photos of individuals of their own ethnicity versus another
ethnicity, but were more active when they imitated individuals of a different ethnicity versus their own. The precuneus, a parietal region
related to self-imagery, was more active when participants observed still
photos of, or imitated, their own ethnicity compared to another ethnicity. Finally, the ventral striatum, important for reward processing, was
more active when individuals imitated their own versus the opposite
gender, regardless of ethnicity. These findings may help explain the neural underpinnings of the self-similarity bias in imitative learning and
ultimately inform behavioral modeling strategies used in educational
settings, behavioral therapy, and rehabilitation.

40

PRIOR MORAL CHARACTER AND FAIRNESS BEHAVIOR IN THE DICTATOR
GAME MODULATE NEURAL ACTIVITY, PHYSIOLOGICAL AFFECTIVE
RESPONSES, AND PUNISHMENT DECISIONS Lasana Harris1, Christine
Hosey2, Stefanie Molicki1, Ernst Fehr3, Elizabeth Phelps1; 1New York University,

2University of Chicago, 3University of Zurich — Both

the violator and victim
influence third party punishment decisions through different motives;
the violator motivates retribution and deterrence, the victim restoration.
We show that prior social knowledge about the moral character of both
parties in the context of a dictator game, as well as the moral and physiological disgust generated by both parties modulate punishment decisions. In separate samples, we recorded physiological responses using
facial electromyography (EMG) and neural responses using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while participants punish morally
bad or admirable fictitious players for fair or unfair decisions. Four male
white neutral faces were paired with real newspaper articles about people performing praiseworthy or blameworthy acts. During the dictator
game, a face was assigned to the role of dictator, and another, recipient,
on each trial. Dictators were responsible for splitting $1 between themselves and the recipient, either fairly 50:50, or unfairly 90:10. Participants
had an opportunity to punish dictators after every decision by entering a
value that was subtracted from the dictator’s total on each trial. Bad dictators are punished more harshly, and bad recipients restored less. Physiological disgust responses predict punishment amounts when a morally
bad dictator behaves unfairly toward a morally good recipient. The
behavior replicates in the scanner, and different neural patterns emerge
during punishment. These findings dovetail with the existing literature,
and add to the growing corpus of research on social and affective factors
that affect decision-making in economic games.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Self Perception

Poster Session A

Emotion & Social: Self Perception
A45
Motoaki
Sugiura1,
1,3
Yuko Sassa , Hyeonjeong Jeong , Keisuke Wakusawa , Ryuta
Kawashima1,2; 1IDAC, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan, 2RISTEX, Japan
Science and Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Japan, 3Tohoku University
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan — Visual self-recognition has

SELF-FACE RECOGNITION AND SOCIAL CONTEXT
1,2

1

been believed to accompany social self-concept, which in humans entails
the representation of one's self in the minds of others. Previous functional imaging studies have, however, predominantly reported self-facespecific activation in the right lateral posterior cortices, which have been
implicated in kinesthetic representations of the self body. Involvement of
the likely neural substrates of the social self, the medial prefrontal cortex
(MPFC), has rarely been reported. We assumed that the involvement of
the social self depends on social context. In this study, using functional
magnetic resonance imaging, we examined the modulation of neural
response to the self-face, a close friend's face, and an unfamiliar face as a
control, based on social context. Healthy subjects performed a familiarity
judgment of these faces in enriched and poor social-context blocks, in
which distracter stimuli were unfamiliar faces and mosaic pictures,
respectively. We identified an enhanced response from the ventral
MPFC in the enriched social context specifically for the self face. Selfface-specific activation in the right lateral posterior cortices, and selfface-specific deactivation in the bilateral temporoparietal regions, as previously reported, were not affected. Unexpectedly, neural response to
the friend’s face stimuli in the right lateral posterior cortices was
enhanced by the enriched social context. These results were the first to
demonstrate the involvement of social self-concept in self-face recognition, as well as the assimilation of the friend to the self in enriched social
contexts. Thus the self-other representation is considered to be multicomponent and dynamically modulated by the social context.

A46

NEUROANATOMICAL VARIABILITY OF PERSONALITY Dimitrios

Kapogiannis1, Angelina Sutin1, Paul Costa1, Susan Resnick1; 1National
Institute on Aging/ National Institutes of Health — We hypothesized that
personality, a set of distinctive and recurrent patterns of thoughts, feelings, and actions, is associated with cortical variability. We tested this
idea by determining whether the Five Factors of personality (assessed by
the revised NEO-Personality Inventory, NEO-PI-R) were associated with
variability in regional cortical volume assessed by voxel-based morphometry. 87 healthy adults took the NEO-PI-R and had structural brain
magnetic resonance imaging at two timepoints with an average interval
of 2 years. Separate regression models were used for analysis of the two
time points at the whole brain level and a conjunction analysis was performed to identify replicable associations. Neuroticism was associated
with decreased volume of R middle temporal cortex (BA 21); Extraversion with increased volume of L anterior cingulate (BA 24), L middle
temporal (BA 21) and L superior frontal (BA 10) cortices and decreased
volume of periaquaductal grey matter; Openness with increased volume
of R BA 10 and decreased volume of bilateral inferior frontal cortex (BA
47); Agreeableness with increased volume of R inferior and middle frontal cortices (BA 47) and decreased volume of bilateral BA 10 and R superior frontal cortex (BA 22); and Conscientiousness with increased
volume within R frontostriatal and bilateral frontoparietal networks and
decreased volume of bilateral BA 10 and R middle temporal cortex (BA
21). These findings demonstrate associations between individual differences in personality and cortical variability in brain regions involved in
high-order cognitive processing and social cognition.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

A47

OPENNESS TO ISOTROPY: A DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING STUDY OF
PERSONALITY Robert Chavez1, Rachael Grazioplene1, Alison Marshall1,

Ranee Barrow1, Rex Jung1,2; 1The Mind Research Network, 2The University of
New Mexico — One of the most widely studied metrics in human psychology is the five-factor model of personality first proposed by Costa &
McCrea (1985). Though certainly not capturing all of the variance in
human personality, there is broad consensus that the five personality
factors serve as useful representations of the major axes of variation in
individual disposition (Nettle, 2006). Recent findings indicate that white
matter connectivity measures are predictive of individual differences in
novelty seeking and reward dependence (Cohen et al, 2008). Using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) at 3 Tesla, we hypothesized that fractional
anisotropy (FA) would be related to individual differences in personality
as measured by the five-factor inventory (NEO-FFI), including Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness.
The sample consisted of 100 subjects, screened to be free of neurological
or psychiatric disorders. Using Tract-Based Spatial Statistics and permutations test, we found the trait of Openness was inversely correlated with
FA within large areas of right cerebral white matter with significance
ranging from p=.037-.005 . The most significant areas were found in portions of the anterior thalamic radiation, a tract connecting the prefrontal
cortex to sub-cortical nuclei. This finding adds to a growing body of literature indicating a relationship of personality to prefrontal connections
linking sub-cortical and limbic regions (Buckholtz, 2007). To our knowledge, this is the first report using DTI to investigate the entire five-factor
model of personality in a large cohort consisting entirely of normal,
healthy subjects.

A48

COMPARING THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF SELF AND OTHERREFERENTIAL JUDGMENTS: A META-ANALYSIS OF FUNCTIONAL
NEUROIMAGING STUDIES Bryan T. Denny1, Hedy Kober1,2, Tor D. Wager1,

Kevin N. Ochsner1; 1Columbia University, 2Yale University — The uniqueness

of the self relative to others has long been of great interest to psychologists. In particular, judgments made about the self or about others have
been shown to have divergent consequences for memory, affect, and
behavior. The advent of functional neuroimaging has allowed for the
investigation of the functional neural architecture underlying such judgments, but different studies have shown variability in the specificity and
localization of self and other-related activations. We performed a comprehensive meta-analysis of 108 functional neuroimaging studies involving self and other judgments using a multi-level kernel-based approach
(MKDA) in order to determine whether the neural correlates of task
judgments made with respect to the self or others are reliably different.
We were particularly interested in differentiable activation patterns in
the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), a key component in several theories of how the brain supports self-relevant cognition. We found that
dorsomedial PFC activation was reliably associated with making judgments when the target of the judgment was another person relative to
the self, whereas judgments made with reference to the self relative to
others were associated with more ventral mPFC activation. Further analyses showed that when the self and other conditions were separately
compared to a non-mentalizing baseline condition, the resulting activation maps were similar across a broad area from ventral to dorsal mPFC.
Region-of-interest analyses were then performed to illustrate these
results. These results suggest that self and other-relevant judgments are
associated with a specialization gradient moving from ventral to dorsal
mPFC, respectively.

41

Poster Session A

Emotion & Social: Self Perception

A49

A51

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING STUDY ON PROCESSING OF VIRTUAL AND
BIOLOGICAL PERSONS BY ONLINE ROLE-PLAYING GAMERS REVEALS
GREATER ANGULAR GYRUS ACTIVITY FOR VIRTUAL SELF THAN FOR
BIOLOGICAL SELF AND GREATER ANTERIOR CINGULATE ACTIVATION
FOR VIRTUAL SELF THAN FOR BIOLOGICAL OTHER Shanti Ganesh1, Hein

SYMPTOM ATTRIBUTION IN FIRST-EPISODE PSYCHOSIS: A CORTICAL
THICKNESS STUDY Lisa Buchy1,2,3, Michael Bodnar1,2,3, Yasser Ad-

T. van Schie1, Floris P. de Lange1, Daniël H. J. Wigboldus1; 1Radboud University
Nijmegen — Goal: This fMRI study aims to investigate the effect of psy-

Dab'bagh1, Claude Lepage1, Alan Evans1, Karine Sergerie1,2, Jorge Armony1,2,
Ashok Malla1,2,3, Ridha Joober1,2,3, Martin Lepage1,2,3; 1McGill University,
Montréal, QC, 2Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Verdun, QC,
3Prevention and Early Intervention Program for Psychoses, Verdun, QC — Back-

chological perspective (1st, 2nd, 3rd person) and person reality (biological vs. virtual persons) on degree of self-reference as measured by (i)
neural self-other overlap in brain areas involved in person processing
during encoding and (ii) recognition memory (Northoff et al., 2006).
Methods: In an encoding task, twenty-two gamers and 21 matched controls counted syllables or indicated the degree to which trait words were
descriptive of self, best friend, the Dutch queen and either avatar (gamers) or favourite cartoon character (controls), while whole brain functional MRI images were recorded. After encoding participants
completed a post-scanning surprise recognition task, where they judged
whether they had previously seen the word in the scanner. Results:
Gamers showed larger neural self-other overlap for avatar than queen,
reflected by larger anterior cingulate activity. An interaction effect of
person reality x psychological perspective x group revealed larger activity for avatar > self in the left angular gyrus and left superior frontal
gyrus (gamers) compared with cartoon > self (controls). Gamers had
higher recognition scores for avatar than for queen. Controls did not
show differences in neural self-other overlap nor recognition scores
between queen and cartoon. Conclusions: These results suggest that not
person reality, but psychological perspective determines the degree of
self-reference. The finding that a virtual person experienced from a 1st
person psychological perspective can overrule neural self-relevance of a
biological third person may have important implications for theories on
development of the self and identity.

ground: Frontal lobe dysfunction is ascribed a vital role in the pathogenesis of illness misattribution in first-episode psychosis (FEP), and this is
conceptualized as the anosognosia/neurological deficit account of poor
insight. Whether non-frontal regions are important for illness attribution
remains to be established. Further, whether common or separable neural
systems underlie attribution of specific symptoms (e.g., delusions, asociality) has not been studied. Method: Cortical thickness analysis was used
to identify the neuroanatomical correlates of Scale for assessment of
Unawareness of Mental Disorder rated insight in 38 people with a FEP.
Results: Misattribution of delusions associated with thinning in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC, BA9). Misattribution of hallucinations associated with thinning in the left DLPFC (BA9) and left middle
temporal gyrus (BA21). Considering blunted affect, misattribution associated with thinning in the bilateral DLPFC (BA9) and left inferior temporal gyrus (BA20). Misattribution of asociality associated with thinning
in the left middle frontal gyrus (BA8). Conclusions: The results confirm
predictions derived from the nosognosia/neuropsychology account and
assert that thickness in frontal cortex is associated with symptom attribution in FEP. That thinning emerged in non-frontal regions in parietal and
temporal cortices suggests that the neural signature of insight involves a
neural network, and not only the frontal lobes, as previously suggested.
The results also provide preliminary evidence for the existence of several
insight-related mechanisms hosted in multiple cortical regions, and suggest the existence of separable neural systems underlying attribution of
specific symptoms in FEP.

A50

A52

SEEING YOURSELF FACILITATES PERCEPTION OF OTHERS’ EMOTIONS
Nim Tottenham1, Yuan Hang Li1; 1UCLA — It has been posited that an inti-

mate link exists between one’s own face and the understanding of other
people’s expressions (Sato &Yoshinkawa, 2007). Much of the literature
has focused on how other face processing influences our own face. We
expand this view by examining the role of our own face in perceiving
others. We hypothesize that there exists an internal self representation
that can aid in recognizing emotions in others – one that can be engaged
through visual perception of one’s own face. Furthermore, this effect
should be greatest when sex is constant between perceiver and stimulus.
Sixty three (47 female) participants were shown either movies of their
own or another’s facial expressions in a between-subject manipulation.
Then, participants engaged in a recognition task where an initially neutral face morphed into a happy or angry expression. They responded
‘angry’ or ‘happy’ as soon as they could detect the emotion. We conducted a 2 (Prime: Self, Other) x 2 (Subject-gender: Male, Female) x 2
(Stimulus-gender: Male, Female) repeated measures ANOVA. We found
a significant 3 way interaction in RT that show Self primes resulted in
faster emotion recognition when sex was constant between perceiver
and stimulus only for male participants. We suggest that self representations are engaged to facilitate in the recognition of emotions in others,
specifically for men recognizing male faces. Our results are consistent
with past literature that suggest men are typically worse at recognizing
emotions; in our case they benefit more from seeing their own faces than
women.

42

SOCIALLY HYPER-EXPERIENCED GRAPHIC SYMBOL AFFECTS
EVALUATIVE PROCESSING OF OUTCOME Shun Itagaki1, Kazuo Hiraki1;

1The University of Tokyo — Relatively unknown fact is that the "O" (circle)
and "X" (christcross) are respectively taken as a "good" sign and a "bad"
one in Japan. From when Japanese began to understand things, these
links between graphic symbols and meanings were socially or culturally
hyper-experienced in daily lives. In this study, we focused on whether
neural processing of these links is characteristic or not. Two experiments
were conducted to investigate this issue based on the feedback-related
negativity (FRN). The FRN is an ERP component which reflects whether
the outcome is good or bad. ERPs were recorded during the alternative
gambling task, associated graphic symbols with Gain/Loss outcome. In
experiment 1, we associated "O"/"X" with Gain/Loss (congruent) and
Loss/Gain (incongruent). The result showed that the FRN was elicited
by the "Loss" feedback in both conditions. In addition, the FRN in incongruent condition was elicited later than in congruent one. This result
suggests that the association between graphic symbols and actual result
affects the evaluation with temporary dimension. In experiment 2, we
used socially unrelated graphic symbols associated rhombus/hexagon
with Gain/Loss (rhombus gain) and Loss/Gain (hexagon gain). The
result showed that the FRN was elicited by "Loss", but there was no difference of the FRN between two conditions in terms of latency, suggesting that the congruency between original meaning of typical graphic
symbols and actual outcome modulates the evaluation process. We conclude that socially or culturally hyper-experienced graphic symbols have
effect on the evaluation of outcome.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Lexicon
A53

DISSOCIATING THE NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF SELF AND OTHER IN
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY USING SENSECAM Joseph
Moran1,
Daniel O'Young1, John D. Gabrieli1; 1MIT — The self is a multifaceted topic

that is central to human psychology. Functional imaging has identified
neural systems that respond preferentially for different facets of self,
including the self-concept (medial prefrontal [mPFC] and posterior cingulate [pCC] cortices) and self-recognition (right prefrontal cortex and
anterior insula [INS]). Autobiographical episodic memory retrieval is an
aspect of the self that shares some task components with those just mentioned (e.g., ‘selfness’ and introspection). Memory research implicates
mPFC and pCC in the retrieval of personally experienced episodes, but
the nature of the task precludes comparing self and other. In this experiment we sought to allow comparison of self-and other-generated autobiographical episodic information. Participants (N=15) took pictures
using a SenseCam (Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK), a wearable
device that passively records several images per minute through a fisheye lens, which are designed to document the participant’s visual experiences. Image streams were then presented to participants at two frames
per second in a blocked-design imaging paradigm. In the control condition, participants viewed image streams created by a confederate. Imaging analysis compared Self with Other blocks, and revealed greater
activation for self images in regions of pCC, left dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex, bilateral INS and bilateral temporoparietal junction. These results
suggest that re-experiencing one’s own compared to another person’s
autobiographical memories recruits brain areas involved in integration
of information about oneself, episodic memory, and social cognition in
general. We speculate that absence of involvement of mPFC may reflect
its preferential engagement in semantic aspects of self-reflection.

A54

THE EFFECTS OF EMOTIONAL MUSIC ON MEMORY: AN INTER-DOMAIN
COMPARISON William Aubé1,2, Isabelle Peretz1,2, Jorge L. Armony1,2,3,4;
1International

Laboratory for Brain, Music and Sound research (BRAMS),
Université de Montréal, 3McGill University, 4Douglas Mental Health University
Institute — Emotional expressions have an influence on episodic memory.

2

Within the visual domain, this effect is emotion-specific, resulting in better memory for fearful faces, but in decreased accuracy for sad ones. In
contrast, initial findings for nonlinguistic vocalizations suggested a better memory for all emotional expressions, compared to neutral ones.
Whether emotion modulates memory for other types of auditory expressions, such as music, remains unknown, despite its powerful ability to
elicit emotional responses. Using a within-subject design, we tested recognition memory in 50 healthy subjects in the auditory domain. Each
participant listened separately to vocalizations and short musical
excerpts (happy, fearful, sad and neutral stimuli) during 2 sessions separated by a few days. Results show an emotional effect of music on memory. Higher accuracy was found for both happy and scary music as
compared to neutral and sad music. Previous findings with vocal expressions were replicated, with a memory advantage for all emotional
expressions. In addition, a correlation between memory performance for
music and vocalizations was found, particularly for expressions of
threat, and to a lesser degree, for happy stimuli. This suggests a similar
memory pattern in both auditory domains which is consistent with the
hypothesis that the emotional pathway of vocal emotions is shared with
musical emotions, and possibly mediated by the amygdala.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session A

Language: Lexicon
A55

WHAT DID YOU SAY JUST NOW, BITTERNESS OR WIFE? AN ERP STUDY ON
THE INTERACTION BETWEEN TONE, INTONATION AND CONTEXT IN
CANTONESE CHINESE Carmen C. Kung1, Dorothee J. Chwilla1, Carlos

Gussenhoven2, Sara Bögels1, Herbert Schriefers1; 1Radboud University
Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, 2Center for
Language Studies, Radboud University Nijmegen — Previous Studies in Can-

tonese Chinese showed that the addition of a rising question intonation
contour to low tones leads to frequent misperception of these tones (e.g.
Ma et al., 2006). Here we explored the processing consequences of this
interaction by comparing the processing and identification of monosyllabic critical words at the end of questions versus statements, using a
tone identification task and ERPs as an online measure of speech comprehension. Experiment 1 yielded high error rates for the identification
of low tones at the end of questions. This difficulty in tone identification
prompted a reanalysis to check for a perceptual error, triggering an
N400-P600 pattern. In Experiment 2, we investigated the effect of immediate lexical context on the tone by intonation interaction. The context
was created by locating the monosyllabic critical words at the second
position of two-word compounds, so that the lexical tone of these words
became highly predictable from the preceding part of the compound.
This contextual constraint led to a huge reduction in errors and a disappearance of the P600-effect. The overall results indicate that there is an
immediate interaction between tone, intonation, and context. The difference in activation patterns between the two experiments highlights the
significance of context in understanding a tone language, such as, Cantonese-Chinese. It also provides further support for the monitoring
hypothesis of language perception (e.g., Kolk & Chwilla, 2007), which
states that the P600-effect reflects a general reanalysis to check for input
processing error when a strong conflict occurs.

A56

LEXICAL ACCESS IN YOUNG, YOUNGER-OLD AND OLDER-OLD ADULTS:
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN THE CONTRIBUTION OF PHONOLOGY AND
SEMANTICS Meredith Shafto1, Billi Randall1, Paul Wright1, Lorraine Tyler1;
1University of Cambridge — Although

most aspects of language comprehension are well-preserved in old age, some findings suggest that age
affects the trade-off between conceptual and perceptual processing, with
older adults relying relatively more on semantic than phonological information during lexical access (e.g., Speranza et al., 2000).This may be
reflected in changes to the neural underpinnings of lexical access, a possibility in keeping with evidence that older adults’ preserved comprehension is accompanied by compensatory recruitment (Tyler et al., 2009).
Thus, changes in neural sensitivity to phonological or semantic factors in
old age may reveal whether increased reliance on semantic information
reflects declines in phonological processing. We tested this hypothesis
by manipulating phonological (cohort competition) and semantic
(imageability) variables in a lexical decision task while young, youngerold and older-old participants were in the fMRI scanner. Young and
younger-old adults replicated a previous behavioural finding that
semantic information assumes greater functional significance as it
becomes more difficult to discriminate between phonologically similar
words (Tyler et al., 2000). However, older-old adults were sensitive to
semantic information even when words were relatively phonologically
unique. This age effect was reflected neurally in that young and
younger-old but not older-old activated left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG)
during word processing, and this activity was sensitive to phonological
discriminability. Older-old adults did not activate LIFG, instead demonstrating sensitivity to semantic availability in a region in left middle temporal gyrus (LMTG). These findings suggest that older adults become
less able to access phonological representations, instead maintaining
comprehension by relying on available semantic information.

43

Poster Session A
A57

EFFECTS OF AGING ON LEXICAL AMBIGUITY PROCESSING Ekaterini

Klepousniotou1, Emma Woods1; 1Institute of Psychological Sciences,
University of Leeds, UK — The present study investigated age-related differences in lexical ambiguity processing by focusing on the effects of sentential context on the processing of multiple meanings of four types of
ambiguous words, namely balanced and unbalanced homonymy, metonymic and metaphorical polysemy. Twenty young (10 female) and
twenty older (10 female) healthy adults participated in a cross-modal
semantic priming experiment. Ambiguous words were incorporated in
dominant- or subordinate-biasing sentence primes followed after a short
(100 ms) interstimulus interval by dominant-meaning related, subordinate-meaning related or unrelated target words. Overall, there were no
effects of aging as similar performance was observed for both young and
older healthy adults. In particular, for balanced and unbalanced homonymy as well as metaphorical polysemy, there were significant effects of
context in that there was facilitation for contextually appropriate meanings only. In contrast, for metonymic polysemy, there were limited
effects of context as both dominant- and subordinate-related targets
were facilitated in both dominant and subordinate contexts, possibly due
to the high degree of the interrelatedness of the two senses. The findings
indicate that the multiple meanings of homonymous, metaphorical and
metonymically polysemous words are affected differentially by biasing
contexts and that these accessing differences possibly point towards representational differences. Finally, the present results indicate that
healthy aging does not affect the processing of lexical ambiguity.

A58

THE PUTATIVE VISUAL WORD FORM AREA SHOWS NO PREFERENTIAL
ACTIVITY FOR WORDS AND LETTERS DURING NAMING AND MATCHING
TASKS Alecia Vogel1, Steven Petersen1, Bradley Schlaggar1; 1Washington
University in St. Louis — A region in the left fusiform cortex has been
termed the “visual word form area” (vWFA), due to reported preferential activity for words and letters that is position, case and size independent (Cohen & Dehaene 2004). However, increased BOLD activity for
other types of visual stimuli has also been shown (Price and Devlin,
2003). We tested whether the vWFA is preferentially tuned for letter and
word processing. Typical adult subjects read aloud words and nonwords (containing either legal or illegal letter combinations). Subjects
also made same/different judgments on pairs of these stimuli, consonant
strings and Amharic character strings (Ethiopian writing system).
Finally, subjects named single letters and pictures, and made same/different judgments on pairs of these stimuli and single Amharic characters. No region in the left fusiform showed preferential activity for
words, strings, or letters. Several regions near the classical vWFA (-42/54/-12) were found in item-type x time analyses of the whole brain, but
showed greater activity for less “word-like” stimuli. For example, all left
fusiform regions showing an effect of string-type in the matching task
demonstrated higher activity for Amharic than letter strings, while
regions showing an effect of item-type in item naming showed more
activity for pictures than letters. When vWFA coordinates were applied,
there was no difference between item-types in any of the tasks. We conclude that the left fusiform cortex, including the putative vWFA, shows
no preferential word or letter activity in the context of tasks that emphasize visual processing or visual-to-phonological and/or semantic interaction.
A59

LANGUAGE EFFECTS IN SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNERS: A
LONGITUDINAL ERP STUDY Laura Soskey1, Katherine J. Midgley1,2, Phillip

J. Holcomb1, Jonathan Grainger2; 1Tufts University, Medford, MA, 2LPC-CNRS,
Marseille, France — Are the mechanisms involved in word recognition in

early L2 learners different from those of more proficient L2 users and
how do these mechanisms evolve during learning? Our study sought to
closely track language effects in beginning learners of an L2. In the
present study both behavioral and ERP data were collected to investigate

44

Language: Lexicon
the changes over time of L2 processing in beginning learners. Monolingual L1 English-speakers enrolled in introductory Spanish at Tufts University were first trained on a list of 228 Spanish words and their English
translations. These critical items were chosen from the vocabulary to be
learned in their Spanish class over the course of the semester. Behavioral
data from this training session and the following experimental sessions
showed expected learning effects. In the three subsequent experimental
sessions the participants saw 3 lists – an English list, a Spanish list, and a
mixed language list, performing a go/no-go lexical decision task. As
observed in previous studies our results showed overall larger negativities in the N400 epoch to L1 items than to L2 items. The differences varied in that amplitudes in the traditional N400 epoch to L2 items became
more negative over the course of the semester. Comparisons between
items in the pure lists and the mixed lists demonstrated differences in
amplitude as well as in timing of the N400 effects. The results will be discussed within the framework of current models of language acquisition.

A60

AUDITORY COMPREHENSION OF IDIOMATIC PHRASES: AN EVENTRELATED FMRI STUDY Kathleen Brumm1, Matthew Walenski2,3, Frank

Haist2, Tracy Love1,2,3; 1Joint Doctoral Program, Language and Communicative
Disorders, SDSU/UCSD, 2UCSD, 3School of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Sciences, SDSU — While left hemisphere neural regions are traditionally
assumed to underlie most aspects of language comprehension, recent
neuroimaging studies suggest bilateral neural engagement while reading idiomatic phrases (Lauro et al., 2008, Zempleni et al., 2008). We
investigated the neural substrates of comprehension for idiomatic
phrases embedded in auditory sentences by employing event-related
BOLD FMRI. Forty ambiguous idioms were chosen, such that each had a
plausible literal or figurative interpretation. Idioms were three words
long, with the form V + NP (i.e. ring a bell). We constructed minimal pair
sentences for each idiom (80 items total)—where one version disambiguated the phrase towards its literal meaning (1), and one disambiguated
the phrase towards the idiomatic meaning (2). The matched sentences
were identical except for the disambiguating phrase immediately following the idiom. Items were counterbalanced across two lists. (1) The
friendly librarian didn’t ring a bell to quiet the students at the conservative college. (2) The friendly librarian didn’t ring a bell to the quiet students at the conservative college. Preliminary results (n=3 to date;
additional data collection/analysis is ongoing) from FMRI analyses
time-locked to the onset of each idiom indicate greater right hemisphere
cortical activation for idiomatic- (2) than literal-biased (1) sentences in
STG (BA22) and MFG (BA6). For the literal-biased, however, there was
greater left hemisphere cortical activation in IPL (BA40). Our results via
auditory presentation concur with prior findings of bilateral neural
involvement during comprehension of literal and figurative language,
but suggest hemispheric specialization for different aspects of language
comprehension.

A61

PASSIVE WORD LEARNING WITHIN MINUTES: BRAIN CORRELATES OF
RAPID MEMORY TRACE FORMATION Yury Shtyrov1, Vadim Nikulin2,

Friedemann Pulvermuller1; 1Medical Research Council (MRC), Cognition &
Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, 2University Medicine Berlin, Germany —
Contrary to traditional research into long-term memory formation that
concentrates on learning-induced changes over days or weeks of practice, we looked into immediate plastic changes caused in the brain by
passive perceptual learning. Our subjects were presented with spoken
words and pseudowords in passive oddball experiments (~150 rare
deviant and ~800 frequent standard trials). Monosyllabic stimuli in each
block differed only in their final consonant, and both acoustic and lexical
contrasts were kept constant across conditions. The subjects' EEG was
recorded using high-density whole-scalp array. We then scrutinised
evoked responses on a trial-by-trial basis, and investigated changes in
these responses over the experimental session. Whereas the brain
response to deviant words was large throughout the experiment (with a

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Lexicon

Poster Session A

weak trend towards an amplitude decline over time), that to deviant
pseudowords increased dramatically, being small at the start and large
at the end of a 15 minute experimental session. Robustness of pre-existing word memory traces with moderate habituation of their activation as
opposed to the apparent formation of new memory circuits for previously unknown pseudowords appear to be the most likely causes of
these effects. As to our knowledge, this is the first report of a neurophysiological manifestation of rapid word learning as it is well-known to take
place in infancy and in second language acquisition. We discuss implications of this new finding for the neurobiological theory of language and
the underlying brain dynamics at the neuronal circuit level.

A62

LANGUAGE EFFECTS IN VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION BY TRILINGUALS :
AN ERP STUDY Xavier Aparicio1,2, Jonathan Grainger2, Katherine J.

Midgley3, Phillip J. Holcomb3, Jean-Marc Lavaur1; 1Université Montpellier Sud
de France, 2Université de Provence - Aix-Marseille, 3Tufts University — Are the

basic mechanisms of word recognition similar for one’s first language
(L1) and subsequent languages (L2, L3…)? Do these basic mechanisms
differ as a function of language dominance? The present research used
electrophysiological measures to compare evoked brain responses in
visual word recognition for the three languages of trilingual participants.
All participants were native French speakers (L1), with English as a second language (L2) and Spanish as a third language (L3). Participants
monitored a series of words from their three languages, blocked by language, for occasional probes from one semantic category, Event related
potentials (ERPs) were recorded to non-probe critical items. The pattern
of ERP waveforms was similar for the three languages. However, the
three languages differed mostly in the amplitude of the N400 component. Analyses of the ERP data showed an effect of language in the traditional N400 window. French (L1) words showed a larger N400
amplitude compared with both English (L2) and Spanish (L3). English
and Spanish, on the other hand, showed very little differences in this
time window. However there was some evidence for differences
between these two languages in an earlier time window. We examine
how these results fit with different possible extensions of models of bilingual processing to the case of trilingualism.

A63

DISSOCIATING LATE ACQUISITION FROM FLUENCY: LINEAR MIXEDEFFECTS MODELLING OF PROFICIENCY AND N400 AMPLITUDE IN
NATIVE AND LATE LEARNERS OF ENGLISH Aaron Newman1, Antoine
Tremblay2, Helen Neville3, Michael Ullman2;

1

Dalhousie University,

2Georgetown University, 3University of Oregon — Findings

of more “nativelike” (L1-like) brain activation patterns during adult second language
(L2) processing in higher- than lower-proficiency L2-learners are complicated by confounds between learner status (L1vs. L2) and proficiency,
since even high-proficiency L2 learners generally have lower proficiency
than L1 speakers. The common practice of dichotomizing the continuous
variable of proficiency into somewhat arbitrary categories of high and
low proficiency has increased the difficulty of teasing apart these factors.
Additionally, many studies do not formally assess proficiency at all. We
sought to address these issues. We recorded event-related brain potentials (ERPs) to lexical/semantic violations in L1 English speakers and in
L2 learners of English (native Spanish speakers, age of acquisition at
least 18 years). English proficiency was measured with a standard test
(TOAL-3) in all subjects. Although proficiency was higher in the L1 than
L2 group, the groups showed proficiency overlap. Linear mixed-effects
modeling was used to identify main effects and interactions between
learner status and proficiency on N400 amplitude and onset. The N400 in
response to semantic violations showed a larger amplitude and earlier
onset in L1 than L2 learners. There was also a main effect of proficiency
on onset, with higher proficiency (over L1 and L2) associated with earlier
N400 onset. There was no main effect of proficiency on amplitude.
Finally, an interaction between learner status and proficiency on ampli-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

tude (no interaction on onset) was driven by larger N400 amplitudes in
higher- than lower-proficiency L1 speakers, with no effects of proficiency within the L2 group.

A64

THE KILOWORD PROJECT: A LARGE SCALE INVESTIGATION OF THE
INFLUENCE OF LEXICAL DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES ON EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS Janelle LaMarche1, Phillip J. Holcomb1, Jonathan Grainger2,

Stephane Dufau2; 1Tufts University, MA, 2LPC-CNRS, University of Provence,
Marseilles, France — The effects of several variables that have previously

been purported to influence lexical processing were investigated using
event-related potentials (ERPs). A large corpus of words (~1,000) was
presented to 100 subjects (50 using lexical decision and 50 using semantic
categorization). Most previous studies have used fewer particpants and/
or fewer words. We conducted detailed time-course analyses of ERPs
contrasting a number of lexical demographic variables, including mean
bigram frequency, rated familiarity, concretenes, and orthographic
neighborhood size, word length and frequency. A host of effects, some
starting as early as 180ms, differentiated the ERPs to words in the different conditions. The results will be discussed in terms of models of lexical
processing.

A65

THE EFFECT OF FORCED LEXICAL ACCESS DURING NAMING TASKS ON
FMRI BOLD ACTIVATION IN THE VENTRAL AND DORSAL VISUAL
PROCESSING STREAMS Jacqueline Cummine1, Carrie Esopenko2, Josee

Amyotte1, Gordon E. Sarty2, Ron Borowsky2; 1University of Alberta, 2University
of Saskatchewan — Background: Past research indicates that the ventral

visual processing stream is active during lexical reading, as evidenced
by imaging experiments that include exception word and regular word
naming tasks. However, the extent to which the lexically-based ventral
stream is active for naming words under varying task demands is less
understood. Purpose: We explored functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) activation in the ventral and dorsal visual processing
streams, for high and low frequency exception words and regular words,
during two reading paradigms: go no-go naming and basic naming. The
go no-go naming paradigm forces lexical access prior to naming and
thus should evoke more ventral activation than the basic naming paradigm, which does not require lexical access prior to naming. Method:
Participants named words aloud in either a go no-go naming paradigm
or in a basic naming paradigm. FMRI activation maps that separate
unique versus shared regions of activation were created. Results: We
found that the go no-go naming task produced activation that was primarily restricted to the ventral visual processing stream (e.g., occipitotemporal gyri). In contrast, the basic naming task produced activation in
the ventral and dorsal (e.g., superior frontal gyri) processing streams.
Conclusion: We provide evidence that the go no-go naming task that
forces lexical access does indeed increase activation within the ventral
visual processing stream. In contrast, the basic naming task, which does
not require the same level of constrained responses, produces a broader
activation pattern as compared to the go no-go naming task.

A66

ERP MASKED PRIMING IN TWO DIFFERENT JAPANESE SCRIPTS

Kana
Okano1, Jonathan Grainger2, Phillip Holcomb1; 1Tufts University, 2LPC CNRS — Research using roman script languages has shown a series of
effects consistent with hierarchical interactive models of visual word
processing. However, the generality of these findings to non-roman
script languages are unclear. The present study examined the timecourse of processing in two different Japanese scripts (Hiragana and
Katakana) using an ERP masked priming paradigm. In the first experiment, Japanese speakers read Hiragana and Katakana target words in
separate blocks preceded by the same or an unrelated masked prime
word displayed for 50ms. The masked primes were in the same script as
the target or a different script. Similar to previous ERP masked priming
studies, Japanese speakers showed within- and cross-script repetition
priming on the N250 and N400 components for Hiragana targets, but no

45

Poster Session A
such effects were observed for Katakana targets. In a follow-up study,
the same paradigm was run with an 80ms prime duration. In this experiment Japanese speakers showed within- and cross-script repetition
priming on the N250 and N400 components in both Hiragana and Katakana targets. These results suggest that Hiragana words are processed
similarly to roman script words, but that Katakana words are likely processed via a different mechanism.

A67

AN ERP STUDY ON BEGINNING SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNING

Yen Na
Yum1, Katherine J. Midjley1,2, Jonathan Grainger2, Phillip Holcomb1; 1Tufts
University, 2LPC - CNRS — In the initial stage of learning to read a second
language (L2), the visual configuration and the meanings of the words
are acquired, often in relation to the first language (L1). Although this is
usually accomplished quickly, it can be challenging when the L2 is in a
different writing system than the L1. With a combination of behavioral
responses and ERP data, the present study tracked how beginning L1
French and L1 English learners acquired the word form and meaning of
Chinese characters in four experimental sessions. At the beginning and
end of each session, participants performed a repetition detection task to
facilitate word form familiarization. Participants were then trained with
a set of 84 single Chinese characters and their L1 translations, and performed a forced choice test with the L1 translations as prime and a
choice of two characters. Although participants initially had no experience with Chinese, test performance was at 97% by the fourth session,
indicating successful acquisition. Results showed systematic changes in
several ERP components across the sessions. An early posterior positivity between 200-400ms was attenuated with increased experience, and
N400-like effects emerged over posterior regions for learned L2 words.
These effects tended toward similarity to those observed in more proficient learners and might indicate changes in orthographic and semantic
processing during L2 learning. These results could be interpreted as
markers of early gradual changes in L2 processing. These results will be
discussed within the framework of recent models of bilingual lexical
processing.

A68

PERCEIVING MANNER- AND PLACE-OF-ARTICULATION CONTRASTS IN
SPEECH: AN MMN STUDY Sonia Cornell1, Aditi Lahiri2, Carsten Eulitz1;
1University of Konstanz, 2University of Oxford — To

fully grasp the mechanisms of speech perception we have to understand more about the fine
structure of stored lexical information. The present study was designed
to query the notion of underspecification as a basic principle in storing
phonological information in the mental lexicon. Previous neurobiological studies have mainly shed light on the underspecification of certain
place-of-articulation features. Here our focus is on manner-of-articulation. Moreover, the contrast sensitivity in different featural dimensions
was compared. We examined the brain’s automatic change-detection
responses to nonword pairs differing in medial consonants [edi], [eni],
[ezi] and [egi] using Mismatch Negativity (MMN). Assuming abstract
underspecified representations, the varying consonants are predicted to
evoke symmetric MMNs for the [ezi]~[eni] reversal (bi-directionally conflicting manner features), and for the [egi]~[eni] reversal (conflicting
manner in one direction and conflicting place in the reversed case), but
asymmetric MMNs for the reversal of the [edi]~[eni] contrast due to the
underspecification of the phonological feature [PLOSIVE] for /d/. The
observed pattern of MMNs supported these predictions. Combined
place and manner conflicts resulted in MMN differences suggesting an
enhanced contrast sensitivity for manner-of-articulation changes.

46

Language: Lexicon
A69

ORTHOGRAPHIC KNOWLEDGE AFFECTS THE PROCESSING OF
UNATTENDED SPOKEN WORDS: MISMATCH NEGATIVITY EVIDENCE

Chotiga Pattamadilok1, Hélène Lafontaine1, Cécile Colin1, José Morais1,
Régine Kolinsky1,2; 1Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium, 2Fonds de la
Recherche Scientifique-FNRS, Belgium — Several behavioral and brain

imaging studies provide strong evidence for the influence of orthographic knowledge on active and high-level speech processing tasks
even when written words are not simultaneously presented. No studies,
however, have successfully shown that such influence could be observed
in a passive speech processing situation, i.e., when participants were not
required to attend to speech. In the present study, the Mismatch Negativity, a specific ERP component that is an automatic index of experience-dependent auditory memory traces, was used to investigate this
issue. An ‘‘odd-ball’’ sequence of acoustic stimuli consisting of frequentstandard words /pu/ (spelled “POU”) and infrequent-deviant words /
mu/ (spelled “MOU”, thus orthographically congruent) and /nu/
(spelled “NOUS”, thus orthographically incongruent) was presented to
15 participants in two speech processing situations: passive listening
(participants watched a silent movie) and active listening (participants
performed a semantic categorization task). Both deviant words elicited a
typical MMN over the frontal regions (~80-180ms), reflecting automatic
discrimination of standard and deviant stimuli. Interestingly, only in the
passive listening situation, the MMN waveform elicited by the orthographically incongruent deviant word (/nu/) showed more negative
peak amplitude and mean amplitude and larger surface than the MMN
waveform elicited by the orthographically congruent deviant word (/
mu/). In the active listening situation, the same differences between the
two deviant conditions were found much later: from 400 ms onwards.
These findings suggest that orthographic knowledge qualitatively
changes the nature of the auditory memory traces. Once reading is
acquired, the “phonological” representations might become “phonographic” representations.

A70

ENGAGING FRONTO-TEMPORAL BRAIN SYSTEMS WITH DERIVATIONAL
MORPHEMES: AN FMRI STUDY OF ARABIC Sami Boudelaa1, Mirjana
Bozic1, William Marslen-Wilson1; 1MRC-Cognition & Brain Sciences Unit,
Cambridge, UK — Neuroimaging evidence regarding linguistic complexity

in Indo-European languages suggests that inflectional complexity
(walked, smoked) engages a left-lateralized front-temporal network,
while derivational complexity (darkness, warmth) is less effective in
doing so. This may reflect the less predictable semantics of derived
forms which, unlike inflected forms, lend them less readily to decomposition. This interpretation is consistent with overt priming where derived
forms prime if their relationship is transparent (departure-depart), but
not if opaque (department-depart). The same tasks reveal strong priming, however, between derived words in Semitic languages regardless of
semantic transparency. This dissociation between morphological decomposition and semantic compositionality predicts the engagement, for
these languages, of the left-lateralized fronto-temporal system even for
derivational complexity. We tested this prediction using three sets of single spoken Arabic words varying in their degree of morphological complexity: (a) words which do not have an internal morphological structure
([lakinna] however), (b) words which encorporate the typical Semitic
derivational processes of interleaved root and word pattern ([juluus] sitting), and (c) words which have in addition an inflectional enclitic affix
([firaaruhum] their escape). These were contrasted with a matched complex auditory baseline that does not trigger a speech percept. Morphologically structured words engage a left-lateralized fronto-temporal
network, which the words with enclitics engage more strongly. Derivational complexity allies itself with inflectional complexity and more generally with syntactic complexity in languages where morphophonological decomposition is divorced from semantic compositional-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Lexicon

Poster Session A

ity. These divergent cross-linguistic patterns underline the necessity of
studying typologically different linguistic systems to achieve explanatory neurocognitive language models.

A73

A71

Washington — Second language (L2) learned in adulthood is thought to be
notoriously vulnerable to forgetting, but not much is known about the
neural events that take place during L2 attrition. Here we report that
novice adult L2 learners’ brain activity, as measured by event-related
potentials (ERPs), showed systematic changes to ungrammatical L2 stimuli during first year of instruction. Crucially, after instruction had ended,
the same stimuli elicited identical ERP response changes, but in reverse
order. English speakers learning Finnish read Finnish words, orthographically legal non-words and illegal non-words while ERPs were
measured in three sessions during first year of instruction and in a follow-up session after instruction had ended. The illegal stimuli were
formed by violating Finnish vowel harmony which prohibits co-occurrence of front and back vowels in a word. Legal non-words enhanced the
N400 effect (Bentin, 1987) in all recording sessions. Illegal stimuli initially elicited an N400-like effect which was replaced by a P600 effect
(Osterhout & Holcomb, 1992) in later sessions during instruction. In the
follow-up session, the size of P600 to illegal stimuli was negatively correlated while the N400 size was positively correlated with number of days
since instruction ended, indicating that in the absence of instruction,
P600 was replaced by an N400. These results suggest that the neural processes underlying some aspects of L2 attrition may involve a similar but
reverse developmental path to the one observed during acquisition. L2
grammatical knowledge, reflected by the P600, may be especially vulnerable to attrition in novice learners.

ATTENTIVE AND NON-ATTENTIVE PROCESSING OF MORPHOLOGICALLY
COMPLEX WORDS AND PSEUDOWORDS: A COMBINED EEG AND MEG
STUDY Alina Leminen1,2, Miika Leminen2,3, Minna Lehtonen4,5,6, Päivi

Nevalainen7, Sari Ylinen2, Lilli Kimppa2, Christian Sannemann1,3, Teija Kujala2,
Jyrki Mäkelä7; 1Cognitive Science Unit, University of Helsinki, Finland,
2Cognitive Brain Research Unit, University of Helsinki, Finland, 3Finnish Centre
of Excellence in Interdisciplinary Music Research, Finland, 4Helsinki Collegium
for Advanced Studies, University of Helsinki, Finland, 5Åbo Akademi University,
Finland, 6Low Temperature Laboratory, Helsinki University of Technology,
Finland, 7BioMag Laboratory, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Finland — It
has been suggested that visually presented complex words such as
'worker' and 'bananas' are automatically parsed into their constituents
during comprehension. However, less is known about the neural processing of spoken complex words. The current study investigated the
effect of attention on the processing of spoken inflected ('bananas') and
derived ('worker') words. Simplex words ('bride') were used as controls.
Attention was manipulated by including two experimental tasks: passive and active. EEG and MEG responses were recorded simultaneously
from 14 participants. In the passive task condition, the participants were
instructed to ignore the incoming auditory stimuli and concentrate on a
silent cartoon. In the active task condition, the participants judged
whether the stimuli were acceptable Finnish words or not. The order of
the task conditions was counterbalanced across participants. The MEG
source localization was performed with Minimum Current Estimates
(MCE). In the active task, a larger negativity effect and stronger left
superior temporal cortex (STC) activation was elicited for inflected
words than for derived words. There were no differences in the N400
effect or left STC activations between simplex and derived words. In the
passive task, there were no differences in N400 effect between derived
and simplex words, but smaller negativity for inflected words. Larger
left STC activation was observed for derived than for inflected words.
The results show that morphological parsing might require conscious
attention. The active task revealed that derived words seem to require
less computational capacity than inflected words, which is in line with
previous behavioral studies.

A72
Marianna Eddy1, Danielle
Phillip
Jonathan
Institute of
Technology, 2Tufts University, 3CNRS and University of Provence — In masked

ERP EFFECTS FOR MASKED WORD PRIMES

Lopez2,

Holcomb2,

Grainger3; 1Massachusetts

repetition priming paradigms, the influence of the prime stimulus on
target processing is typically examined. Because of the close temporal
proximity of the prime and target it is difficult to disentangle the processing related to only the prime. In this experiment, we presented
masked word and word-like stimuli for 50ms followed by a 20ms backward mask, like in a typical masked priming paradigm, however, no target stimulus followed the backward mask. This allowed us to examine
the ERP time course of recognition of masked primes without being
obscured by target processing. We found an extensive amount of processing takes place with even a 50ms prime exposure. The non-word
conditions (consonant strings, false fonts) all differed from the real
words starting at 200-300 ms continuing from 300 ms until 400 ms potentially indicating a difference in orthographic and phonological processing respectively. The pseudoword condition differed from the word
condition early on (200-300 ms), but this difference was not significant
during a late time window (300-400ms). Pseudowords also differed from
consonant strings and false fonts from 300-400ms, suggesting a difference in mapping to a phonological representation. The results of this
study demonstrate even when a prime is briefly presented and masked,
a substantial amount of orthographic and phonological information is
activated.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

USE IT OR LOSE IT: SECOND LANGUAGE ATTRITION IN BRAIN LOOKS LIKE
ACQUISITION IN REVERSE Ilona Pitkanen1, Lee Osterhout1; 1University of

A74

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE
COMBINATORIC PROCESSING Robert

FOR

MORPHEME-BASED

Fiorentino1;

1

University of
Kansas — Although there is increasing evidence for the decomposition of
visually-presented complex words (e.g., “teacup”) into their constituent
morphemes (e.g., “tea”/”cup”), the nature and neural bases of the combinatorial processes that operate on these mental representations remain
unclear. In the current study, we present electrophysiological evidence
suggesting morpheme-based combinatorial processing from EEG and
MEG recordings obtained during a concurrent visual lexical decision
task. The stimuli included sets of 95 known compound words (e.g., “teacup”), novel compound words (e.g., “tombnote”), long words without
complex structure (e.g., “throttle”), and novel non-words without real
morpheme parts (e.g., “blenyarp”). The stimuli were matched on wholeword properties including length, orthographic neighborhood, and for
known words, frequency. Moreover, the known and novel compounds
were matched on morpheme properties including length, neighborhood
and frequency. Across-condition comparisons revealed separable
responses tracking the activation of the constituents of known and novel
compounds and the post-decompositional (compositional) processes
involving their constituents, prior to, and dissociable from, the eventual
overt lexical decision response. The findings converge with previous
psychophysical results suggesting the across-the-board processing of
known and novel complex words in terms of their morphological constituents, and with previous electrophysiological studies suggesting constituent activation effects within the first half-second of visual word
recognition. Crucially, the current findings also propose a measure of the
post-decompositional integrative processing of complex word constituents. Together, the findings support a model of complex word processing involving the initial segmentation of the whole-word into potential
constituents, the activation of these constituents, and their combination
into a complex representation.

47

Poster Session A
A75

INFLUENCE OF EMOTIONAL CONNOTATIONS ON WORD ACQUISITION

Thore Apitz1, Christian Dobel1, Pienie Zwitserlood2, Markus Junghoefer1;
1
Institute for Biomagnetism and Biosignalanalysis, University of Muenster,
Germany, 2University of Muenster, Germany — We investigated how emo-

tional connotations underlying words’ concepts affect the integration of
novel words into pre-existing lexical and conceptual memory networks.
Participants learned a set of 100 pseudowords as new denotations for 50
aversive (e.g. syringe, tank) and 50 neutral objects (e.g. bottle, chair)
using a statistical learning paradigm. Based on a pilot study, objects
were chosen from a huge database with respect to optimal, univocal
labeling. Over the course of five learning sessions at consecutive days,
each visually presented pseudoword was frequently paired with a picture of one specific object and infrequently with pictures of ten different
objects. Subjects had to decide via button press if the presented word
might match the object. Accuracy of decision increased from chance level
to 90% after the fifth session. Whole head Magnetencephalographic
event-related fields were recorded as participants read the pseudowords
prior to and after the learning sessions. Underlying neural activity was
estimated using the L2-Minimum-Norm-Least Squares method. Comparisons of event related brain activity to pseudo word presentation
before and after learning showed enhanced sensory activity for aversively conditioned pseudo-words in the time range of the “Early Posterior Negativity” i.e. 200 to 300 ms after word onset, in left parietooccipital regions. These results demonstrate that newly acquired emotional words evoke brain responses similar to those found for adjectives
or nouns with arousing content.

A76

REVISITING NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF NOUNS AND VERBS IN
CHINESE USING FMRI Xi Yu1, Yanchao Bi2, Zaizhu Han2, Sam-Po Law1;

1The University of Hong Kong, 2State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience

and Learning — Most earlier studies claiming different neural correlates of
nouns and verbs were based on comprehension and/or production of
action and object names unmatched on imageability in brain-injured and
normal individuals (Bird et al., 2000). More recently, some have argued
the noun/verb difference can be reduced to one in morphological paradigm (Tyler et al., 2008). This raises the question of whether different
neural representations of nouns and verbs exist in languages with
impoverished inflectional morphology, e.g. Chinese. Li et al. (2004)
addressed the issue using a lexical decision task with materials matched
only on frequency and character complexity, and found no regions specifically activated for nouns or verbs. Interesting as they may seem, their
observations may not be relevant as lexical decisions do not necessarily
require conceptual or morphosyntactic processing. In our study, we
focused on noun and verb processing at the conceptual level using a
semantic-relatedness judgment task and stimuli, single-character and
two-character words, matched on frequency, imageability, age-of-acquisition, and number of stroke. Our results based on 15 native speakers of
Mandarin Chinese in Beijing showed that, although many common brain
regions were activated by both word classes, the left inferior temporal
gyrus was more activated in noun processing, and the left middle and
superior temporal gyri in verb processing. We further found greater verb
than noun activation in the left frontal area (BA 44, 47) in ROI analysis.
We conclude that conceptual processing of nouns and verbs in a language with few morphosyntactic morphemes still activates different cortical areas.
A77

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE OF THE SEMANTIC AND
PHONOLOGICAL ENCODING IN MANDARIN PRODUCTION AND
COMPREHENSION Yi-Shiuan Chiu1,2, Li-Chiun Tsai1; 1Fu Jen Catholic

University, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C., 2Laboratory for Cognitive Neuropsychology,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C. — The psycholinguistic debates of serial and parallel models in language production and
comprehension were investigated by a non-alphabetic language, Manda-

48

Language: Lexicon
rin. Two event-related potential (ERP) components were used to explore
the time course of semantic and phonological encoding during picture
naming and word comprehension in Mandarin. The components of the
lateralized readiness potential (LRP) and N200 were presumably related
to response preparation and response inhibition. In the language production tasks, participants were shown the pictures and made dual
choice go/nogo decisions based on semantic features (animate or inanimate) and different phonological features (end phonemes in experiment
1, and the phonological length in experiment 2). The results showed that
the pick latencies of the N200 were significantly earlier in these two go/
nogo = phonology condition than in the go/nogo = semantics condition.
The nogo LRP was found only in the go/nogo = end phonemes but not
in the go/nogo = number of phonemes, suggesting the cascade process
in Mandarin production. In the comprehension tasks, the decisions were
based on semantic features (animate or inanimate) and different phonological features (initial phonemes in experiment 3, and end phonemes in
experiment 4). The results suggested the serial process and semantics
prior to phonology in Mandarin comprehension. In conclusion, the electrophysiological findings indicated the semantic word property was
available earlier than the phonological features when participants produce and read single words. Furthermore, the language comprehension
process is not just the reverse pattern of the production model.

A78

IMMEDIATE AND DELAYED EFFECTS OF NOVEL WORD ACQUISITION
BEFORE AND AFTER NOCTURNAL SLEEP - A MEG-STUDY OF LANGUAGE
PLASTICITY Annuschka Eden1, Pienie Zwitserlood1, Gareth Gaskell2,

Christian Dobel3; 1University of Muenster, Germany, 2University of York, United
Kingdom, 3Institute for Biomagnetism and Biosignalanalysis, University of
Muenster, Germany — Immediate and delayed neurophysiologic and
behavioural effects of word acquisition in adults were investigated. A
statistical word-learning-training was implemented, consisting of 40
acoustic pseudo words, paired seven times with matching and seven
times with mismatching objects. One group performed the training in
the morning (am-group), another in the evening (pm-group) while magnetoencephalographic (MEG) brain responses were measured. MEG
responses to matching and mismatching combinations were measured
again 12 and 24 hours after training. L2 Minimum norm estimates were
calculated to determine the sources of the brain signals. A typical N400m
response indicated a clear progress during training with differences
between correct and incorrect stimulus-pairings after four presentations
which was confirmed by behavioural responses. Neural networks mediating these integration processes were found within the left temporal
lobe, an area typically described as one of the main generators of the
N400 response. An addition, there emerged expected differences
between groups at the second session. The pm-group exhibited a leap of
progress from session one to two while the am-group showed this
behaviour from session two to three. Thus confirming earlier behavioural results, consolidation of novel word learning seems to be associated with a time-interval crucially involving sleep.

A79

TASK-EFFECTS ON EARLY BRAIN RESPONSES IN VISUAL WORD
RECOGNITION REVEALED BY EEG/MEG Yuanyuan Chen1, Matt Davis1,

Friedemann Pulvermuller1, Olaf Hauk1; 1Medical Research Council Cognition
and Brain Science Unit, Cambridge, UK — Electrophysiological data on the
time course of visual word recognition are still quite inconsistent, with
estimates for latencies of different processing stages varying by several
hundreds of milliseconds. This discrepancy may be partly attributed to
the tasks used. The current study used combined EEG/MEG to investigate responses to single words in silent reading (R), lexical decision (LD)
and semantic decision (SD) in the same group of subjects. Sensor analysis and MNE source estimation revealed that brain activation was comparable across tasks until about 150ms, when the three tasks began to
differ. MNE analysis revealed a spread of activation from occipital to
temporal and inferior frontal brain areas within 250 ms in all tasks. Task-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Lexicon
related differences were most pronounced in inferior frontal brain areas.
Preliminary analysis of several specific psycholinguistic variables using
multiple regression (Length/N, Lexical Frequency, Bi/Trigram Frequency, Concreteness/Imageability, Action-relatedness, Number of
Meanings/Senses) indicated that multiple processing stages already
occur less than 300 milliseconds after stimulus onset. The absence of
early (~100ms) differences between tasks demonstrates that the level of
general attentional demands is similar across tasks, and in particular that
silent reading produces reliable brain responses without requiring overt
responses. Our data suggest that task-relevant information is retrieved
around 150 ms, providing further evidence for early lexico-semantic processes in visual word recognition.

A80

LEXICAL REPRESENTATION OF NOUNS AND VERBS IN THE LATE
BILINGUAL BRAIN Jing Yang1, Li Hai Tan2, Ping Li1; 1Pennsylvania State

University, 2University of Hong Kong — Neuroimaging studies of lexical rep-

resentation in English suggest that basic lexical categories such as nouns
and verbs are represented by different brain circuits. By contrast,
research from Chinese indicates that nouns and verbs involve common
neural patterns of activation. How are nouns and verbs of two different
languages organized in one brain, that is, in bilingual speakers who have
representation of lexical categories in both languages? The present study
investigates the neural representation of nouns and verbs in late Chinese-English bilinguals using fMRI. During fMRI scanning subjects were
asked to make a lexical decision task to English words (or nonwords)
and disyllabic Chinese words (or nonwords). In the baseline condition,
they were told to judge the direction of arrows. Data analyses revealed
that, consistent with previous research on monolingual Chinese speakers, there were no significant differences between Chinese nouns and
verbs. Both nouns and verbs evoked neural responses in the left middle
frontal cortex and posterior temporal-parietal regions. Interestingly,
these late Chinese-English bilingual subjects also showed no systematic
differences in brain activation patterns for English nouns and verbs,
except that English verbs elicited stronger activation in the left middle
frontal cortex and bilateral temporal-occipital regions. The findings from
the current study are consistent with our previous studies of both monolingual Chinese and early bilingual Chinese-English speakers. Together,
these studies provide support for the hypothesis that neural circuits for
languages are shaped both by language-specific properties and by the
learner’s specific experiences with first and second languages.

A81

LEXICAL PROCESSING IN BILINGUAL BRAINS: TRANSLATION
EQUIVALENTS Laura Sabourin1, Christie Brien1; 1University of Ottawa —
Research on the organization of language and how it is processed in the
bilingual brain is an important aspect of not only understanding linguistic processes but also very important for understanding neural organization in general. It is currently debated whether bilinguals and language
learners make use of one single lexicon (containing words from both
their languages), or whether they have separate stores for words from
each language. The present experiment investigates lexical processing in
English-French bilinguals by using behavioural and event-related brain
potential masked priming techniques to investigate semantic and translation priming effects. Masked priming, which has provided evidence
for early, automatic semantic priming effects in monolingual populations (Grossi, 2006), has also been used to investigate the possible existence of one large lexicon for items in both languages, or whether
separate lexicons exist for each language. Results show that the earlier
the L2 is acquired the more likely that one lexicon is used to store items
from both languages. With this data we are getting close to being able to
determine at what stage in the lifespan maturational changes may affect
the neural organization of lexical storage.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session A
A82

EARLY AUTOMATIC PROCESSING OF DERIVATIONAL AND INFLECTIONAL
FORMS IN SPOKEN WORD COMPREHENSION: COMBINED MEG-EEG
EVIDENCE Caroline Whiting1, Yury Shtyrov1, William Marslen-Wilson1; 1MRC
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge UK — Recent studies suggest
that the presence of a potential stem and affix within a word (corn-er) is
sufficient to trigger attempts at its decomposition, regardless of semantic
compositionality. Using combined magneto- and electroencephalography, we investigated how the processing of spoken words is modulated
by such morpho-phonological cues. The mismatch negativity (MMN), a
well-known index of long-term linguistic memory traces, was recorded
to examine the spatiotemporal neural dynamics elicited by words of varied complexity: transparent derivational affixation (baker), pseudo-affixation (beaker), inflectional affixation (bakes, beaks) and non-affixed
forms, in the absence of focused attention. Matched pseudowords were
used as acoustic and phonological controls. A critical variable was
semantic transparency within the derivational set, where the embedded
stem is related or unrelated to the meaning of the whole form (baker vs.
beaker). Results revealed an initial peak approximately 150-200ms after
the deviation point with a major source in left supratemporal cortex.
This early component was sensitive not only to lexicality - showing a
larger response to real words than pseudowords - but also to morphological structure, with a significant increase for a potential but invalid
segmentation (beak-er). A later component at 250-300ms following the
deviation point showed differential processing for word conditions containing a suffix, but not for the non-affixed endings. Finally, the N400like component indicated increased activation for pseudowords, but
showed no morphological sensitivity. These results support recent theories pointing to early and automatic processing based on the presence of
phonological cues to morphological structure.

A83

ERP EVIDENCE FOR MASKED TRANSLATION AND ASSOCIATIVE PRIMING
EFFECTS IN HIGHLY PROFICIENT BALANCED BILINGUALS Jon Andoni
Dunabeitia1, Maria Dimitropoulou1,2, Itziar Laka3, Manuel Carreiras1,3;
Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, 2University of La Laguna,
3University of the Basque Country — In a first study, we examined whether
1Basque

there is symmetrical masked translation priming effects in a group of
balanced simultaneous Basque-Spanish bilinguals using event-related
brain potential recordings. Participants were presented with Spanish
and Basque words that could be preceded by their repetitions (identity
condition), by their translations in the other language, or by unrelated
words (Spanish and Basque). Results showed a significant masked repetition effect, mainly evident in the N250 and N400 components. Importantly, a masked translation priming effect was also found in the N400
component, being the magnitude of the N400 modulation similar for
both language directions (L1-to-2 and L2-to-L1). In a second study, a
bilingual group of the same characteristics completed an ERP masked
priming experiment in which they were presented with Spanish targets
that could be preceded by semantically related Spanish and Basque
words (by means of word association), or by semantically unrelated
Spanish and Basque words. Within-language associated word pairs and
between-language associated pairs showed a modulation of the N400
component, as compared to within- and between-language unrelated
word pairs. Furthermore, language switch cost effects were also found in
the two studies, confirming that masked primes that do not match targets’ language elicit more negative-going N250 and N400 deflections.
These studies represent the first piece of evidence of neural responses
guiding unconscious and automatic word translation and word association processes in balanced simultaneous bilinguals, and confirm the predictions of models of bilingual word processing and bilingual memory.

49

Poster Session A

Language: Lexicon

A84

A86

MORPHOLOGY IS NOT REDUCIBLE TO THE COMBINATION OF
SEMANTICS AND ORTHOGRAPHY: A PRIMING TASK FOR FRENCH
VERBS Phaedra Royle1,2,3, Karsten Steinhauer3,4, John E. Drury3,4, Nicolas

CHARACTERIZING LEXICAL COMPLEXITY COMPUTATIONS IN THE
FRONTO-TEMPORAL LANGUAGE NETWORK Mirjana Bozic1, Li Su1, Cai

1,3 1

2

3

4

Bourguignon ; Université de Montréal, CHU Ste-Justine, CRLMB, McGill
University — Morphological aspects of language processing have been
suggested to be reducible to the combination of formal (phonological or
orthographic) and semantic effects. We tested this idea in a priming
study using event-related potentials (ERPs) and lexical decision. Target
words were inflected French verbs and were preceded by either unrelated control words or one of three prime-types: Morphological: cassait –
CASSE ‘broke – break’; Formal: cassis – CASSE ‘blackcurrant – break’;
and Semantic: brise – CASSE ‘break – break’. Primes were presented
very briefly (50 ms) with a forward and backward mask. We expected
this procedure (based on prior literature) to eliminate semantic priming
while retaining formal and morphological priming, which could then be
compared directly. Twenty-two native French-speaking right-handed
adults (18 to 35 years old) with (corrected to) normal vision participated
in the experiment. The EEG was recorded continuously from 19 standard
electrodes and was analyzed as event-related potentials (ERPs) timelocked to the target verbs. As expected, there were no significant behavioral or ERP semantic effects, while both morphological and formal
priming were observed. Though the ERP patterns for these two conditions were quite similar, the morphological effects persisted ~100 ms
longer than the formal effects. This presence of a distinct ERP pattern for
morphological versus formal priming in the absence of any semantic
effects is inconsistent with models that reduce morphology to "semantics
+ orthography" and is consistent with the view that morphology is a
valid theoretical construct for descriptions of lexical and linguistic processing.

A85

PROCESSING LEXICAL COMPLEXITY IN POLISH: BEHAVIOURAL AND
NEUROIMAGING EVIDENCE Zanna Szlachta1, Aleksandra Jelowicka1,
Bozic1,

Marslen-Wilson1; 1MRC

Mirjana
William
Cognition and Brain Sciences
Unit, Cambridge, UK — Different types of lexical complexity in English
modulate the involvement of different fronto-temporal language networks during language comprehension (Bozic et al., 2007). Morpho-phonological complexity (regularly inflected verbs, jumped) activates leftlateralised inferior frontal areas, while increased general processing
complexity (words with onset-embedded stems, clay-claim) engages
front-temporal areas bilaterally. In this initial study we ask whether Polish, with its much richer inflectional system, can be shown to observe
similar neuro-cognitive contrasts. We used passive listening efMRI and
auditory lexical decision experiments to investigate parallel types of lexical complexity in Polish. For nouns we contrasted uninflected (e.g. dom
– house), case-inflected (e.g. dom-u – house, genitive) and onset-embedded (e.g. kotlet – cutlet) conditions. For verbs we co-varied number of
alternate stem forms (2 or 4) with number of inflectional choices. Behaviourally, nouns showed differing latencies according to apparent complexity; with inflected nouns slowest and simple nouns fastest. Imaging
data, in contrast to English, did not differentiate these noun conditions.
For verbs we saw no effects of inflectional complexity in either imaging
or lexical decision. Multiple stem forms, however, elicited lower latencies in lexical decision and were correlated with a reduction in neural
activation in the left superior and middle temporal gyri, relative to verbs
with fewer stem forms. This facilitation by multiple stem forms of the
same verb may be analogous to the processing advantage for words with
multiple senses (Rodd et al., 2002). Lexical processing in morphologically complex languages like Polish may differ substantially from less
complex languages like English.

50

Wingfield1, William Marslen-Wilson1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit,
Cambridge UK — Bilateral fronto-temporal systems play a key role in
speech comprehension. Evidence suggests that their activation is modulated by variations in the lexical complexity of the incoming input. General processing demands for linguistically simple words (e.g. dark)
activate a bilateral subsystem, while combinatorial processes reflecting
the presence of linguistic complexity (e.g. regular inflectional morphemes, play+ed) engage a left hemisphere perisylvian subsystem
(Marslen-Wilson & Tyler, 2007). We applied Representational Similarity
Analysis (RSA; Kriegeskorte et al, 2008) to establish information content
and test the type of computation performed in fronto-temporal areas
during processing of these different input types. Consistent with findings from univariate analyses, results showed that combinatorial processes triggered by the presence of inflectional suffixes (-ed) produce
inter-correlated patterns of representation in left pars triangularis
(BA45). Competition between multiple candidates for lexical access (e.g.,
in words with embedded stems, claim-clay), which increase general processing demands, correlated with the representation pattern in bilateral
pars orbitalis (BA47). In a follow-up study we varied combinatorial and
general processing demands in both inflected and derived words (e.g.
played vs bravely), to test further how different complex inputs modulate the computations performed in fronto-temporal areas. The results
show that inflected and derived words present different challenges for
the speech processing system, and suggest a dynamic modulation of the
type of computation performed in different linguistic contexts. This
novel approach to studying language comprehension allows more precise characterization of the information carried and processed in the
fronto-temporal language network.

A87

SPATIOTEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF MORPHOLOGICAL PROCESSING: AN
MEG/EEG INVESTIGATION Elisabeth Fonteneau1, Mirjana Bozic1, Billi

Randall2, William Marslen-Wilson1; 1MRC - Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit,
Cambridge, UK, 2Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, UK — Different aspects of spoken word processing are differentiated within the
neural language system. Linguistic complexity engages primarily left lateralised processes, whereas general processing complexity - as indexed
by lexical competition - engages a more bilateral network (Tyler et al.,
2005). To track the spatiotemporal dynamics of these systems we combined magneto-encephalography (MEG) and event-related brain potentials (ERPs) in an auditory study. Participants listened to lists of words
that varied on two different dimensions and occasionally performed a 1back memory task. Linguistic processing complexity was manipulated
by the presence of a potential inflectional morpheme (played, trade).
General processing complexity was engaged by the presence of onsetembedded lexical competitors (claim, hump). Results indicate magnetic
and electric field differences between the two types of processing complexity from 250 ms and extending until 510 ms post stimulus and maximally distributed on the anterior left part of the scalp. Source estimates
computed with MNE (L2, minimum norm estimates) and analysed using
regions-of-interest suggest that general processing complexity activates
selectively right inferotemporal posterior areas from 350 ms, as the evidence builds up for the presence of an embedded stem. By contrast, linguistic processing elicited stronger activation in left middle temporal
and posterior sources from 450 ms, linked to the timing with which the
inflectional ending starts to be heard. These results support a spatiotemporal distinction between processes corresponding to different types of
lexical processing complexity.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Lexicon
A88

CONTEXTUAL WORD LEARNING – A MEG STUDY Kati Keuper1, Pienie

Zwitserlood1, Antoni Rodríguez-Fornells2, Ludger Elling3, Christian Dobel3;
1University of Münster, Germany, 2Faculty of Psychology, University of
Barcelona, Spain, 3Institute for Biomagnetism and Biosignalanalysis,
University of Münster, Germany — The meaning of a new word in a foreign
language can be derived from context, similar to L1 acquisition during
infancy. Accordingly, Mestres-Misse et al. (2007) had participants learn
the meaning of novel words by embedding them in intelligible sentences. They observed a brain response related to lexical and semantic
processing (N400) that changed along with learning progress. The
present study intended to replicate this finding, and to identify the neural generators by means of advanced magnetencephalographic sourcereconstruction techniques. Fifteen healthy German native speakers performed contextual novel-word learning. Each item occurred in the final
position of three consecutive plain text sentences (triplets). These either
implied one shared meaning for the novel word (congruent context) or
disparate meanings for each sentence of a triplet (incongruent context).
Thus, a novel word´s meaning emerged with its repeated exposition.
Stimulus-related brain responses were recorded. Learning progress was
verified by various behavioral measures. We observed a significant
decline of the brain response over widespread cortical regions as a function of the repeated exposure to the novel word in a 200-600 ms time
range. As expected, first presentations showed no difference between
congruent and incongruent contexts. Significant differences emerged for
third presentations: Novel words in the congruent condition caused
smaller neural responses. We discuss our data in relation to prior findings mentioned above.

A89

ACQUISITION OF PRELEXICAL CUES OF A FOREIGN LANGUAGE:
EVIDENCE FROM A LONGITUDINAL ERP STUDY Sonja Rossi1, Tobias

Hartmueller1, Hellmuth Obrig1,2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2University Hospital Leipzig, Germany —

Phonotactics is one prelexical cue which comes into play during the
acquisition of a foreign language since a native English speaker will classify a word starting with ‘bz‘ as phonotactically illegal. These rules,
which define the possible combination of different phonemes in a given
language, need to be altered when he or she learns Slovak, since a word
starting with ‘bz’ is legal in Slovak phonotactics. Here we investigate
how such phonotactic rules are acquired and which neurophysiological
correlates of such a plastic change are observable. Two kinds of
pseudowords were acoustically presented to German native speakers
while the EEG was recorded: pseudowords phonotactically legal in German were compared to pseudowords phonotactically illegal in German.
The illegal pseudowords, however, corresponded to a language
unknown to the subjects, the Slovak language. The experiment comprised pretest, training, and posttest sessions on three consecutive days.
Two training strategies were compared. One group of subjects underwent an “implicit training”, by passively listening to novel phonotactic
rules. The second group of subjects took part in an “explicit training”, in
which their focus was explicitly directed to the phonotactic rules to be
learned. In line with previous results from our group (Rossi et al, submitted) the critical ERP component (N400) was larger for legal compared to
illegal pseudowords. With regard to the plasticity of the language system across the different testing sessions a modulation of the N400 effect
for trained and untrained items was present suggesting differential neuronal processing mechanisms while learning prelexical cues.

A90

ERP MEASURES OF L1 LEXICAL ATTRITION IN BENGALI-ENGLISH
SPEAKING INDIVIDUALS Hia Datta1, Valerie Shafer1, Loraine Obler1, Mira

Goral1,2, Martin Gitterman1,2; 1The Graduate Center, CUNY, 2Lehman College,
CUNY — Individuals who use two or more languages over their lifespan
experience change in these languages depending on the dynamics of
how they are used (Kopke, 2004, Goral et al., 2008). Attrition is a phe-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session A
nomenon where one’s first language (L1) changes from the more stable
language to a more volatile, inaccessible language due to interference
from the stronger second language (L2). Using a lexical cross-modal and
cross-linguistic picture-word priming paradigm, we investigated lexical
access in two groups of Bengali-English speaking individuals who are
dominant in their L1 and L2 respectively. Words were presented in 1)
two conditions a) semantically matched: where the pictures and the
auditory words matched and b) semantically mismatched: where the
pictures did not match the auditory words, and 2) two languages a)
English b) Bengali. Event related potentials, recorded from 64 scalp sites,
demonstrated that our Bengali-English L2-dominant participants, compared to the L1-dominant group, were more sensitive to the English
semantically mismatched words than the Bengali ones. Results are discussed in the context of lexical attrition in L2-dominant participants living in their second language environment.

A91

ERP CORRELATES OF ORTHOGRAPHIC NEIGHBORHOOD EFFECTS USING
THE LEVENSHTEIN DISTANCE Marta Vergara-Martínez1, Tamara Swaab1;

1University of California, Davis — One of the assumptions in theories of
visual word recognition is that the presentation of a word activates similar words at orthographic, phonological or semantic levels. The impact
of orthographic neighbors on word reading has allowed for a better
understanding of the time course of orthographic information in lexical
access. However, visual word recognition studies using Coltheart's
orthographic neighborhood size criteria (N: number of words that can be
derived from another word by changing one letter in a specific position
while keeping the number of letters constant) do not account for recent
research investigating other types of neighbors (deletion, addition or
transposition). Moreover, N is very restrictive with large length words.
To further investigate the neural bases of orthographic processing, in the
present study we used Levenshtein Distance and manipulated orthographic similarity over high and low frequency words of different
lengths. Event Related Potentials (ERPs) were recorded while participants read words in a semantic categorization task. Our results for short
words showed frontal N400 neighborhood effects in low frequency
words: larger negativities were obtained for large compared to small
neighborhoods. This pattern of results was not observed for long words.
We interpret our results in terms of larger activation of orthographic/
semantic representations for high neighborhoods and discuss alternative
measures of orthographic similarity for understanding the mechanisms
underlying word reading.

A92

NEUROANATOMICAL ORGANIZATION OF SPEECH AS REFLECTED BY THE
MISMATCH NEGATIVITY RESPONSE McNeel Jantzen1, Jonathan AdamsMoore1, K.J. Jantzen1; 1Western Washington University — Presence of the mis-

match negativity indicates automatic cerebral processing of acoustic
and/or phonological properties (Näätänen & Winkler, 1999). Phillips
(2001) proposed that there are three levels of speech representation,
acoustic, phonetic, and phonological. Further, Zeftawi (2005) found that
the encoding of acoustic information occurs earlier than the encoding of
both the phonetic and phonological information of the speech signal.
Finally, Hickok and Poeppel (2000) suggest that speech perception is
strongly lateralized to the left hemisphere with two distinct pathways
involved in the process. One is inclusive of the temporal-parietal-occipital junction and is accessed when the mental lexicon is needed. The second involves inferior parietal and frontal areas and is used for access to
sub-lexical speech segments. We addressed the following questions to
determine whether the location of the mismatch negativity was indicative of acoustic, phonetic, or phonological processing of the speech
sound: 1) Does perceptual training improve the mismatch negativity
amplitude in the temporal and frontal areas 2) How does the neural representation of the speech signal compare to the behavioral results when a
perceptual mapping procedure is performed. Fourteen subjects were
trained over a five-day period to identify a voiced, unaspirated, dental
stop consonant. Days one and five consisted of a perceptual mapping

51

Poster Session A

Long-Term Memory: Other

procedure and an electrophysiology mapping. Behavioral results show
that training improved subjects’ ability to perceive the non-native contrast. Training effects and organization of perceptual features was
reflected in the mismatch negativity response as observed by location of
the mismatch negativity, increased duration and decreased onset
latency.

Long-Term Memory: Other

A93

serve to regulate future behavior. Prospective memory is the unique
human ability to remember executing an intended action or plan at some
designated point in the future. Sleep is well known to benefit the consolidation of memories for past events. The prospective aspect in memory,
however, has been largely ignored in sleep and memory research. Here,
we show that sleep after forming an intention is essential to execute the
intended action after a delay of two days, benefiting both remembering
that something has to be done and remembering what has to be done.
We further confirm that this effect is bound to active sleep-associated
processes occurring during slow wave sleep, and not REM sleep, going
beyond passive protection against interference. This enhancing effect of
sleep on prospective memory was nullified when the intended action
was executed already before sleep and thus was not further active during sleep. These findings suggest that sleep selectively benefits those
memories that are relevant for future behavior. By strengthening the
intentional memory representation, sleep enhances the probability that
the intended action is executed at the appropriate time in the future.

LEARNING LANGUAGE LATERALITY AND THE MOTOR SYSTEM
Friedemann Pulvermuller1, James Kiff1, Yury Shtyrov1; 1MRC Cognition and
Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge — Is language laterality inborn or a conse-

quence of learning? Our data show that learning, specifically the binding
of sound information to articulatory patterns, plays an important role.
Right-handed monolingual subjects learned spoken phonologically regular nonsense words over several sessions and EEG brain responses
were recorded for new and learned items. In a perceptual learning condition, subjects were asked to listen to the nonsense words and in an
articulatory learning condition, subjects were required to repeat each
nonsense word after presentation. After learning, brain responses were
enhanced to learned words as compared with new, not previously
encountered ones. The degree of enhancement was similar in both learning conditions, but was left-lateralized only in the articulatory learning
condition. Source localization indicated early (220 ms) co-activation of
superior-temporal and precentral cortical sources when words learned
in the articulatory task were recognized. Superior-temporal but no motor
systems activation was seen for items learned in the passive perceptual
learning task. Our results suggest that language laterality can be learned
and that auditory-articulatory links, reflected in superiortemporal-prefrontal coactivation, are critical for learning language laterality.

A94

COGNITIVE AND BRAIN REORGANISATION FOR READING AFTER
NEUROSURGERY Sarah Lippe1, Ghislaine Dehaene-Lambertz2, Marie

Hully3, Georg Dorfmuller4, Catherine Chiron5, Lucie Hertz-Pannier3; 1CHU SteJustine Research Center, University of Montréal, Psychology, Montréal, 2Unité
INSERM 562 CEA/NeuroSpin, 3Laboratoire de Recherche Biomédicale
(LBIOM) NeuroSpin I2BM/DSV CEA, 4Fondation Ophtalmologique Adolphe de
Rothschild, 5Inserm u663 Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades — In contrast to
language, brain plasticity of reading is weakly explored. Here, using
neuropsychological testing and functional MRI (fMRI) we describe the
evolution of reading abilities in a child with focal epilepsy caused by a
gliotic lesion whose resection was undertaken at 12 years of age (left
cuneus, pre-cuneus and occipital pole). Full neuropsychological evaluations were performed one year before and 2 months after the surgery.
Partial neuropsychological evaluations as well as fMRI for words, faces,
houses and checkerboard perception were performed 4 months before
and 4 months after the surgery. 80 full brain images were acquired on a
3T Siemens scanner(TR2400 TE30). The neuropsychological results
revealed postsurgery deficits in reading, visuo-spatial memory and
visuo-motor coordination, but spared attention. Reading regressed from
a 2 years, 2 month delay before the surgery to a 5 year, 9 month delay 4
months after the surgery. Before the surgery, fMRI showed a specific
activation to words in the left temporo-occipital (-48 -57 -15) (FDR p <
0.048) region, which functionally disappeared post-surgically. After the
surgery, right occipital (27 -99 5mm corrected p <3.2502e-004) and left
temporal lobe (-39 -3 -27mm uncorrected p< 0.006) activations were
enhanced by all visual stimuli. A new neural network for reading could
have emerged after the left neurosurgery, however, recruitment of the
right occipital and left temporal regions were not specific to reading.
These results support the importance of the left occipito-temporal network for reading and reveal its robustness in the context of developmental lesions.

52

A95

SLEEP TO MEMORIZE INTENTIONS FOR THE FUTURE

Susanne
Diekelmann1, Ines Wilhelm1, Ullrich Wagner1,2, Jan Born1; 1University of
Luebeck, Germany, 2Bangor University, UK — Memories are of the past but

A96

FMR-ADAPTATION AS AN ONLINE MEASURE OF UNITIZATION IN
ASSOCIATIVE RECOGNITION Rachael Rubin1, Neal Cohen1, Brian
Gonsalves1; 1University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign — The current study

investigated the process of creating unitized representations of separate
items, a process that has been hypothesized to allow associative recognition to be supported by item rather than relational memory, and thus by
brain regions other than the hippocampus. A difficulty with research on
unitization has been establishing when unitization of separate items has
occurred, in a way that does not rely on inferences from memory outcomes. Here, unitization was encouraged during the initial presentation
of novel objects by manipulating whether two objects moved together,
and thus may be perceived as a single object, or moved separately, and
thus may be perceived as separate objects. Immediately following a 4second movie of either of these two movement conditions, a static version of the fused object was presented. Differences in peak activity in the
combined BOLD response to the movie and static image were compared
between conditions in which the same visual form was presented
throughout the duration of the trial to conditions in which different variants of the visual form (e.g. non-unitized variants) were presented during the trial. It was predicted that a match between the visual forms in
the trial would produce maximal adaptation while a mis-match between
the visual forms in the trial would produce recovery from adaptation.
Preliminary results (n=8) revealed evidence of adaptation in response to
unitized items but not non-unitized items bilaterally in the fusiform cortex.

A97

FUNCTIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF N170 AS REVEALED BY WILLIAMS
SYNDROME: CORRELATION WITH MEMORY FOR FACES IN A GENETIC
SYNDROME CHARACTERIZED BY ENHANCED ATTENTION TO FACES

Inna Fishman1, Anna Yam1,2, Rowena Ng1, Ursula Bellugi1, Debra Mills3; 1The
Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 2University of Florida, 3Bangor
University — The present study examined whether event-related potentials (ERP) patterns linked to the processing of faces are correlated with
memory for faces, in individuals with Williams Syndrome (WS) and typically developing controls (TD). ERPs were recorded as participants
viewed pictures of faces displaying happy, fearful or neutral expressions, and scrambled face stimuli. Using spatiotemporal Principal Component Analysis (PCA), a N170 and a frontal positivity (P200) were
identified. For N170, no significant group effect was found (i.e., both WS
and TD exhibited comparable amplitudes of N170). However, within

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Other

Poster Session A

groups, the N170 was modulated by affect in TD, but not in WS, such
that it was the largest for Fear, followed by Happy and the smallest for
Neutral faces. Next, the PCA-derived components were correlated with
the participants’ performance on a standardized test of memory for faces
(Wechsler Memory Scale, Faces Subscale). The N170 amplitude was correlated with performance on the Delayed Recall task in the WS group
only, such that the larger (more negative) the N170, the better was their
memory for faces. This relationship was not found in the TD group. In
contrast, the frontal P200 was positively correlated with performance on
the Immediate Recall in the TD group, but not in WS. These results suggest that, in WS, the early perceptual stage of face processing – manifested on scalp by N170 – contributes to, or is a part of the same
algorithm that underlies their enhanced memory for faces, and is likely
instrumental in the “hypersociability” associated with WS.

A98

THE SEGREGATION OF SEMANTIC REPRESENTATION AND RESOURCE
ALLOCATION IN NUMBER PROCESSING Yi-Fang Hsu1, Dénes Szücs1;
1University of Cambridge — Repetition suppression observed in the adapta-

tion paradigm is considered as the indicator for the nature of representations across different stages of a processing stream. It is reported in
numerical cognition research tackling the automatic access to numerical
magnitude as the adaptation paradigm enables the separation of
response from representation. However, the time course in which the
brain discriminates numerical magnitude in an automatic manner
remains unclear. The lack of temporal information makes it difficult to
determine whether the effects found in previous studies reflect the
semantic analysis of numerical magnitude or some domain-general processes. This study used ERP adaptation to reveal the unfolding mechanisms involved in the automatic activation of numerical information. We
found that ERP amplitudes between habituation/deviant stimuli differed at four time windows. We also found that ERP amplitudes triggered by the deviant stimuli per se were modulated by the numerical
distance between habituation/deviant stimuli at three time windows.
While the effect at earlier time windows is comparable to the ERP
numerical distance effect reported in previous studies, the effect at later
time windows seems to reflect the P3 amplitudes difference between
conditions. The results suggest that the brain can discriminate numerical
magnitude by around 150-200 ms in the absence of response requirement. Moreover, numerical information in the adaptation paradigm
seems to modulate participants’ resource allocation. Our finding that the
modulation of numerical magnitude reflects a mixture of different mechanisms challenges the one-to-one link between the parametric effect of
numerical distance and the semantic analysis of numerical magnitude.

A99

MATCH-MISMATCH

PROCESSES

BEYOND

THE

HIPPOCAMPUS

Jonathan P. Shine1, Andy C. H. Lee2, Kim S. Graham1; 1Wales Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology, Cardiff University, UK,
2
University of Oxford, UK — Using a match-mismatch paradigm, Kumaran
and Maguire (2007) showed increased activity in the left hippocampus
(HC) for temporal and location changes (mismatches) compared to when
these were repeated (match). By contrast, the right HC coded the presence of objects in familiar locations. We asked (a) whether these effects
could be replicated when there was no demand to remember over
repeated trials, (b) whether they were affected by stimuli (object versus
scenes) and (c) whether they extended to other medial temporal lobe
(MTL) regions. Participants viewed two grids (2 x 3) each containing 3
trial-unique items (scenes, objects or shapes) and indicated whether
these were same (match) or different (mismatch – different item location
or different item). The right HC showed a preference for objects and
scenes that were presented in the same location, while left HC exhibited
an increase in activity for both types of mismatch (particularly for object
compared to scene location mismatches). Perirhinal cortex (PrC) showed
a consistent preference for objects over scenes (across all conditions),
with a trend towards greater activation to item, compared to location,
mismatches (left PrC). Parahippocampal place area (PPA) demonstrated

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

a preference for scene, compared to object, stimuli, with right PPA more
active during both object and location mismatch trials and left PPA more
active for scenes presented in the same location. The findings reveal that
the PPA, as well as the hippocampus, contributes to match-mismatch
detection, and that the role of the hippocampus in novelty detection is
modulated by stimuli type.

A100

EFFECTS OF VOLITIONALLY CONTROLLED VISUAL EXPLORATION ON
Voss1,
Brian
MEMORY AND BRAIN-NETWORK DYNAMICS Joel
Gonsalves1, Kara Federmeier1, Neal Cohen1; 1Beckman Institute — Choices

must be made during learning regarding what to study and when, and
the cognitive and neural determinants of these choices are poorly understood. We manipulated the extent to which individuals could control
their visual exploratory behavior while learning the locations of objects
and found that volitional control is a major determinant of learning outcome. Volitional control (choosing which objects to view and when) was
associated with marked benefits for both item recognition and spatial
recall relative to passive control (directing attention to specified objects
at specified times). Furthermore, volitional control produced beneficial
effects on memory by coordinating the activity within a brain network
centered on the hippocampus and including cortical structures involved
in memory, attention, cognitive control, and object identification. Distinct patterns of network activity were associated with volitional benefits
to spatial versus item-specific memory. Volitional benefits to spatial
recall were associated with increased correlations between hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, and inferior cerebellum, whereas volitional benefits to item recognition were associated with increased correlations
between hippocampus, parahippocampal cortex, and lateral parietal cortex. These results collectively indicate that actively directing the learning
process benefits memory by organizing neuroanatomically distinct cognitive operations such that memory representations that evolve with
time can guide new learning.

A101

BRAIN POTENTIALS REFLECT CHANGES IN MEMORY WITH AGE Robert
G. Morrison1,2, Heather D. Lucas2, Susan M. Florczak2, Mirinda James1, Jana
M. Wingo1, Ken A. Paller2; 1Loyola University Chicago, 2Northwestern
University — Memory decline is a fundamental hallmark of cognitive
aging, and can be a harbinger for more drastic neurodegenerative
changes as in Alzheimer’s disease. To characterize these changes and
find measures that can predict pathological decline, we developed a continuous recognition paradigm that allows for both behavioral and electrophysiological assessment. Participants viewed a mixed sequence of
words and colorful kaleidoscope patterns. Items were shown a second
time after 0, 2, 4, or 6 intervening items. Each of the 800 items was
endorsed as “new” or “old.” Hit rates declined as retention delay
increased, and forgetting curves were similar in young (<30 years) and
older participants (50-75 years). Yet, event-related potentials (ERPs)
were considerably different in the two groups. Younger adults showed
late positive old/new effects at all delays. Older adults showed old/new
effects that were smaller in amplitude and temporally delayed. Similar
late positive ERPs have been associated with explicit-memory retrieval
in prior studies. At the longer delays with kaleidoscopes, earlier old/
new ERP effects were also evident, and these ERPs resembled ERPs previously associated with perceptual priming. These negative old/new
ERPs were greater in older adults than younger adults, suggesting that
recognition in certain situations of high difficulty is driven increasingly
by implicit memory as people age. Thus, ERPs capable of differentiating
implicit and explicit memory may be superior to common behavioral
measures of memory not only in providing exquisite temporal information about memory processes, but also in sensitivity to changes in strategies and in memory retrieval abilities in older adults.

53

Poster Session A

Long-Term Memory: Other

A102

A104

BRAIN POTENTIALS INDEX PERCEPTUAL LEARNING AND PERCEPTUAL
PRIMING WITH KALEIDOSCOPE IMAGES Ken A. Paller1, Joel L. Voss1,2;

DREAMING OF A LEARNING TASK IS ASSOCIATED WITH ENHANCED
SLEEP-DEPENDENT MEMORY CONSOLIDATION Erin Wamsley1, Matthew

1Northwestern

University, 2The Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and
Technology at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — When a per-

son views an object repeatedly, activity changes in neural populations
involved in perceptual analysis and memory representation. However, it
is difficult to map neural responses that are altered by repetition onto
memory effects, because memory effects can include both facilitated perceptual analysis (as measured in a priming test) and explicit memory
retrieval (as measured in a recognition test). In an effort to disentangle
these factors, we studied implicit memory for novel geometric shapes
that we previously showed could be recognized either in an explicit way
(Voss & Paller, 2009b, Neuroimage) or an implicit way (Voss & Paller,
2009a, Nature Neuroscience). Perceptual priming was indicated by
speeded responses to repeated stimuli in a task that required subjects to
count the number of colors used in each stimulus. Repetition was associated with negative shifts in brain potentials at ~200-400 ms, and these
amplitude differences were largest for the trials with the greatest magnitude of priming. Furthermore, amplitudes of positive potentials indicative of perceptual learning during initial stimulus presentation predicted
subsequent priming magnitude. These findings indicate that repetition
of novel stimuli produces perceptual fluency with distinctive neural correlates that closely resemble those previously associated with accurate
recognition decisions based on guessing, thus substantiating prior demonstrations of implicit recognition (Voss & Paller, 2009a). Additionally,
the amount of perceptual learning engaged during the first encounter
with a stimulus, as indexed by brain potentials, can be systematically
related to how fluently the stimulus is processed upon seeing it for a second time.

A103

TEMPORAL CONSCIOUSNESS AND VARIETIES OF CONFABULATIONS IN
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE AND IN AMNESIA Valentina La Corte1,2, Mara

Serra4, Marie-Françoise Boissé3, Gianfranco Dalla Barba1,2,3,4; 1Université
Pierre et Marie Curie - Paris VI, Paris, France, 2Centre de Recherche de l’Institut
du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, INSERM, U975, Paris, France, 3AP-HP,
Hôpital Henri Mondor, Service de Neurologie, Créteil, France, 4Università degli
Studi di Trieste, Italy — Confabulation often consists either of true episodes
misplaced in time and place or of personal habits and routines that are
considered by the patient as specific personal episodes. When asked
what they did today or what they will do tomorrow, confabulators may
reply with well established memories, however irrelevant these memories may be to their present situation. The aim of this work was to better
characterize and quantify the type of confabulations produced by 10
patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and 8 confabulating amnesic patients (CA) of different aetiologies. Confabulations were collected
with the Confabulation Battery (Dalla Barba, 1993), which comprises 169
questions tapping various aspects of semantic and episodic memory.
Overall AD patients confabulated significantly less than CA patients.
Both patients groups confabulated significantly more in answering questions tapping episodic memory, than in others types of questions. In both
patients groups the majority of confabulations consisted of general memories, habits or misplacements in time and place of true memories. These
results are interpreted as reflecting different degrees of Temporal Consciousness (TC), i.e. conscious awareness of one’s own past, present and
future, dysfunction in AD and CA. According to the Memory, Consciousness and Temporality Theory (Dalla Barba, 2002) the integrity of
the medial temporal lobe (MTL) and related structures is crucial for the
normal functioning of TC. Confabulators still have TC, which works in
an abnormal way. CA patients confabulate more because they have relatively preserved TC and MTL structures compared to AD patients.

54

Tucker1, Jessica Payne1,2,3, Joseph Benavides1, Robert Stickgold1; 1Harvard
Medical School/Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 2Harvard University,
3Notre Dame University — It is now well established that post-learning
sleep is beneficial for human memory. Human and animal studies suggest that this mnemonic benefit may be associated with the neural-level
reactivation of memory traces during sleep. Here, we report that
improved performance on a virtual navigation memory task several
hours after initial training was strongly associated with task-related
dream imagery during an intervening afternoon nap. Subjects who
napped following training on the spatial memory task (n=50) improved
significantly more at retest than those who remained awake during the
retention interval (n=49; p=.02). In the Sleep group, the participants who
reported task-related dream experiences ranked amongst those with the
largest post-sleep performance improvements in the sample (MannWhitney rank order test, p=.005), improving tenfold more than Sleep
participants without task-related reports (p=.0004). Task-related
thoughts during wakefulness, however, were not associated with
improved performance. These observations suggest that sleep-dependent memory consolidation in humans is facilitated by the offline reactivation of recently formed memories, and furthermore, that dream
experiences reflect this memory processing. That similar effects were not
seen during wakefulness suggests that these mnemonic processes are
specific to the sleep state.

A105

SLEEP SELECTIVELY BENEFITS MEMORIES RELEVANT FOR THE
FUTURE Ines Wilhelm1, Susanne Diekelmann1, Ina Molzow2, Amr Ayoub1,

Jan Born1; 1University of Luebeck, 2University of Wuerzburg — Sleep consoli-

dates memory, which has been proposed to result from an active and
selective reprocessing of newly encoded information. However, neither
the selectivity of sleep associated memory consolidation has been compellingly demonstrated nor are the factors known that determine access
of a memory to sleep associated consolidation. Here, we show that the
mere expectancy that a memory will be used at a future test distinctly
enhances the benefit for this memory from post-learning sleep. Subjects
learned to criterion declarative memories before retention periods of
sleep and wakefulness. There was a strong sleep-dependent improvement at delayed retrieval if subjects were informed about this retrieval
test after the learning period. If they were not informed, retrieval after
retention sleep was not better than after wake retention intervals, and
retrieval expectancy also did not influence retention across wake intervals. Retrieval expectancy likewise enhanced sleep-dependent consolidation of procedural memory. It increased slow wave activity and sleep
spindle counts during post-learning slow wave sleep (SWS). Declarative
memory consolidation was highly correlated to slow wave activity and
spindle counts (r > 0.72), but only in the intention-group. Sleep benefits
preferentially the consolidation of memories that are relevant for the
future, presumably through SWS-dependent reprocessing of the memories.

A106

ON THE ROLE OF ATTENTIONAL PROCESSES IN EVENT-BASED
PROSPECTIVE MEMORY Justin B. Knight1, Gene Brewer1, Brett A.
Clementz1, Richard L. Marsh1; 1University of Georgia — Event-based prospec-

tive memory (PM) refers to the cognitive processes that enable completion of intentions through reliance on some environmental cue. Among
PM theorists there is much debate as to whether preparatory attentional
processes are always needed in order to notice intention related cues and
fulfill intentions. Using dense-array electroencephalography, we sought
to examine this issue by evoking a visual steady-state response (SSVEP;
i.e., by presenting a flickering box with a superimposed flickering linguistic stimulus) while participants performed a lexical decision task
with a PM intention. Two groups of participants were either given the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Other
intention to make a special key press when they saw the word horse
(focal intention) or when they saw any animal word (nonfocal intention).
In comparisons to neural activity when both groups completed a lexical
decision task with no intention, attentional modulation of SSVEPs across
ongoing trials was evident in a sustained increase in single trial power
over occipital-parietal regions from around 250-1500 ms post-stimulus
onset for the nonfocal group. No such attentional modulations were
present for the focal group. Considering the focal group detected a
higher proportion of cues yet showed no evidence of reliance on preparatory attentional processes as assessed by modulation of SSVEPs and
behavioral response times, our results provide evidence that preparatory
attentional processes are not always necessary to notice intention related
cues and successfully fulfill intentions. These findings provide support
for the multiprocess view of PM and challenges for the preparatory
attentional and memory processes theory.

A107

DO ORGANIZATIONAL STRATEGIES MEDIATE NONVERBAL MEMORY
IMPAIRMENT IN DRUG-NAÏVE PATIENTS WITH OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE
DISORDER? Na Young Shin1, Do-Hyung Kang2, Jung-Seok Choi2, Myung

Hun Jung2, Joon Hwan Jang2, Jun Soo Kwon1,2; 1Interdisciplinary Cognitive
Science Program, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, 2Brain & Cognitive
Sciences-WCU program, College of Natural Sciences, SNU & Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea — Nonverbal memory impairment is one of the most consistently reported neurocognitive findings in
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Recent studies have reported that
memory dysfunction is mediated by organizational strategies in patients
with OCD. The present study aimed to evaluate nonverbal memory and
organizational skill in patients with OCD who had never received psychotropic medication. One hundred twenty-three subjects (41 drugnaïve OCD patients, 41 medicated OCD patients, 41 healthy controls, all
matched for gender, age, education, and intelligence) made up three
groups. The Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure Test (RCFT) was administrated to evaluate nonverbal memory ability and organizational strategy.
OCD patients demonstrated impaired nonverbal memory irrespective of
medication status. Medicated patients showed deficits in organizational
strategies, which mediated nonverbal memory impairment. In drugnaïve patients, degree of impairment in organizational skill was not
severe enough to achieve statistical significance and the association
between organization and nonverbal memory was weak. The present
results provide new evidence suggesting that organizational skill might
not be a reliable factor in explaining impaired nonverbal memory in a
drug-naïve sample of patients with OCD. Our findings also indicate that
the clinical characteristics may be important to consider in future
research. Further studies are needed to better understand the nature of
nonverbal memory dysfunction in OCD.

A108

INTERACTIONS OF MULTIPLE MEMORY SYSTEMS DURING INITIAL AND
REVERSAL LEARNING Kathryn C. Dickerson1, Victoria K. Lee1, Mauricio R.

Delgado1; 1Rutgers University — Learning about the value of a stimulus can
occur through multiple learning and memory systems posited to exist in
the brain. One can learn that a stimulus predicts reward through trial
and error/feedback (basal ganglia dependent). Alternatively, the same
association can be formed by mere observation that the stimulus predicts
reward (hippocampus dependent). It is unclear however, how such
memory systems interact when updating a previously learned reward
contingency in a manner that is consistent or inconsistent with initial
acquisition. To address this question we scanned participants during a
probabilistic learning task where they learned the value of several visual
cues (100%, 87.5%, or 62.5% probabilistic) and then updated the information in a reversal session. During initial learning, participants learned the
associations of 6 cues via a distinct learning type (feedback for group 1;
observation for group 2). During the reversal phase, both groups
updated contingencies via feedback (3 cues) and observational (3 cues)
learning. Employing this design allowed us to examine how partici-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session A
pants’ behavior and their underlying neural circuitry were modulated
when learning type was consistent or inconsistent with how the information was originally acquired. Preliminary results suggest that both
groups were able to learn and reverse contingencies successfully. Activity in the striatum was observed during learning, irrespective of learning
type (FB or OB) or learning session (initial or reversal). In contrast,
engagement of the hippocampus was only observed during initial observational learning and during reversal for participants who initially
learned via observation (group 2).

A109

DOES THE WORD FREQUENCY MIRROR EFFECT STILL EXIST IN HEALTHY
OLDER ADULTS AND IN PATIENTS WITH ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE? Eve

Attali1,2, Gianfranco Dalla Barba1,3; 1CRICM INSERM U975, 2Université Paris
6, 3Universita degli studi di Trieste — The word frequency mirror effect
(WFME) reflects the fact that Low Frequency-words (LF) produce more
Hits and less False Alarms (FA) than High Frequency-words (HF). It had
been explained by different memory or attentional theories. Because of
the cognitive changes that occur in both memory and attention in
healthy older adults (OA) and in mild Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the
WFME pattern may differ in these populations. 35 young adults (YA), 34
OA and 18 mild-AD studied lists of HF- and LF-words, and were given a
yes/no episodic recognition memory test. Results indicated: - a group
effect with a decrease of Hits and an increase of FA across age and AD. a word frequency effect: LF-words produce both a higher Hit rate and a
lower FA rate than HF-words. - a word frequency X group interaction:
the WFME is present in YA, decreases in OA, who recognize HF-words
as well as LF-words, and tends to reverse in AD who better recognize
HF- than LF-words. The frequency effect in Hits decreases across age
and reverses for the mild AD patients, whereas it persists in FA rate.
These results can be explained by the fact that OA and AD fail in the
attention demanding recollective processes but not in the more automatic familiarity-based processes. Moreover, if we consider that HFwords have a deeper semantic memory representation than LF-words,
we can explain the reverse advantage for HF-words in Hits for AD who
have an earlier/specific episodic memory deficit but a preserved semantic memory.

A110

PREDICTING MEMORY FORMATION OF SCENES: AN ERP STUDY Julie
Yoo1, Marianna Eddy1, Nupur Lala1, John Gabrieli1,2; 1Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, 2McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology — The rate of learning or memory formation varies
over time, in part due to moment-to-moment fluctuation of brain state.
The aim of the present study was to discover whether there are signals in
electroencephalography (EEG) data that might provide predictive information as to what brain state is more conducive to learning and memory
acquisition. In order to explore if there are such brain signals, we conducted an event related potentials (ERP) study using a subsequent memory paradigm. Twenty subjects underwent EEG recording with a 32electrode array while viewing 225 novel scenes singly presented for 2
seconds and preceded by a fixation cross for 2 seconds. A recognition
memory test was administered in a second session. A 2-second pre-trial
interval was analyzed for each successfully remembered and unsuccessfully remembered scene. The 2-second interval was further broken down
into 100 ms increments and a time-course analysis were performed with
a 2 (Memory: Remembered/Forgotten) x 3 (Electrode Site: Frontal,/
Frontal Central-Medial/Frontal Central-Lateral) x 2 (Hemisphere: Left/
Right) ANOVA comparing trials that were subsequently remembered
and forgotten at electrodes that showed predominant effects. Brain states
measured just prior to scene presentation correlated with whether that
scene was later remembered or forgotten. There was a stronger negative
going deflection for subsequently remembered stimuli than forgotten
stimuli approximately 250 ms before stimuli onset. The trial by trial classifications analyses on the ERPs and the spectral profiles of the EEG signals were also performed to build a classifier for using the pre-trial
information to enhance memory encoding.

55

Poster Session A

Long-Term Memory: Semantic

A111

A113

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INDICES OF THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF LONGTERM MEMORY TO DECISION-MAKING Carol Baym1, Neal Cohen1, Kara

THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBES ARE INVOLVED IN LATE BUT NOT EARLY
ITEM GENERATION IN A CATEGORY FLUENCY TASK Signy Sheldon1,2,

Federmeier1, Brian Gonsalves1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign —

Morris Moscovitch1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute —

Many types of everyday decisions are based on both declarative and
non-declarative long-term memory for past experience. How and under
what conditions long-term memory subserves various types of decisions, however, is currently not well characterized in the psychological
or electrophysiological literature. The current study examined how processing during the encoding and retrieval of photographs is related to
later decisions regarding the quality of those memory representations, as
indexed by event-related potentials (ERPs). Healthy young adults were
shown color photographs of easily-nameable common objects and were
instructed to remember them for later. At test, participants were cued
with the name of a studied object (e.g., “apple”) and asked to make a
decision regarding the test difficulty they would like for that trial. Probe
trials were 2-, 3-, or 4-alternative forced-choice recognition tests and
reward for correctly choosing the previously studied exemplar increased
linearly with test difficulty. Behaviorally, participants distributed their
choices across the three test difficulties and performed with similar accuracy across the three, suggesting that they were able to use some aspect
of long-term memory strength to guide behaviorally advantageous decisions. Preliminary ERP results during initial encoding show enhanced
positivity for items for which participants later selected the hardest
memory test, suggesting that memory signals at encoding indeed provide at least part of the basis for later choice behavior. Additionally, ERP
responses to the cue word differed depending on which test participants
then selected. Results are discussed in terms of how the quality of memory encoding can affect subsequent decisions.

Recent studies have suggested that category fluency, a traditional
semantic task, involves areas within the medial temporal lobes (MTL;
Ryan, et al., 2008). Given that the MTLs are crucial for episodic memory,
this suggests that category fluency may involve episodic processes. The
aim of the current study was to examine more specifically how the MTLs
contribute to category fluency, and more generally, semantic tasks. We
propose that the MTLs are involved in semantic tasks after classic
semantic processes have been exhausted. Specific to category fluency,
we suggest that initial item generation will be based upon wellrehearsed, prototypical knowledge, but as this semantic knowledge is
depleted, episodic memory processes become more relevant. To test this,
participants were presented with categories that elicited various
retrieval types and were asked to generate items that belonged to these
particular categories while in an fMRI scanner. Importantly, for categories that could benefit from episodic processes, greater activity in the
MTL structures (hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus) and other associated brain regions (e.g. middle frontal gyrus, precuneus) was found for
later generated items compared to earlier generated items. Areas associated with semantic processing (e.g. left inferior frontal gyrus) were more
active for earlier generated items compared to later generated items. This
study suggests that episodic memory processes contribute to semantic
tasks after semantic search strategies have been exhausted or when the
semantic task (e.g. thinking of items) becomes more ambiguous.

A112

THE ROLE OF THE STRIATUM IN HABIT LEARNING: EFFECTS OF
REPETITION ON LEARNING IN PARKINSON'S DISEASE Nathaniel

Clement1, Karin Foerde1, Erin Kendall Braun1, Daphna Shohamy1; 1Columbia
University — Studies of the neural bases of learning and memory have
suggested that the striatum supports incremental learning of stimulusresponse associations. However, less is known about the role of the striatum after learning, when learned knowledge must be accessed to guide
behavior. In this study, we sought to advance understanding of the role
of the striatum in learning by comparing the performance of patients
with disrupted striatal function due to Parkinson's disease against that of
matched controls in a two-phase learning and generalization task. The
first phase involved feedback-based learning of associations. The second
phase involved generalization of what was learned to novel stimulus
combinations. Given that the striatum is thought to be sensitive to the
repeated experience of stimuli and associated responses, and given a
putative competition between habit learning in the striatum and flexible
use of learned knowledge (supported by the hippocampus), we hypothesized that in healthy controls repetition would enhance learning but
impair generalization. We further predicted that this effect of repetition
on learning and generalization would not be found in Parkinson’s
patients. To test this hypothesis, during learning, associations were
repeated either many times (high-repetition condition) or few times
(low-repetition condition). We found that more repetition led to reduced
generalization in healthy individuals; however, repetition did not modulate generalization in Parkinson’s patients. This pattern of results highlights the role of the striatum in mediating the effects of repetition on
learning and raises questions about the dynamic relationship between
multiple brain systems that contribute to learning.

56

A114

DISSOCIABLE BRAIN PATTERNS EMERGE WITH THE ACQUISITION OF
NEW VISUAL CATEGORIES Amy Palmer1, Richard Granger1; 1Dartmouth
College — Brain responses to object categories, and to the psychophysics
of category boundaries, have been much studied; but relatively few
experimental investigations have focused on how new categories are
learned. Effortless adult recognition of, e.g., animals, birds, and cardinals
was necessarily preceded by a time when these nested category structures were acquired. Recent studies have shown that some of these
regions change when psychophysical boundaries between arbitrary categories are shifted; in contrast, the present study aims at identifying
mechanisms that underlie the acquisition of entirely new prototypebased categories. We studied the emergence of category structure using
abstract dot patterns that were distortions of separate central prototypes.
Subjects initially performed at chance on these patterns, but after brief
(20 min) training exceeded 90% recognition. Full brain searchlight analysis before and after training identified regions in medial and inferior
temporal lobes as well as in frontal and basal ganglia regions that corresponded to the acquisition of new category knowledge. The findings
suggest a network of brain regions that emerge as new categories are formulated based on visual experience.

Long-Term Memory: Semantic
A115

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF METAMEMORY JUDGMENTS:
COMPARING RETRIEVAL OF SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE USING MUSICAL
AND VERBAL CUES Maya Zuckerman1, Daniel A. Levy2, Roni Tibon3, Niv

Reggev1, Anat Maril1; 1The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 2The
Interdisciplinary Center (IDC), 3Bar-Ilan University — Insights into memory

retrieval processes may be obtained by examining metamemory states
such as Feelings-of-Knowing (FOKs), the feeling that a currently unrecalled item nevertheless exists in one’s long term memory. Neural correlates of metamemory have been studied using both verbal and visual
stimuli. Musical stimuli may serve as a special class of retrieval cues, as
they provide incrementally increasing amounts of cue information that
may lead to a dynamic FOK pattern over time. We conducted an ERP

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Semantic
study of retrieval of semantic knowledge using either auditory verbal or
musical cues (current N=9). Items of general knowledge were queried
with short final-word-critical questions, and names of commonly-known
songs were queried using short initial song segments. In a within-subject
design, ERPs were measured while participants were presented with
verbal and musical cues and required to rate their FOK (Know/ Tip-ofthe-Tongue [TOT]/ Feeling-of-Knowing [FOK]/ Don’t Know) by keypress. Knowledge claims were confirmed off-line following the recording session. EEG data were analyzed for response-locked epochs.
Analysis reveals a TOT-related fronto-central positive peak at ~650 ms
before response relative to the other three conditions for the general
knowledge retrieval, and a different pattern associated with successful
retrieval in both verbal and musically-cued retrieval in frontal electrodes
in the 400-600 ms pre-response range, differing in stability between
modalities. These patterns of activity may reflect participants' continued
FOK-motivated attempts to retrieve information up to response execution. Further, spectral analysis of the EEG data is expected to reveal continuous activation patterns related to different levels of FOK.

A116

POSTER TITLE: NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE THAT REPETITION
EFFECTS AND THEIR PERCEPTUAL-SPECIFICITY DIFFER BETWEEN
CATEGORY AND RECOGNITION DECISIONS WITH VISUAL OBJECTS

Stephen Maher1, Haline Schendan1; 1Tufts University — Two event-related
potential experiments compared repetition effects during category and
recognition decisions and assessed whether these varied with exemplar
changes between study and test and exemplar typicality. The two-state
interactive account of visual object cognition predicted greater effects on
a centrofrontal N390 during categorization, and memory theories predicted the late positive complex (LPC) index of episodic explicit memory
would be greater on recognition. Repetition effects were exemplar-specific on the centrofrontal N390 but not the centroparietal N400 index of
linguistic semantic integration. Both N390 and N400 repetition effects
were greater during category than recognition decisions, indicating
these effects index implicit memory for visual object and linguistic
knowledge, respectively. In addition, a parietal P600 showed exemplarspecific repetition effects during both category and recognition decisions. As predicted, the LPC was larger during recognition than category
decisions. Together with prior evidence, N390 findings indicate that
visual object knowledge in occipitotemporal cortex supporting model
selection is visually-specific for the particular view and exemplar of an
object but not local contours composing these global shapes, and this
knowledge is selectively involved in category decisions and implicit
memory. In contrast, later memory during the P600 is highly visuallyspecific for the line contours in a particular view of an object exemplar
during category and recognition decisions, and the LPC reflects strategic
recollection from episodic explicit memory that is more strongly
recruited for recognition decisions. Overall, memory reactivation can
depend upon decision demands.
A117

EEG CORRELATES OF OBJECT RECOGNITION DURING AN ONGOING
VISUAL PERCEPTION TASK Roman Freunberger1,2, Robert Fellinger1,
Markus Werkle-Bergner2, Wolfgang Klimesch1; 1University of Salzburg, Austria,
Max-Planck Institute for Human Development, Germany — Most EEG studies

2

rely on event-related task designs to investigate neural correlates of
object recognition. By averaging over many trials, this procedure allows
the extraction of evoked and clearly phase-locked neural signatures
related to stimulus processing. Towards a more natural setting for object
recognition we used short ongoing video-sequences where no specific
"event" could occur. The videos initially started with blurred images of
an object (real or distorted) that became clearly visible later during the
sequence. The participant’s task was to indicate when they recognized
the object. We also included a purely sensory control condition where
subjects distinguished between mirrored and not-mirrored objects. We
replicated initial findings from a previous event-related study (Freunberger et al., 2008, Neuroimage) showing that the time point of object

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session A
recognition is related to an amplitude decrease and a stronger phasecoupling between frontal and posterior electrode sites within the human
alpha rhythm (~12Hz). The alpha-specific effects were not observed for
the sensory task supporting the assumption that alpha is especially relevant for semantic and not sensory processing. Furthermore, the ongoing
task-design allows to infer that the alpha effects are not simply caused by
evoked brain responses due to stimulus-presentation. We conclude that
modulations of ongoing alpha-oscillations reflect a guiding mechanism
that enables the access to a (semantic) long-term memory trace.

A118

A LINK BETWEEN FAMILIARITY IMPAIRMENTS IN RECOGNITION
MEMORY AND IMPAIRMENTS IN FAMILIARITY ASSESSMENT FOR
SEMANTIC CONCEPTS ACQUIRED OVER A LIFETIME Ben Bowles1, Ken
McRae1, Stefan Köhler1; 1University of Western Ontario — Recognition mem-

ory is supported by two processes, recollection and familiarity. Recollection provides recovery of contextual detail of a prior encounter, while
familiarity signals prior occurrence without such recall. Previously, we
demonstrated that patient NB, who underwent resection of the left anterior temporal lobe with hippocampal sparing, exhibits impairments in
familiarity with preserved recollection. Here, we examined whether NB
also exhibits impairments in a task that requires assessment of familiarity based on lifetime exposure and, unlike a recognition memory test,
does not make reference to a specific study episode. NB and 22 controls
rated their familiarity for 541 concepts, such as plates and chipmunks. To
establish reliability, we recruited NB and five control participants on a
second occasion several months later. On both occasions, NB differed
from controls in that the correlation between her familiarity ratings and
those of the average control was lower than that of any other participant.
Furthermore, NB’s test-retest correlation was the lowest. In addition,
NB’s familiarity ratings differed from control participants’ ratings in
how they were related to the presence of specific feature types across all
items. For example, NB’s familiarity ratings correlated to a significantly
greater degree than did controls’ with the number of encyclopedic features listed for the concepts, and to a significantly lesser degree with the
number of visual form and surface features. These results are consistent
with the idea that a common process supports familiarity assessment in
both recognition memory and in tasks that depend on semantic representations acquired over the lifetime.

A119

PROFESSIONAL MUSICIANS EXHIBIT EXPERIENCE-DEPENDENT
NEUROPLASTICITY OF SEMANTIC MAPS FOR MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS IN
AUDITORY CORTEX Klaus Hoenig1, Cornelia Müller1, Bärbel Herrnberger1,

Eun-Jin Sim1, Manfred Spitzer1, Günter Ehret1, Markus Kiefer1; 1University of
Ulm, Germany — The brain of professional musicians constitutes an ideal
model for understanding experience-dependent neuroplasticity, particularly in the auditory and motor domain. The intensive sensorimotor
experience of musicians with musical instruments has been shown to
entail plastic brain alterations in cortical perceptual and motor maps.
However, it is hitherto unknown whether learning-dependent plasticity
in the brain of musicians extends beyond basic perceptual and motor
representations to higher-level conceptualizations of the world. Using a
picture-word matching paradigm and a sound perception task during
fMRI scanning, we show that visual recognition of musical instruments
automatically activates right posterior superior and middle temporal
gyri (pSTG/MTG) only in professional musicians, but not in musical laypersons. These areas in auditory association cortex were recruited both
by conceptual processing of musical instruments during visual object
recognition, and auditory perception of real sounds. Hence, the unique
intensive experience of musicians with musical instruments translates
into a reorganization of conceptual knowledge in the human brain, i.e.,
the very building blocks of human cognition. This evidence unequivocally demonstrates that experience-driven neuroplasticity in professional musicians is not confined to the alteration of perceptual and motor
maps, but even affects the higher-level functional reorganization of

57

Poster Session A
semantic maps embodied in auditory cortex. These findings do not only
highlight the eminent importance of sensory and motor experience for
acquiring rich concepts of the world, they are also a starting point for a
deeper understanding of how the brain allows music to speak to all
aspects of the human being.

A120

INVOLVEMENT OF SEMANTIC MEMORY IN THE DEFAULT MODE
NETWORK Wirth Miranka1, Jann Kay1, Dierks Thomas1, Federspiel Andrea1,

Wiest Roland1, Horn Helge1; 1University Hospital of Psychiatry, Bern,
Switzerland — The Default Mode Network (DMN) is a higher-order rest-

ing state network associated with internally-generated self-referential
thought. As such, the DMN is thought to incorporate basic cognitive
modules which contribute to internal mentation. In the effort to deduce
these functional sub-units, episodic memory was recently associated
with the DMN. Likewise, it has been suggested that semantic memory is
involved in the DMN; however, evidence for anatomical and functional
convergence of the DMN and semantic memory is missing. Using stateof-the-art Independent Component Analysis (ICA) and a well-established block-design fMRI paradigm, we examined spatial and functional
links regarding the DMN and fMRI-correlates evoked by a semantic
memory task in comparison phonological and perceptual decisions to
visually-presented words. Our findings show selective spatial overlap
between the DMN and semantic activations within left-hemispheric hetero-modal brain regions, that is, lateral parietal, temporal, medial frontal, inferior frontal and posterior cingulate areas. Correspondingly,
semantic retrieval induced less deactivation within the global DMN and
these local overlapping regions compared to phonological and perceptual processing. Our results indicate that semantic memory constitutes
an integral part of default cognitions involving high-order association
cortices. These brain regions are thus proposed to constitute associative
hubs likewise recruited during internally- and externally-generated
semantic operations. Overall, our findings substantiate views that the
default cognitive mode as mediated by the DMN incorporates memory
systems.

A121

THE ROLE OF THE ANTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBES IN THE PROCESSING OF
Maria
PERSON-SPECIFIC SEMANTIC INFORMATION Simona

Brambati1,2, Sophie Benoit1, Laura Monetta3, Sylvie Belleville1,2,4, Sven
Joubert1,2,4; 1Centre de recherche de l’Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de
Montréal, QC, Canada, 2Unité de Neuroimagerie Fonctionnelle, CRIUGM, QC,
Canada, 3Centre de recherche Université Laval Robert-Giffard, Québec, QC,
Canada, 4Université de Montréal, QC, Canada — Neuroimaging studies on

healthy subjects have reported the involvement of the anterior temporal
lobes (ATL) in recognizing known people. However, it is still matter of
debate whether this activation is associated with the name retrieval or
the access to person-specific semantic information. To address this issue,
we used fMRI to map the brain regions involved in the semantic processing of famous faces at a general and specific level. Specifically, participants (n=12, mean age =23.0 ± 1.7 years, F/M = 8/4) were asked to
determine whether the stimulus photograph matched with the label of
the occupation category (such as politics, show business, sport in the
general condition, mayor, singer, director in the specific condition). All
famous face stimuli were presented in both general and specific conditions. Image pre-processing and random effects statistical analyses were
performed using standard methods implemented in SPM8. Semantic
processing of famous faces in both general and specific conditions
revealed a common network of activation involving the occipital cortex,
the fusiform gyrus and the inferior frontal gyrus (pars triangularis) bilaterally, and the ATL, parahippocampal and posterior middle temporal
gyri in the right hemisphere. Specific relative to general categorization
activated left ATL and the posterior middle temporal gyrus. Moreover,
increased activation in the left ATL in the specific categorization condition was associated with increase in effective connectivity from the right

58

Long-Term Memory: Semantic
ATL, as revealed by Dynamic Causal Modeling analysis. These findings
support the idea of a crucial role of the anterior temporal lobes in the
processing of person-specific semantic information.

A122

A CONCURRENT MANUAL TASK INTERFERES WITH THE NAMING OF
OBJECTS THAT ARE FREQUENTLY MANIPULATED Eiling Yee1, Evangelia

G. Chrysikou1, Cindy Navarro1, Mariam Akbar2, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill1;
1University of Pennsylvania, 2Brandeis University — Sensorimotor-based the-

ories of semantic memory claim that semantic information about an
object is distributed over the neural substrates that are invoked when we
perceive and interact with that object. This predicts that occupying a
neural substrate that is an important part of an object’s representation
(e.g., with a concurrent secondary task) should interfere with the ability
to access that representation. We tested this prediction as it pertains to
the manipulation component of an object’s representation by requiring
participants to name pictures of objects under conditions of “interference” (performing a concurrent manual task) or “no interference” (no
concurrent task). Objects varied (according to ratings from separate subjects) in the extent to which one interacts with them manually (e.g., tiger
= low manual interaction, hammer = high manual interaction). Preliminary results show that performing a concurrent manual task increases
naming errors for all objects. Critically, however, the increase in errors is
greatest for objects rated as high in manual interaction. This interference
effect suggests that the conceptual representations of these frequently
manipulated objects share resources (specifically, motor resources) with
those that are required to perform an overt manual task. Further, it suggests that motor information about these objects is accessed even when
the primary task (lexical access for picture naming) does not manifestly
require it.

A123

ACOUSTIC AND ACTION-RELATED CONCEPTUAL FEATURES RAPIDLY
ACTIVATE THE AUDITORY AND MOTOR BRAIN SYSTEMS Natalie

Trumpp1, Klaus Hoenig1, Eun-Jin Sim1, Friedemann Pulvermueller2, Markus
Kiefer1; 1University of Ulm, Germany, 2MRC Brain and Cognition Unit,
Cambridge, UK — The organization of the conceptual system is controversially debated. Classical models assume that conceptual knowledge is
abstract and represented in an amodal unitary system distinct from sensory and motor systems. More recent models, however, propose that
concepts are embodied in the sense that interactions with objects form
their conceptual memory traces in distributed modality-specific brain
areas, which typically process sensory or action-related object information. In support of modality-specific models, previous neuropsychological studies showed that categorisation tasks with, for example, natural
and artificial concepts evoke differential activation in sensory and motor
brain regions. Here we investigated the neural representation of acoustic
and action-related conceptual features using ERPs. Participants performed a lexical decision task on visually presented object names which
referred to objects with high relevance of acoustic (“helicopter”) and
action-related (“hammer”) conceptual features, respectively, as well as
pseudowords as distracters. Feature dependent ERP effects were
observed 100-132 ms after stimulus onset over the frontal and central
scalp. Source analyses revealed that words with acoustic conceptual features elicited stronger activities in superior temporal brain regions that
belong to the auditory association cortex. Words with action-related features, however, showed stronger activity in central brain regions close to
the motor cortex. As these effects emerged very early after word onset,
they reflect rapid access to acoustic and action-related conceptual features rather than post-conceptual processing. In line with modality-specific models, our results support the assumption that concepts are
embodied in the sensory and motor systems of the human brain.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Semantic
A124

WHAT PART OF THE TEMPORAL LOBE IS CRITICAL FOR PICTURE
NAMING? DIVERGENCE OF ACTIVATION STUDIES AND DEMENTIA
LESION STUDIES Howard Chertkow1,2, Jim Nikelski1, Haythum Tayeb1,2,
Alan Evans2; 1Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University,

2McGill University — Semantic

memory and access to phonological representations are critical stages in naming pictures, and both clearly involve
activity in the left temporal lobe (LTL) in most individuals. We report of
series of studies pointing to a divergence in the localization of naming in
the LTL depending on whether data is derived from activation studies in
normal individuals, or associated with brain damage. In a series of activation studies in normal young and old subjects using fMRI and oxygen
15 PET, picture naming for pictures of decreasing was most associated
(in regression analysis and in subtraction analysis) with activation in
posterior left temporal regions. In VBM work with semantic dementia,
Grossman and colleagues have demonstrated association with inferior
and anterior temporal lobe. In separate work from our laboratory, correlation of anomia with cortical thinning in a large set of Alzheimer's Disease subjects (n = 180) in the ADNI (Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging
Initiative) study, similarly demonstrated largely anterionr LTL localization which correlated with degree of anomia. Thus a distinction between
posterior sites most associated with activation in normal individuals,
and anterior temporal correlations with anomia in various forms of
dementia, appears to be the rule rather than the exception. Various
hypotheses will be put forward to explain this discrepancy, including
technical features of activation studies, and compensatory mechanisms
after brain damage.

A125

DISTINGUISHING BETWEEN MEMORY SYSTEMS: FALSE MEMORIES
DEPEND ON SERIAL POSITION Halle R. Zucker1, Kristin E. Flegal1,
Alexandra Atkins2, Patricia A. Reuter-Lorenz1; 1The University of Michigan,
Duke University — The idea that memory can be divided into separable

2

systems dates back at least to William James (1890). Of the various divisions proposed since then, the longest-standing distinguishes shortfrom long- term memory (STM; LTM). Recent challenges to this dichotomy, favoring a unitary memory system, have come in part from neuroimaging evidence for common regions of activation for STM and LTM
tasks. However when imaging across the serial position curve, Talmi
and colleagues (2006) found the recency and primacy portions resulted
in dissociable activation sites, consistent with separable memory systems. Building on this and other prior findings, we sought to investigate
further whether items from the recency and primacy portions of 12-item
lists would be subject to different types of memory errors—indicating
the operation of different principles. Because we were especially interested in determining the relative susceptibility of LTM and STM to
semantic distortions, we used 12 item (supra)lists comprised of 3 sublists
following the variant of the Deese-Roediger-McDermott task developed
previously in our lab (Atkins and Reuter-Lorenz, 2008). Each sublist contained four strong associates of a common theme word that was always
unique to that sublist. Free recall after each supralist indicated poorer
veridical memory and more false semantic memories for the primacy
sublist, and better recall and more false phonological memories for the
recency sublist. A follow-up recognition test indicated superior memory
for primacy sublists. These findings support separable memory processes by converging with much prior research demonstrating that different principles operate on memory for different serial positions.

A126

DOES REPEATED PRESENTATION OF ITEMS IN VARYING CONTEXTS LEAD
TO SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE? Stefanie Nickels1, Bertram Opitz1;
1

Experimental Neuropsychology Unit, Saarland University, Saarbrücken,
Germany — Memory enhancement after repeated presentation of items is

an often replicated finding in memory research. Assumingly this is due
to the extraction of shared features of the repeated items, which in sum
will be encoded as decontextualized, i.e. semantic knowledge. To inves-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session A
tigate this issue, subjects studied celebrity faces along with faces of non
famous individuals. Half of the unknown faces were presented either in
the same context (background and biographical information) or with
varying contexts across presentations. The electrophysiological correlates of explicit memory and conceptual priming for these faces were
examined. In the explicit memory condition, the early frontal old/neweffect, an indicator of familiarity, and the late parietal old/new-effect,
indexing recollection, were found both for celebrity faces and non
famous faces from the different contexts condition. Non famous faces
with no variation of context only elicited the partial old/new-effect. Furthermore, conceptual priming in the implicit memory condition was
indexed by positive potentials over fronto-central regions, in addition to
faster reaction times for previously presented faces. ERP potentials elicited by celebrity faces and non famous faces repeated in different contexts exhibited remarkable similarities. This we interpret as evidence for
acquisition of semantic knowledge as a result of repeated presentation of
information in varying contexts. Furthermore, results from Frequency
Analysis and Independent Component Analysis will be reported.

A127

NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF NEW OBJECTS ARE MODULATED BY
OBJECT-RELATED SENSORY EXPERIENCE Christian Bellebaum1,2, Marco

Tettamanti1, Pasquale Della Rosa1, Irene Daum2, Stefano Cappa1; 1San
Raffaele Scientific Institute and Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milano,
Italy, 2Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany — Category-specific impairments
of semantic memory observed in neurological patients have given rise to
different theories on semantic memory organization. One of the most
influential accounts stresses the role of object-related sensory experience,
claiming that visual features are more frequently used in the acquisition
of knowledge about living objects, and manipulation knowledge plays a
larger role for non-living objects. The present study aimed to find direct
evidence for this modality-specific theory by inducing new semantic
memory representations in healthy subjects. Sixteen volunteers engaged
in three training sessions to learn about features of new, manipulable
objects. Importantly, the modality of knowledge acquisition was varied:
Subjects learned to manipulate one set of new objects, whereas training
was restricted to visual features for a second set. A third set of objects
was not part of the training. Brain activity was measured with functional
magnetic resonance imaging during an object-matching task pre- and
post training. Activation increases post- compared to pre-training were
observed in the bilateral precuneus irrespective of training. For both
visual and manipulation training, increased activity was also found in
the left lateral parietal cortex. Specific activation changes for the type of
training were found in the left middle temporal gyrus for visual training
and in the bilateral middle frontal gyrus for manipulation training. The
results show that the neural representation of objects depends on objectrelated sensory experience and therefore provide support for the modality-specific account of semantic memory organization.

A128

ARE SEMANTIC DEFICITS MODULATED BY THE PRESENCE OF
DEPRESSIVE SYMPTOMS IN OLDER ADULTS WITH AMNESTIC MILD
COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT? Julie Brunet1,2, Carol Hudon3,4, Joël Macoir3,4,

Sylvie Belleville1,2, Sven Joubert1,2; 1Centre de recherche, Institut Universitaire
de Gériatrie de Montréal, Montréal, 2Université de Montréal, Montréal, 3Centre
de recherche Université Laval Robert-Giffard, Québec, 4Université Laval,
Québec — Recent evidence suggests that amnestic MCI (aMCI) patients
show semantic memory deficits. Studies have also shown that aMCI
patients who present with depressive symptoms present with different
patterns of episodic memory and executive function deficits when compared to aMCI patients without depressive symptoms, suggesting a role
of depression in the presentation of cognitive symptoms. The aim of this
study was to examine whether semantic memory deficits in aMCI are
modulated by the presence of concomitant depressive symptoms in
these persons. Three groups of participants were included in this study:
1) an aMCI group without depressive symptoms (aMCI) (N=17), 2) an

59

Poster Session A

Long-Term Memory: Semantic

aMCI group with depressive symptoms (aMCI-D) (N=15), and 3) a control group (N=36). Participants carried out a semantic test of famous people knowledge, in which they were asked to answer questions testing
biographical knowledge about famous political figures, singers, actors,
and athletes. Results show that aMCI and aMCI-D patients were significantly impaired compared to the age- and education-matched control
group on the semantic test. However, the aMCI-D group and the aMCI
group did not differ significantly between each other on the semantic
test. These results confirm the presence of semantic deficits in aMCI and
aMCI-D, but they indicate that depressive symptoms do not appear to
modulate the severity of the semantic deficits in aMCI, at least regarding
famous people knowledge. Further studies are needed to explore the
relations that exist between depression and memory in individuals at
risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease. Keywords : semantic memory,
MCI, depression

A129

DISRUPTION OF VENTROLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX DURING
MEMORY-GUIDED DECISION-MAKING Elizabeth Race1, Jessica Wilson2,
Benjamin

Levy2,

Anthony

Wagner2; 1Boston

University,

2Stanford

University —

Priming-related neural activity reductions have been widely observed in
left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC), including mid-VLPFC (BA
45). Recent fMRI evidence (Race et al., 2009) indicates that primingrelated activity reductions in mid-VLPFC reflect reduced cognitive control demands when retrieved stimulus-decision associations inform current decision-making. In contrast, stimulus specific and stimulusresponse learning reduced processing demands in more rostral and caudal regions of PFC, respectively. While these results demonstrate that
left mid-VLPFC control processes operate at the decision level, it is
unclear whether left mid-VLPFC computations are necessary when
retrieved stimulus-response associations can guide goal-directed behavior. The present experiment used transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) to test whether mid-VLPFC processes are necessary for goaldirected behavior in the absence of decision-level learning, regardless of
learning at other levels of representation. Subjects performed six blocks
of the same semantic classification priming task used by Race et al.
(2009) to dissociate learning at the stimulus, decision, and response levels. On three blocks, subjects received TMS (1Hz, 6min) targeting left
mid-VLPFC, with TMS applied after completion of the study trials but
before the critical test trials. Two main findings are of note: (1) TMS disrupted behavioral performance only when both learned stimulus-decision and stimulus-response associations conflicted with current goals,
and (2) TMS did not disrupt priming when accurate responding could be
guided by learned stimulus-response associations, regardless of
demands on decision-level control. Together, these results demonstrate
that mid-VLPFC processing is necessary in the absence of decision-level
learning only when learned stimulus-response associations cannot guide
goal-relevant behavior.

processing in schizophrenia. However, like controls, patients were able
to take advantage of the longer prime duration to produce larger N/
P190 priming effects. The opposite pattern of findings across the two
prime durations was seen on the N400: at the short prime duration,
patients showed a normal priming effect, suggesting that, under these
highly automatic conditions, feedforward activation from the prime
effectively facilitated semantic processing of the target picture. At the
longer prime duration, however, controls showed a larger N400 effect
than at the shorter duration, but patients showed a smaller N400 effect.
We suggest that, in controls, efficient mapping of perceptual information
to the semantic representation of the prime further facilitated semantic
processing of the target, but that, in patients, inefficient early perceptual
processing of the prime impeded activation of its semantic representation.

A131

ADVANTAGE EFFECT SWITCHES IN DIFFERENT LEVELS DURING HUMAN
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL Haiyan Zhou1, Wei Jing1, Jieyu Liu1, Yulin Qin1,2,

Shengfu Lv1, Ning Zhong1,3; 1International WIC Institute, Beijing University of
Technology, Beijing, China, 2Carnegie Mellon University, PA, 3Maebashi
Institute of Technology, Maebashi-City, Japan — The effect of basic-level
advantage showed some information appeared to be more readily accessible to the human mind (Rogers, 2006, 2007; Rosch, 1976; Wisiniewski,
1989). Other researchers found that the basic-level advantage was not
reliable (Large, 2004; VanRullen, 2001). We carried out 3 experiments to
investigate how advantage effect switched in different levels in Chinese.
A word-picture category matching task and a picture-word category
matching task were used in experiment1 and experiment2 individually,
with same materials. The results showed that in the word-picture matching task, the basic-level advantage disappeared, inconsistent with Rogers (2007). The inconsistent results might be related to the limited
materials. In the picture-word matching task, we found a reliable basiclevel advantage. The different advantage effects in experiment 1 and 2
suggested that when the processing relied more on semantic memory,
such as in the task of picture-word matching, the basic-level advantage
appeared (Pansky, 2006). To further investigate the advantage effect
switching, we expanded our materials and used a naming task, which
was more natural in experiment3. The results showed except for the very
familiar concepts, there was a significant basic-level advantage effect.
Based on the results, we concluded that during information retrieval, the
advantage effect switching in different levels were constrained by both
the semantic representation in memory system and the demand of the
outside world.

A130

SEEING THE WOOD FOR THE TREES: ERPS REVEAL ABNORMAL
PATTERNS OF PERCEPTUAL AND SEMANTIC PRIMING DURING OBJECT
RECOGNITION IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Gina Kuperberg1,2, Kana Okano1,

Marissa Lipton1, Marianna Eddy3; 1Tufts University, 2Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging, Mass General Hospital, 3Massachusetts Institute of
Technology — We used event-related potentials (ERPs) to probe the time-

course of automatic object recognition in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia
patients and demographically-matched controls performed a go-no-go
semantic categorization task while viewing pictures preceded by
masked identical or non-identical picture primes. Two different prime
durations, 90ms and 150ms, were used while the SOA was held constant
(170ms). Patients showed abnormal patterns of priming on ERP components indexing both early perceptual stages of object recognition (the N/
P190) and later semantic processing (the N400). On the N/P190, repetition priming effects were smaller overall in patients than controls, consistent with previous findings indicating impaired perceptual visual

60

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Attention: Auditory
B1

INDEPENDENT EFFECTS OF SEROTONIN AND DOPAMINE
POLYMORPHISMS ON PROCESSING OF ATTENDED AND UNATTENDED
AUDITORY INFORMATION IN AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL
PARADIGM Theodore Bell1, Courtney Stevens2, Helen Neville1; 1University
of Oregon, 2Willamette University — Polymorphisms in both 5HTT (seroto-

nin transporter gene) and DAT1 (dopamine transporter gene) have previously been associated with variability in cognitive performance. In a
group of 3- 5-year-old children, we observed differential effects of these
polymorphisms on event related potentials to attended and unattended
stimuli using a dichotic listening task (described in Sanders, Stevens,
Coch, & Neville, 2006). Previous work using this paradigm has shown
that distracter suppression to be differentiable from signal enhancement
(Stevens, Fanning, Coch, Sanders, & Neville, 2008; Stevens, Lauinger, &
Neville, 2009). The long allele of 5HTT was associated with poorer signal
enhancement in the attended channel relative to the short allele. In contrast, the 10r allele of DAT1 was associated with poorer distracter suppression in the unattended channel relative to the 9r allele of DAT1.
These effects appear to be additive and independent. These results have
important implications for theories and models of attention, as well as
for our understanding of the impact of genetic variation on cognition.

B2

MUSICAL METER DIRECTS THE HIERARCHICAL ALLOCATION OF
ATTENTION IN TIME Ahren Fitzroy1, Lisa D. Sanders1; 1University of
Massachusetts, Amherst — When perceptual systems are overwhelmed by
information changing rapidly, listeners can use temporally selective
attention to preferentially process the most critical information. Eventrelated brain potential (ERP) research has shown that temporally selective attention affects early perceptual processing as indexed by the
amplitude of the first negative peak 100 ms after sound onset (N1) in a
manner similar to that observed for auditory spatially selective attention.
Further, the difference in ERPs elicited by sounds at attended and unattended times is larger when the attended time is cued by an isochronous
pulse rather than explicit instruction alone. These findings are consistent
with entrainment models of dynamic attending that propose attentional
resources fluctuate, phase-locked to external rhythms. Entrainment
models also predict that hierarchically organized exogenous rhythms
will induce a hierarchical distribution of attention across time; the current study employed the hierarchical rhythmic structure found in Western music to test this hypothesis. Auditory evoked potentials elicited by
physically identical stimuli presented at times of relative strength and
weakness in the metric hierarchies of short melodies were compared in
musicians and musically naïve individuals. Sounds presented at points
of metric strength elicited larger amplitude N1s than the same sounds
presented at points of metric weakness. This result suggests that multiple exogenous periodicities induce a hierarchical allocation of tempo-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

rally selective attention without explicit instruction and provides
electrophysiological support for entrainment models of dynamic attending.

B3

ENTRAINMENT OF OSCILLATORY ACTIVITY TO RHYTHMIC STIMULUS
STREAMS IN DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA Fruzsina Soltesz1, Denes

Szucs1, Victoria Cheah1, Usha Goswami1; 1Centre for Neuroscience and
Education, University of Cambridge — Introduction: Children with developmental dyslexia have difficulties in auditory rhythmic processing and in
rhythmic entrainment. (Goswami et al., 2002; Thomson and Goswami,
2008). Previous studies with monkeys have shown that neuronal oscillations entrain (phase-lock) to the structure of an attended rhythmic stimulus stream (Lakatos et al., 2008). Here we studied an analogous
phenomenon in dyslexia. Methods: Adults with DD and control subjects
listened to a rhythmic auditory stream of 500Hz sounds presented via
earplugs (SOA: 660ms). Occasional oddball stimuli (15%, white noise)
required an active response. Deviants served to maintain participants’
attention to the stimulus stream. EEG data was collected with a 128channel Electrical Geodesics system. Event-related spectral perturbation
(ERSP) and inter-trial phase coherence (ITC) data in the range of 0.1 to 40
Hz was analysed. Results: A strong expectancy-related power increase
was found in control participants prior to the stimuli, across the whole
frequency range in ERSP. This expectancy effect was attenuated in the
dyslexic group. ITC data reflected event-related potentials in both
groups. Conclusions: Our results show that adults with DD show
weaker expectancy effects, locked to rhythmic acoustic stimuli, than controls. The lack of a strong oscillatory entrainment in DD may explain
their weaker performance in auditory processing tasks, and may play a
key role in phonological development via syllabic parsing and representation.

B4

STEPWISE PROCESSING OF NEGATIVE EMOTIONS REVEALED BY FMRI

Patricia Bestelmeyer1, Pierre Maurage2, Julien Rouger3, Ian Charest1, Frances
Crabbe1, Pascal Belin1; 1CCNi, University of Glasgow, 2Catholic University of
Louvain, 3University of Maastricht — Behavioural adaptation effects for

vocal, non-linguistic affective information have recently been shown
(Bestelmeyer et al., submitted). Using adaptation (continuous carry-over
design) we were interested in the processing stages of vocal affect perception and the neural correlates involved. Nineteen healthy participants took part in this fMRI study. We created four morph continua
between anger and fear in seven morph steps of 15% (5/95% anger/fear
to 95/5% anger/fear). We employed a continuous carry over design
with type-1-index-1 sequence of serially balanced stimuli. Participants
listened to these sounds while performing a two-alternative forced
choice emotion classification task in a Trim Trio Siemens scanner. Parametric modulation analyses were conducted using SPM8. Two main
regressors of interest were identified: first, a physical difference regressor (difference between morph steps of two consecutive stimuli) and,
second, a perceptual difference regressor (difference between the mean
behavioural responses of each participant for two consecutive stimuli).

61

Poster Session B
We observe a positive correlation between increasing physical difference
and BOLD signal in the right amygdala and posterior cingulate as well
as bilateral temporal voice areas. After regressing out the effect of physical difference we show a positive correlation between perceptual difference and BOLD signal in the bilateral insulae and left inferior frontal
gyrus. Results suggest that the processing of vocal affect recognition
happens hierarchically involving the right amygdala, posterior cingulate
and bilateral voice areas which are sensitive to physical properties while
more abstract, perceptually correlated representations (effect of perceptual difference) of vocal affect are processed in bilateral insulae and left
inferior frontal gyrus.

B5

THE N100 RESPONSE TO UNATTENDED STIMULI RELATES TO
ADOLESCENT EXECUTIVE FUNCTION WITHIN A NORMALLY DEVELOPING
POPULATION Christine Lackner1, Diane L. Santesso1, Jane Dywan1,

Terrance J. Wade1, Sidney J. Segalowitz1; 1Brock University — The N100 auditory ERP component is usually larger to attended compared with unattended stimuli. However, in atypically developing or at-risk populations
such differences are not observed and this lack of differentiation has
been associated with negative outcomes in school and social situations.
In this study, we investigated the N100 response within a typically
developing population of adolescents to determine whether individual
differences in N100 amplitudes and in executive functioning would be
related to each other. Forty 12- to 15-year-olds were administered intermixed and non-overlapping auditory tones to each ear with instructions
to respond to targets in one ear only, switching attended ears across
blocks of trials. Parents completed the Behavior Rating Inventory of
Executive Function (BRIEF). Regression analyses showed that smaller
N100s at Fz and FCz to unattended stimuli, adjusted for responses to
attended stimuli, were associated with greater global executive scores,
whereas the amplitude of the N100 to attended stimuli did not relate to
any measures of executive control. Further analyses showed that this
N100 effect was associated with the BRIEF index of metacognitive function and not with the index of behavior regulation suggesting a conceptual basis for the relation. These results indicate that the ability to
disattend to irrelevant information, as indexed by the N100 to nonattended stimuli, is highly predictive of behavioural indices of executive
function.

B6

THE EFFECTS OF ATTENTION ON THE SPEECH PERCEPTION OF
INFANTS Karen Garrido-Nag1,2, Valerie Shafer2, Richard Schwartz2, Winifred

Strange2; 1Gallaudet University, 2The Graduate Center, CUNY — Knowledge
of how infants use their attentional resources in speech perception will
help to understand the nature of language development. Furthermore,
knowledge of how attention affects speech discrimination in typically
developing infants can be used to examine clinical populations who are
known to have both deficits in attention and language (e.g., children
with autism). This study examines how attention affects the speech perception skills of 4-to 8-month old infants. More specifically, we explore
what role attention plays in the development of vowel perception skills
in infants through the use of associative learning between auditory and
visual stimuli and explore the functional nature of the brain discrimination responses in infants. This study uses brain discrimination measures
(Mismatch Responses ([MMRs]), to compare auditory discrimination of
tones and CVC words in two different tasks designed to focus attention
differently. Attention is manipulated in tasks by pairing a sound change
with a following face (cross-modal) task consistently or inconsistently.
This leads to an associative relation being built between the auditory and
visual stimuli. Cross-modal processing can facilitate the discrimination
of sound contrasts by directing attention to one modality by using the
other modality as a reward. Results have shown that negative Mismatch
Responses (MMRs) were present when attention was focused to the
change in the sound. A significant difference was seen in the amplitude

62

Attention: Auditory
of the MMR when focusing attention on the sound change versus attending to the overall auditory stimuli. Directed attention may be required
for infants to actively discriminate difficult contrasts.

B7

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INDICES OF LANGUAGE PROCESSING IN
VEGETATIVE STATE (VS) AND MINIMALLY CONSCIOUS STATE (MCS) –
Steppacher1,
Simon
PREVALENCE AND PROGNOSTIC VALUE Inga

Eickhoff1, Michael Kaps2, Wolfgang Witzke2, Johanna Kissler1; 1University of
study
investigated
Konstanz, 2Kliniken Schmieder Allensbach — This

whether patients with severe disorders of consciousness after brain
injury show electrophysiological signs of language processing and if so,
whether their presence is associated with a favourable clinical outcome.
The N400 Event Related Potential (ERP) in response to semantically congruous and incongruous sentence endings was recorded in 175 patients
with severe disorders of consciousness (vegetative state ~ VS or minimally conscious state ~ MCS). The presence of a N400 was evaluated by
interrater reliability among three experts and using a single trial ERP
quantification method, the t-continuous wavelet transform (tCWT,
Bostanov & Kotchoubey, 2006). Clinical follow-ups were available for 92
out of the 175 patients. Five to twelve years after the brain injury 44.6%
of the patients had died, 26.1% were still in VS or MCS, but 18.5% had
recovered to different degrees. Out of the followed up patients, 35% had
originally shown the language-related N400 component, 65% had not.
Out of the patients who had shown an N400 component during VS or
MCS, 68 % regained consciousness. Out of the remaining patients who
had not shown an N400 initially, only 12 (23.5%) had recovered to some
degree by the time of the follow-up. This difference in distributions was
highly significant (Fisher’s Exact p<.001). Results indicate that the presence of the N400 ERP after severe brain injury predicts a favourable outcome even in patients with serve disorders of consciousness such as VS
and MCS.

B8

THE EFFECT OF REPETITIVE TMS TO THE RIGHT INFERIOR PARIETAL
CORTEX ON AUDITORY SPATIAL ATTENTION Debra S. Karhson1, Edward J.
Golob1; 1Tulane University — Behavioral studies support the concept of an

auditory spatial attention gradient, with attentional processing being a
positive function of angular distance between stimulus and attended
locations. Right inferior parietal cortex (rIPC) lesions can induce left spatial neglect, suggesting rIPC contributes to attentional gradients. This
study examined the role of rIPC in auditory spatial attention by using
event related potentials (ERPs) to define attention-related processing
and repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) to transiently
interfere with rIPC activity. Subjects (n=10) listened to noise bursts at
five azimuth locations (left to right: -90°, -45°, 0° midline, +45°, +90°) and
responded to one target location (-90°, +90°, separate blocks). ERPs were
analyzed before (baseline) and after (Post 1, 2) rTMS (1 Hz, 16 min) to the
rIPC and focused on sensory (P200, ~200 ms latency) and attentional
(P3a, ~300 ms latency) processing. For left and right target conditions the
P3a to non-targets had linear increases in amplitude with greater distance from target locations (p<0.001), suggesting an attentional gradient.
When attending to the right, P200 and P3a amplitudes were reduced in
Post 1 vs. baseline (p<0.05), and returned to baseline in Post 2. P200 had
amplitude decreases at -90°, followed by P3a reductions at all locations.
Results suggest the rIPC is vital for establishing auditory attentional gradients when attending to the right. Effects of rTMS on the P200 and P3a
suggest a time-course of rIPC-rTMS influence starting at locations farthest from the attended location and followed by a broader effect at all
tested locations.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Attention: Development & Aging

Poster Session B

B9

B11

AUDITORY EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS IN CHILDREN WITH ATTENTIONDEFICIT/HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER AFTER A NEUROFEEDBACK
TREATMENT Melissa Calderon1, Ana Cristina Piñón1, Josefina Ricardo-

HOW DOES THE CONTEXT OF A REGULAR SOUND STRUCTURE
MODULATE SENSORY MEMORY REPRESENTATIONS OF AUDITORY
PATTERNS? Johanna Rimmele1, Christian Keitel1, Elyse Sussman2, Thomas

Garcell1, Thalia Fernández1, Thalia Harmony1; 1Instituto de Neurobiología
UNAM — Now days, one of the most common psychiatric problems found

in children is the attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), its
prevalence is between 3 and 5% in children during the school time
(American Psychiatric Association, 2000). Stimulant medications are
preferentially used as a treatment of choice for ADHD. However, is well
documented that medications fail to produce the desired improvement
in behavior in a significant percentage of patients, from 30 to 40 % (Nash,
2000). Neurofeedback (NBF) has been used to treat children with ADHD
and some advantages over the medications have been reported. It has
been useful in the 80% of the subjects treated with this therapy (Lubar,
1999) and the changes produced have lasted (Tansey, 1993). However,
there are few investigations in wich the neurobiological changes associated with the improvement in behavior associated with the NBF are
explored. Twenty children with ADHD and excess of fronto-central theta
activity who received 30 sessions of NFB were studied in this investigation. The main objective of this study was to see if the positive changes in
behavior produced by NBF were reflected in the auditory ERPs. At the
beginning and after the treatment auditory ERPs were recorded using
the Test of variables of attention (TOVA) as the stimulation paradigm.
After the treatment, reducing theta absolute power, positive changes in
behavior were observed and those changes lasted two months after the
treatment. Also, positive changes in the amplitude of the ERPs were
observed after the treatment, compared with ERPs obtained before.

B10

DYNAMIC ATTENDING AND TEMPORAL PROCESSING IN PATIENTS WITH
CEREBELLAR OR BASAL GANGLIA LESIONS Michael Schwartze1, Sonja

A. Kotz1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences —
What mechanisms guide attention along temporally structured signals?
Dynamic attending theory (DAT, Large & Jones, 1999) models attention
as an oscillation that adjusts its phase and period in an attempt to synchronize internal resources with the temporal structure of external
events, thereby allocating attention to specific points in time. As an
instance of anticipatory stimulus-driven attending (Jones et al., 2002) this
adaptation has to rely on an internal representation of temporal structure, possibly generated by neural systems implicated in temporal processing. The cerebellum (CE) and the basal ganglia (BG) are assumed to
perform either pre-attentive, event-based or attention-dependent, interval-based temporal processing (Buhusi & Meck, 2005). To elaborate on
these positions, the current study exploited the high temporal resolution
of the Electroencephalogram (EEG) to investigate whether the amplitude
of the event-related potential (ERP) associated with the attentive detection of change (P300) indicates the quality of synchronization in healthy
and patient populations. The EEG was recorded from controls as well as
patients with focal cerebellar or basal ganglia lesions while these participants directed their attention to two-tone auditory oddball sequences
(600 Hz standard, 660 Hz deviant). The inter-stimulus-interval (ISI) in
each sequence was manipulated to convey either isochronous or random
temporal structure. Results suggest that this manipulation indeed has an
impact on P300 amplitude. In comparison to controls and CE patients,
the effect was strongest for BG patients. These findings support DAT as
well as the proposed roles of the CE and the BG in pre-attentive, eventbased and attention-dependent temporal processing, respectively.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Jacobsen1,3, Erich Schröger1; 1Institue of Psychology, University of Leipzig,
Germany, 2Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, 3Experimental
Psychology Unit, Helmut Schmidt University / University of the Federal Armed
Forces Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany — Listeners must cope with temporal
fluctuations in the perception of speech and music and other complex
auditory sequences. Patterns of temporal variability allow the perception
of constancy in the presence of physical change. Not only complex and
abstract regularities in sound structure, but also regularities of feature
conjunctions are represented in sensory memory. However, there is little
research on how multiple patterns of sound feature regularities are represented. In a passive Paradigm, we investigated how temporal and
tone-frequency structure interact in sensory memory. In four experimental conditions, sounds were presented with: 1) a regular temporal and a
regular frequency pattern (TF); 2) a regular temporal pattern (T); 3) a regular frequency pattern (F); 4) no regular pattern (N). Violations of regularities in feature conjunctions were controlled for to ensure that effects
were caused by the structural sound context and not simple sound feature changes. The mismatch negativity (MMN) component of the eventrelated potential to temporal and frequency pattern deviations was
recorded as a measure of sensory memory representation. An active protocol was used to measure behavioral detection performance. MMN was
elicited by temporal and frequency pattern deviants in the TF and by frequency pattern deviants in the F condition. No MMN was elicited in the
T condition. Behavioral detection of pattern deviants was highest in the
TF condition. There was no evidence for an effect of a regular temporal
context on sensory memory representations of the frequency structure of
sound, but a regular frequency context modulated the temporal structure representation.

Attention: Development & Aging
B12

AUDITORY SELECTIVE ATTENTION IN 3- TO 5-YEAR-OLD CHILDREN Lisa
D. Sanders1, Lori B. Astheimer1, Benjamin Zobel1, Mara Breen1, Lindsay
Demers1; 1University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Previous studies showed
that event-related brain potentials (ERPs) elicited by auditory probes
presented from the same locations as attended and unattended narratives differ beginning by 100 ms in 3- to 5-year-old children: a linguistic,
spatially selective attention effect with an onset latency similar to what is
reported for adults. We conducted two experiments to determine if this
effect is dependent on domain (linguistic, nonlinguistic) or selection
dimension (space, time). First, children were asked to attend to one of
two simultaneously presented auditory environments (e.g., ocean
sounds) to detect a target (e.g., fog horn) in the attended soundscape. As
was shown previously with linguistic stimuli, ERPs elicited by auditory
probes presented from the same locations as the attended and unattended environments differed beginning at 100 ms after onset. Second,
we examined whether children direct temporally selective attention to
the initial portions of words in continuous speech. Previous studies indicate that adults listening to a narrative direct attention to the times at
which word-initial information is presented, resulting in differences in
N1 amplitude elicited by probes played during the first 150 ms of words
compared to control times. A temporally selective attention effect with
similar onset latency was evident in children listening to stories. These
results suggest that the effects of selective attention on auditory processing are robust in 3- to 5-year-old children across domain and selection
criterion. Further, they make it possible to determine the specificity of
the relationship between selective attention and receptive language processing abilities in this age group.

63

Poster Session B

Attention: Development & Aging

B13

B15

ADULT AGE DIFFERENCES IN BOTTOM-UP AND TOP-DOWN INFLUENCES
ON AUDITORY LATERALITY IN DICHOTIC LISTENING Susanne Passow1,

TRACING THE TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT OF AUDITORY AND VISUAL
SUBCOMPONENTS OF ATTENTION AND WORKING MEMORY IN
PRESCHOOL AGES Jacalyn Guy1, Julie Hanck1, Kim Cornish1,2; 1McGill

René Westerhausen2, Isabell Wartenburger3, Kenneth Hugdahl2, Hauke R.
Heekeren1,4, Ulman Lindenberger1, Shu-Chen Li1; 1Center for Lifespan
Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Germany,
2Cognitive Neuroscience Group, University of Bergen, Norway, 3University of
right-ear
Potsdam, Germany, 4Freie Universität Berlin, Germany — The
advantage (REA), indicating superiority of the left hemisphere in speech
processing, can be observed during verbal dichotic listening (e.g.
Kimura, 1961). Recent studies with young adults focused on the interaction between bottom-up and top-down processes in affecting REA (e.g.
Westerhausen et al., 2009). Initial evidence suggests that normal aging
affects top-down attentional control of the REA. We investigated how
normal aging alters (i) the interaction between bottom-up and top-down
processes and (ii) lateralization of auditory processing. Twenty-four
younger and 25 older adults were screened for their hearing acuity. Bottom-up stimulus characteristics were manipulated by gradually varying
the inter-aural intensity differences. The degree of top-down modulation
was manipulated by forcing attention to the right ear (FR), the left ear
(FL), or none of the two ears (NF). The results of the behavioral study
indicate: (i) bottom-up and top-down processes differ with age, as
reflected in the significant four-way Attention x Ear x Intensity x Age
interaction (epsilon=0.41, eta-squared=0.01); (ii) older adults’ performance for a given ear depends more on inter-aural intensity differences
(Intensity x Ear: epsilon=0.28, eta-squared=0.95) than younger adults’
performance (Intensity x Ear: epsilon=0.23, eta-squared=0.71), indicating
their reduced ability in exerting top-down control; (iii) relative to
younger (RE>LE, Cohen’s d=0.95) the REA is weakened in older adults
(RE>LE, n.s.). These behavioral results are in line with evidence on
senescent decline in attentional control and on alterations in hemispheric
asymmetry during speech processing (Bellis et al., 2000). The follow-up
EEG experiment will investigate neurophysiological correlates of these
age-related differences.

B14

REDUCED AUDITORY MISMATCH NEGATIVITY TO LOUDNESS
DISCRIMINATION IN CHILDREN WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM
DISORDERS Bettina Mohr1,2, Amanda Ludlow1, Antony Whitmore1, Max

Garagnani2, Friedemann Pulvermuller2; 1Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge,
UK, 2Medical Research Council, Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit,
Cambridge, UK — Sensory symptoms are characteristic among individuals

with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and have been thought to relate
to both language alterations and problems in social interactions. These
sensory deviations appear to affect auditory processing, leading to
hyper- or hyposensitivity to sounds and speech. 12 high functioning children (mean age 13.1 years) with a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders and 12 typically developing children (mean age 13.4 years)
participated in an auditory oddball task using speech sounds. Both
groups were matched for verbal and nonverbal IQ and for handedness.
In a mismatch negativity (MMN) paradigm, responses to changes in
loudness were compared to those of stimulus length and changes in frequency. We found significantly reduced MMN responses to loudness
deviants in ASD children compared to typically developing children. In
contrast, other deviant stimuli produced similar MMNs in both groups.
Further analyses showed that the stimulus-specific MMN difference in
ASD children was due to deviant-elicited ERPs whereas standard
responses were similar for both populations. Our data suggest hyposensitivity in detecting auditory changes in speech sounds in children with
ASD, as reflected in a reduced MMN for deviant sounds of decreased
loudness. We discuss the possible role of the MMN as a neurophysiological marker of change-type specific sensitivity in children with autism
spectrum disorders.

64

Child Laboratory for Research and Education in Developmental Disorders,
McGill University, 2Developmental Neuroscience and Genetic Disorders
Laboratory, Monash University — The differential development of the subcomponents of attention and executive function in preschool ages is not
yet fully understood. Consequently no clear trajectory of age-related
changes in attention has yet been reported for this age group. Furthermore, the bulk of current research is focused primarily on the investigation of visual attention, which neglects the development of auditory
attention and thereby a cross-modal perspective. However, the importance of delineating age-related changes of attentional proficiencies and
deficiencies rests largely in their utility for understanding atypical developmental trajectories; specifically in neurodevelopmental disorders that
are characterized by attentional difficulties. The focus of the present
study is to first document age-related changes in sustained attention,
response inhibition and working memory across the auditory and visual
systems in typically developing girls and boys through the ages of 3-6
years. Furthermore, a second aim is to identify the modality specific differences as revealed by performance on analogous auditory and visual
paradigms. An experimental computerized testing battery comprised of
both auditory and visual continuous performance tests, Stroop-like
adapted Day-Night tasks, and Noisy Book adapted tasks was used to
assess sustained attention, inhibition and working memory, respectively.
Preliminary results indicate that a developmental trend exists across all
tasks, such that performance, specifically in terms of speed and accuracy,
improves with age. Furthermore, performances for all visual tasks outpaced analogous auditory task performances, which suggest that auditory tasks are potentially more difficult than visual ones for this
particular age group.

B16

METHYLPHENIDATE IMPROVES ATTENTIONAL ABILITIES OF RATS MADE
IRON DEFICIENT IN EARLY INFANCY Wael Mohamed1, Erica Unger1,2,

Byron Jones1,3; 1Neuroscience Institute, Penn State University, 2Nutritional
Sciences, Penn State University, 3Biobehavioral Health, Penn State
University — Clinical studies indicate that iron deficiency early in life produces persistent, impaired cognitive and attentional abilities The aim of
this study was to study the effects of methylphenidate, MPH on attentional deficits in rats made iron deficient (ID) early in life. The subjects
for this study were Sprague-Dawley rats made iron deficient starting at
postnatal day 4 by being placed on iron-deficient dams (vs. control). At
weaning, all pups were placed on an iron-sufficient diet for the remainder of the study. At 45 days of age, the animals were tested for attention
set shifting in a test consisting of 5 consecutive tasks, simple discrimination, compound discrimination, intra-dimensional reversal, extra-dimensional shift and extra-dimensional reversal. After testing, the animals
were assigned to one of 4 MPH dose groups, 1, 5 or 10 mg/kg p.o. vs.
vehicle control. Drug treatment continued for 15 days prior to a second
round of attention set shift testing and continued throughout testing.
Our results showed overall that ID rats performed more poorly than
controls in all aspects of attentional set-shift testing. MPH at 1mg/kg
and 5mg/kg significantly improved ID and control rats’ performance;
for the ID rats, lower doses were more effective than higher doses. These
data support our hypothesis that early ID produces persistent effects on
attention perhaps by impairing dopamine neurobiology. Moreover, we
are the first group to show that methylphenidate can improve attentional
processes in early iron deficient animals. Supported by a generous grant
from the PSU Social Science Research Institute.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Attention: Development & Aging

Poster Session B

B17

B19

AGE DIFFERENCES IN THE RECRUITMENT OF WIDESPREAD NEURAL
NETWORKS: IMPLICATIONS FOR DISTRACTIBILITY Karen Campbell1,2,

THE TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF VISUAL ATTENTION IN ALZHEIMER’S
DISEASE AND IN DEMENTIA WITH LEWY BODIES Frédéric Peters1, Sylvie

Cheryl Grady1,2, Lynn Hasher1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research
Institute, Baycrest — The present study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine age differences in brain activity during
encoding in a distraction-laden task and the relationship between that
activity and subsequent knowledge about the distraction. Older and
younger adults were shown a rapid stream of letter strings (words and
nonwords) superimposed on objects and were asked to perform a 1-back
task on either the letters or the objects, with the attended modality
manipulated across blocks. On a subsequent word fragment completion
task, older adults showed more priming for the distracting words than
younger adults. Furthermore, greater priming in the older group was
associated with an inability to suppress activity in an area of the rostral
prefrontal cortex (PFC) previously implicated in the default mode network. Younger adults, on the other hand, recruited a more lateral region
of the rostral PFC, an area thought to be part of a frontal-parietal control
network. Further functional connectivity analyses confirmed that these
rostral regions were indeed distinct, with the older adults’ more medial
area being functionally connected to other default regions and the
younger adults’ more lateral area being connected to other control
regions, including ventrolateral PFC and anterior inferior parietal
regions. These results suggest that older adults’ lessened attentional control, as indexed by their increased priming for the distracting words, is
due to alterations in two major brain networks. That is, a failure to adequately suppress the frontal nodes of the default mode network and to
simultaneously engage frontal nodes of the control network.

B18

TYPICAL TRAJECTORY OF ATTENTIONAL FUNCTIONING IN EARLY
CHILDHOOD: PERFORMANCE ON MEASURES OF SELECTIVE,
SUSTAINED, FOCUSED AND INHIBITORY CONTROL Julie Hanck1, Jacalyn

Guy1, Kim Cornish1,2; 1McGill Child Laboratory for Research and Education in
Developmental Disorders, McGill University, 2Developmental Neuroscience
and Genetic Disorders Laboratory, Monash University — Understanding the

typical trajectory of proficiencies and deficiencies within the cognitive
domain of attention can provide critical information towards understanding atypical developmental trajectories. The aim of the present
study was to chart the typical development of attentional processing in
four subcomponents of attention: selective, sustained, focused and inhibitory control using a computerized battery (Amsterdam Neuropsychological Tasks) in 140 children ranging from 3 to 10 years of age. In
addition, the mental age of each subject was assessed using the Peabody
Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT). The participants were divided into two
groups; 1) 3 to 5 year olds and 2) 6 to 10 year olds. For the 3 to 5 year old
group, results indicate that measures of speed and accuracy improved
between the 3 and 4 year old groups across all subcomponents of attention suggesting that at four years they have reached a developmental
plateau on this battery. Inattention as measured by misses on the
GoNoGo task were the most frequent type of error made by three year
olds but leveled off at four years of age. 2) For the 6 to 10 year old group,
results indicate that measures of speed and speed variability improved
across all tasks up until the age of 9 years old, where a developmental
plateau appears to have been reached. There was no observed developmental trend on measures of accuracy across all tasks, with the exception
of misses on the GoNoGo task suggesting that measures of accuracy may
be dynamic across development.

Belleville1, Serge Gauthier3, Pierre Jolicoeur2, Anne-Marie Ergis4; 1Institut
Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montréal, Canada, 2Université de Montréal,
Canada, 3McGill Center for Studies in Aging, Canada, 4Institut de Psychologie,
Université Paris 5, France — Objective: To study the temporal dynamics of
visual attention in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and dementia of
the Alzheimer type (DAT) using the attentional blink paradigm (AB).
This paradigm allowed us to examine patients' ability to attend to successive stimuli in close temporal proximity. Methods: Eighteen DAT
patients, 15 DLB patients and 33 elderly controls were tested in a rapid
serial visual presentation task. Participants were asked to report one
(single-target condition) or two targets letters (T1 and T2) embedded in a
sequence of distractors (i.e. digits). AB effect was measured as the deficit
in identifying T2 when T1 was correctly reported. The temporal dynamics of AB was examined by varying the number distractors between the
two targets. Results: The proportion of targets correctly reported was
significantly lower in DLB group than in the DAT and control groups.
Although an exaggerated AB effect was observed in both patient groups,
this effect was significantly stronger in DLB patients as compared to
DAT patients. Time-course analyses of the AB effect revealed that the
control participants recovered to their single-target baseline after five
intervening distractors (595 msec), whereas both DAT and DLB patients
did not recover to their single-target baseline until there were nine intervening distractors (1071 msec). Conclusions: DAT and DLB patients
show an increased difficulty of engaging attention twice within a short
period of time. The results also suggest that attentional deficits in DLB
are widespread and encompass low-level attentional processes that are
not affected in DAT.

B20

A POSITIVITY BIAS IN OLDER ADULTS’ ATTENTION TO SCENES? Jennifer

Tomaszczyk1, Myra Fernandes1; 1University of Waterloo — According to the

socioemotional selectivity theory (SST) older, relative to younger, adults
place a greater emphasis on maintaining positive well-being, and this
affects cognitive processing. Previous work (Mather & Carstensen, 2003)
has shown that older adults are biased to avoid attending to negative
information, particularly faces with negative expressions, relative to
younger adults. We examined attentional biases in younger and older
adults, but used realistic pictures rather than faces as stimuli. Pairs of
pictures of different emotional valences (positive-neutral and negativeneutral) were briefly presented on a computer screen, followed by a dot,
presented in the previous location of one of the pictures (right or left side
of screen). Participants indicated the location of the dot as quickly and as
accurately as possible. Response times (RT) were used to calculate attentional bias scores (Score = RT to detect a dot replacing a neutral picture –
RT to detect a dot replacing a positive/negative picture), which indicated the degree to which participants’ selective attention was biased
toward positive, negative, or neutral pictures. Results showed that
although both age groups were biased to attend to emotional relative to
neutral pictures, younger adults had a greater bias to attend to negative
pictures, whereas older adults had a greater bias to attend to positive
pictures, though the interaction was not statistically significant. In line
with SST, results suggest that younger adults’ selective attention is
biased toward negative information, whereas older adults’ selective
attention is biased toward positive information. This effect, however, is
small and unreliable.

B21

AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN COGNITIVE CONTROL AND CONFLICT
PROCESSING Kathryn Holt1, Paul Kieffaber1; 1College of William and
Mary — The nature and specificity of age-related changes in cognitive
function are topics of considerable debate. In the current study, agerelated changes in the attentional and response-selection components of
cognitive control were investigated using a novel task-switching proceCognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

65

Poster Session B
dure while recording EEG. Participants were asked to judge pairs of figures according to three rules (shape, size, or color). Two of the rules,
shape and size, required a judgment about whether the two figures were
the “same” or “different” on the dimension specified by the rule. The
color rule required a decision about the color (red/blue) of the figurepair. Because responses were indicated by pressing one of two buttons,
some task-switches required an attentional-set switch while others
required a switch of both attentional- and response-set. Moreover, this
procedure engenders two distinct varieties of cognitive “conflict” permitting the determination of specific age-related changes in conflict processing. Significant differences in the response-times and the N2
component of the target-locked event-related brain potential between
the varieties of conflict in younger participants indicate the integrity of
distinct attentional- and response-set components of cognitive control.
Age-related differences in behavioral and ERP measures, however, indicate a differential vulnerability to response-set conflict. These results
suggest that deficits of cognitive control observed in normal aging may
be specific to response-set conflict effects and the ability to implement a
context-relevant response in the face of competing response alternatives.
The specificity afforded by this procedure may also lead to an improved
understanding of pathological changes in cognitive functioning associated with aging.

B22

AGE DIFFERENCES IN CONTROLLING THE CONTENTS OF WORKING
MEMORY: EVIDENCE FROM PHASE AND AMPLITUDE MEASURES OF
ALPHA OSCILLATIONS Markus Werkle-Bergner1, Roman Freunberger2,
Myriam C. Sander1, Wolfgang Klimesch2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human
Development, Germany, 2University of Salzburg, Austria — Performance on

working memory tasks declines with advancing age. Prominent theories
of cognitive aging either suggest reduced processing speed or inhibitory
control mechanisms to account for the observed age differences. On the
neuronal level, oscillatory EEG activity in the alpha range (~10 Hz) is
theorized to reflect cognitive processes related to memory and control
operations. Therefore, the present study investigated whether age-differences in the ability to control the contents of working memory (WM) can
be linked to a differential top-down modulation of phase-locked and non
phase-locked alpha rhythms. Participants performed a modified sequential Sternberg-WM task while EEG was recorded. During WM encoding,
cues instructed the participants either to maintain or to discard individual items from the memory set. Time-resolved spectral analyses revealed
a stronger increase in upper alpha power (~10-12 Hz) for not-to-beremembered items compared to to-be-remembered items in young
adults. A similar effect was present in older adults. However, the spectral signatures were shifted towards the beta-range (~14-20 Hz). Given
the importance of phase-locked alpha rhythms for the timing of neuronal
inhibition, we discuss this finding in light of implications for the coordination of neuronal information processing in distributed networks in
older adults. Furthermore, our results underscore the importance of
individually tailored analysis strategies to derive valid conclusions in
age-comparative studies of neuronal oscillatory activity.

B23

AGE AND INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY
AND SELECTIVITY: DIFFERENTIAL INSIGHTS FROM ERP AND TIMEFREQUENCY MEASURES Myriam Sander1,2, Markus Werkle-Bergner1,
Ulman Lindenberger1,2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Development,
Germany, 2Berlin School of Mind and Brain, Germany — Visual
working

memory (WM) is characterized by its limited capacity and shows
marked decline with advancing adult age. A fronto-parietal network
thought to play a major role in the top-down selection and maintenance
of information held in WM undergoes strong age-related changes.
Recently, lateralized event-related potentials (ERP) were suggested to
reflect interindividual differences in WM capacity and selectivity (Vogel
et al., 2004). Therefore, in the present study, younger (20-25 years) and
older adults (70-75 years) performed a cued change detection task. To

66

Attention: Multisensory
allow for age-fair comparisons, load levels and presentation times were
manipulated within and across age groups. In general, WM capacity was
lower in older adults than in younger adults, and longer presentation
times were associated with better performance. Lateralized ERP delay
activity replicated the results of previous studies regarding individual
differences in WM capacity during maintenance. However, these ERP
markers were not associated with age group differences in WM performance. At the same time, early ERP components (P1N1 amplitude difference, N2pc) indicated that the task was perceptually more challenging
for older adults than for younger adults. Amplitude and phase measures
of alpha and theta oscillations revealed general age differences in selection and attention mechanisms during encoding and maintenance. We
conclude that normal aging compromises several core mechanisms of
visual WM that interactively limit capacity by diminished information
uptake and less efficient top-down guidance.

B24

ATTENTIONAL PROCESSES IN AGING AND LEVEL OF EDUCATION
EFFECTS IN AN ERP STUDY Chloé de Boysson1, Jean-François Demonet2,

Sylvie Belleville1; 1Research Center, Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de
Montréal, Montréal, Qc. Canada, 2INSERM U825, Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse,
France — Education has been suggested to modulate cognitive processes
in healthy aging, but little is known regarding its effect on attentional
control processes. This study aimed to explore divided attention and the
ability to control attentional priority using ERPs and see how these processes differ in regard to educational level in older adults. A visual
detection task and an alphanumerical equation verification task were
completed under focused and divided attention conditions. There were
three conditions of divided attention: one in which instructions asked for
equal division of attention, one in which participants were asked to prioritize detection and one in which they were asked to prioritize equation. Thirty-one aged participants were studied as a whole and then split
into 2 groups according to education. The effect of condition was found
on the whole group for area under the peak and amplitude of N1 and P2
indicating that the detection condition differs from all the other conditions. An Education effect was found on the P2 area and N2 amplitude:
these were higher for participants with a higher level of education than
for those with a lower education level, and for all conditions. Furthermore, there was a positive correlation between performance in the equation task and N1 (amplitude), P2 and N2 (areas) for the highly educated
group, whereas P3 component was negatively correlated with the detection performance for the low education group. The degree of attentional
control modulates the ERP components. Educational level alters those
components but irrespective of the attentional condition.

Attention: Multisensory
B25

HEROIN DEPENDENCE AND ATTENTIONAL BIAS: AN EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL STUDY Rujie Qu1,2, Yuejia Luo2,3, Wenzhong Wang2, Kan Shi1,2;
1Graduate

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China,
Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 3Beijing
Normal University, Beijing, China — This study investigated the attentional
2

bias for drug-related stimuli in heroin dependent and normal subjects
using an event-related potential technique. A modified cue-target paradigm was adopted with drug-related and neutral pictures as uninformative location cues. Event-related potentials were recorded for visual
target stimuli that were preceded by these cues. In heroin dependent
group, reactions were slowed down and the occipitoparietal P1 amplitude was reduced when targets appeared at the opposite location to
drug-related pictures relative to neutral ones, whereas in normal control
group, the P1 amplitude was reduced when targets appeared at the same
location as drug-related pictures relative to neutral ones. These results
suggest that the attentional bias caused by peripheral drug-related stim-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Attention: Multisensory

Poster Session B

uli is able to modulate the visual inputs in early processing stages, and
heroin addicts have difficulty to disengage their attentions from the
drug-related information rather than engage to those stimuli.

B28

B26

D. Anderson3,4, Susan J. E. Murtha1; 1York University, 2Baycrest Centre, 3KuninLunenfeld Applied Research Unit, Baycrest, 4University of Toronto — The abil-

VISUAL-TACTILE UNIMODAL AND MULTISENSORY PROCESSING IN THE
VISUAL PERIPHERY, AN FMRI STUDY Christina Karns1, Mark Dow1,
Jolinda Smith1, Scott Frey1, Helen Neville1; 1University of Oregon — Presumed

unimodal sensory areas show surprising responses to other sensory
modalities. These multisensory interactions are often reported for stimuli in the visual periphery. Processing in the visual periphery may be
specifically implicated in cross-modal neuroplasticity and modified with
intermodal attention. We aimed to determine the brain regions contributing to visual-tactile processing in peripheral vision and periocular
touch and the extent to which unimodal and bimodal representations are
modifiable by attention. In an fMRI experiment, participants detected
targets in either the visual or tactile modality in unimodal visual, unimodal tactile, or bimodal blocks. Unimodal visual stimuli in the far-periphery (~45°) elicited increased BOLD signal in the anterior calcarine (acV1)
and lateral occipital complex (LOC). Tactile stimulation of the periocular
region of the face elicited increased BOLD signal in the parietal operculum (S1/S2). As predicted, regions implicated in the processing of bimodal visual-tactile stimuli depended on the attended sensory modality
and included low-level sensory and multisensory areas. Visual attention
elicited greater BOLD signal in acV1, V2, and LOC relative to tactile
attention. Tactile attention to the same stimuli elicited greater BOLD signal in the parietal operculum (S1/S2) and temporal parietal junction
(TPJ). When contrasting the response to bimodal with unimodal visual
and tactile stimuli, a network of multisensory regions was implicated
including the posterior middle temporal gyrus, TPJ, inferior frontal
gyrus, LOC, and globus pallidus. These preliminary results suggest that
attention is an important factor in both unimodal and multisensory processing and may influence the network of regions recruited for multisensory processing.

B27

SEEING OR NOT: VISION MODULATES TACTILE ATTENTIONAL
SELECTION Bettina Forster1, Helge Gillmeister2; 1City University London,

UK, 2University of Essex, Colchester, UK — Vision of the hands while direct-

ing attention to one hand over short (transient) or longer (sustained)
periods of time leads to earlier attentional modulations of somatosensory processing than when participants’ hands are not visible. This effect
of vision on tactile spatial selection of stimuli to one hand over the other
could be explained by vision providing information about the hands in
external space. The aim of the present study was to investigate whether
vision of the hands also affects attentional selection when the relative
location of the hands was irrelevant and attention was either directed to
the body or away from it. Participants were presented with an alternating stream of tactile and auditory stimuli presented to the right or left
hand and from a central speaker while their hands were either visible or
covered from view. In separate blocks participants were counting infrequent auditory or tactile deviants while ignoring stimuli in the other
modality. ERPs to tactile stimuli were analysed under conditions were
these were either attended (count touches) or unattended (count
sounds). When hands were visible, attentional modulations were
already present for the time range of the N80 component, but when
hands were covered from view only later attentional modulations, starting in the time range of the P200, were present. Therefore, vision of the
body strongly affects the mechanisms underlying attentional selection of
touch. Importantly, the functional mechanisms of such vision effects are
not restricted to providing information about the location of the hands in
external space.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

VISUAL SEARCH EFFICACY IN YOUNG AND MIDDLE-AGED ADULTS: HOW
CAN AUDITORY CUES HELP? Paula M. McLaughlin1, Jill B. Rich1,2, Nicole
ity to visually search one's environment is a complex skill used everyday. Success at finding a particular object is dependent on a variety of
factors, including search strategy, the ability to ignore distracting items,
efficiency in shifting attention, and age. As demonstrated in our lab and
elsewhere, when participants are provided with an informative visual
cue (i.e., visually cueing a location) target detection is facilitated during
simple and more complex visual searches in young and older adults. In
the present study, we investigated whether auditory cues can also facilitate visual search performance, and whether these effects are dependent
on the type of cue (informative spatial cue vs. non-informative preparatory cue) and the age of the participant (young vs. middle-aged). Participants were presented with two visual search tasks: orienting
(informative cues) and preparatory (non-informative cues). In each task
search condition (single, conjoined), array size (5, 9, 17), target presence,
and cue availability were manipulated. Results showed that middle-age
adults were less efficient on complex visual searches relative to younger
adults. Additionally, auditory cues facilitated visual search performance
similarly in young and middle-aged adults. Although the preparatory
cues improved performance, facilitation was dependent on search condition, array size and target presence. Furthermore, the cueing effects
observed on the orienting task were larger and more widespread. These
findings indicate that auditory cues can improve visual search efficacy,
particularly when the cue is spatially informative.

B29

THE COMT VAL158MET POLYMORPHISM MODULATES STATE ANXIETY
AND NEURAL HABITUATION IN REGIONS INVOLVED IN ATTENTION

Isabella Mutschler1, Birgit Wieckhorst1, Markus Klarhöfer3, Frank H. Wilhelm1,
Franz Müller-Spahn1, Andreas Papassotiropoulos1, Erich Seifritz5, Tonio
Ball6,7; 1University Basel, Switzerland, 3MR-Physics, University Hospital Basel,
Switzerland, 5Clinic for Affective Disorders and General Psychiatry, Psychiatric
Hospital Zurich, 6Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, University
of Freiburg, Germany, 7Epilepsy-Center, University Hospital Freiburg,
Germany — The Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) val158met polymorphism influences catecholamine neurotransmission and is postulated to influence cognitive functions [1]. The exact mechanisms are not
clear. Here, we investigated 103 healthy females (mean age = 23.7, SD =
3.36, range = 18 - 35, all right handed) using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). State anxiety was assessed before and after the
experiment. State anxiety reflects a human transitory emotional state or
condition that is characterized by subjective, consciously perceived feelings of tension and apprehension [2]. During fMRI, movies of laughing
and crying babies were presented to the subjects, who carried out subjective ratings of the movies. We found that the mean anxiety level significantly increased throughout the fMRI experiment’s period exclusively in
the val/val carriers. Furthermore, at the same time scale, val/val carriers
also showed a faster neural habituation as parametrized by a faster
decline in the stimulus-induced blood oxygen level-dependent signal, in
the temporo-parietal junction (TPJ) area (p < 0.05, FWE-corrected). We
conclude that state anxiety can be increased in val/val carriers and that
his may contribute to cognitive performance differences due to the
COMT polymorphism. Furthermore, altered TPJ responses – an area
implicated in attentional processes – may play a role in the underlying
neuronal mechanisms. 1. Aleman et al., (2008) 2. Spielberger et al., (1970)

67

Poster Session B
B30

ATTENTION DEPENDING INFLUENCE OF OLFACTION DURING
NEUROBAVIORAL TASKS Kathrin Hey1, Stefan Kleinbeck1, Edmund
Wascher1, Christoph van Thriel1; 1Leibniz Research Centre for Working
Environment and Human Factors — Neurobehavioral tests are used to

assess health effects in exposed working populations as well as to provide data for the setting of health based threshold limit values (TLVs).
Beside the neurotoxicological effects due to different substances, already
an annoying odor might cause deficits in performance. In our experiment we focused on the effects caused by hydrogen sulfide (HS), a substance with an unpleasant smell comparable to the foul odor of rotten
eggs. During four-hour HS exposures different neurobehavioral tasks
were carried out: inhibition of return, visual and visuospatial working
memory and response inhibition. In order to study the attention depending influence of olfaction, a high concentration (mean: 5 ppm) and a low
concentration (mean: 0.5 ppm) were applied in combination with two
attentional conditions. In the focused attentional condition, participants
had to count the exposure peaks, whereas in the non-focused condition
they were told that exposure peaks were mainly determined by technical
reasons. Reaction time and error rate were taken for each task, psychophysical ratings were recorded every half hour during HS exposure.
Regarding the inhibiton of return task and the working memory tasks,
the behavioral results yield an interaction between attention and concentration. A main effect of concentration could not be found. During the
high exposure condition the attentional focus enforces distractive effects,
while during the low exposure condition the attentional focus diminishes distractive effects. Concerning the attentional capture, it might be
the combination of exposure level and attentional focus that leads to
poorer performance.

B31

THE PROCESSING OF IRRELEVANT INFORMATION IN A MULTISENSORY
CONFLICT PARADIGM Sarah Donohue1, Alexandra E. Todisco1, Marty G.
Woldorff1; 1Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University — Selective
attention to one modality in the face of distracting stimuli is crucial to
successful behavior. In multisensory conflict, attention is thought to
enhance processing in the relevant modality, as suggested by some fMRI
studies. It is less clear, however, what type of processing occurs in the
sensory cortex processing the distracting information, and when such
modulations might occur. To determine the time-course of distractor
processing during multisensory conflict, we collected EEG data during
an auditory attention task. Participants attended to the auditory modality to make a letter discrimination on each trial, while simultaneous,
task-irrelevant, bilateral visual stimuli were presented that could be fully
congruent, partially incongruent, or fully incongruent with the auditory
stimulus. On half the trials, a bilateral visual probe stimulus was presented 500-700 ms post-multisensory-stimulus onset to determine the
attentional allocation to the visual modality after the different trial types.
EEG time-locked to the multisensory-stimulus onset revealed a centrally
distributed negative wave starting ~300 ms that was greater for incongruent than congruent. Time-locked averages to the probe stimuli
revealed that when they followed a fully or partially incongruent multisensory stimulus there was a significantly enhanced N1 and P2 response,
relative to following a congruent stimulus. These data suggest that
instead of the irrelevant information being suppressed, it acts as a distracting draw of attention, pulling more attention toward the irrelevant
modality, at least at the time of these probes. These results highlight the
need to assess the multifaceted time course of the brain’s responses to
stimulus conflict.

B32

THE INTERACTION OF EXPECTANCY AND SOMATIC ATTENTION ON
THERMAL PAIN PERCEPTION Natalie E. Johnston1, Lauren Y. Atlas1, Tor D.
Wager1; 1Columbia University — Pain is a complex psychological construct

that may be evaluated differently and engage disparate processes
depending on how its significance is interpreted. A wealth of research

68

Emotion & Social: Development & Aging
suggests both that attention to pain and expectations about pain intensity strongly influence self-reported pain. However, it is unclear if these
processes modulate pain independently, or whether they interact to
influence pain perception. In this study, we examined whether expectancy and somatic focus interact to modulate perceived pain. Auditory
cues elicited expectations for low or high pain. On a subset of trials
(“expectancy violations”), these cues were followed by a single temperature calibrated to elicit moderate pain. Throughout the experiment, a
divided attention procedure directed attention toward or away from the
body during noxious thermal stimulation. The results of expectancy replicated previous findings from our lab, indicating that medium trials
were rated as more painful when preceded by high pain cues than low
pain cues. There was also an effect of pain expectancy on attention: High
pain (versus low pain) expectancy resulted in greater performance on
the task drawing attention toward the body. Finally, the effects of
somatic focus were surprising: With high pain expectancy, pain was
greater when attending away from the body than when attending to the
body. The findings suggest that trying to ignore pain by attending elsewhere may be counter-productive, particularly when pain is expected to
be intense. A more effective pain-control strategy under such circumstances might be to attend to and make judgments about the non-affective aspects of pain.

Emotion & Social: Development & Aging
B33

DEVELOPMENT OF AMYGDALA SPECIALIZATION IN FEAR
PROCESSING Yuwen Hung1,2, Mary Lou Smith2, Margot J. Taylor1;
1

Diagnostic Imaging, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Canada, 2University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, Canada —

The ability to detect potential threats, as can be represented in fearful
faces, involves neural systems that facilitate fast responses for adaptive
behaviour. The amygdalae are known for their role in processing emotions such as fear. To date little is known regarding the development of
this specialization of the amygdalae in emotion processing. We examined the amygdalae responses to facial emotions in children (aged 7 – 10
and 12 – 15 yrs; n=13/group) using magnetoencephalographic (MEG),
151 channel CTF system. We applied a simple target-detection task during MEG recordings, in which a scrambled pattern (target) and an emotional face (happy, fearful or neutral) were presented simultaneously in
the peripheral hemifields. Source analyses used the anatomical MRIs of
each participant. Results showed left amygdala activation in the younger
children in response to fearful and happy emotional faces, while the
older children showed right amygdala activation only to the fearful emotion, all compared to the neutral faces. We also observed activation in the
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) in the older children responding to the
fearful relative to the neutral faces. The MEG source activations in the
older children were similar to what we have found in adults. Our results
suggest that the amygdalae responses to emotions undergo qualitative
developmental changes. These data provide developmental profiles of
the amygdala-ACC responses to fearful faces related to functional specialisation and lateralisation in these brain regions in children.

B34

MEASURING THE FUNCTIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF A CLINICAL
ALLOSTATIC LOAD INDEX IN OLDER ADULTS AND WORKERS Robert-

Paul Juster1,2,3, Sonia Lupien2,3; 1Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill
University, 2Fernand-Seguin Research Centre, University of Montréal,
3Laboratory of Psychoneuroendocrinology of the Centre for Studies on Human
Stress — Allostatic load (AL) refers to biological wear and tear caused by
chronic psychosocial stress. The AL model proposes that by measuring
the multi-systemic interactions among sub-clinically relevant biomarkers, biomedical advances can be made in the detection of individuals at
high risk for stress-related diseases. By incorporating an AL index
encompassing neuroendocrine, immune, metabolic, and cardiovascular

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Development & Aging
biomarkers, a growing body of literature has demonstrated augmented
prediction of numerous deleterious outcomes. Unfortunately, the current formulation is based on biomarker values from individual studies,
which limits the biomedical utility of this promising technology. Using a
new AL index based on clinical reference ranges, we investigated physical and psychological outcomes in two studies. In Study 1, 85 older
adults were followed longitudinally over eight years, while Study 2
included 30 younger workers assessed cross-sectionally. We hypothesized that increased AL indices based on 7 and 15 biomarkers would
relate to increased levels of psychosocial stress, dysregulated diurnal
and reactive stress hormone levels, subjective memory and physical
complaints, explicit and declarative memory impairments/declines, and
finally symptoms of depression and burnout. Our results support our
predictions for specific age-related outcomes. For older adults, higher
AL predicted greater depressive symptoms three years in advance with
cognitive impairments/declines. For younger workers, higher AL was
manifested physiologically and symptomatically as a pre-burnout condition with the absence of cognitive and physical complaints. These findings provide strong preliminary support for a new clinical AL index
sensitive to specific stress-related problems throughout the life span that
is, moreover, easily accessible to health-care providers.

B35

DEPRESSION IN PARKINSON'S DISEASE: A CORTICAL EXPLORATION

Thomas Jubault1,2, Jean-François Gagnon1, Alain Ptito4, Alan Evans5, Oury
Monchi1,2; 1Université de Montréal, 2Unité de Neuroimagerie Fonctionnelle,
Centre de Recherche de l'Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montréal,
4Montréal Neurological Institute, McGill University, 5McConnell Brain Imaging
Centre, McGill University — Idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder diagnosed on the basis of motor symptoms. PD is
characterized by a subcortical pattern of lesions, though neuronal loss
occurs in the cortex in later stages of the disease. Patterns of cortical neuronal loss have not been consistently identified with traditional techniques. Additionally, depression is a well known feature of the disease,
while its origin and association to other symptoms remains unclear.
Therefore, we investigated the cortical degeneracy specific to PD and to
the occurence of depressive symptoms. We acquired high resolution
MRI T1 weighted sequences for 30 healthy controls (HC) and 43 PD
patients. CIVET pipeline was used to extract cortical surfaces. Locally
registered cortical thickness was modelled as a linear function of age and
condition for each participant, and as a function of age and depression in
the PD group only. Global cortical thickness is globally lower in the PD
group than in the HC group, with accentuated thinning in the pSMA.
We also found that the right lateral prefrontal cortex is associated with a
worsened depressive condition. These preliminary results suggest that
PD with depressive symptoms is associated with structural modifications in the prefrontal cortex. It should be noted that this region, among
other, is involved in executive processes that are subject to deficits in PD.
The identification of consistent patterns of neuronal loss through cortical
thickness analysis could lead to the definition of stable subgroups in
degenerative disease such as PD.

B36

SOCIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTORS PREDICT DIFFERENCES IN
EMOTIONAL REACTIVITY AND REGULATION Jennifer A. Silvers1, Margot A.

Schel2, Katherine A. Remy1, Kevin N. Ochsner1; 1Columbia University, 2Leiden
University — Recent research suggests that adolescence is a “make or

break” time for the development of effective emotion regulation skills.
However, little empirical work has examined how emotion regulation
capacity changes during adolescent development. It has also been suggested that adolescents are more sensitive to negative social cues than
adults but this hypothesis has not been formally tested. The present
study investigated whether, over the course of adolescence, 1) emotion
regulation success increases and 2) reactivity to negative social emotional stimuli decreases. Individuals at the beginning (10-13 years), middle (14-17 years) and end of adolescence (18-22 years) completed an

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session B
emotion regulation task. On each trial, participants viewed a negative or
neutral picture while either drawing themselves closer to the emotional
details of the picture (“close”) or mentally distancing themselves from
such details (“far”). Half of the pictures viewed contained social content.
After each trial participants rated their negative affect. Participants of all
ages reported less negative affect in response to negative stimuli on “far”
trials than “close” trials but older participants were more effective (as
evidenced by a larger drop in negative affect) at using the “far” strategy
when viewing negative stimuli than younger individuals. Additionally,
younger participants reported more negative affect in response to negative social stimuli than older participants. Skin conductance responses
mirrored age and task-dependent differences in negative affect. These
behavioral and physiological findings suggest that emotion regulation
success improves over adolescence as emotional reactivity to negative
social cues attenuates.

B37

DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EMOTION
AND COGNITION Nicole Strang1, Seth Pollak1; 1University of WisconsinMadison — There has been little research investigating whether there are
developmental changes in the relationship between emotion and cogniton. This is an important area of research as it has been hypothesized
that the relationship between the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and limbic system changes across development (Casey et al., 2008, Sommerville et al.,
2009). In this block design functional MRI investigation forty participants between the ages of 12 and 21 (12-15-years, n=20, 18-21-years,
n=20) completed a task with cognitive and emotional components. The
task involved two categories of problems: math, and math+stress. In the
math condition they responded to math problems, and in the
math+stress condition participants responded to more difficult math
problems with a time limit titrated for each participant to ensure an
accuracy rate of 40%. During the paradigm participants were informed
that they were performing poorly in the math+stress condition, and
needed to try harder.FMRI data were analyzed for differences between
the math and math+Stress condition and differences between the age
groups. Relative to the Math condition the math+Stress condition
resulted in a network of increased activation including the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), bilateral anterior insula, and dorsal lateral
PFC (DLPFC) for both age groups. Age-related differences were specific
to the Math condition, where adolescents showed greater activation in
the left anterior insula relative to the adults. The results were interpreted
as evidence for improvements emotion-regulation across development,
as the insula (a stress-related brain region) remained activated in the
adolescents in the absence of the stress.
B38

FRONTOSTRIATAL MATURATION PREDICTS BEHAVIORAL REGULATION
FAILURES TO APPETITIVE CUES IN ADOLESCENCE Leah
Somerville1,

Todd Hare1,2, BJ Casey1; 1Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology,
Weill Cornell Medical College, 2California Institute of Technology — Adolescence is associated with enhanced risk-taking behavior, potentially
related to enhanced motivation to approach potential rewards relative to
immature behavioral regulation. This study aimed to determine the contributions of frontostriatal circuits in approach motivation and behavioral regulation using an emotional Go No-Go task. During fMRI
scanning, child, adolescent, and adult participants approached ("Go" trials) or suppressed an approach behavior ("No-Go" trials) to neutral and
happy faces. Participants were more motivated to approach the happy
stimuli as evidenced by faster response times. A summary performance
measure (d’) revealed that while children and adults performed better
for happy relative to neutral trials, adolescents failed to show this behavioral facilitation, driven by adolescents' enhanced false alarm rates on trials in which approach behavior should have been suppressed (happy
no-go). The ventral striatum demonstrated maximal sensitivity to happy
trials in adolescents. During correct suppression trials, we observed
greater recruitment of the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (IFG) the
younger the participant which also predicted performance, such that

69

Poster Session B
individuals who were less successful at suppressing approach responses
yielded greater recruitment for successful suppression trials. Adolescents showed greater coupling within frontostriatal networks during
happy trials, relating interactions within frontostriatal circuits to developmental shifts in approach and behavioral regulation at the level of the
striatum (ventral and dorsal). Taken together, these findings suggest that
adolescence is marked by reduced behavioral suppression to potential
rewards, which may result from hypersensitivity of ventral striatal
responses to appetitive cues paired with prefrontal regulatory responses
that are not fully mature.

B39

TRAUMA AND THE DEVELOPING BRAIN: NEUROIMAGING EVIDENCE FOR
LONG-TERM STRESS-RELATED NEURAL CHANGE IN HEALTHY
CHILDREN Barbara Ganzel1, Heather Gilmore1, Nim Tottenham2, Elise

Temple3; 1Cornell University, 2Univerity of California at Los Angeles,
3Dartmouth College — Is there a long-term impact of life stress on the
brains of healthy children (i.e., in samples known to be free of clinical
disorder)? Using fMRI, we imaged fifteen healthy children (10 male, 5
female, 12.9 ± 2.2 years) while they passively viewed fearful and calm
faces in order to examine the association between prior life stress and
amygdala function. All of the children resided in the New York metropolitan (NYC) area and all were screened to exclude physical and mental
disorder. Most of the children had been in the NYC area during the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center on 9/11/01, which was
between 5.7 to 6.1 years prior to the time of imaging. We found significant increases in amygdala reactivity to emotional faces (fearful versus
calm) with increasing proximity to the World Trade Center on 9/11/01
(? = -.67; p < .01). The average number of traumas in lifetime in this sample was 2.6 ± 1.7 traumas, and we found increases in amygdala reactivity
(F > C) with increasing number of traumas in lifetime for these children
(? = .64; p = .01). Frequency of trauma exposure was associated with current child anxiety (? = .77; p < .01) and anxiety was associated with
amygdala reactivity (? = .75; p = .04: ROI from whole brain voxel-wise ttest [F>C]). These data provide evidence for long-term stress-related
neural change in healthy children, which in turn is associated with current anxiety.

B40

BE RATIONAL: GOAL UNDERSTANDING IN THE AUTISTIC BRAIN
Antonia Hamilton1, Lauren Marsh1; 1University of Nottingham, UK — When

typical adults see a child reach for a cookie, brain areas involved in comprehending action goals are reliably activated. Some theories claim that
these neural systems, including the human mirror neuron system, may
be dysfunctional in individuals with autism. This study aimed to test
this hypothesis, comparing responses in typical and autistic brains during observation of rational and irrational goal-directed hand actions
(GDHA). 18 high-functioning adults with autistic spectrum disorder and
19 age and IQ matched typical adults took part. During fMRI scanning,
participants watched movies depicting (1) GDHA with a rational
(straight) trajectory (2) GDHA with an irrational (curved) trajectory (3)
GDHA which rationally curved over an obstacle (4) GDHA which irrationally moved straight through the obstacle or (5) shapes moving linearly over a plain background. Both typical and autistic groups showed
similar levels of activation in middle temporal gyrus, anterior intraparietal sulcus and dorsal premotor cortex when viewing hand actions compared to viewing moving shapes. This suggests that basic neural
responses to observed actions are not abnormal in autism. Critically, a
group by rationality interaction was found in medial prefrontal cortex:
only typical participants distinguished between rational and irrational
actions in this region. This shows that brain areas associated with mentalising also respond to irrational actions in typical individuals, but this
response may be abnormal in adults with autism. The broad implications of these results for understanding typical and autistic action comprehension and social interaction will be discussed.

70

Emotion & Social: Other
B41

PITUITARY VOLUME PREDICTS INTERNALIZING SYMPTOMS IN
ADOLESCENCE Sarah Whittle1, Amy Zipursky2, Murat Yücel1, Valentina

Lorenzetti1, Nicholas Allen1; 1The University of Melbourne, 2The University of
North Carolina — Early adolescence is a critical period for the development of both internalizing and externalizing disorders. Stress dysregulation has been identified as a key contributing factor in the development
of both arms of psychopathology. Pituitary volume may be a useful way
to index stress dysregulation in this context, as it has been associated
with hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis function, and found to
be abnormal in a range of psychopathologies. However, it is not clear
whether abnormal pituitary volume may be associated with risk for psychopathology. In a community sample of 154 early adolescents, we
examined whether pituitary volume was able to prospectively predict
change in internalizing or externalizing symptoms over a 2.5 year
period. Participants were screened for psychopathology, underwent a
magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan, and completed an assessment
of self-reported depressive, anxiety, and externalizing symptoms. At follow-up, adolescents again completed the CES-D, BAI, and CBCL. We
found a significant relationship between larger pituitary volume and an
exacerbation of both anxiety and depressive symptoms over time. As
larger pituitary volume is thought to reflect high activity of the HPA
axis, these results suggest that hyperactivity of the HPA axis could be an
important biological risk factor for the development of internalizing disorders in adolescence. In contrast, we did not find a relationship between
pituitary volume and change in externalizing symptoms, pointing to the
specificity of our findings. These findings provide further support for the
utility of incorporating methods of altering HPA axis activity into psychosocial intervention for internalizing disorders.

Emotion & Social: Other
B42

EYETRACKING TO SOCIAL SCENES: COMPARISONS BETWEEN
AMYGDALA LESIONS AND AUTISM Elina Birmingham1,2, Moran Cerf1,

Ralph Adolphs1; 1California Institute of Technology, 2Simon Fraser
University — The amygdala plays a critical role in orienting gaze and
attention to socially salient stimuli. We previously found that SM, a
patient with rare bilateral amygdala lesions, was unable to recognize
fearful facial expressions because she failed to fixate the eyes in faces.
Amygdala dysfunction has also been implicated as a contributing factor
in autism, consistent with some findings that individuals with autism
show reduced fixations to eyes in faces. Yet detailed comparisons
between autism and patients with amygdala lesions have rarely been
undertaken. Here we carried out such a comparison, using eyetracking
to complex social scenes that contained faces. Participants were shown
scenes depicting several people under three main conditions: they either
had to report on what kind of room the scene was taking place in (Neutral), describe the scene (Describe), or infer what the people in the scene
were attending to (Social Attention). SM looked less at the eyes and
much more at the mouths of people in the scenes relative to control participants, especially in the Neutral condition, consistent to how she
directs her gaze to real people. Individuals with autism, by contrast, did
not show this pattern but instead showed more subtle abnormalities.
These results suggest that amygdala damage leads to a specific reduction
of exploration of other people's eyes. However, individuals with high
functioning autism do not exhibit robust social orienting deficits, at least
when using static pictures of social stimuli.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Other
B43

DO YOU SEE WHAT I SEE?: THE NEURAL BASES OF JOINT ATTENTION
DURING A LIVE INTERACTIVE GAME Elizabeth Redcay1, David. Dodell-

Feder1, Mark J. Pearrow1, Mario Kleiner2, Penelope L. Mavros1, Jing Wang1,
John D. E. Gabrieli1, Rebecca Saxe1; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
2Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics — Joint attention refers to

the ability to coordinate one’s own attention with another on a third
entity (e.g. object or common goal). This uniquely human ability
emerges late in the first year of life and is critical to social-cognitive and
language development; yet the neural bases for this pivotal skill remain
largely understudied. Joint attention includes both Responding to Joint
Attention (RJA), or following another’s bid for shared attention on an
object, and Initiating Joint Attention (IJA), or initiating a bid for shared
attention on an object. To identify the neural bases of both IJA and RJA
we implemented a dual-video set-up in which both subject and experimenter could monitor each other via video feed in real-time during fMRI
data collection. In each trial, participants either followed the experimenter’s gaze to a target (RJA) or cued the experimenter to look at the
target (IJA). A control condition, non-joint attention (NJA), was included
in which the subject shifted gaze to a target while the experimenter
closed her eyes. Greater activation was seen in the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (dMPFC) and bilateral posterior superior temporal sulcus
(pSTS) during joint attention (IJA + RJA) as compared to NJA. RJA elicited greater activation in posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS) than
NJA while IJA recruited greater activation in dMPFC than NJA. This
novel experimental set-up allowed for the first time identification of the
neural bases of both initiating and responding to joint attention.

B44

THE NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF JUDGMENTS OF MORAL
AND CONVENTIONAL VIOLATIONS Ayelet Lahat1, Charles C. Helwig1,
Philip David Zelazo2; 1University of Toronto, 2University of Minnesota —

Greater activation within the prefrontal cortex has been found for moral
versus non-moral judgments (e.g., Greene et al. 2004). However, prior
research has not examined the possible neural correlates of the distinction between moral and conventional violations (e.g., Turiel 2008). Moral
violations (e.g., hitting), in contrast to conventional violations (e.g., a boy
wearing a dress), are not contingent on the presence of rules, and are
usually considered wrong even in the absence of a rule (e.g., Nucci,
1981). The present study examined whether the two types of violation
are associated with different neurophysiological correlates, and focused
on the N2, an event-related potential (ERP) usually observed 200-400 ms
post-stimulus at medial-frontal sites (Lewis et al., 2006). ERPs were
recorded from 30 undergraduates who participated in a task that presented neutral, conventional, and moral violations. Participants judged
whether the act was acceptable or unacceptable in the presence and
absence of a rule. Results indicated that when a rule was present, N2
amplitudes were significantly larger (more negative) for conventional
than moral violations, but in the absence of a rule, N2 amplitudes for
moral violations were as large as conventional violations. For all violations, N2 amplitudes were largest on the right scalp, as compared to the
left and center scalps, but the effect was strongest for conventional violations. The findings support the distinction between morality and conventions and suggest that moral violations may be judged automatically
when a rule is present, but require overcoming an automatic response in
the absence of a rule.

B45

EMOTIONAL PROSODY PROCESSING IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE:
SIDEDNESS OF MOTOR SYMPTOMS MAKES THE DIFFERENCE Patricia

Garrido-Vásquez1, Marc D. Pell2, Silke Paulmann3, Karl Strecker4, Johannes
Schwarz4, Sonja A. Kotz1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2McGill University, Montréal, Canada, 3University
of Essex, UK, 4University of Leipzig, Germany — Several studies have suggested emotional processing deficits in patients with Parkinson’s disease
(PD). However, most of these studies are behavioral, and thus do not

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session B
shed light on the time course of emotional processing in PD. Also, little is
known about possible differences between patients with left-dominant
versus right-dominant motor symptoms, which is especially important
considering views of hemispheric specialization in the brain for emotional processing. To address these issues, we conducted an eventrelated potentials study on the processing of emotional prosody in PD.
Patients listened to well-formed (lexical) German sentences and sentences in pseudo-speech in five different emotional tones (angry, disgusted, frightened, happy, neutral). Attention to emotional content was
manipulated by using an implicit (lexical decision) or explicit (emotional
decision) task. We differentiated between patients according to their
more affected body side. The left PD group (LPD) showed early processing deficits in the P200 time window and their ERP response was generally more positive-going than in healthy controls, whereas the right
group (RPD) manifested deficits later in time, i.e. in a late positivity, with
no difference between lexical and pseudo-sentences while controls
showed this differentiation. These results suggest that the dominantly
involved body side may affect different processing mechanisms underlying emotional prosody. We suggest that LPD patients, whose right basal
ganglia are dominantly affected, have difficulty to detect emotional
salience (enlarged P200), while RPD patients (left basal ganglia more
affected) show deficient integration of prosodic and semantic information reflected in the late positivity.

B46

MORAL HYPERSENSITIVITY IN OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER
Hanah Chapman1, Tania Georgescue2, Neil Rector3, Peggy Richter3, Arun
Ravindran2, Adam Anderson1; 1University of Toronto, 2Centre for Addition and
Mental Health, 3Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre — While there has been

considerable interest in individuals who are relatively insensitive to
socio-moral norms (i.e., psychopaths), less is known about those at the
other end of the spectrum, individuals who are morally hypersensitive.
We examined moral cognition in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD),
a condition in which excessive concerns about immorality are common.
Patients and controls completed a questionnaire measure of concerns
about committing moral transgressions, and subsequently underwent
fMRI while making judgments about social and moral transgressions as
well as neutral control acts. Preliminary results indicate that individuals
with OCD are indeed hypersensitive to moral transgressions: patients
judged transgressions more harshly than controls, and also had stronger
concerns about committing moral transgressions. Moreover, in response
to moral transgressions but not neutral acts, patients showed higher activation in affective processing regions such as bilateral mid-insula and
mid-cingulate as compared to controls. By contrast, patients had lower
activation for moral transgressions in the precuneus and right lateral
parietal regions. These results suggest that moral hypersensitivity in
OCD may be mediated by increased emotional and decreased cognitive
responses to transgressions.

B47

ATYPICAL PAIN EMPATHY IN YOUNG OFFENDERS WITH CALLOUSUNEMOTIONAL TRAITS: AN ERP STUDY An-Yi Hung1, Jean Decety2, Yawei
Cheng1; 1National Yang-Ming University, 2University of Chicago — Empathy

disruption is one of the core characteristics in youth with callous-unemotional (CU) traits. However, how the CU traits disrupt the neural underpinning of empathy remains to be determined. The study measured the
ERP elicited by pain empathy in 15 controls (mean age = 17.53 ± 1.76
yrs), 15 offenders with Conduct Disorder (CD) (mean age = 16.73 ± 0.99
yrs) and 13 offenders with CU traits (mean age = 16.88 ± 0.84 yrs). Immediately after being presented with the static pictures depicting someone’s
limbs in painful and non-painful situations with intentionality (Agent
pain/Neutral) or not (Limb pain/Neutral), the participants were
required to perform a pain judgment task. Mean ERP voltages were
obtained from each grand average peak, starting from the onset of each
visual stimulus and continuing 800 ms post-stimulus. During the Limb
Pain, the controls and the CD group showed pain empathic responses at
frontal N120 and central P300 whereas the CU group didn’t show such

71

Poster Session B
response. Nevertheless, during the Agent Pain, a late positive potential
(LPP) with significant pain effects over frontal, central and parietal areas
were observed in the controls and the CU group but not in the CD
group. The findings indicated that pain empathy in youth with CU traits,
in contrast to CD, could be modulated by social context to a certain
degree. The atypical pattern could be ascribed to lack of early emotional
sharing but preservation of late emotional regulation under social context.

B48

COILED NON-SNAKE FORMS ARE EFFECTIVE SIGNALS OF THREAT
Christine Larson1, Lorri Kais1, Vanessa LoBue2, Molly Barton1, Elizabeth
Steuer1; 1University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 2New York University — Recent

work has suggested that simple geometric forms represent a mechanism
facilitating rapid detection of potential threat in the environment. A simple downward V shape (similar angry eyebrows) is perceived as aversive, captures attention rapidly, and activates neural circuitry
supporting threat detection. Extending this principle, we recently found
that coiled wires and hoses were detected just as rapidly in a visual
search paradigm as coiled snakes, suggesting that the coiling shape may
be a biologically prepared threat cue. In the present study we examined
whether the coiling form also recruits threat-related brain regions, further supporting the notion that coiling is also a primitive form evocative
of threat. During fMRI scanning participants (N=10) viewed four types
of stimuli in a block design: coiled snakes, coiled non-snakes (wires,
hoses), uncoiled snakes, and uncoiled non-snakes. Consistent with our
hypothesis that coiling would elicit amygdala activation , a Shape
(coiled, uncoiled) X Stimulus Type (snakes, hoses/wires) ANOVA
revealed a main effect for Shape such that greater amygdala activation
was evident for coiled compared to uncoiled stimuli. Furthermore, there
was no main effect for Stimulus Type indicating that amygdala activation was not greater for snakes compared to hoses and wires. Finally, the
Stimulus Type X Shape interaction was significant and was driven by
greater amygdala activation to coiled snakes compared to coiled hoses
and wires. Activation for uncoiled snakes was not greater than that for
uncoiled hoses/wires. Overall, these data support the hypothesis that
the coiling form itself serves as an effective signal of threat.

B49

AMYGDALA’S ROLE IN REFLEXIVE ORIENTING ON EMOTIONAL FACES IN
AUTISM SPECTRUM CONDITIONS Dorit Kliemann1,2, Isabel Dziobek1,2,

Alexander Hatri1,2, Jürgen Baudewig1, Hauke R. Heekeren1,2; 1Freie Universität
Berlin, Germany, 2Max-Planck Institute for Human Development, Germany —
When processing faces subjects on the autism spectrum (ASC) focus less
on the eyes than typically developed controls (NT). A 2-component
model (Spezio et al., 2007) suggests that ASC specific gaze patterns on
faces might reflect both an avoidance of and a missing orientation to eye
contact. On the neural level, reflexive orientation to the eyes in NT is
reflected by an increase of amygdala activity (Gamer & Büchel, 2009),
whereas findings about amygdala activation and face processing in ASC
remain contradictory. We tested whether ASC a) fail to orient to the eyes,
accompanied by a decrease of amygdala activity and b) show a tendency
to gaze away from the eyes, accompanied by an increase of amygdala
activity. Using fMRI and eye tracking, we monitored participants while
they performed a facial emotion-discrimination task, in which fearful,
happy, and neutral faces were presented for 150ms with fixation starting
either at the eyes or the mouth. ASC showed a reduced orientation
towards the eyes and a decrease of amygdala activation whereas NT
clearly oriented towards the eyes, accompanied by an increase of
amygdala activation. When starting fixation on the eyes, ASC showed a
strong tendency to gaze away from the eyes. The corresponding greater
response in the amygdala is in line with the aversion component. The
current results emphasize the specific role of the amygdala in adequately
processing social information via mediating orientation towards social
cues.

72

Emotion & Social: Other
B50

EFFECT OF RIGHT VERSUS LEFT HEMISPHERE LESIONS ON THE ABILITY
TO INTERPRET SOCIAL SITUATIONS Juliana Baldo1, David Wilkins1,

Andrea Zvinakis1, Nina Dronkers1,2,3; 1VA Northern California Health Care
System, 2University of California, Davis, 3University of California, San Diego —
Previous studies have suggested that the right hemisphere (RH) plays a
critical role in our ability to understand the minds of others. Various theories have been used to explain this ability, including the idea that the
RH processes “global” information to derive meaning from social contexts. In the current study, we compared 11 RH stroke patients to 11 left
hemisphere (LH) stroke patients and normal controls on a cartoon interpretation task that required participants to state what a character in a
cartoon was most likely saying/thinking. The test included two types of
items: Some cartoons portrayed an unambiguous social situation (e.g., a
priest marrying a bride and groom), while other items were more ambiguous (e.g., a sad-looking man with his head down and a woman standing next to him). We hypothesized that RH patients would only show an
impairment on the ambiguous items, in which the global context was
critical to interpreting the situation. Five independent raters, blind to the
aim of the study, scored the participants’ responses on a scale from 1-5
(very inappropriate to very appropriate). RH patients were impaired
overall on the task relative to controls and also showed reduced performance relative to LH patients (trend). There was no interaction with condition, however, as RH patients’ responses were rated as less
appropriate on both ambiguous and unambiguous items. These findings
provide further support for the role of the RH in social inferencing but
also suggest that the degree of ambiguity does not play a significant role.

B51

DRUMMING TOGETHER INCREASES ACTIVITY IN THE CAUDATE AND
Kokal1,
PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR - IF DRUMMING COMES EASY Idil

Annerose Engel1,3, Sebastian Kirschner4, Christian Keysers1,2; 1BCN
NeuroImaging Center, University of Groningen, The Netherlands, 2The
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3Music
Cognition & Action Group, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 4Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany — Why does chanting together in religious
situations, drumming together in a tribe or dancing together in a club
make people feel united? Here we investigated the neural correlates of
such experiences and its impact on prosocial behavior by letting people
drum together. 18 non-musicians learned to drum a simple rhythm - and
differed considerably in how easily they acquired the rhythm. Thereafter, their brain activity was measured using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while they drummed, in alternating blocks, with
two different experimenters: one drummed in- and the other one out-ofsynchrony with the participant. On the last run, half the participants
drummed continuously with the in- and half with the out-of-synchrony
experimenter. Thereafter, this experimenter ‘accidentally’ dropped eight
pencils in front of the participant outside the scanner. Analysis revealed
that participants who mastered the rhythm easily prior to scanning
showed increased activity in an area involved in social reward, the bilateral caudate, when they drummed in synchrony with another person.
Importantly, the amount of activity in this reward area predicted the
number of pencils the participants picked up to help the experimenter.
We provide the first neuroscientific evidence that evolution has linked
joint synchronized musical activity to the reward systems in the caudate,
which in turn increases the propensity for prosocial behavior towards
synchronized individuals. The instances showing that non-human primates do not spontaneously engage in such joined musical activities suggest that this process is evolutionarily recent and may be specific to
humans.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Other

Poster Session B

B52

B54

ENHANCED SOMATOSENSORY AND DLPFC EEG POWER TO ERRORS
BIASES ERROR ESTIMATIONS AMONG STEREOTYPE THREATENED
MINORITIES Chad Forbes1, Toni Schmader2, John Allen3; 1National

AN EVENT-RELATED STUDY OF ANIMACY PERCEPTION: TURTLE OR
ROBOT Haruaki Fukuda1, Kazuhiro Ueda1; 1The University of Tokyo — It has

Institutes of Health, 2University of British Columbia, 3University of Arizona —

Stereotype threat, a situational pressure targets of negative stereotypes
experience when they fear their actions may confirm the stereotype,
biases stigmatized individuals’ attention towards negative feedback
early in the information processing stream. Less is known however
about how these attentional shifts alter neural processing during the performance, and what ramifications this has on explicit performance perceptions. The present study measured White and minority students’
EEG activity while they received error feedback on a task described as an
intelligence test. Low resolution brain electromagnetic tomography
(LORETA) analyses were conducted and Global EEG power elicited
from Brodmann’s Area 40 (BA40) and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC), regions identified as integral to basic, early-stage somatosensory processing and executive function respectively, was extracted via
ROI analyses. This provided an on-line neuronal index of early-stage
processing and interpretation of error feedback. The relationship
between BA40 and DLPFC power and accuracy of students’ selfreported error estimates was then examined. Results revealed that
increased BA40 power in response to error feedback predicted increased
DLPFC power among all subjects. However, increased DLPFC power
predicted inaccurate error estimations, where the number of errors made
on the supposed intelligence test was overestimated, among stereotype
threatened minorities only. DLPFC power partially mediated the relationship between BA40 power and error overestimation. This suggests
that stereotype threat engenders enhanced neural activity at early stages
of somatosenory processing and later stages associated with sensory
interpretation in response to negative feedback. This neural bias in turn
has negative ramifications on explicit performance perceptions.

B53

SOCIAL CUES, MENTALIZING AND THE NEURAL PROCESSING OF
SPEECH AND GESTURES Benjamin Straube1,2, Antonia Green1, Andreas

Jansen1, Anjan Chatterjee2, Tilo Kircher1; 1Philipps-University Marburg,
Germany, 2The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia — Body orientation

and eye gaze influence how information is conveyed during face-to-face
communication. However, the neural pathways underpinning the comprehension of social cues in everyday interaction are not known. In this
study we investigated the influence of addressing vs. non-addressing
body orientation on the neural processing of speech accompanied by
gestures. While in an fMRI scanner, participants viewed short video clips
of an actor speaking sentences with object- (O; e.g. shape) or personrelated content (P; e.g. saying goodbye) accompanied by iconic (e.g. circle) or emblematic gestures (e.g. waving), respectively. The actor’s body
was oriented either toward the participant (frontal, F) or toward a third
person (lateral, L) not visible. For frontal vs. lateral actor orientation
(F>L), we observed activation of bilateral occipital, inferior frontal,
medial frontal, right anterior temporal and left parietal brain regions.
Additionally, we observed activity in the occipital and anterior temporal
lobes due to an interaction effect between actor orientation and content
of the communication (PF>PL)>(OF>OL). Our findings indicate that
social cues influence the neural processing of speech- gesture utterances.
Mentalizing (the process of inferring the mental state of another individual) could be responsible for these effects. In particular, socially relevant
cues seem to activate regions of the anterior temporal lobes if abstract
person-related content is communicated by speech and gesture. These
new findings illustrate the complexity of interpersonal communication,
as our data demonstrate that multisensory information pathways interact at both perceptual and semantic levels.

been said that we have an ability to distinguish animate things from
inanimate things. This ability is called animacy perception and is essential for our social cognition. However, the cortical mechanism underlying animacy perception is controversial. Some studies showed that right
Superior Temporal Sulcus (rSTS) was activated in animacy task. Other
studies indicated that Mirror System had selectivity for living thing. In
this study, we investigated the differences in brain activity between
when interacting with an animate thing and when interacting with an
artificial thing. We measured Event–Related Potentials (ERPs) for this
purpose. In animacy condition, we recorded Electroencephalogram
when participants reached a living thing (turtle). In non-animacy condition, they reached an artificial thing (robot). We compared ERPs for the
reaching events in animacy condition with those in non-animacy condition. The appearance and motion of the robot were controlled to be the
same as the turtle. The ERP difference wave between conditions presented two effects. The first effect was that a positive component was
elicited at the beginning of reaching action over the left inferofrontal
region only in animacy condition. Later on in reaching action, significantly larger ERPs amplitudes were elicited over the right occipitotemporal region in animacy condition than in non-animacy condition. These
differences might be generated in mirror system and rSTS, considering
previous neuro-imaging studies and their scalp distributions. These
results suggest that both rSTS and Mirror System are involved in animacy perception.

B55

HERITABLE AND NON-HERITABLE BRAIN METABOLISM DURING
EXPOSURE TO POTENTIAL THREAT Jonathan Oler1, Andrew Fox1, Steven

Shelton1, Terrence Oakes2, Wendy Shelledy3, Thomas Dyer3, John Blangero3,
Jeffrey Rogers3,4, Richard Davidson1, Ned Kalin1; 1University of WisconsinMadison, 2Center for Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Washington,
D.C., 3Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, 4Baylor College of
Medicine — This study was designed to examine the heritability of the
brain's response to acute stress. We measured glucose metabolic activity
with FDG-PET in 238 young rhesus monkeys (mean=2.4 years) all
belonging to a single-family multigenerational pedigree. We used the
no-eye-contact (NEC) variant of the human “intruder” paradigm,
thereby posing an ambiguous and relatively mild threat to the animals.
Functional and structural brain data were co-registered to a standard
rhesus brain template space, and a voxelwise heritability analysis was
performed. To estimate the effect of additive genetic variance on
observed brain activity the known pedigree relationships and individual
phenotype measures were used in variance components analyses with
the Sequential Oligogenic Linkage Analysis Routines (SOLAR) software
package. To account for potential confounds age, age^2, sex and gray
matter probability at each voxel were included in the variance components model as covariates of no interest. The resulting whole-brain heritability data were corrected for multiple comparisons with a False
Discovery Rate (FDR; q=0.05). Brain activity during NEC was significantly heritable in bilateral anterior hippocampal regions (right:
h^2=0.58, p<0.001; left: h^2=0.61, p<0.001). No significantly heritable
clusters were observed in the amygdala. Furthermore, heritability estimates in the dorsal prefrontal cortex (PFC) and posterior cingulate gyrus
(PCC) were on the order of 0.9, and were highly significant (p<1.0e-5).
These results suggest that threat-related glucose metabolism in anterior
hippocampus, the PCC and the PFC reflect inherited neural responses to
acute stressors.

B56

GRAY-MATTER PROBABILITY IN THE AMYGDALA PREDICTS ANXIOUS
TEMPERAMENT AND IS HERITABLE Andrew Fox1, Jonathan Oler1, Steven

Shelton1, Terrence Oakes2, Wendy Shelledy3, Thomas Dyer3, John Blangero3,
Jeffrey Rogers3,4, Richard Davidson1, Ned Kalin1; 1University of WisconsinCognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

73

Poster Session B
Madison, 2Center for Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Washington
DC, 3Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, 4Baylor College of
Medicine — In humans, childhood anxious temperament is a risk factor
for the development of anxiety and depression. In monkeys, functional
alterations within the amygdala are associated with the anxious temperament endophenotype. In our previous investigations of the relationship
between anxious temperament and brain metabolism we accounted for
variability in gray-matter probability (GMP) to ensure that our findings
were related to brain function per se. In this work, we complement our
previous analyses using a large sample of monkeys (n=238) to specifically investigate the relationship between anxious temperament and
brain structure, as measured by GMP at each voxel. In addition, we
investigated the heritability of brain structure. Because our subjects were
part of a single family pedigree, we were able to investigate the heritability of these structural differences by estimating the additive polygenic
component of variation using the Sequential Oligogenetic Linkage Analysis Routines (SOLAR) software package. To account for potential confounds, we co-varied for age, age2 and sex in all statistical analyses.
Together these analyses seek to identify regions of the brain where brain
structure is related to anxious temperament and is under genetic control.
Results demonstrate GMP in the amygdala was correlated with individual differences in anxious temperament (p<.001, two-tailed uncorrected;
voxel in amygdala t=3.67, p= 0.00015), and show substantial heritability
(p<.05, FDR-corrected; peak voxel in amygdala: h2=.62, p=.000065).
These findings suggest that the genetic determinants of structural variation within the amygdala may contribute to the risk to develop affective
psychopathology.

B57

TMS EVIDENCE OF A LINK BETWEEN SOCIOCOGNITIVE TRAITS AND LOWLEVEL MOTOR RESONANCE IN NORMAL INDIVIDUALS Jean-Francois

Lepage1,2, Sara Tremblay1,2, Hugo Théoret1,2; 1Université de Montréal, Québec,
Canada, 2Centre de Recherche de l'Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montréal,
Canada — Activity of the primary motor cortex (M1) during action observation is thought to reflect motor-pairing processes hypothesized to play
a role in social cognition. The precise time course of M1 activity during
action observation remains to be fully determined. Here, we conducted
two studies using TMS-induced motor evoked potentials (MEPs) during
action observation to determine 1) the time course of M1 excitability during the observation of a simple finger movement; and 2) the relationship
between M1 and measures of empathy and autistic traits. In a first study,
we used a chronometric approach and administered single TMS pulses
at 30ms intervals during the observation of simple finger movements.
Results showed enhanced corticospinal excitability occurring between 60
and 90ms after movement onset. In a second study, single TMS pulses
were administered at 30, 90 and 150ms after movement onset and participants were asked to complete the Empathy Quotient (EQ) and the
Autism Spectrum Quotient (AQ) scales. Correlational analysis revealed a
significant link between motor facilitation at 90 ms and the EQ and AQ
scores. These results suggest that corticospinal excitability modulation
seen at M1 during action observation is the result of a rapid automatic
process, which may be related to social functioning.

B58

SEGREGATING THEORY OF MIND FROM ACTION SIMULATION Marc
Thioux1, Linda Geerligs1, Luca Nanetti1, Christian Keysers1; 1University of
Groningen, The Netherlands — Mirror neurons are known to encode the
immediate goal of observed actions (the intention in action). We used
fMRI to test the hypothesis that the same system could also support the
comprehension of higher levels of intentions and mental states. Subjects
viewed short movies of actors grasping a big or a small ball inside a box.
In one condition, the subjects had to decide whether the actor was going
to grasp the big or the small ball. In the other condition, they had to
judge whether the actor was sure about which ball to pick. Only the
torso and the hand of the actors were visible in the movies. Relative to
baseline the two conditions were associated with increased activity in

74

Emotion & Social: Other
the parietal and premotor cortex, suggesting that participants simulated
the observed action within the mirror neuron system. Contrasting the
two main conditions directly, we found increased activity in the mirror
neuron system when the participants had to pay attention to the immediate goal of the action (big or small ball). The reverse contrast however
showed that activity increased in the temporo-parietal junction when the
participants were requested to judge whether the actor was sure about
which ball to pick or not. Our results demonstrate that shifting attention
from the immediate goal to the mental states of others shifts neuronal
activity from the mirror neuron system to the temporo-parietal junction.

B59

MAINTAINING OPTIMISM IN THE FACE OF REALITY: A LEARNING BIAS

Christoph Korn1,2, Ray Dolan1, Tali Sharot1; 1Wellcome Trust Centre for
Neuroimaging, University College London, 2Berlin School of Mind and Brain,
Free University Berlin — Humans express a pervasive optimism bias. They
tend to make overly positive predictions about the future, which are
often inaccurate. How do people maintain unrealistic positive views,
while frequently encountering information that challenges those optimistic beliefs? Here, we reveal a novel learning bias supporting optimism that is mediated by differential processing of negative and positive
information in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). We collected functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data while participants estimated the likelihood of experiencing 80 different negative life events
(e.g. cancer, divorce, robbery). After each trial participants were presented with the average probability of that event occurring to a person in
the developed world. In a second session they were again asked to estimate the likelihoods, so we could to assess whether they had updated
their expectations. Results show that participants selectively learned
from information that enforced optimism. When subjects had over-estimated the probabilities of a negative event (i.e. gave a pessimistic estimate and received positive information) they were more likely to update
their expectations than when they under-estimated the probability (i.e.
gave overly optimistic estimates and received negative information).
fMRI data revealed an error signal in the ACC that coded the difference
between participants’ estimate and the feedback they received. Strikingly, this signal was larger when the participant received positive information relative to negative information. The study uncovers a neural
mechanism supporting differential processing of wanted and unwanted
information about the future, which leads to unrealistic optimism.

B60

MORAL DECISION-MAKING…THE SECOND TIME AROUND Jana Schaich
Borg1, Scott Grafton2, Walter Sinnott-Armstrong3; 1Stanford University,
2
University of California, Santa Barbara, 3Dartmouth College — Much
has
been learned about how people make complex moral judgments the first
time they encounter difficult moral scenarios. However, judgments
about controversial moral issues (such as euthanasia or stem-cell
research) are often easier to make after the issues have been previously
encountered, even if the judgments one makes remain emotional or controversial. Here we investigate whether responses to well-characterized
moral dilemmas change over time. 51 subjects were given twice our previously-published questionnaire of 36 moral and non-moral scenarios
that controlled for the amount of harm (consequences), commission vs.
omission of action, and intentional vs. unintentional harm: once when
the scenarios were brand new and again at least two weeks later. Participants responded to scenarios much more quickly the second time they
encountered them, and also more consistently. Moreover, participants
judged more moral acts to be wrong (and were less willing to perform
them) and judged more non-moral acts to be not wrong (and were more
willing to perform them) the second time they encountered them, especially if an act required an overt action to arrive at equivalent amounts of
harm. fMRI results from thirteen subjects who responded to the moral
questionnaire twice while being scanned support the hypothesis that different cognitive processes are evoked by moral dilemmas that have been
previously considered than by moral dilemmas that have never been

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Development & Aging
considered. These results may have implications for our understanding
of how humans process difficult moral issues on a daily basis, as
opposed to in isolated crisis situations.

B61

SENSORY AND HEDONIC CUES SHOW ASSIMILATION EFFECTS FOR
LIKED, BUT NOT DISLIKED YOGHURT STIMULI Johanna Kuenzel1,2, Wael
El Deredy2, Isabelle Blanchette2, Elizabeth H. Zandstra1, Anna Thomas1;

1Unilever R&D Vlaardingen, 2University of Manchester — Expectations

help
us to predict the world and to deal with the uncertainties of daily life.
This experiment studied the effect of reward expectations evoked by
sub- and supraliminal cues on liking of yoghurts. As cues, different unfamiliar symbols were used. N=39 participants first learned to associate
one cue with a highly sweet yoghurt and one with a mildly sweet
yoghurt (liked yoghurts). The same was done with two other cues for
mildly/highly salty yoghurts (disliked yoghurts). Half of the participants learned to associate a cue with liking of the yoghurt, i.e. hedonic
cues, the other half with how sweet/salty they were, i.e. sensory cues. In
every trial (40 trials), a cue was shown for 20 or 500msec and participants
then tasted a yoghurt. The drink-cue combination was either congruent
(e.g. high-sweet cue, high-sweet yoghurt), incongruent (high-sweet cue,
mild-sweet yoghurt), or mildly incongruent (high-sweet cue, mediumsweet yoghurt). Results showed that hedonic and sensory cues equally
influenced liking. For sweet/liked yoghurts we showed clear assimilation effects: liking followed the direction of the cue. This was found for
supraliminal (500msec) but not for subliminal (20msec) cue presentations. For salty yoghurts, no effects of cues were found. A probable reason is that the yoghurts were not disliked enough. To our knowledge,
this study is the first to address how different cues influence liking of a
product. This provides insights on how expectations shape liking, about
properties of expectations necessary to evoke these effects and helps in
the interpretation of behavioural and neuroscience studies.

B62

HUMOR PROCESSING IN INDIVIDUALS WITH ASPERGER’S
SYNDROME Andrea Samson1, Karsten Müller2, Michael Hegenloh3, Oswald

Huber1, Maximilian Reiser3, Thomas Meindl3, Kristina Hennig-Fast3;
of Fribourg, Switzerland, 2Max-Planck-Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, Leipzig, Germany, 3Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich,
Germany — The present study aims to investigate with functional Mag1University

netic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) humor processing and appreciation in
individuals with Asperger’s syndrome (AS) and a healthy control group.
90 humorous cartoons were contrasted to a control condition, consisting
of cartoon-like pictures with an irresolvable incongruity. 14 individuals
with AS and 14 healthy controls were investigated in a 3T fMRI scanner.
The inferior frontal gyrus and the temporo-parietal junction (TPJ) were
activated in humor processing and appreciation in contrast to the control
condition, replicating results from previous fMRI studies on humor. Furthermore, the insula was activated which was discussed by Watson et al.
(2006) in relation to humor. The analysis of the comprehension ratings
showed that individuals with AS had more difficulty to understand the
punch lines. However, if they understood the punch line they did not
differ from the control group regarding the funniness ratings. We expect
to find in individuals with AS less activation in so-called “mind reading”
and “mentalizing” areas such as the TPJ and anterior medial prefrontal
cortex. At the CNS, the analysis of fMRI data on the differences between
individuals with AS and the healthy control group will be presented as
well.

B63

MENTALIZATION IMPAIRMENTS IN FIRST-EPISODE PSYCHOSIS

Amelie
M. Achim1,2, Rosalie Ouellet1,2, Marc-André Roy1,2, Philip Jackson1,2,3; 1Centre
de Recherche Université Laval Robert-Giffard (CRULRG), 2Université Laval,
3CIRRIS — Although several studies have highlighted mentalization (also
known as Theory of Mind) impairments in people with schizophrenia,
very few studies have assessed this aspect of social cognition in young

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session B
adults with a first-episode of psychosis (FEP). For this study, we
recruited 34 FEP patients and 34 matched control subjects who performed a mentalization task as well as a non-social reasoning task. In
addition, other aspects of social cognition such as social perception and
social knowledge were also assessed. The mentalizing task showed the
greatest effect size, with an effect size d = .68, whereas the social perception and social knowledge tasks showed effect sizes in the low range
(d=.27 and d=.25, respectively) and failed to reach significance. In addition, a significant impairment was detected for the non-social reasoning
task (d=.50), so we also compared the two groups for the mentalizing
task using the non-social reasoning scores as a covariate, and the
between group difference for the mentalizing task remained significant.
This study suggests that mentalizing is particularly affected in FEP,
although the specific cognitive mechanisms that are at play remain to be
outlined.

Executive Processes: Development &
Aging
B64

PREDICTING EFFORTFUL CONTROL FROM ATTENTION AND
EMOTIONALITY IN INFANCY Alexandra Ursache1, Clancy Blair1; 1New York
University — The Rothbart-Posner model of temperament posits that
young children who are better able to use executive attention to regulate
negative affect will exhibit higher effortful control. The goal of the current investigation was to more specifically examine developmental trajectories of attention and negative affect as predictors of early effortful
control. The sample included approximately 1,100 children from predominantly low-income, rural communities participating in a large longitudinal study. Data collectors in the home rated infants’ attention and
irritability at 7, 15, and 24 months of age. At 24mos, children completed
two measures of effort control: a delay task and a working memory task.
We found that attention was significantly related to performance on the
delay task at all ages, r =.07, .08, .17, all p<.05, and to performance on the
working memory task at 15mos and 24mos, r =.10 and r =.26, both
p<.001. For the effortful control tasks, the relationship with attention
increased significantly with age. Ratings of irritability, however, were
not significantly related to performance on the tasks until 24mos. Additionally, irritability and attention were significantly related and stable
from 7mos to 15mos, r=-.59, p<.001, but the relation increased at 24mos,
r=-.74, p<.001. Consistent with the Rothbart-Posner model, these results
suggest that while attention is a good predictor of effortful control from
infancy, negative emotionality does not emerge as a predictor of effortful
control until the toddler period at which time children are expected to
use attention to regulate negative affect.

B65

DEVELOPMENTAL TRAJECTORIES OF COGNITIVE CONTROL IN
ADOLESCENCE: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF THE STROOP TASK

Jessica Andrews-Hanna1, Kristen L. Mackiewicz1, Luka Ruzic1, Laurence
Steinberg2, Eric Claus3, Elizabeth E. Cauffman2, Jennifer L. Wollard4, Sandra
Graham5, Marie T. Banich1; 1University of Colorado Boulder, 2Temple
University, 3Mind Research Network, 4Georgetown University, 5University of
California Los Angeles — Although adolescence is often behaviorally characterized by poor cognitive control, impulsivity, and elevated emotional
reactivity, the neural underpinnings of these behavioral phenotypes
remain largely unknown. The present study sought to investigate developmental functional changes in cognitive control and interference resolution while 66 participants between the ages of 14 and 25 performed a
variant of the Stroop Color-Word task (Stroop, 1935). Four separate age
groups (14-15 year olds, N = 16; 16-17 year olds, N = 17; 18-21 year olds,
N = 15; 22-25 year olds, N = 18) completed a hybrid block/event-related
functional MRI design providing means to investigate transient and sustained fMRI patterns of cognitive control. Results revealed minimal differences in behavioral interference (marked by increases in RT during

75

Poster Session B
incongruent compared to neutral stimuli) across groups, accompanied
by drastically different patterns of activation. Activity in regions comprising a frontoparietal control network increased across age for
INCONGRUENT compared to CONGRUENT or NEUTRAL blocks, particularly between the two youngest groups. Event-related results demonstrated similar age patterns. Additionally, behavioral interference
effects correlated positively with Stroop-related patterns of activation.
Interestingly, group changes were also observed within the so-called
“default network.” The 16-17 year olds exhibited stronger activation of
the default network during fixation blocks, with increased contributions
of two regions involved in emotion: the ventromedial prefrontal cortex
and the insula. In summary, adolescence appears to be marked by progressive functional maturation of sustained and transient processes associated with cognitive control and relative overactivation of limbic
regions during rest.

B66

EMOTIONAL FEEDBACK AFFECTS AGE-RELATED DECLINES IN COGNITIVE
SET SHIFTING Marissa A. Gorlick1, Brian D. Glass1, Tanya Chotibut1, W.

Executive Processes: Development & Aging
recorded EEG from 64 electrodes. We found a reliable positive association between PEs and the P3 amplitude following gains. Relations
between PEs and N2 did not differ reliably from zero, and differed reliably from relations between PEs and P3, indicating that outcome evaluative processes are more strongly reflected in the P3 than in the N2
component. Furthermore, the relation between PEs and P3 was statistically significant in adolescents and younger adults (P3 increase of 5.15µV
and 3.51µV per SD PE, respectively) but not in children or older adults
(2.92µV increase and 1.22µV increase, respectively), indicating lifespan
age differences in evaluative processes of outcome monitoring and their
EEG correlates.

B68

BRAIN AND COGNITIVE CHANGES AFTER PHYSICAL TRAINING IN
COGNITIVELY NORMAL SENIORS Elizabeth Kanter Bartz1, Molly Keebler1,

Claire Gardner1, Raksha Anand1, Jinsoo Uh2, Hanzhang Lu2, Joseph Cleaver3,
Kenneth Cooper3, Sandra Bond Chapman1, John Hart Jr.1,2; 1University Of
Texas at Dallas, 2University of Texas Southwestern, 3The Cooper Institute —

with declines in many aspects of executive function that co-occur with
several structural and functional changes (Raz, 2000). One aspect of executive function that is especially susceptible to normal aging is cognitive
set shifting. For example, older adults perseverate more than younger
adults in the Wisconsin Card Sort Task (WCST; Rhodes, 2004). Other
research indicates that as we approach the end of life, regulation of emotional states becomes more important than other types of goals
(Carstensen, 2006). These shifts in motivation lead to increased attention
to positive emotional experiences and/or decreased negative emotional
experiences (Mather & Carstensen, 2005). The present study merges
these two lines of work and tests the hypothesis that emotional feedback
might attenuate age related cognitive set shifting deficits. We examined
the performance of healthy older (aged 60-90) and younger adults (aged
18-35) in a set shifting task analog of the WCST. Four versions of the task
were examined that differed only in the nature of the feedback and were
constructed from a factorial combination of feedback type (logical:
points vs. emotional: faces) and feedback valence (positive vs. negative).
Preliminary results suggest that emotional feedback does attenuate set
shifting deficits in older adults. Older adults are faster at initial concept
learning in emotional feedback conditions, especially with positive emotions. In addition, older adults are quicker to abandon a previous valid
rule in favor of a new rule in emotional feedback conditions. Implications of this work in a socioemotional approach to learning are discussed.

Adults 60 and over represent one of the fastest growing segments of our
society. It is anticipated that this cognitively vulnerable group could
experience a high incidence of cognitive decline with aging. Significant
potential exists to modify the structure and function of the aging human
brain with physical activity. Preliminary evidence highlights the potential of physical training to modify and strengthen brain and cognitive
function in seniors. In this study, sedentary, cognitively-normal seniors
between ages 60 and 70 years were recruited for the study and randomized into 2 groups: a physical-trained group and a wait-listed control
group. Participants were neuropsychologically screened to insure they
were cognitively normal. Prior to intervention, participants’ baseline
cognitive functions, fitness measures and structural/physiological Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) measures were obtained. In particular,
Magnetization-Prepared Rapid Gradient- Echo (MPRAGE) and Arterial
Spin Labeling (ASL) sequences were collected. Participants then underwent 12 weeks of aerobic physical training (exercise group) or maintenance of current level of activity (wait-listed group) with the same
assessment as baseline at midpoint and endpoint. Brain imaging will
measure changes in relative cerebral blood flow, global and regional
brain volume with a particular focus on changes to frontal regions and
hippocampus. We have found increased relative blood flow to the hippocampus after 12 weeks of exercise and a correlated 13% improvement
in new learning tasks. Overall physical exercise has the potential to
improve cognitive function, in particular new learning with an associated increase in medial temporal relative blood flow, after 12 weeks of
physical exercise.

B67

B69

Todd Maddox1; 1University of Texas, Austin — Normal aging is associated

LIFESPAN DIFFERENCES IN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF
EARLY MONITORING AND LATE EVALUATIVE PROCESSES OF CHOICEOUTCOME CONTINGENCY: DIFFERENTIAL ROLES OF FEEDBACKRELATED NEGATIVITY AND FEEDBACK-RELATED POSITIVITY Dorothea

Brehmer1, Lars Farde1, Lars Nyberg2, Lars Bäckman1; 1Karolinska Institutet,
2
Umeå University — Age-related losses in dopamine receptor densities

study was to investigate lifespan differences in ERPs of early monitoring
(N2 or feedback-related negativity) and late evaluative (P3 or feedbackrelated positivity) processes during reinforcement learning. Previous
evidence suggests that the P3 amplitude to feedback is larger when the
perceived choice-outcome contingency is low (e.g., Tueting, 1970,
Eppinger, et al. 2008). By fitting a reinforcement learning model (cf. Krugel et al. 2009) to the behavioural data at the individual level, we investigated whether prediction errors (PEs) are differentially related to the
two feedback-related ERPs. Given that children and older adults learn
less from performance feedback (Eppinger et al. 2008), we expected
lesser effects of PEs in these two groups. We tested 166 participants (39
children, 44 adolescents, 42 younger adults, and 41 older adults) on a
probabilistic reinforcement learning task (cf. Frank et al., 2004) and

have emerged as a powerful mediator of age-related cognitive decline.
However, most age-comparative molecular imaging studies have
focused exclusively on striatal D2 receptor densities. Much less is known
about changes in the D1 receptor with aging, despite recent findings that
striatal and extrastriatal D1 receptors play an important role in executive
functioning, inhibition, and working memory. We used Positron Emission Tomography and SCH23390 to quantify D1 receptor binding in 20
younger (20-30 years) and 20 older (65-75 years) healthy adults. Results
showed age-related decreases in D1 receptor densities in striatal, limbic,
and neocortical regions. Moreover, receptor densities in subdivisions of
the striatum (associative, ventral, and sensorimotor) were strongly correlated with each other and with receptor densities in frontal and limbic
areas in younger, but not in older, adults. This may indicate that the agerelated loss of D1 receptors is not mediated by a global mechanism. We
discuss these results in terms of their implications for understanding
age-related cognitive decline.

Haemmerer1, Guido Biele2, Marios Philiastides1, Sascha Schroeder1, Viktor
Mueller1, Ulman Lindenberger1, Shu-Chen Li1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human
Development, Germany, 2Freie Universität Berlin, Germany — The aim of the

76

DECREASED INTER-REGIONAL RELATIONSHIPS AMONG D1 RECEPTORS
IN AGING Anna Rieckmann1, Sari Karlsson1, Per Karlsson1, Yvonne

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Development & Aging

Poster Session B

B70

B72

THE EFFECTS OF CHRONIC DOPAMINE AND SEROTONIN ANTAGONISM
ON COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT IN MONKEYS Dorothy J. Mandell1,2, Gene

IMPROVING
CORTICAL
EFFICIENCY
WITH
AGE:
AN
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY (EEG) STUDY OF CORTICAL ACTIVITY
DURING RESPONSE INHIBITION Zhong-Xu Liu1, Marc D. Lewis1;

P. Sackett2; 1University of Amsterdam, 2University of Washington, Washington
National Primate Research Center — It has been proposed that developmental changes in dopamine (DA) is a neurobiological mechanism contributing to the development of executive functioning skills that
involving reward processing. Developmental changes in frontal (Lambe,
et al. 2000) and striatal (Haycock, et al., 2003) DA biomarkers have been
documented between birth and late adolescents. However, it is unclear
how changes in DA concentrations are related to changes in behavior.
We assessed the effects of chronically antagonizing the DA/5HT system
(with risperidone) or the 5HT system (with quetiapine) on cognitive
development. Subjects were 40 mother-reared juvenile macaques (M.
nemestrina) randomly assigned to a placebo, risperidone or quetiapine
drug group. Animals began cognitive testing at 260 days of age (SD=16)
and were followed for 64 weeks. Monkeys were tested on a variety of
age-appropriate cognitive tasks during 4 16-week phases: 1) pre-drug, 2)
low-dose, 3) high-dose, and 4) off-drug. The cognitive results from
Learning Set (LS; Harlow, 1949) and Nonmatch to Sample (NMTS) are
presented here. All animals significantly improved on LS over the course
of testing. A significant drug by phase interaction was found (p<.02).
Animals did not significantly differ at baseline. During the low-dose
phase, the risperidone group outperformed the placebo group (p<.05)
and remained the highest performing group through the two drug
phases. During the off-drug phase, the performance of these animals
dropped significantly (p<.02). In contrast, no significant drug interactions were found with NMTS performance. These data provide evidence
that chronic disruption of DA affects the development of rewarddirected behavior.

1
University of Toronto — Response inhibition, one aspect of executive function, plays an important role in children’s cognitive development. It has
been proposed that brain maturation, especially cortical efficiency
improvement, may underlie the development of inhibitory control.
However, previous studies using EEG and functional magnetic resonance imaging have shown inconsistent results: Some studies find cortical activity increases with age but others find the opposite. The present
study was designed to provide more data on this issue by focusing on
EEG power during response inhibition. EEG data were collected from 42
normally developing children (age: 8-18 years) while they performed a
go/no-go task. We examined EEG power in alpha (8-12Hz) and theta (47Hz) frequency bands during no-go trials. Hierarchical linear regressions were employed to test the role of cortical activation underlying
developmental effects. Results showed that 1) behavioral performance
improved with age, 2) baseline (-250ms – 0ms) power at both frequency
bands decreased with age, and 3) theta power during the response inhibition window (200 – 400ms post-stimulus) increased with age. Also,
baseline alpha and theta power were negatively, and theta power during
inhibition positively, correlated with behavioral performance. Most
important, when the effects of these brain measures on behavioral performance were controlled, age effects on performance became nonsignificant. Therefore, these findings indicate that, as children age, the cortex
becomes less activated before an inhibitory task but more activated during the task, suggesting a more efficient allocation of neural resources.
This provides support for a model of cortical development highlighting
increasing efficiency.

B71

B73

INHIBITION OF RESPONSES IN YOUNG MONOLINGUAL AND BILINGUAL
CHILDREN: EVIDENCE FROM ERP Raluca Barac1, Sylvain Moreno1, Ellen

DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN CONNECTIVITY ASSOCIATED WITH
INHIBITORY CONTROL Kai Hwang1, Katerina Velanova1, Robert

Bialystok1,2; 1York University, 2Rotman Research Institute & University of
Toronto — Previous behavioral research has reported advantages for

bilingual children relative to comparable monolinguals in aspects of
nonverbal executive functioning such as inhibitory control (Bialystok &
Martin, 2004; Carlson & Meltzoff, 2008), and switching (Barac & Bialystok, 2009). These findings have been attributed to their need to manage
attention to two languages in order to switch between them and inhibit
interference from the inactive language. This management of attention is
handled by the executive function system and its frequent use for this
purpose enhances these processes for bilinguals. To date, in children this
has been examined exclusively in behavioral studies. Therefore it is not
known whether the experience of speaking two languages also results in
changes apparent in children at the brain level. In the current study we
recorded ERPs in 32 5-year-old children (16 English-speaking monolinguals, 16 bilinguals) as they performed a standard visual Go/No-go
task. Children were matched in terms of age and general intelligence as
measured by vocabulary and block design subtests of the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence - III. Our results showed that
bilingual children had higher N2 amplitude than monolinguals for the
No-go trials, whereas the performance on the Go trials was similar for
the two groups. The N2 component is related to conflict detection and
response inhibition, so the greater amplitude for the bilingual children is
interpreted as greater sensitivity and responsiveness to conflict. These
results are used to interpret evidence for better cognitive control by bilinguals in previous behavioral research.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Terwilliger1, Beatriz Luna1; 1University of Pittsburgh — The ability to voluntarily suppress responses to task irrelevant stimuli is crucial to cognitive
control. Response inhibition has been shown to improve from childhood
through young adulthood. Prior developmental fMRI studies of
response inhibition have found changes of brain activity in a distributed
network. However the developmental changes in connectivity supporting the response inhibition circuitry is not well studied. In the current
study, we measured connectivity between brain regions associated with
inhibitory control with functional connectivity and granger causality.
We then characterized the developmental changes of this connectivity
profile. We recruited 78 participants (27 adults aged 18-7, 25 adolescents
aged 13-17 years, and 26 children aged 8-12 years) for our FMRI study.
Subjects were asked to perform the antisaccade (AS) task. Connectivity
analyses were applied to the preprocessed time series extracted from
oculomotor and cognitive control regions recruited by the AS task. We
found that frontal cognitive control regions (right DLPFC, right IFG,
bilateral insula, ACC) were connected to down-stream oculomotor
regions (FEF, IPS, thalamus, basal ganglia and superior colliculus) in
adolescents and adults, more than children. Granger causality analysis
revealed that these connections were mostly top-down, with frontal
regions influencing parietal and subcortical regions. Developmentally,
connectivity strength increased with age from frontal to parietal and
subcortial regions. In contrast short-range connectivity strength within
the parietal cortex decreased with age. Our developmental results support the hypothesis that developmental improvements in inhibitory control are supported by enhancing top-down connectivity from the
prefrontal cortex to parietal and subcortical regions.

77

Poster Session B
B74

PREDICTORS OF INHIBITORY CONTROL GROWTH IN PRESCHOOL
CHILDREN: A LONGITUDINAL STUDY Sandra A. Wiebe1, Kimberly Andrews

Espy2, Tiffany Sheffield2; 1University of Alberta, 2University of NebraskaLincoln — The preschool years are an important time for the development

of executive control, related to the continued maturation of networks
involving prefrontal cortex. This study examined the development of
inhibitory control, and relations between growth and child demographic
and temperament characteristics. The sample included 394 preschool
children (194 girls, 200 boys), enrolled at 3, 3.75, 4.5, or 5.25 years in a
cohort-sequential design, and followed longitudinally every 9 months
through age 5.25. Children completed a preschool go/no-go task, and
were instructed to press a button whenever a fish appeared on the computer screen (75% of trials), but withhold the button-press when a shark
appeared (25% of trials). We used growth curve modeling to analyze
accuracy on go and no-go trials as well as reaction times for go trials, and
then examined the relations between growth parameters and covariates
including maternal ratings of child temperament and behavior problems, maternal education (as an index of SES), and child sex. Children
with better effortful control were more accurate on no-go trials, but less
accurate on go trials. Children with fewer attention problems also were
more accurate on no-go trials. Higher maternal education was associated
with more accurate go performance and faster improvement in response
times on go trials. Girls were more accurate on no-go trials, whereas
boys responded more quickly and accurately on go trials. Results extend
previous findings of sex and SES differences in preschool executive control, and suggest that go/no-go performance is meaningfully related to
everyday behavioral regulation.

B75

IMPROVEMENT IN MIDLIFE COGNITION: IMPLICATIONS FOR COGNITIVE
AND BRAIN AGING Sherry Willis1, Elizabeth Aylward2, Paul Borghesani1,

Tara Madhyastha1; 1University of Washington, 2Seattle Children's Research
Institute — Longitudinal studies report normative patterns of stability in
cognition during midlife. However, prospective dementia studies report
preclinical changes in cognition occurring as early as midlife. In this
study we examine the group differences in brain volume and functioning for individuals exhibiting either cognitive decline or cognitive gain
in midlife. Seattle Longitudinal Study subjects were assessed on an
extensive psychometric ability battery at multiple occasions in midlife
(age 43 – 63). Subjects’ midlife trajectories on three abilities (executive
functioning, verbal memory, psychomotor speed) were characterized as
indicating reliable decline, gain, or stability. While midlife trajectories
were stable for the majority of subjects, approximately ten to fifteen percent of subjects showed reliable decline or reliable gain. Decliners and
gainers did not differ in age or education. Structural MRI scans and DTI
analyses were conducted on subjects who declined or gained cognitively
in midlife and who were currently in midlife or old age. Analyses indicated significant differences in brain volume for those showing midlife
decline vs gain on episodic memory and executive functioning.

B76

FMRI OF AN N-BACK WORKING MEMORY TASK IN CHILDREN AND
ADULTS Yao (Sarah) Lin1,2, Lauren Dade2,3, Marie Arsalidou2, Elizabeth J.
Donner2, Margot J. Taylor1,2; 1University of Toronto, St. George, 2Hospital for
Sick Children, 3Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation — Although working memory

(WM) has been extensively studied in adults using fMRI, little is known
about how this capacity develops in the human brain. Here, we assessed
the neural correlates of WM in 36 healthy children, aged 6-16 years, and
19 adults, aged 19-34 years, using an n-back block-design fMRI paradigm. Colorful abstract patterns were presented in three conditions that
demanded varying WM maintenance. In 1- and 2-back conditions, participants indicated when the current stimulus matched the one presented
n trials previously, where n=1 or n=2. In the 0-back vigilance condition,
participants responded to a solid blue square. Children were divided
into 4 age groups for analysis. Group images were analyzed using a ran-

78

Executive Processes: Development & Aging
dom effects analysis of variance. Three contrasts (1>0, 2>0, 2>1) were
computed for the whole brain to identify task-specific activations.
Behavioral results indicated adults were more accurate and were quicker
to respond than children across all conditions, with the largest difference
at the highest load. Although activations in bilateral inferior frontal,
middle frontal and cingulate gyri, and parietal cortex were generally
similar in adults and children, children demonstrated less focal activity
in these regions. Additionally, while adults responded to higher WM
loads by recruiting frontal regions, young children did not exhibit
increasing frontal activation. Furthermore, correlations were observed
between frontal activity and behavioral profiles as a function of age.
These findings revealed a developmental trajectory of WM in which activations increase as a function of greater WM load and become more focal
with age.

B77

QUANTIFIER COMPREHENSION IN CORTICOBASAL SYNDROME AND
FRONTOTEMPORAL DEGENERATION Brianna Morgan1, Rachel G. Gross1,

Corey McMillan1, Ashley Boller1, Murray Grossman1; 1University of
Pennsylvania — This study contrasted number-based and majority quanti-

fiers involving number knowledge with logical quantifiers that do not
depend on numbers in corticobasal syndrome (CBS) and frontotemporal
degeneration (bvFTD). We studied 6 CBS, 10 bvFTD and 11 matched
controls. Participants evaluated the truth value of a statement describing
a picture. Four sentence types with quantifiers and a factual control
without a quantifier were created to correctly described each of 20 pictures depicting familiar objects (e.g. cups on a table, books on a shelf).
An equal number of false sentences were created, resulting in 200 randomly-ordered, picture-sentence stimuli. The four experimental sentences included: Precise—naming an exact number (e.g. “there are 3 cups
on the table”); number-based—“…at least two…”; majority—“…more
than half…”; logical—“…some…”; and control—“there are books…”.
Sentences contained only small, single-digit numbers and were matched
for length with adjectives. CBS showed selective deficits for stimuli
involving number knowledge—Precise, Number-Based and Majority—
compared to controls (p=0.05), but equaled controls for logical quantifiers and control statements. bvFTD were selectively impaired for logical
quantifiers and majority quantifiers (p=0.05), but equaled controls for
number-based, precise and control statements. Results support previous
findings in CBS, showing comprehension difficulty for quantifier statements that depend on number knowledge. bvFTD showed deficits for
majority quantifiers that entail working memory. Moreover, bvFTD
were impaired with logical quantifiers. This is consistent with their
social judgment deficit, and our “social executor” model that emphasizes
resource limitations in adapting social/emotional knowledge to realworld settings.

B78

BRAIN OSCILLATORY 1-40 HZ FREQUENCY RESPONSES DURING AN
AUDITORY WORKING MEMORY TASK IN 6-, 11- AND 14-YEAR-OLD
CHILDREN Anna-Mari Andersson1, Aleksander Alafuzoff1, Heini Heikkilä1,

Venla Pehunen1, Tero Hakala1, Nina Sajaniemi1, Elina Kontu1, Meri
Reunanen1, Tarja Puhtimäki1, Sirpa Ranto1, Mari Nislin1, Christina M. Krause1;
1Helsinki University — The development of the cognition-related brain
oscillatory response system in childhood is yet poorly understood. Current study investigated the relationships between the development of
memory functions and brain oscillatory EEG responses during an auditory memory task (encoding and recognition). Altogether 49 healthy
children from three different age groups (mean ages 6, 11 and 14 years;
n=16, n=17 and n=16, respectively) were included in the study. Brain
oscillatory responses of the 1-40 Hz EEG frequencies during the performance of an auditory memory task were assessed. On the behavioural
level, in the memory task, the 11- and 14-year-old children performed
equally well, while the 6-year-old children performed statistically significantly poorer. In the EEG alpha frequency range (~8-12Hz), both during
encoding and recognition, greater magnitude brain oscillatory responses

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Development & Aging
were witnessed in the 11- and 14-year-old children as compared to those
of the 6-year-old children. Brain oscillatory responses during memory
processing - especially in the EEG alpha frequency range - differentiated
the 6-year-old children from the 11- and 14-year-old children. This observation might reflect the difference in cognitive developmental stage.

B79

NEURAL UNDERPINNINGS OF EXECUTIVE FUNCTION DEVELOPMENT IN
ADOLESCENCE: A LONGITUDINAL INVESTIGATION Monica
Luciana1,

Paul Collins1, Ryan Muetzel1, Jim Porter1, Kelvin Lim1; 1University of
Minnesota — Brain development continues throughout adolescence with
post-pubertal nonlinear declines in gray matter (GM) and linear increments in white matter (WM) volumes that regionally vary. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) suggests increments in WM’s directional organization.
Executive functions (EFs) improve. Whether age-related changes in
structural maturation underlie EF improvements is the focus of this analysis. Adolescents (n=165, ages 9-23) completed structural MRI/DTI
scans, acquired on a 3-tesla Siemens Trio Scanner. EFs were assessed
through a comprehensive battery. Self-reported personality characteristics were measured. Participants repeated the full battery two years later.
We observe widespread declines in GM/cortical thickness (r’s= .45 to
.65) with more subtle changes in WM. Indices of WM microstructure
(fractional anisotropy) show age-related increases (r’s=.2 to .3); the effect
size is similar when derived from region-of-interest versus probabilistic
tractography approaches. Age-related improvements in working memory, inhibition, and planning (r’s = .2 to .7) are evident; performance
asymptotes around age 17. Motivated decision-making improves into
the late teens. Cross-sectional analyses have described structural networks that support performance on motor (Muetzel et al., 2008), delay
discounting (Olson et al., 2009), planning (Luciana et al., 2007), and verbal fluency (Porter et al., 2009) measures. This analysis extends those
findings by presenting composite scores reflecting major domains of EF
derived from longitudinal data. Regression analyses will be implemented to assess which aspects of neural maturation contribute to longitudinal changes in EF domains with the goal of dissociating structural
networks that support ‘cold’ versus ‘hot’ cognition. Findings will inform
our understanding of adolescents’ EF development.

B81

EVENT-RELATED EEG OSCILLATIONS IN HIGH-PERFORMING YOUNG AND
ELDERLY INDIVIDUALS DURING COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY TASKS Bruno

Kopp1,2, Jürgen Howe3, Karl Wessel1,2; 1Cognitive Neurology, University of
Technology Carolo-Wilhelmina Braunschweig, 2Braunschweig Hospital,
3University of Technology Carolo-Wilhelmina Braunschweig — We conducted
a study of normal brain aging that was based upon event-related brain
potentials (ERPs) and time-frequency analysis of event-related EEG biosignals. Forty participants (twenty-four young, mean age 22 years; sixteen elderly, mean age 70 years) took part in two tasks that were
designed to challenge cognitive flexibility. Time-frequency analysis of
event-related EEG oscillations rested on complex Morlet wavelet transformations in the theta-, alpha- und beta-frequency bands. Elderly participants had slower RTs than young participants, whereas error rates
did not differ between the two age groups. Elderly participants showed
reduced auditory N1 and P2 amplitudes and a ‘frontal shift’ of the P3b.
Time-frequency analysis of brain oscillations revealed two novel findings: 1. The elders showed less pronounced stimulus-induced alphadesynchronization at posterior electrodes. 2. The elders showed more
pronounced beta-desynchronization at central electrodes in response to
imperative stimuli. Cortical beta rhythms might indicate the integrity of
frontal-subcortical loops and their dopaminergic regulation.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session B
B82

A NEUROIMAGING INVESTIGATION OF THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN
AEROBIC FITNESS, HIPPOCAMPAL VOLUME AND MEMORY
PERFORMANCE IN PREADOLESCENT CHILDREN Laura Chaddock1, Kirk

I. Erickson2, Ruchika Shaurya Prakash3, Jennifer S. Kim1, Michelle W. Voss1,
Matt VanPatter1, Matthew B. Pontifex1, Lauren B. Raine1, Alex Konkel1, Charles
H. Hillman1, Neal J. Cohen1, Arthur F. Kramer1; 1University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, 2University of Pittsburgh, 3The Ohio State University — Because
children are becoming increasingly overweight, unhealthy and unfit,
understanding the neurocognitive benefits of an active lifestyle in childhood has important public health and educational implications. Animal
research has indicated that aerobic exercise is related to increased cell
proliferation and survival in the hippocampus as well as enhanced hippocampal-dependent learning and memory. Recent evidence extends
this relationship to elderly humans by suggesting that high aerobic fitness levels in older adults are associated with increased hippocampal
volume and superior memory performance. The present study aimed to
further extend the link between fitness, hippocampal volume, and memory to a sample of preadolescent children. To this end, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was employed to investigate whether high- and
low-fit 9- and 10-year-old children showed differences in hippocampal
volume and if the differences were related to performance on an item
and relational memory task. Relational but not item memory is primarily
supported by the hippocampus. Consistent with predictions, high-fit
children showed greater bilateral hippocampal volumes. Furthermore,
hippocampal volume was positively associated with performance on the
relational but not the item memory task. The findings are the first to suggest that aerobic fitness can impact the structure and function of the
developing human brain.

B83

THE INTERACTION OF INHIBITION AND CONCEPTUAL-SEMANTIC
PROCESSING IN CHILDREN AS MEASURED BY THE N2-P3 RESPONSE
DURING THREE GO-NOGO TASKS Mandy Maguire1,2, Joshua White1,

Matthew Brier2; 1University of Texas at Dallas, Callier Center for
Communication Disorders, 2University of Texas at Dallas, Center for
BrainHealth — The N2-P3 ERP response to Go-NoGo tasks has provided
an invaluable measure of inhibitory development in typical and disordered children. Unfortunately, past studies often vary based on age
groups, methods, and stimuli making it difficult to determine what factors influence the development of these components. This project investigates how the N2 and P3 change based on systematic increases in
conceptual-semantic difficulty across three Go-NoGo tasks. Twenty-two
7-8 year-olds and 22 10-11-year-olds completed all three tasks. The “Single” task included the repetition of one car (Go - 80% of the trials) and
one dog (NoGo - 20% of the trials). The “Basic Category” task included
multiple cars (Go-80%) and multiple dogs (NoGo-20%). The “Semantic
Category” task included a range of objects (Go-80%) and animals
(NoGo-20%). Thus, the tasks increased from using perceptual cues in the
single task (identical items) to feature detection in the basic category task
(legs, eyes vs wheels and windows) to semantic identification in the
semantic category task (limited common perceptual features). Findings
indicate that the N2 response does not change significantly with task difficulty. However, the amplitude for the P3 Go response increased linearly by task difficulty (p = 0.026), such that the most complex task no
longer exhibited a significant Go-NoGo difference. This pattern held true
for both age groups. Thus, conceptual-semantic complexity influences
the P3 measure of inhibitory processing in a systematic way in children.
This paradigm may be a key for investigating inhibitory dysfunction in
disorders such as ADHD and autism.

79

Poster Session B

Executive Processes: Goal Maintenance & Switching

B84

NORMAL AGING IMPAIRS A/B BUT ENHANCES A/NON-A PROTOTYPE
LEARNING Brian D. Glass1, Tanya Chotibut1, Jennifer Pacheco1, David M.

Schnyer1, W. Todd Maddox1; 1The University of Texas at Austin — Behavioral

and fMRI techniques have identified two dissociable prototype learning
systems in young adults (Zeithamova et al., 2008). One system mediates
A/B prototype learning where participants learn to categorize exemplars derived from two prototypes, and the other system mediates A/
non-A prototype learning where participants learn to categorize exemplars derived from one prototype and non-categorical exemplars. The
A/B task recruits brain regions associated with episodic memory
retrieval and explicit reasoning (parahippocampus and inferior parietal
and orbitofrontal cortices), while the A/non-A task recruits brain
regions associated with nondeclarative learning (lateral occipital cortex
and striatum). The effect of normal aging on A/B and A/non-A prototype learning has not been addressed. Whereas episodic memory and
explicit reasoning are known to decline with normal aging (Hedden &
Gabrieli, 2004), some forms of nondeclarative learning are spared in normal aging (Fera et al., 2005). The current study examined the performance of healthy younger (aged 18-29) and older adults (aged 60-81) in
an A/B and A/non-A prototype learning task. In line with previous
research showing episodic memory and explicit reasoning deficits, older
adults were less accurate than younger adults in the A/B task. However,
older adults were more accurate than younger adults in the A/non-A
task. Follow-up analyses suggest that older adults were better able to
classify the anti-prototype and were more accurate overall for non-A
exemplars. The implications of this work for system-level interactions
and potential compensatory mechanisms in normal aging are discussed.

B85

THE NETWORK ARCHITECTURE OF FUNCTIONALLY DEFINED REGIONS
SPANNING THE BRAIN REORGANIZES FROM A PREDOMINANTLY LOCAL
ARCHITECTURE IN CHILDREN TO A DISTRIBUTED, FUNCTIONAL
ARCHITECTURE IN ADULTS Jonathan Power1, Alexander Cohen1, Steven

Nelson1,

Wig2,

Miezin1,

Vogel1,

Church1,

Gagan
Fran
Alecia
Jessica
Kelly Anne
Barnes1, Bradley Schlaggar1, Steve Petersen1; 1Washington University in Saint
Louis, 2Harvard University — Several recent anatomical and resting state

functional connectivity (rs-fcMRI) studies have described large-scale networks in the human brain. These studies have defined networks in terms
of voxels or anatomical parcellations, which may not capture the behavior of functional areas. Here we examine the functional network structure of the brain across development based upon a combination of fMRI
and rs-fcMRI analyses. We identified 164 regions of interest (ROIs) from
meta-analyses (>300 subjects total) of signals related to task-level control,
errors, reading, speech output, manual output, memory retrieval, and
task-induced deactivations. 95 additional ROIs were found using rsfcMRI tools that identify putative cortical areas (Cohen et al., 2008).
These 259 spherical (10mm diameter) ROIs were applied as seeds in a rsfcMRI analysis of a separate group of 210 subjects (7-31 years old) yielding within-subject pairwise correlations of all seed timecourses. Community detection analysis of these correlations divided the network into a
relatively small number of “modules” with high confidence indices (Q).
In adults (avg. age 26), several modules resembled familiar distributed
networks, such as control and default networks. In children (avg. age 8),
however, modules tended to group regions by anatomical proximity.
Sensory cortex organization was largely preserved over development,
including a distinction between dorsal and ventral somatomotor cortex,
in which ventral “mouth” somatomotor regions were strongly associated with auditory processing regions. These data confirm previous
reports of the developmental trajectories of specific functional networks,
and suggest that from a functional perspective, sensory-motor cortex
achieves a “mature” configuration earlier than association cortex.

80

Executive Processes: Goal Maintenance &
Switching
B86

WHEN THE GOING GETS TOUGH, ATTENTION STARTS GOING Nikki

Pratt1, Adrian Willoughby2, Diane Swick1,3; 1VA Northern California Health Care
System, 2University of Birmingham, UK, 3University of California, Davis — Pre-

vious research suggests that the prefrontal cortex is important in both
directing attention to relevant stimuli and maintaining information in
working memory (Corbetta & Shulman, 2002). Few studies, however,
have reported the effect of working memory load on attention via topdown cortical connections. The following study addresses the extent to
which working memory load influences early (P1) and late (P300) attentional ERP components using a dual task paradigm. Participants were
presented with an arrow flanker task alone (single task condition) or
along with a Sternberg memory task (dual task condition). In the flanker
task, participants responded to the direction of a central arrow surrounded by congruent or incongruent arrows. In the dual task condition,
participants were presented with a Sternberg task comprised of either 4
or 7 consonants to remember prior to a short block of 8 flanker trials.
Behavioral and electrophysiological responses were analyzed in
response to the flanker trials and compared across the single and dual
task conditions. Participants were slower and less accurate on incongruent versus congruent trials, regardless of the load on working memory.
Furthermore, both load conditions reduced accuracy on incongruent
flanker trials. Likewise, amplitudes for the P1 and P300 components
were diminished to flanker trials when the Sternberg memory set was
introduced. This suggests that working memory influences attentional
resources in the brain regardless of response conflict. Importantly, the P1
finding indicates that top-down attentional control over early visual processing is diminished by increasing demands in working memory.

B88

NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF COGNITIVE SWITCHING AND INHIBITION IN A
FACE PROCESSING TASK Camille Piguet1, Virginie Sterpenich1, Martin

Desseilles1,2, Yann Cojan1, Gilles Bertschy2,3, Patrik Vuilleumier1,2; 1Faculty of
Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University Hospital of Geneva, Switzerland,
3
University Hospital of Strasbourg, France — We frequently need to change
our current occupation, an operation requiring additional cognitive
demands. Switch from one task to another may involve two distinct processes: the need to inhibit the previously relevant task-set, and the ability
to switch to another one. Here we tested whether these two processes are
underlined by two separate brain networks and to which extent these
networks might be influenced by the nature of the task when performed
on different aspects of faces. We used functional magnetic resonance
imaging in healthy human volunteers who had to perform a categorization task on emotional faces, according to three different judgment rules
(color, gender or emotional expression). Our paradigm allowed us to
separate neural activity associated with inhibition and switching according to the sequence of the tasks used on successive trials. Our results
reveal that two regions showed consistent activation for switching condition independently of the three different tasks, namely the medial
superior parietal lobule bilaterally and the posterior cingulate gyrus.
Superior parietal cortex showed reduced activation in inhibition conditions, but no region was activated by inhibition across all tasks. However, inhibition produced deactivations in distinct brains regions. Most
critically, the insula and superior temporal sulcus were deactivated
when emotional processing was inhibited during switch. We conclude
that, unlike for switching ability mediated by fronto-parietal and striatal
circuits, there is no general effect of task-set inhibition, but inhibition
leads to a selective deactivation of brain regions normally engaged in a
specific task.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Goal Maintenance & Switching
B89

IMPROVED PERFORMANCE RELATES TO ADDITIONAL CONTROL
PROCESSES DURING THE STROOP COLOR-WORD TASK Gregory
C.

Burgess1, Roselinde Kaiser1, Jessica R. Andrews-Hanna1, Akira Miyake1, Marie
T. Banich1,2; 1University of Colorado - Boulder, 2University of Colorado Denver — A frontoparietal network, including dorsolateral PFC, dorsal
ACC, and lateral parietal lobule, has been implicated in attentional control. These regions tend to be activated on average across individuals
performing the Stroop Task, suggesting that processes subserved by
these regions are necessary for attentional control. Unfortunately, far less
attention has been given to control processes that are differentially activated by better-performing individuals. The current study investigated
whether better attentional control during the Stroop task resulted from
increased recruitment of this frontoparietal network, or from recruitment of additional regions above and beyond this frontoparietal network. We measured fMRI activation and behavioral interference during
the Stroop Task in a group of 50 young adults. On average, the group
activated the typical frontoparietal network frequently implicated in
attentional control. As individuals performed better (i.e., showed
reduced behavioral interference), they demonstrated increased activation of overlapping and adjacent portions of the frontoparietal network.
However, better performance also related to increased activation of
regions that were not recruited by the group as a whole, including
regions related to “cognitive branching” and memory retrieval (e.g., left
anterior PFC (BA10) and right hippocampus). This pattern suggests that
improved attentional control performance is related both to processes
employed by the group as a whole (e.g., active maintenance of task
goals, response inhibition, and response selection) and to additional processes that were not utilized by the average participant. We argue that a
complete picture of neural processes involved in attentional control
requires consideration of variation related to individual differences in
performance.

B90

DISTINCT REPRESENTATION OF GOAL COMPLETION FROM OTHER TASK
RELEVANT INFORMATION IN THE FRONTO-PARIETAL NETWORK Ausaf

Farooqui1, Russell Thompson1, John Duncan1; 1MRC - Cognition and Brain
Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK — Converging evidence from a range of
sources implicates a network of frontal and parietal regions as playing a
crucial role in cognitive control. Further, these areas have been shown to
hold a selective representation of task relevant information. However,
functional distinctions within these areas are not fully understood. Here
we show that a distinct set of areas within this network is preferentially
sensitive to information that marks task completion. Methods: Subjects
had to covertly detect the letters of a cued three-letter string. Detection of
all three letters in their proper order completed the task and made the
subjects eligible for a reward that could be had by correctly answering a
probe question related to the task at the end of the trial. Thus, while all
target letters were relevant to the task, only the third target letter marked
its completion. Result: A network of frontal areas including ventro-lateral prefrontal cortex, inferior frontal junction, and supplementary
motor area, together with lateral intra-parietal sulcus showed increased
activity in response to detection of the first two target letters. In contrast,anterior regions of DLPFC and ACC, together with medial parietal
areas, showed increased activity only in response to the detection of the
final target, suggesting a distinct representation of information marking
the completion of task from other task relevant information.

B91

UNDERPINNINGS OF THE COSTS OF FLEXIBILITY IN PRESCHOOL
CHILDREN: THE ROLES OF INHIBITION AND WORKING MEMORY
Nicolas Chevalier1, Kimberly A. Espy1, Tiffany Sheffield1, Jennifer M. Nelson1,
Caron A. C. Clark1, Sandra A. Wiebe2; 1University of Nebraska-Lincoln,
Nebraska, 2University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta — The present study
aimed to understand the basis for the development of flexibility by
understanding its main underlying cognitive components, goal setting

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session B
and switch implementation, at an age of rapid acquisition. We examined
the potentially differential effects of inhibition and working memory on
goal setting and switch implementation in preschoolers. To this end, 300
4½-year-old children’s flexibility, inhibition, and working memory were
respectively assessed with the Shape School, which required switching
between color and shape naming tasks, a go-nogo task, which required
suppressing a prepotent response, and a working memory span task,
which required recalling lists of items in the correct order. Mixing costs
and local costs were computed to specifically capture respectively the
difficulty of goal setting and switch implementation on the Shape
School. Individual differences in both inhibition and working memory
resources significantly predicted both local and mixing costs, though
working memory more systematically influenced mixing costs and inhibition had a stronger influence on local costs. Furthermore, higher inhibition or working memory resources often resulted in better switching
accuracy, though at the expense of slower responding. Such speed/accuracy tradeoffs contrast with what is generally reported in older participants, presumably because of rapid skill acquisition at preschool age.
Consistent with evidence for less fractionation of executive control in
preschoolers than later in development, both goal setting and switch
implementation were found to relate to both inhibition and working
memory.

B92

UNDERLYING PROCESSES OF SWITCHING BETWEEN TASKS:
RECONFIGURATION OR ADAPTATION? Wouter De Baene1, Simone Kühn1,

Marcel Brass1; 1Ghent University — People show a remarkable flexibility in
switching between multiple tasks. However, people are generally slower
and less accurate at switching than at repeating tasks (i.e. the “switchcost”). The switching paradigm has frequently been used to systematically examine control processes in human cognition. In fMRI studies,
many regions thought to be involved in cognitive control showed
increased activation during switching compared to repeating. The dominant account for this activation difference is that a switch engages an
active reconfiguration process to tune the cognitive system for a proper
task execution. Such process will normally not be needed when repeating a task. However, higher activation patterns for switch than repeat trials could also be explained by adaptation in the repeat trials. Adaptation
refers to the decrease in neuronal activity when a stimulus is repeated. In
this fMRI study, we examined which account better explains the differential activation in preparing a switch compared to a repeat trial. Subjects needed to switch between a motion and color task. To disentangle
reconfiguration from adaptation, we generated different parametric
models for these views and used bayesian model selection to find the
best fitting model for the different areas. Both in areas involved in cognitive control functions as in task-specific regions, the adaptation model
fitted the data much better than the reconfiguration model. We argue
that the dominant reconfiguration view on task switching should be
revised. Furthermore, our data provide first evidence for adaptation on
an abstract representational level, namely for the representation of task
sets.

B93

THE NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL MECHANISMS OF EXPLORATORY AND
EXPLOITATIVE BEHAVIOR Nicole M. Long1, Bradley B. Doll1, Michael J.
Frank1, David Badre1; 1Brown University — When the outcomes of two

choices are clearly known, it is easy to choose between them. But with
uncertain outcomes, how do individuals decide whether to stick with the
status quo or to try an unexplored choice that might be more rewarding?
Neurogenetic research has shown that prefrontal dopamine function, as
measured by the COMT gene, predicts the degree to which individuals
explore as a function of uncertainty, whereas striatal dopaminergic
genes predict exploitation. However, left unanswered is the question of
which prefrontal region tracks uncertainty for the purpose of exploration. To address this question, the present experiment used fMRI to scan
a previously established reinforcement learning task in combination
with computational modeling to derive trial-by-trial estimates of uncer-

81

Poster Session B
tainty regarding individual choices, and reward prediction error following decision outcomes. Exploration is predicted to occur as a function of
the difference in uncertainty among choices. On each trial, participants
observed a clock face whose hand rotated clockwise over the course of
5s. The goal was to respond at the time during the rotation that afforded
the most points. Reward schedules were such that expected value could
increase, decrease, or remain constant with respect to response time. Preliminary results suggest that frontal pole tracks exploration as a function
of the relative uncertainty between choices (i.e., fast or slow responses),
while the basal ganglia track reward prediction error. These results can
lend further insight into the specific fronto-striatal systems supporting
the decision to explore or exploit.

B94

DRD2 GENOTYPE MODULATES THE EFFECT OF MOTIVATION ON
PREFRONTAL COGNITIVE PROCESSING Christian Fiebach1, Christine

Stelzel1, Ulrike Basten1, Ricarda Steinmayr1, Christian Montag2, Birgit
Spinath1, Martin Reuter2; 1University of Heidelberg, Germany, 2University of
Bonn, Germany — It is long known that motivational traits influence the

performance in cognitive tasks. Here we investigated how regulatory
focus modulates brain activation during a demanding cognitive task, i.e.,
rule-based task switching. Consistent with previous results, task switching activated prefrontal regions, particularly the inferior frontal junction
area (IFJ) and an area more anteriorly in the middle frontal gyrus. Persons with a strong self-regulatory focus on promotion showed relatively
greater task-switching activity in these regions compared to persons
with a weaker promotion focus, suggesting that promotion focused individuals invest more neural effort into task performance. Including
molecular genetic data on dopaminergic gene polymorphisms, we tested
the hypothesis that a promotion focus depends on dopamine system
activity. We observed that individuals without an A1 allele of the
DRD2/ANKK1-TaqIa polymorphism, i.e., individuals with relatively
greater D2 receptor density, have a significantly increased promotion
focus. However, an effect of promotion focus on brain activation as
described above was observed only for A1 allele carriers, i.e., for individuals with a relatively reduced density of D2 receptors who are more efficient in cognitive flexibility tasks (Stelzel et al., submitted). Non-carriers
of the A1 allele, in contrast, showed a reverse IFJ-correlation with the
strength of prevention focus, suggesting that a prevention focus leads to
less recruitment of task-related brain regions in this gene variant. Taken
together, these results indicate that motivational traits influence the neural effort invested into cognitive task performance. The strength of these
influences, however, depends on the efficiency of dopaminergic neural
systems.

B95

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF TASK SWITCHING WITHIN
THE SAME-DIFFERENT JUDGMENT PARADIGM Shulan Hsieh1, Mengyao

Wu2; 1Cognitive Electrophysiology Laboratory, Institute of Cognitive Science,
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, 2National Chung Cheng
University, Chia-Yi, Taiwan — The aim of this study was to explore electrophysiological correlates of re-orienting of attention to different aspects of
task processing by means of examining task switches within the samedifferent judgment paradigm. In the present study, two digits were presented simultaneously and participants were asked to judge the sameness or differences of pairs of digits according to either their perceptual
dimension or conceptual dimension. All four task-relevant dimensions
for same-different judgment varied randomly from trial to trial in a
block, with the constraint that a total of shifting probability was equal to
repeat trials. The length of preparatory interval, i.e., cue-target interval
of 200 ms or 1000 ms, was also manipulated. The behavioral data
showed that mean reaction time was slower in the switch than in the
repeat trials and the same-different judgment was faster when based on
perceptual dimensions than based on conceptual dimensions. The current ERP results further showed that task switching did not modulate a

82

Executive Processes: Goal Maintenance & Switching
similar stimulus-locked switch-related ERP component as found previously. The implications of the current results indicate there may be fundamental differences between different task switching paradigms.

B96

EXPERIENCE-DEPENDENT BRAIN STRUCTURAL PLASTICITY IN
SIMULTANEOUS LANGUAGE INTERPRETERS Narly Golestani1,2, Barbara

Moser-Mercer1, Alexis Hervais-Adelman1, Micah Murray3,4, Ulrich
Frauenfelder1, Reto Meuli3, Patric Hagmann3,5, Sophie K. Scott2, Christoph
Michel1; 1University of Geneva, 2University College London, 3Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Vaudois, 4University of Lausanne, 5Ecole Polytechnique Fédéral
de Lausanne — Previous work has shown experience-dependent structural plasticity in the human adult brain. For example, in the domain of
language, phoneticians with more phonetic transcription experience
have a larger left pars opercularis (subregion of Broca’s area) than those
with less such experience, suggesting that such training results in structural change in a brain region involved in phonetic segmentation
(Golestani et al, submitted). Here, we examined experience-dependent
brain structural change longitudinally in a new group of language
experts in training: simultaneous language interpreters. Simultaneous
language interpretation is a highly complex cognitive task, involving
performing active, ‘on-line’ switching between languages, and producing speech in one language while fully processing it in another. Interpreters are thus very skilled at language control, and flexible, rapid
online thinking. We scanned 10 interpretations students using high-resolution structural magnetic resonance imaging before, during, and after a
15-month intensive training program. We also scanned 12 healthy students in other domains, matched for age, sex, and multilingualism with
the interpreters, at similar time points, to control for brain changes
resulting from non-specific learning. We found evidence for brain structural plasticity in brain regions involved in processing phonology, grammar, and linguistic meaning as well as in more ‘executive’ regions
involved in controlled access to stored conceptual representations and
decision making (the left pars orbitalis and supramarginal gyrus) in the
interpreters but not in the controls. Results suggest that intensive training in a complex cognitive skill involving multiple languages results in
brain structural change in the very regions involved in expert performance.

B97

SPATIOTEMPORAL
ANALYSIS
OF
SET
SHIFTING
USING
MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY Julie Vidal1, Elizabeth W. Pang1, Travis

Mills1, Margot J. Taylor1; 1Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada — Cognitive flexibility has been investigated using set-shifting tasks; neuroimaging studies showing the critical role of the prefrontal cortex. Our aim
was to characterize the spatiotemporal correlates of the brain mechanisms involved in shifting, particularly in the frontal lobes, using the fine
temporal and spatial resolution of magnetoencephalography (MEG). Sixteen healthy right-handed adults participated in this study. Subjects
matched one of two coloured images with a target image by either the
colour or shape dimension of the target. Series of at least three trials were
included within a set before a rule shift occurred. Shifts were either
intradimensional (ID) or extradimensional (ED). MEG was recorded
using a 151 channel CTF system. Source analyses used the anatomical
MRI of each participant. We analyzed responses to the first (Shift) and
third (Repeat) trials in a set using a beamformer algorithm and compared them separately for ID and ED sets; shifts were compared between
ID and ED. Despite the absence of obvious differences at the sensor level
among these conditions, source analyses showed stronger activity starting at 200ms post-stimulus-onset in: 1) right middle frontal gyrus for ED
shifts compared to ED repeats and for ED shifts compared to ID shifts,
and 2) left prefrontal areas in ID shifts vs. both ID repeats and ED shifts.
Time-frequency analyses specified the frequency bands where changes
in brain oscillations occurred. These findings provide precise information about the timing and the localization within the prefrontal cortex of
the brain ability to shift from a rule to another.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Goal Maintenance & Switching

Poster Session B

B98

B100

ACETYLCHOLINE MODULATES FRONTOPARIETAL RESPONSE TO
DEMANDS FOR COGNITIVE CONTROL Mary K. Askren1, Elise Demeter1,

THE D2 AGONIST BROMOCRIPTINE MODULATES PREFRONTAL ACTIVITY
ASSOCIATED WITH FLEXIBILITY IN TASK SWITCHING Christine Stelzel1,

Mary Winters1, Stephan Taylor1, Martin Sarter1, Cindy Lustig1; 1University of
Michigan — Cognitive neuroscience research in primates (including
human neuroimaging) emphasizes the involvement of frontoparietal
networks in response to demands for cognitive control. Behavioral neuroscience research with rodents indicates that increases in acetylcholine
play a critical role in the brain’s response to these demands. The present
experiment integrates these approaches by using a task-switching procedure to vary demands for cognitive control and donepezil hydrochloride
(an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor) to vary extracellular acetylcholine levels. Demand for cognitive control varied with the requirement to attend
to external cues indicating the currently-relevant task rule (low: all trials
used the same rule; intermediate: current trial used the same rule as the
previous trial; high: current trial required switching to a new rule in
response to the cue). Young adults (age 18-30, n = 20 per group) were
tested at baseline and subsequently scanned 3 hours after receiving a
placebo pill, 5 mg, or 10 mg donepezil. Demand-related frontoparietal
activations differed most between the placebo and 5 mg conditions, suggesting a U-shaped dose-response curve. Under placebo, the largest activation increases occurred in the shift from low- to intermediate-demand,
where cue-processing first became relevant. The 5 mg condition did not
show significant differences between low- and intermediate-demand.
Instead, activation increases were isolated to the high-demand condition. This suggests that the 5 mg group only increased engagement of
frontoparietal control regions when a cue-based switch was immediately
required. Moderate increases in extracellular acetylcholine may facilitate
rapid shifting between internally-focused and externally-focused processing modes, allowing more selective engagement of frontoparietal
networks.

B99

DISTRIBUTED PATTERNS OF ACTIVATION IN THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX
REFLECT TASK-RELEVANT VISUAL DIMENSIONS OF A STIMULUS David

Pagliaccio1, Sophie Lebrecht1, David Badre1; 1Brown University — Prefrontal

cortex (PFC) is thought to maintain contextual information, rules, and
goals in order to guide action. However, the nature of the contextual
information maintained by these various frontal regions remains an
open question. In the present study, multi-voxel pattern analysis
(MVPA) of fMRI data was used to index the distributed patterns of activation in PFC associated with representation of specific task-relevant
dimensions of visual input and how multiple such contextual representations are maintained simultaneously. On each trial, participants were
presented one of two abstract shapes appearing in one of two orientations and in one of two colors. Two of the three dimensions (color, shape,
or orientation) were paired with particular manual responses based on
their identity. The third dimension cued one of these two dimensions as
the relevant response pairing for that trial. Thus, across all trials, one
dimension was always relevant and cued which of the two other dimensions was relevant on a given trial. MVPA prediction accuracy was used
to index when stimulus information along each of these three dimensions was being maintained by PFC. Initial results indicate that PFC
codes for only those visual dimensions relevant to selecting a response
or set of rules. By contrast, classifier success indicated that visual areas
code for these same dimensions regardless of task-relevance. These
results are consistent with the hypothesis that PFC flexibly maintains
contextual information in working memory that is relevant to selecting a
response, regardless of the specific content of that context.

Christian J. Fiebach1, Roshan Cools2, Mark D'Esposito3; 1University of
Heidelberg, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen,
3University of California, Berkeley — Recent imaging genetics studies suggest a role of the dopamine D2 receptor in the flexible adaptation of
behavior in humans based on differences in fronto-striatal activity
between genetic groups. However, the quasi-experimental nature of
these genetic studies limits the causal interpretability of these findings.
In the present study we provide converging evidence for our previous
finding of an association of genetic variations in the D2 receptor gene
with prefrontal activity changes in a rule-based task-switching paradigm. Using the D2 receptor agonist bromocriptine, we tested whether
increased D2 receptor stimulation causes increased prefrontal taskswitching-related activity as suggested by the genetic study. In two separate fMRI sessions (placebo/drug), participants performed 5 or odd/
even decisions on number stimuli, depending on a task cue. Increases in
switching-related reaction times under bromocriptine were accompanied by selective BOLD increases in prefrontal regions involved in task
switching, i.e., the left inferior frontal junction (IFJ) region and the anterior cingulate cortex. Importantly, the greater switching-related IFJ activity under the D2 receptor agonist concurs with the finding of greater
activity in this region for individuals with genetically determined high
D2 receptor density. This result further supports the assumption that
cognitive flexibility is related to the D2 system that exerts its effects in
prefrontal regions when task sets have to be switched flexibly from trial
to trial.

B101

COMPETING STRATEGIES FOR PRONOUN RESOLUTION Megan Reilly1,

Corey McMillan1, Robin Clark1, Murray Grossman1; 1University of
Pennsylvania — Individuals can use at least two decision-making strategies to resolve pronoun reference in ambiguous sentences like “The client chased the king. He laughed”. A syntactic strategy relies on
assigning a pronoun to the preferred subject (“client”) of a sentence. A
semantic strategy relies on gender information (“king” is male; “client”
is gender-neutral). We hypothesize that successful resolution of pronoun
reference requires, in part, the ability to choose between these strategies.
bvFTD patients have mental flexibility limitations with relative sparing
of language, and we predicted impaired pronoun reference resolution
due to limited ability to use each strategy appropriately. 14 healthy
seniors (WNL) and 9 bvFTD patients matched for age and education
were presented with 40 unambiguous (“The king chased the princess.
He laughed”) and 40 ambiguous (“The king chased the client. He
laughed”) sentence pairs. We manipulated whether the correct referent
was the subject or object (in unambiguous pairs) or whether the genderbiased noun (king) was the subject or object (in ambiguous pairs). Participants were instructed to identify the pronoun’s referent. We evaluated
mental flexibility using Oral Trails. bvFTD are less accurate for pronouns
referring to the object relative to the subject [t(8)=2.33, p<0.05] in unambiguous items. In ambiguous stimuli, bvFTD select the subject noun
(24% of responses) more than WNL (5% of responses) when the genderbiased noun is the object [t(21)=2.84, p=0.01]. This inappropriate use of a
syntactic strategy by bvFTD correlates with Oral Trails (r=-0.70, p=0.05),
which suggests that a limitation in mental flexibility may affect pronoun
resolution.

B102

UNPACKING THE PROSPECTIVE CODE AVAILABLE UNDER DIFFERENTIAL
OUTCOMES TRAINING Leh Woon Mok1; 1National Institute of Education,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore — This study examined a form
of prospection that involved minimal self-projection. The conditional
discrimination choice task was used, which modeled real-life delayed
choices learned and made conditionally based on the presenting discriminative/cue situation. Each correct cue-choice occurrence was followed

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

83

Poster Session B
by an outcome stimulus. Under the “differential outcomes” (DO) training procedure, outcome stimuli were unique to each correct cue-choice
occurrence (“cue-unique”). The DO procedure produces consistently
more accurate and faster learning, as compared to following all correct
choices with a “common outcome” (CO), or random, “non-differential
outcomes” (NDO). Healthy adults performed discrimination tasks under
the DO, CO and NDO procedures, and related comparison tasks, while
undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Differential
outcomes were sensory-perceptual events (visual vs. auditory). Sensoryspecific cortices and related brain regions prospectively coded the stimulus content of the respectively expected cue-unique outcomes (Mok et
al., 2009). These cue-unique outcome expectations "enriched" the prospective code available to bridge the memory delay. Previous results
indicated that, facilitated by the posterior parietal cortex, this enrichment
promoted an earlier transition from retrospection (of cue information) to
prospection (of events expected after the delay, e.g., correct choice and/
or anticipated outcome). Here, the prospective code available under DO
training was further unpacked. Choice stimuli were visual objects. Conjunction analyses across tasks implicated prospective coding also for: the
expected correct choice in precuneus (possibly a response intention), and
visual-specific inferior, lateral and medial frontal, and lingual gyri, and
cerebellum; and a general anticipatory response in anterior insula, likely
for an available (sensory-perceptual) outcome goal.

B103

A COMPONENTIAL ANALYSIS OF TASK-SET SWITCHING IN PARKINSON’S
DISEASE Li Jingling1, T-H. Chang2, C-H. Tsai1,3,4, M-K. Lu3,5, Y-C. Lin3;
1

Graduate Institute of Neural and Cognitive Sciences, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan, 2China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan,
3Neuroscience Laboratory, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan, 4Graduate Institute of Medical Science, China Medical University,
Taichung, Taiwan, 5Motor Cortex Group, Goethe-University, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany — Patients with Parkinson ’s disease (PD) have been reported to
have problems in cognitive flexibility. In this study, we further investigated which cognitive components of this deficit in PD patients correlate
with their disease and their 99mTc-TRODAT-1(dopamine transporter)
SPECT image. To this aim, we included not only age-matched controls
but also a young group to study the relative contributions of the disease
and aging to cognitive flexibility. Twenty-two patients with PD, 28
healthy age-matched older people, and 31 healthy young controls, were
recruited in this study. Three components, the mixing cost, the switching
cost, and the congruency effect, were measured in a task-set switching
paradigm. The participants performed two simple tasks either separately
in different blocks or alternating in a mixed block. The activation of the
striatum area of PD’s 99mTc-TRODAT-1 SPECT image was calculated
relative to the occipital lobe as an index of strength of the dopamine
transporters in the striatum. PD patients performed worse in switching
cost than older controls, and have larger mixing cost than young controls. Also, aging affects both the mixing cost and the congruency effect,
but not the switching cost. Furthermore, the index of the 99mTc-TRODAT-1 SPECT image significantly correlated with patients’ mixing cost.
Our findings suggest that (1) PD patients uniquely impaired in switching mental sets from one to the other, and (2) their deficits in keeping
two mental sets in mind simultaneously correlate with the loss of
dopamine in striatum.

B104

PRIMING AND BACKWARD INTERFERENCE IN THE HUMAN BRAIN:
STIMULUS ONSET ASYNCHRONY MANIPULATIONS REVEAL PROCESSING
INTERACTIONS DURING THE STROOP AND REVERSE STROOP TASKS

Lawrence Appelbaum1, Carsten Boehler1, Marty Woldorff1; 1Duke University —
Stroop interference provides a widely used and powerful marker of
executive cognitive function. Moreover, the Stroop-task stimulus components can be separated in time in order to explicitly study the dynamics
of information processing in the human brain. In the present work, we
measured behavioral and neural markers of interference using high-den-

84

Executive Processes: Goal Maintenance & Switching
sity ERPs as subjects performed variants of the Stroop (color-naming)
and reverse-Stroop (word-naming) tasks in which the task-irrelevant
component could appear at one of five stimulus onset asynchronies
(SOAs) relative to the task-relevant component: -200 or -100 ms before,
simultaneously, or +100 or +200 ms after. Experimental sessions were
run with both equal (50-50%) and unequal (80-20%) congruent and
incongruent pairings, and with and without the inclusion of neutral distractors, to assess the relationships between task-set (color- versus wordnaming), stimulus context (incongruency probability), and SOA-incongruency interactions. For all task variants, stimulus incongruency interacted with SOA producing greater conflict-related behavioral and ERP
effects when the irrelevant stimulus component preceded the task-relevant target, and diminished but still significant effects when the taskirrelevant stimulus component followed. These ‘priming’ and ‘backward
interference’ SOA effects both interacted with task, showing a nearly
50% reduction in behavioral and neural interference in the equal-probability reverse-Stroop task (e.g., prototypical trial-type frequency effects).
Interestingly, ERP incongruency effects also produced opposite accelerating and decelerating latency patterns across SOAs for the two tasks,
reflecting faster processing speeds for words than colors in these tasks.
These results provide powerful examples of how cognitive task and
stimulus conflict interact in the human brain.

B105

THE IMPACT OF PARKINSON’S DISEASE ON THE EFFECTS OF A MATCH
BETWEEN GLOBAL AND LOCAL INCENTIVES IN RULE-BASED CATEGORY
LEARNING Monica Zilioli1, W. Todd Maddox2, Edward Drasby1, Shawn Ell1;
1University of Maine, 2University of Texas — Recent

data suggest that performance on rule-based category learning tasks can be modulated by
manipulating the extent to which global and local incentives match. The
goal of the present study was to investigate if the effects of the match
between global and local incentives are mediated by fronto-striatal networks by using Parkinson’s disease (PD) as a model of fronto-striatal
dysfunction. Global incentive was manipulated by placing participants
in a promotion (sensitive to gains) or prevention (sensitive to losses) regulatory focus. The local incentive was to maximize gains by earning
points on a trial-by-trial basis and was constant across conditions. Participants were trained on a rule-based task where successful performance
required learning to attend to a single, relevant stimulus dimension and
ignore three irrelevant stimulus dimensions. Once a learning criterion
was met, the categorization rule was changed (i.e., a previously irrelevant dimensions became relevant). PD patients performed similar to
healthy controls on the first rule. When the categorization rule changed,
however, the performance of the two groups diverged. For healthy control participants, there was a savings when there was a match between
the global and local incentives (i.e., promotion) and a cost when there
was a mismatch between the global and local incentives (i.e., prevention). In contrast, for individuals with PD, there was a cost of similar
magnitude for both the match and mismatch conditions. These results
suggest that the fronto-striatal networks disrupted in PD mediate the
effects of a match between global and local incentives in rule-based category learning.

B106

SEX DIFFERENCES UNDER DIAZEPAM IN RULE GUIDED BEHAVIOR: AN
FMRI STUDY Zeidy Munoz-Torres1, Jorge Armony3, David Trejo-Martínez2,

Rubén Conde2, María Corsi-Cabrera1; 1Laboratory of Sleep, Faculty of
Psychology, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 2Module of
Neuroimage and Cognition, Hospital Ángeles del Pedregal, 3Douglas Mental
Health University Institute, McGill University — Benzodiazepines (BZD) modulate GABA-A receptor by increasing Cl- conductance across the membrane. In addition, progesterone and its metabolites have been shown to
exert modulatory effects on the GABA-A receptor complex. Enhancement of inhibition with BDZ can have important effects at the cognitive
level, including executive functions such as behaviour guided by complex and arbitrary rules. To investigate the neural correlates of these

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Other
effects, we explored the influence of BDZ on brain activity during a rule
guided-behavior task using fMRI. Eighteen healthy volunteers participated in a single-blind study. BOLD activity was measured 2 hours after
a single-dose (10 mg) of diazepam (DZ) or placebo (PL) administration
in two counterbalanced sessions during the rule guided task. Performance was analyzed in two tasks: simple rule and complex rules modalities. We found that a single dose of DZ was enough to increase reaction
times and reduce accuracy in the complex-rules with greater effects in
women than in men. Task performance under DZ did not activate the
frontal regions as in PL, while in posterior areas an increase in BOLD
activity was observed, with clusters in temporal, parietal and occipital
cortices, more evident in men than in women. Thus, DZ appears to exert
a different antero-posterior asymmetric activation pattern between
women and men. These results suggest that the enhanced inhibition produced by DZ alters the activity in the neural networks involved in complex rule-guided behaviors, leading to a decrease in performance. The
sex differences effects of DZ may have clinically relevant implications for
therapeutic strategies.

Executive Processes: Other
B107

FUNCTIONAL SPECIALIZATION WITHIN RIGHT VENTROLATERAL
PREFRONTAL CORTEX: A META-ANALYSIS OF STOPPING, REFLEXIVE
ORIENTING, AND MATERIAL SPECIFICITY EFFECTS Benjamin J. Levy1,
Anthony D. Wagner1; 1Neuroscience Program, Stanford University — Delineat-

ing the functional organization of prefrontal cortex is central to advancing neural and psychological models of goal-directed cognition. Over the
past decade, considerable functional neuroimaging data indicate that
specific forms of cognitive control are consistently associated with distinct subregions of ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC). While this
has led to increasingly specified models of left VLPFC functioning, less is
known about functional differentiation within right VLPFC. Recently,
two proposals have dominated theories about the role of right VLPFC:
stopping of motor responses and reflexive orienting to abrupt perceptual
onsets. At present, it remains unclear whether these processes activate
the same or distinct VLPFC subregion(s), and whether these putative
processes are inherently linked (e.g., stopping may often involve orienting to an infrequent stop cue). Moreover, it is also unclear whether and
how these perspectives can account for the broad range of goal-directed
tasks that activate right VLPFC. For example, it is not obvious how either
could account for the frequent observation of right VLPFC activation
during processing of, and episodic memory for, visuospatial stimuli.
Here we review these disparate literatures through meta-analysis of
right VLPFC function. ALE analyses revealed both overlap and divergence in the VLPFC subregions associated with stopping, reflexive orienting, and visuospatial processing tasks. These results advance
understanding of the functional heterogeneity within right VLPFC, and
we discuss how this heterogeneity relates to hierarchical theories of PFC
functional organization and cognitive control. Funded by NIMH (5R01–
MH080309).

B108

A SYSTEMS MODEL FOR SELECTIVITY BETWEEN DEFAULT AND TASK
MODES Kevin Brown1, Jonathan Smallwood1, Jonathan Schooler1, Jean

Carlson1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara — Neuroimaging data suggests that the human brain has at least two attentional states - a taskfocused mode in which attention is focused externally on the task at
hand and a less constrained internal mode dubbed the default state. An
essential step to understanding the distinct processes governed by these
different states is to understand the way in which the brain divides finite
cognitive resources and selects among externally- and internally-driven
goal states. We present a coarse-grained, systems-level dynamical model
which explores the temporal nature of the interaction between these different modes, in which we examine the role of the locus coeruleus in
modulating between external events and internally generated signals.
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session B
We discuss the implications of the model for understanding mindwandering and attentional failures, which we characterize as partitioning of
cognitive effort away from externally-driven tasks to internally-generated ones. We also discuss the potential of directly fitting the dynamical
model to multimodal dynamical measurements (surface EEG, BOLD
fMRI and pupillometry data).

B109

BRAIN BASES OF COGNITIVE EFFICIENCY: TRIAL-LEVEL PROCESSING
SPEED AS A PREDICTOR OF BOLD SIGNAL-CHANGE Neena K. Rao1,

Michael A. Motes1,2, Bart Rypma1,2; 1Center for BrainHealth & School of
Behavioral and Brain Sciences University of Texas at Dallas, 2University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center — Previous neuroimaging research on
brain bases of cognitive efficiency has examined inter-subject variability.
Group-level correlations between performance and neural activity have
shown that better performance is supported by less prefrontal cortex
(PFC) activity, at least among younger adults. In this study, however,
brain bases of cognitive efficiency were studied at the intra-subject level.
Subject-level correlations between trial-level reaction time (RT) and fMRI
BOLD signal-change were examined. While undergoing fMRI, participants completed a scanner-adapted version of Digit-Symbol Substitution
(Wechsler, 1997), a measure of processing speed. A key of nine digitsymbol pairings and a single digit-symbol probe pair appeared simultaneously on the screen (for 4 s). Participants were to indicate whether the
probe was present in the key or absent. Linear deconvolution, using an
RT time-series model (derived from proportional scaling of an eventrelated HRF model by trial-level RT), was used to evaluate relationships
between trial-level RT and BOLD percent signal-change. Group-level
analyses of the RT-BOLD correlations revealed that in multiple brain
regions faster RTs were associated with less signal-change. Thus, cognitive efficiency was associated with neural efficiency over a broad network of brain regions. Comparisons between trials in which the probe
was present versus those in which it was absent revealed that RTs mediated activation within parts of PFC. When the probe was present, greater
activation within left PFC was associated with faster RT; however, when
the probe was absent, greater activation within right PFC was associated
with slower RT, suggesting that cognitive efficiency might be associated
with lateralized PFC efficiency.

B110

EFFECT OF L-DOPA ON BRAIN ACTIVITY PATTERNS DURING A MOTOR
TASK IN PARKINSON'S PATIENTS ON AND OFF MEDICATION: AN FMRI
STUDY Kristina Martinu1, Clotilde Degroot1, Antonio Strafella2, Oury
Monchi1; 1Centre de Recherche de l'Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de
Montréal, 2CAMH-PET Imaging Center / Toronto Western Hospital — Parkin-

son’s patients manifest cognitive and motor symptoms. Using a cognitive fMRI task, we previously showed that activity in cortical regions
vary depending on striatal recruitment. Also, L-dopa helped restore a
normal pattern in the motor but not the cognitive cortico-striatal loop.
Furthermore, when comparing self-initiated (SI), externally-triggered
(ET), and repeated (Ctl) movements in healthy participants, we found
activations in the motor loop for SI and ET movements, and in the cognitive loop for SI movements. We investigated L-dopa effects on activation
patterns using the same finger-movement task. We predicted that
patients OFF medication would have altered cortico-striatal patterns of
activity and that medication should partially restore the activity
observed in controls. 15 Parkinson’s patients underwent two fMRI sessions, once on, once off medication. Participants used their right hand to
perform SI, ET, and Ctl movements. 15 healthy controls were also
recruited. Preliminary results indicate increased activity in the PFC and
striatum with increasing task complexity. Patients ON or OFF do not
show such an increase in prefrontal activity, but ON patients exhibit similar patterns of cortical activity as the controls in regions such as the parietal and premotor cortex. Greater putamen activation ON than OFF or
control is observed for all conditions. Our results show that activity in
the premotor and parietal regions is partly restored when patients are

85

Poster Session B
ON, although task difficulty has a stronger effect. While there is an effect
of medication on the motor loop, these results support the lack of L-dopa
effect on the cognitive loop.

B111

MAPPING DISSOCIABLE COMPONENTS OF FRONTAL-EXECUTIVE
FUNCTION Ami Tsuchida1,2, Lesley Fellows1,2; 1Montréal Neurological

Executive Processes: Other
B113

IMPROVED CONTROL OVER BRAIN REGIONS USING META-COGNITIVE
AWARENESS: FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY CHANGES UNDERLYING
IMPROVED SELF-REGULATION OF RLPFC Matthew Dixon1, R. Graeme
McCaig1, Kalina Christoff1; 1University of British Columbia — Real-time fMRI

prefrontal cortex (PFC) plays a central
role in higher order ‘executive’ functions critical for flexible, goaldirected behavior, including planning, problem-solving and decisionmaking. A growing body of fMRI work argues for fine-grained distinctions in the functions of specific regions within PFC. However, the component processes underlying executive functions, and their anatomical
substrates, remain hotly debated. Loss-of-function studies are an important source of converging evidence in this debate. Dissociable deficits are
a particularly powerful form of evidence that can emerge from such
studies. Here, we aimed to test putative functional specializations within
PFC in a large sample of patients with focal damage affecting various
sectors of the frontal lobes. A battery of tasks was chosen to selectively
tap a range of component processes, including working memory,
response inhibition, selective attention, and reinforcement learning. The
focus was on components thought to relate to different major subregions
within PFC. The battery was administered to 40 subjects with chronic,
focal frontal lobe damage, and to 50 demographically-matched healthy
participants. Performance on all 7 tasks was worse in those with frontal
damage compared to controls. However, there was evidence of functional specialization: Nearly all patients were impaired at one or more
task, and no patient was impaired at all tasks. Overall, this dataset provides support for ‘fractionated’ views of frontal lobe function, and clarifies the behavioural and anatomical selectivity of a set of widely used
tests of executive function.

(rt-fMRI) has allowed for the possibility of training subjects to control
localized brain activation. While rt-fMRI studies have mainly focused on
changes in an isolated target region of interest, it is likely that learning to
control activation in a given brain area is instantiated by changes across
a network of regions. We previously reported that a real-time feedback
group, but not a sham feedback group, learned to regulate activation in
rostrolateral prefrontal cortex (RLPFC) through use of meta-cognitive
awareness. Here we sought to provide first examination of changes in
the strength of functional connectivity during the course of real-time
training using RLPFC as a seed region. Several regions including the
bilateral inferior parietal lobule, posterior cingulate/retrosplenial cortex,
and right inferior frontal gyrus exhibited a linear increase in functional
connectivity with the RLPFC across training sessions and this effect was
significantly greater in the real-time feedback group. Additionally, the
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the inferior frontal junction (and the
ventral striatum at a liberal threshold) displayed greater functional connectivity with the RLPFC in the real-time relative to the sham group
across all training sessions. Improved control over RLPFC activation and
sustained meta-cognitive awareness was associated with enhanced functional connectivity between RLPFC and a distributed network of areas
supporting internal experience, executive control, and reinforcement
learning. These findings highlight the importance of considering network mechanisms in learning to control localized brain activation and
open the possibility of using rt-fMRI training to alter large-scale functional networks of the brain.

B112

B114

Institute, 2McGill University — The

A COMPLEMENTARY APPROACH TO IMPULSIVITY IN ADHD USING A
TIME PERCEPTION TASK Kazufumi Omura1, Nami Okada1; 1Faculty of
Education, Art and Science, Yamagata University — Previous research has
contributed to the understanding of impairments in behavioral inhibition (impulsivity) in patients with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). It is suggested that time perception may be related to
impulsiveness. The internal clocks of impulsive individuals may run
faster than those of non-impulsive individuals. An impulsive individual
would be likely to overestimate time intervals. This study evaluated how
individual differences in the time perception correlate with the impulsive traits measured by simple behavioral experiments and self-reported
questionnaires. Twenty-six healthy participants completed self-reported
impulsivity measure, Barratt Impulsiveness Scale, version 11 (BIS-11,
three components of impulsivity: motor, cognitive, and attentional).
Afterwards, they were asked to perform two behavioral tasks, a time
perception task and a stop-signal task. In the time perception task, participants estimated time interval (15 s) during seeing a fixation on a computer screen and press the button when they thought the number of
seconds had passed. In the stop-signal task, participants inhibited to
press the button if a stop signal appears after the onset of go signal. Reaction time and responses were recorded and analyzed. Faster participants’ time estimation was found to be related to significantly higher
score of their BIS-11 motor-impulsivity. Strangely, there were no significant correlations between the score of the stop-signal task and any subsets of BIS-11. The results suggest that time perception task to be a
potential tool to the complementary nature of self-report questionnaires
and neuropsychological tasks in the assessment of impulsivity in
ADHD.

86

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY OF NUMBER COMPARISON IN 6-7 YEAR-OLD
CHILDREN Nadia Nosworthy1, Matt Waxer1, Daniel Ansari1; 1The University
of Western Ontario — A large body of research has demonstrated that
numerical magnitude processing is important for children's development of mathematical skills. Significantly less is known about the neural
representation of numerical magnitude and how this changes as a function of development and learning. In the present study we examined the
brain responses during numerical magnitude processing in a group of
children who are at the beginning of formal math instructions. Specifically, we used event-related brain potentials (ERPs) to measure the time
course of brain activation during numerical magnitude comparison. We
used the numerical distance effect (NDE) to measure the effect of numerical magnitude on ERP responses. The NDE is characterized by an
inverse relationship between reaction times and numerical difference.
Behavioral research has demonstrated that this effect changes over
developmental time and previous research using ERPs in adults and
five-year-old children has revealed an NDE on ERP responses. However,
there currently exists no research of this kind for children who are just
beginning formal math education and arithmetic learning. To address
this question, we examined the neural correlates of numerical magnitude
comparison in first and second grade students. Seventeen 6-7 year-olds
completed a numerical comparison task while wearing a 128-channel
geodesic sensor net. Consistent with previous research, a significant
main effect of distance was found on the transition between the N1 and
P2p components over parietal electrode sites. Age-related differences in
ERP responses as well as relationships between individual differences in
mathematical achievement and brain responses will be discussed.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Other

Poster Session B

B115

B118

CONNECTIVITY-BASED PARCELLATION OF HUMAN PARIETAL AND
DORSAL PREFRONTAL CORTICES Jerome Sallet1,2, Rogier Mars1,2, Saad

SUBCORTICAL AND COGNITIVE DEFICITS IN 1991 GULF WAR
SYNDROME 2 Kimberly Case1, Ilana Levy1, Kaundinya Gopinath2, Jeffrey

connectivity of the human brain, even though regions connections to the
rest of the brain strongly constrain its functions. Our knowledge of
human brain organization is principally based on its cytoarchitecture
and on inferences from neuro-anatomical studies in non human primates and rodents. Recent developments of Diffusion Tensor Imaging
(DTI) tools enable now to study the connectivity of the human brain. In
this experiment, DTI was used to investigate connectivity profiles of dorsal prefrontal and parietal cortices. First, an algorithm was used to search
for regional variations in the probabilistic connectivity profiles of all prefrontal and parietal cortex voxels with the whole of the rest of the brain.
The results of this analysis were submitted to a clustering algorithm to
determine clusters that slow similar connectivity profiles. Second, the
probabilities of connection between identified clusters and predefined
target regions of interest were calculated, such as to determine a connectivity fingerprint for each region. Preliminary results suggest a consistent clustering across subjects that fairly seems to follow known
cytoarchitectonic differences. These preliminary results suggest in the
parietal cortex a rostro-caudal organization of IPL and SPL. In the dorsal
prefrontal cortex, they suggest a dorso-ventral and rostro-caudal segregations of clusters. These later results of the parcellation analysis will be
discussed in regards to the theory of the functional hierarchical organization of the dorsolateral prefrontal.

symptoms not explained by post-traumatic-stress disorder, collectively
known as Gulf War Syndrome (GWS). One group of studies divided
GWS into 3 syndrome groups with syndrome 2 (GWS 2) showing the
most marked cognitive deficits. GWS 2 patients have been found to have
dysfunction of the basal ganglia (BG) possibly due to sarin exposure. Ten
GWS 2 patients (53-71yrs) and twelve healthy deployed controls (5176yrs) performed a blocked word-generation fMRI task. Participants
were given category cues and asked to covertly generate category members for 15 seconds. The analysis of fMRI BOLD signal incorporated
recently developed statistical methodology that accounts for the spatial
correlation among voxels. Clusters of contiguous voxels were defined
based on regional spatial models, and local signal was estimated by spatial averages within clusters. Using this method, the GWS 2 patients had
significantly less activity in the BG, thalamus, and other subcortical
regions than healthy control veterans. Participants also completed a battery of language-related tests showing that GWS 2 patients had lower
scores on phonemic fluency (DKEFS) and a semantic working memory
task. These results emphasize the cognitive deficits of GWS 2 patients
and the importance of further research in understanding GWS 2 and the
other Gulf War Syndromes groups. These findings also demonstrate
how basal ganglia dysfunction can account for cognitive performance in
GWS 2 patients.

B116

B119

ERP VOLTAGE MAPPING AND SURFACE LAPLACIAN MEASURES
MEDIATE OBSERVED GENETIC INFLUENCES ON EARLY AND LATE
PROCESSING IN A VISUAL ODDBALL TASK Lauren E. Ethridge1, Stephen

SELECTION AND CONTROLLED RETRIEVAL: SHARED NEURAL
SUBSTRATES, DIFFERENTIAL MODULATION BY ANXIETY AND
DEPRESSION Hannah R. Snyder1, Marie T. Banich1, Yuko Munakata1;

Jbabdi2, Timothy Behrens2, Heidi Johansen-Berg2, Matthew Rushworth1,2;
1
Decision and Action Laboratory, University of Oxford, 2Oxford Centre for
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain, John Radcliffe Hospital,
University of Oxford — Surprisingly we do not much about the structural

M. Malone2, William G. Iacono2, Brett A. Clementz1; 1University of Georgia,
2University of Minnesota — Studying genetic influences on complex cogni-

tive operations provides an opportunity to understand the extent to
which constitutional and environmental factors uniquely contribute to
individual differences in problem-solving abilities. Monozygotic (MZ or
identical) twins share all of their genes, while dizygotic (DZ or fraternal)
twins share only about 50 percent of them. An increased similarity
between MZ compared to DZ twins for a particular trait should be due
to genes rather than shared environment. Neuroimaging studies (fMRI
and/or EEG/MEG studies in which data are analyzed in source space)
of normal twins performing complex cognitive operations are surprisingly rare. In the present project, subjects were required to detect infrequent target stimuli within the context of frequently presented nontarget, or standard, stimuli. N170 and P300 components in the target
condition showed moderate to high levels of heritability when measured
with scalp potentials alone, but reduced heritability when measured at
the level of approximate sources using surface laplacian mapping. The
P250 component associated with the target condition showed the opposite effects, while the nontarget-associated late slow wave component
showed similar levels of heritability for both voltage and surface laplacian measures. Results suggest that observed genetic influence on brain
activity may be dependent on method of measurement: global (voltage)
versus more localized (surface laplacian). Traditional additive and dominance (ADE) models were tested for all peaks, however intraclass correlation values suggest that emergenic rather than additive genetic effects
may be indicated for a subset of these components.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Spence2, Kristin Moffett1, Parina Gandhi2, Aman Goyal2, Yan Fang2, Richard
Briggs2, John Hart2, Anna Moore3, Bruce Crosson1; 1University of Florida,
2University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 3Emory University School of
Medicine — About 26-32% of 1991 Gulf War veterans have multiple

1

University of Colorado at Boulder — During language production, words
must constantly be retrieved and selected for production in the face of
many possible alternatives. Multiple lines of evidence indicate the
importance of left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) in this process, but its exact role is debated: (1) selection between multiple automatically-activated representations (e.g. Thompson-Schill et al., 1997), (2)
controlled retrieval from semantic memory when a response is not automatically activated (e.g. Martin & Cheng, 2006), or, (3) selection in midVLPFC and retrieval in anterior-VLPFC (e.g. Badre & Wagner, 2007).
Previous research used correlated measures of selection and retrieval
demands, making it difficult to adjudicate between these competing
hypotheses. We use unconfounded measures and independently manipulate selection and retrieval demands in a verb generation task, showing
shared neural substrates support these processes, including left anterior
and mid-VLPFC and posterior anterior cingulate/pre-supplementary
motor area (pACC/pre-SMA). Moreover, selection and retrieval interact
in left VLPFC: selection effects are stronger when retrieval demands are
low. These results are contrary to previous accounts positing a single
role for left VLPFC or a functional dissociation between anterior and mid
VLPFC. Rather, we suggest that two properties of PFC, competitive inhibition and recurrent connectivity, respectively support selection and
retrieval within in the same cortical areas. While shared neural substrates subserve selection and retrieval, they are differentially modulated
by psychopathology: anxiety affects VLPFC activity during selection
while depression affects pACC/pre-SMA during retrieval. Implications
for models of cognitive control during language production, and cognitive control deficits in anxiety and depression, are discussed.

87

Poster Session B

Executive Processes: Other

B120

B122

COGNITIVE ASSESSMENT AND QUANTITATIVE IMAGING IN SYSTEMIC
LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS Becky Haynes1, Kevin Davies1, Nicholas

REPRODUCIBILITY OF FMRI BOLD SIGNAL IN THE COGNITIVE CONTROL
NETWORK IN THE STROOP PARADIGM Raymond
Cho1,
Tetsuya

Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) and aims to relate this to quantitative brain
imaging. Whereas other imaging studies have focused on a single metric
of cognitive impairment this study focuses on separate aspects of cognition. Patients (mean age 41±8.6) with a primary diagnosis of SLE were
compared to matched controls. Participants completed a broad cognitive
test battery, psychological measures and quantitative MRI using magnetisation transfer and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). From DTI we can
measure the extent (ADC) and directionality (FA) of diffusion which are
sensitive measures of brain structural integrity. Initial results indicate
that across the battery the patient group performed worse than controls.
Significant differences emerged on episodic memory (AVLT), simple
speed of processing tasks and fluency tasks. On the AVLT the patients
had lower baseline recall scores, but comparable rates of learning to controls. Controls showed more proactive interference, whereas the patients
showed greater retroactive interference. SLE patients have previously
showed some speed of processing deficits. In this study deficits were evident on pencil-and-paper tasks, with no difference on computerised
ones, suggesting perhaps motor problems (moderate correlation
between finger tapping and digit symbol copying) or motivation issues.
On DTI measures the patient group showed increased ADC and
decreased FA in the white matter, changes which are consistent with
subtle brain damage. Future work will involve relating these changes to
the cognitive deficits identified and how these differences relate to neuropsychiatric manifestations in these patients.

(fMRI) has been one of the primary tools for study the neural bases of
cognitive processes. However, the large variability in the fMRI blood
oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal can pose a challenge when
making comparisons between groups or across time. There has been relatively little work regarding the reproducibility of BOLD signal modulations as elicited by cognitive tasks. We investigated test-retest reliability
of BOLD activations in the dorsoloateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and
anterior cingulated cortex (ACC) regions in 15 healthy control subjects
performing a fast event-related version of the Stroop task in two separate
sessions. Regions of interest (ROI) were defined by main effects of condition in two separate ANOVA models, one contrasting Incongruent and
Congruent trials (Contrast 1) and the other contrasting Error and Correct
(Contrast 2) trials. Both contrasts gave rise to highly robust ROIs in the
DLPFC and ACC regions, with no main effect of Session or Condition by
Session interaction, indicating an overall stability of the activations. Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) were calculated for each Contrast in
each ROI. Significant, moderate ICCs were observed for the DLPFC
(Contrast 1) and ACC (Contrast 2) with poorer ICCs for the other indices.
These findings indicate that even higher cognitive processes such as
those tapped in cognitive control paradigms such as the Stroop task can
elicit fMRI BOLD signals that have a relatively high degree of reproducibility.

Dowell1, Paul Tofts1, Jenny Rusted2; 1Brighton and Sussex Medical School,
2
The University of Sussex — This study investigates cognition in Systemic

B121

THE BAYCREST PSYCHOSOCIAL STRESS TEST: A NEW PARADIGM
ALLOWING FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF IN VIVO COPING BEHAVIOUR
FOLLOWING TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Katherine Krpan1,2, Donald

Stuss1,3, Nicole Anderson1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Kunin-Lunenfeld Applied
Research Unit, Baycrest, 3Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest — Coping has

been hypothesized to be the final common pathway leading to negative
outcomes following traumatic brain injury (TBI). The mechanisms of this
relationship, however, are unclear. Prior research in this area has almost
exclusively depended upon self-reported coping. These measures are
particularly problematic following TBI given the known impairments in
self-awareness and memory. The purpose of this study was to assess
coping behaviour during a simulated real world stress test that we
developed, the ‘Baycrest Psychosocial Stress Test’, and to relate behaviour to neuropsychological performance. People with TBI and matched
controls completed a neuropsychological test battery, the Ways of Coping (WOC) Questionnaire, and were asked to give an impromptu speech
about crime in Toronto to a confederate posing as a specialist in communications. Between task instructions and speech delivery, participants
were left alone for 10 minutes with a number of materials that facilitated
either planful or avoidant coping. Behaviour was recorded and later
coded by three independent blinded raters. There were no differences
between groups in self-reported coping on the WOC. However, the control group engaged in more planful than avoidant coping, while the TBI
group engaged in more avoidant than planful coping. Moreover, based
on behaviour, the TBI group could be divided into ‘planners’ and ‘avoiders’, and varied on a number of neuropsychological variables including
executive function and premorbid intelligence. Results suggest that the
BPST may be sensitive to differences in coping that are not evident on
self-report measures, and that these differences are related to neuropsychological function.

88

Takahashi1, Rupa Ramaswamy1, Cameron Carter2, Jonathan Cohen3;
1
University of Pittsburgh, 2UC Davis, 3Princeton University — Functional MRI

B123

EFFECT OF LEVODOPA MEDICATION ON IMPLICIT SEQUENCE LEARNING
IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Mazda Beigi1,2, Leonora Wilkinson1, Andrew
Parton2, Marjan Jahanshahi1; 1Institute of Neurology, 2Brunel University —

Introduction: 11C-raclopride PET imaging has shown that in healthy
individuals sequence learning on the serial reaction time task (SRT) is
associated with release of endogenous dopamine in the striatum. Tonic
increase of dopamine with levodopa medication has been proposed to
mask phasic changes in dopamine necessary for learning. In light of
these, our aim was to investigate how levodopa medication affects
implicit sequence learning on a probabilistic SRT in Parkinson’s disease.
Method: Nine patients with Parkinson’s disease (mean age 66.1, 11 male)
with mild to moderate illness were tested on two separate days with a
minimum interval of a week, once on medication and once off medication (overnight withdrawal for mean of 11.3 hours (SD=1.6). We used 15
blocks of 100 trials of a probabilistic (85% probable and 15% improbable
targets) SRT. Parallel second order conditional 12 item sequences were
used for training on and off medication, with order counterbalanced.
Results: Preliminary results suggest that implicit sequence on the probabilistic SRT is somewhat better on than off medication; although the
sample size needs to be increased. Conclusion: Preliminary results are
consistent with previous findings that functions mediated by motor and
associative fronto-striatal circuits are improved with levodopa medication in PD.

B124

PERCEPTUAL AMBIGUITY DRIVES SUBJECTIVE DECISION COSTS: A TEST
OF NEURAL MEDIATION Joseph McGuire1, Matthew Botvinick1; 1Princeton
University — Decision-making under conditions of ambiguous or conflicting evidence can carry intrinsic costs. Decision costs can lead people to
avoid or defer decisions, or alternatively to adopt simplifying strategies.
The mechanisms through which information processing demands give
rise to decision costs are poorly understood. Participants in the present
fMRI experiment made simple motion-direction decisions about stimuli
that varied in their perceptual difficulty (i.e., noise vs. coherence). Participants were periodically permitted to escape their current difficulty
level, and opted to escape more frequently when perceptual difficulty
was greater. Analyses tested for neural regions that were candidates to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Other

Poster Session B

mediate the influence of perceptual difficulty on escape. Whole-brain,
within-subject mediation analyses revealed that activity in dorsomedial
prefrontal cortex and in anterior areas of the basal ganglia showed statistical covariance patterns characteristic of mediation. In basal ganglia the
mediating response was negative: greater perceptual noise elicited
reduced BOLD response, which in turn predicted decisions to escape the
task. In dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, conversely, the mediating
response was positive. Processes subserved by the identified brain
regions may account for decision costs by effecting a transformation
between decision difficulty and reduced valuation. Results offer insight
to the origin of subjective decision costs under conditions of ambiguous
perceptual evidence.

B125

COVERT COUNTERMEASURES DISRUPT FMRI-BASED DECEPTION
DETECTION Giorgio Ganis1,2,3; 1Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
2Massachusetts

General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, 3Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA — Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies
have documented differences between deceptive and honest responses.
Capitalizing on this research, companies marketing fMRI-based lie
detection services have been founded, generating ethical concerns. Critically, no fMRI study has examined directly the effect of countermeasures, methods used by prevaricators to defeat traditional deception
detection procedures. An fMRI study was conducted to fill this research
gap using a concealed information paradigm. In one condition, participants were trained to use a covert countermeasure, whereas in a second
condition they performed the task without using countermeasures.
Robust group fMRI differences between deceptive and honest responses
were found only in the no-countermeasure condition. Furthermore, in
single participants, deception detection accuracy was 100% without
countermeasures, based on activation in medial and ventrolateral prefrontal cortices, but fell to 33% with countermeasures. These findings
clearly demonstrate that fMRI-based deception detection measures are
vulnerable to countermeasures. Importantly, they underscore the pressing need for more basic science research before these methods can be
applied in real life settings.

B126

SELECTIVE ROLE OF THE ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX IN FEEDBACK
EVALUATION Celine Amiez1, Jerome Sallet2, Emmanuel Procyk3, Michael

Petrides1; 1McGill University, Montréal Neurological Institute,
Neuropsychology/Cognitive Neuroscience, Montréal, Canada, 2University of
Oxford, UK, 3INSERM U846, Stem Cell and Brain Research Institute, Bron,
France — Learning is affected by outcome expectations and the detection

and utilization of actual outcomes (positive and negative). In primates,
this function is known to involve the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). On
one hand, several studies have shown that neuronal activity in the anterior cingulate cortex specifically encodes negative feedback signaling
incorrect trials. On the other hand, recent studies have suggested that the
role of this region may not only be restricted to error processing, but may
also extend to the encoding of positive feedback. The present study
examined whether the ACC is involved in the evaluation and utilization
of both negative and positive outcomes of goal directed actions. We used
functional magnetic resonance imaging to demonstrate the involvement
of the ACC in tracking the value of both negative and positive feedback
during trial and error learning. Normal human subjects (N=11) were
scanned in a 1.5T scanner while performing a problem-solving task in
which they had to discover by trial and error which one of four identical
stimuli was associated with positive feedback. ACC feedback-related
activity was modulated by prediction errors, i.e. the difference between
the expected and the obtained feedback. These results therefore demonstrate that the ACC is involved in evaluating positive or negative outcomes that carry information for adaptive behavior, such as maintaining
exploration after errors (negative feedback) or shifting towards exploitation following the occurrence of a correct response (positive feedback).

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

89

Attention: Spatial
C1

AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN THE ATTENTIONAL CONTROL OF VISUAL
CORTEX: A SELECTIVE PROBLEM IN THE LEFT VISUAL HEMIFIELD
Lindsay Nagamatsu1, Patrick Carolan1, Teresa Liu-Ambrose1, Todd Handy1;
1
The University of British Columbia — To what extent does our visual-spatial

attention change with age? While it has been previously reported that
relative to young controls, seniors show delays in attention-related sensory processing, it remains unclear whether these differences are due to
deficits associated with the sensory benefits of attention, or whether the
generation of control signals to begin with are impaired. Therefore, our
study reported here examined both attentional control and attentional
facilitation using a basic cueing paradigm in seniors (aged 66 to 74 years)
and undergraduate students (aged 18 to 25 years). Participants
responded to peripheral targets that were either cued or uncued by a
central, predictive arrow. Both behavioural and electrophysiological
data were collected, via reaction times and event-related potentials
(ERPs) respectively. Results indicate that compared to young controls,
seniors have delayed attentional facilitation in sensory processing in the
left visual field, as indexed by the lateral occipital P1 ERP component.
Additionally, we found an attenuated attentional control response in the
left visual field of seniors, as measured by the anterior-directing attentional negativity (ADAN) ERP component. Based on our results, we conclude that within controlled, top-down attentional orienting, there are
impairments in two separate aspects of the system in seniors: both the
act of orienting and changes in sensory gain that result from attention.
These results can be interpreted as suggesting that seniors have problems with both the orienting and reorienting of attention, and that the
underlying cause of these problems may stem from right-hemisphere
specific deterioration.

C2

CORTICAL GAMMA-OSCILLATIONS MODULATED BY VISUOMOTOR
TASKS -INTRACRANIAL RECORDING IN PATIENTS WITH EPILEPSY Eishi

Asano1, Tetsuro Nagasawa1, Robert Rothermel1, Csaba Juhasz1, Masaaki
Nishida1, Sandeep Sood1; 1Children's Hospital of Michigan, Wayne State
University — A number of human studies using intracranial electrocor-

ticography (ECoG) have shown that visually-cued movements elicit augmentation of gamma-oscillations in the Rolandic area. In the present
study of children with focal epilepsy who underwent epilepsy surgery,
we determined how visuomotor tasks modulated gamma-oscillations in
the posterior head region as well as Rolandic area. Each visual-cue consisted of either a sentence or hand gesture instructing the subject to press
or not to press the button. Regardless of the recorded hemisphere, viewing sentence and gesture cues elicited gamma-augmentation sequentially in the lateral-polar occipital and inferior occipital-temporal areas;
subsequently, button-press movement elicited gamma-augmentation in
the Rolandic area. The magnitudes of event-related gamma-augmentation in the Rolandic and inferior occipital-temporal areas were larger
when the hand contralateral to the recorded hemisphere was used for

90

motor responses. A double dissociation was found in the left inferior
occipital-temporal cortex in one subject; the lateral portion had greater
gamma-augmentation elicited by a sentence-cue, whereas the medial
portion had greater gamma-augmentation elicited by a gesture-cue. Sensorimotor attention to one side of the hand may enhance connectivity in
the contralateral hemisphere between the primary sensorimotor and
ventral visual areas. The present study demonstrates the presence of two
distinct ventral visual pathways participating in processing of sentence
and gesture cues in an epileptic patient.

C3

LARGELY OVERLAPPING NETWORKS MEDIATING ATTENTIONAL CONTROL
DURING SPATIAL AND OBJECT-BASED ATTENTION Christian Stoppel1,

Hendrik Strumpf1, Jens-Max Hopf1,2, Hans-Jochen Heinze1,2, Mircea Ariel
Schoenfeld1,2,3; 1Centre for Advanced Imaging, Otto-von-Guericke-University,
Magdeburg, Germany, 2Leibniz-Institute for Neurobiology, Magdeburg,
Germany, 3Kliniken Schmieder, Allensbach, Germany — Visual attention can

be shifted between spatial locations, single features or objects. These
shifts are under control of a network of frontal and parietal areas. The
current study employed fMRI to investigate the neural correlates of
attentional control during voluntary and stimulus-driven attentional
shifts between locations and objects. Subjects were presented with two
apertures located in the left and right visual field, with two overlapping
transparent surfaces continuously moving into opposite horizontal (left
aperture) and vertical (right aperture) directions. They were cued to
attend one of the two transparent surfaces at one spatial location and
pressed a button on the occurrence of a fast movement in the predominant movement direction of that attended surface. On specific directioncombinations of two short subsequent displacements of the attended
surface the subjects either maintained their attention at the same surface,
switched to the other surface within the same aperture or switched to the
other aperture to one specific surface at that location. In addition fast
movements also occurred within the non-attended surfaces thereby capturing the subjects’ attention. After extensive practice 18 subjects participated in the study. The results demonstrate that attentional maintenance
and different attentional shifts (endogenous/exogenous and spatial/
object-based) recruit a largely-overlapping fronto-parietal network, in
which modulations only differed in magnitude across conditions. Our
data support the notion that attentional control is executed by one
domain-general cortical network.

C4

RESPONSE PROFILES OF MACAQUE DLPFC NEURONS DURING TARGET
SELECTION AND SUSTAINED ATTENTION Therese Lennert1, Julio C.

Martinez-Trujillo1; 1McGill University, Montréal, Canada — The

dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) has been proposed as a source of attentional
control signals in the primate brain. To investigate this issue we recorded
single-cell activity in dlPFC and visual area MT of two macaques during
the following task. During a trial an animal was presented with two differently colored moving random dot patterns (RDPs) left and right of a
central fixation spot. According to a color selection rule the animal
selected one RDP as the target, sustain attention to it, and detected a

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Attention: Spatial
transient change in its motion direction. From 222 dlPFC neurons, 61%
showed task-related activity. Out of these, 68% reliably encoded the
position of the attended target (attention neurons). These were subdivided into three distinct populations: one group encoding target position
transiently, starting ~150ms after color cue onset (21%, ‘selection neurons’), a second group signaled target position in a sustained manner,
starting ~350 ms after cue onset (42%, sustained attention neurons), and
the third group combined features of the aforementioned groups (37%).
Analysis of MT responses revealed that neurons encoded target position
starting ~400 ms after cue onset, similarly as the dlPFC sustained attention neurons. Our data indicate that different populations of dlPFC neurons may be involved in the selection and sustained enhancement of
target signals. Once the target has been spatially selected by selection
neurons, sustained attention neurons may send feedback signals to
visual area MT enhancing the processing of visual features at the
attended location.

C5

EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIALS REVEAL EVIDENCE FOR WITHINCATEGORY COMPETITION FOR VISUAL REPRESENTATION Paul

Corballis1, Robert Starling1, Matthew Hilimire1, Nathan Parks2; 1Georgia
Institute of Technology, 2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — The

biased competition theory of visual attention holds that stimuli compete
for representation within the visual system. According to this account,
competition arises primarily in the extrastriate visual cortex, and occurs
when two or more objects are presented within the same receptive field.
In this study, we sought an event-related potential (ERP) correlate of
competition in the human visual system. We capitalized on the extensive
literature indicating that separate populations of neurons respond
strongly to images depicting human faces (e.g., the fusiform face area,
FFA) and houses (the parahippocampal place area, PPA), and that these
areas have large receptive fields. In two conditions we recorded ERPs
while subjects monitored a stream of centrally-presented stimuli (either
faces or house images) for rare inverted images. The central stimuli were
flanked by pairs of faces, houses, or phase-scrambled images. We reasoned that flanking faces would compete for representation with other
faces but not with houses, and likewise that flanking houses would compete with houses but not faces. Phase-scrambled flankers were included
as a low-level control. In the “face” condition the N170 component of the
ERP was attenuated when the flanking stimuli were faces compared to
houses or scrambled faces. Similarly in the “house” condition the N1
component was reduced in amplitude when the flanking stimuli were
houses compared to faces or scrambled houses. These results are consistent with predictions derived from the biased competition theory that
there should be more competition between stimuli from the same perceptual category than from different categories.

C6

TARGET LIKELIHOOD AND ERP CORRELATES OF A LARGE SET-SIZE
VISUAL SEARCH TASK Barry Haimson1, Meghan Brouillard1, Andrea

Shafer2, Eric Ragusa1, Megan Speer1, Kristin Monteiro1; 1University of
Massachusetts Dartmouth, 2Centre for Neuroscience, University of Alberta —
Previous researchers have reported that visual search (VS) tasks with
large set-sizes and high distracter homogeneity are grouped together
and are processed globally while VS tasks with small set-sizes are processed locally. The purpose of the present study was to further clarify the
factors contributing to the processing of targets embedded in a large set
of distracters by varying the likelihood of the target. ERP activity was
obtained while participants viewed a series of displays consisting of a 11
X 11 matrix of white lines on a black background. Distracter displays
consisted of homogeneous lines tilted at a 45 degree angle to the left or
right. Target displays contained one line that was tilted 45 degrees in the
direction opposite to the distracters. The target randomly appeared on
either 50 or 20 percent of the trials at two locations in either the left visual
field (LVF) or the right visual field (RVF). Peak amplitude values in the
P300 window for an initial set of participants were evaluated with a 2

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session C
(Target Likelihood) X 2 (VF) repeated measures ANOVA. The results
indicated a significant or close to significant Target Likelihood X VF
interaction at C3, P3, Cz, and Pz. Peak amplitude values were higher for
the 20-percent condition when the target was in RVF and for the 50-percent condition when the target was in the LVF. These results suggest the
mode of processing in a large-set-size VS task might be influenced by
target likelihood, VF, and hemispheric projections.

C7

ACTIVITY IN THE FRONTO-PARIETAL ATTENTION NETWORK REFLECTS
BOTH INTERACTING AND INDEPENDENT FUNCTIONAL SUBNETWORKS: A
Tipper1,
Barry
PARTIAL LEAST SQUARES APPROACH Christine

Giesbrecht1, Scott Grafton1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara — The
instantiation of multiple cognitive processes subserving attention, such
as volitional maintenance of expectancy, reflexive orienting to an unexpected target, or vigilance in the absence of an explicit cue, within a
broad fronto-parietal attention network (FPN) is of considerable empirical interest. We employed a multivariate partial least squares (PLS) analysis to identify the cognitive processes involved in an attention task and
their functional architecture. PLS identifies independent sources of variance that account for differences in BOLD activity between conditions,
allowing patterns of brain function to emerge without the a priori theoretical constraints required in applying linear contrasts. SPM5 was used
to estimate BOLD activity for 24 subjects, within six conditions: correct
and incorrect responses for targets following valid, invalid, and neutral
cues. Weighted beta images were submitted to PLS, and the significance
of each latent variable was assessed via bootstrapping and permutation
tests. The first significant variable reflected opposing influences of volitional and reflexive orienting processes within dorsal and ventral subnetworks anatomically consistent with existing research (Corbetta &
Shulman, 2002). While these functions were localized to distinct anatomical regions within the FPN, their joint emergence in a single latent variable indicates that they are not functionally independent processes, but
rather operate in direct opposition. The second and third variables
reflected independent processes involved in expectancy violation and
behavioral accuracy. The results support the view that attention-related
brain activity reflects the contribution of multiple interacting and independent cognitive processes mediated by functionally distinct sub-networks of the broader FPN.
C8

FROM LOCAL INHIBITION TO LONG-RANGE INTEGRATION: A
FUNCTIONAL DISSOCIATION OF ALPHA-BAND SYNCHRONIZATION
ACROSS CORTICAL SCALES IN VISUOSPATIAL ATTENTION Sam

Doesburg1,2, Jessica Green3, John McDonald3, Lawrence Ward1,4; 1University of
British Columbia, 2Child and Family Research Institute, 3Simon Fraser
University, 4Brain Research Centre, University of British Columbia — When
attention is allocated to one visual hemifield, increased alpha power is
observed in ipsilateral visual cortex. This has been attributed to synchronization of alpha-band oscillations within cortical regions which reflects
inhibitory processing. Recent results, however, indicate that synchronization of alpha oscillations between cortical regions is relevant for transient functional coupling. Such coupling is thought to be involved in
orienting attention to a specific region of the visual field. We thus
hypothesized that alpha-band synchronization between low-level visual
cortex and higher-level visual brain regions would be increased in the
hemisphere contralateral to an attended location. To test this hypothesis
we calculated phase synchronization between attention-related EEG
source activations occurring between predictive directional cues and
expected visual targets. Alpha amplitude (understood as an index of
local synchronization) within low-level visual cortex was increased ipsilateral to attended locations and decreased contralateral to attended
locations, consistent with alpha-band scalp topography and previous
research relating local alpha power to active inhibition. Increased longrange alpha-band synchronization between low-level visual cortex and
parietal cortex, however, was observed contralateral to the attended

91

Poster Session C
visual hemifield, whereas decreased synchronization (phase scattering)
was observed in the ipsilateral hemisphere. These results identify a
potential mechanism for the enhanced processing of stimuli appearing at
attended locations, as long-range synchronization is thought to increase
the fidelity and effectiveness of communication between brain areas.
Our observation of inhibitory amplitude changes, interpreted as
increased local-area synchronization, and facilitatory long-range synchronization demonstrates a functional dissociation for alpha-band synchronization across cortical scales.

C9

PRISMATIC ADAPTATION IN THE THERAPY OF SPATIAL AND OBJECT
NEGLECT: A CASE STUDY Anna Grzybkowska1, Miroslaw Wyczesany1;

1Jagiellonian University — The goal of the present study was to evaluate the
experimental method of prismatic adaptation which can be used in the
rehabilitation of patients with hemispatial neglect. Paper and pencil tests
(drawing, line bisection, landmark test, Ota’s tests) were used to diagnose neglect symptoms. Moreover, the computer version of Ota’s tests
which can diagnose spatial and object variants of neglect were applied
(Ota et al., 2003). The patient who participated in the study was 71 year
old man, 11 years after right hemisphere stroke. In the computer tasks he
compared angles between clock hands of two clocks presented on a
either left or right side of the computer screen and also had to imagine
these clocks (the hours were presented only as digits). His performance
after the administration of prismatic adaptation was compared to the initial performance level. The measurements were also done one hour, one
week, and one month after the rehabilitation session. Summarizing,
before administration of the prismatic adaptation, the patient showed
symptoms of spatial neglect in the perceptual task, but not in the imagination task. These symptoms declined after prismatic adaptation. There
were also no signs of spatial neglect symptoms reversion after the prolonged time. In all these measurements the patient showed no signs of
spatial neglect in the imagination task, and no signs of object neglect in
the perceptual and imagination tasks. The therapeutic applications of the
presented method are discussed.

C10

ATTENTION BIASES THE PERCEIVED MIDPOINT IN THE BISECTION TASK
IN NORMAL SUBJECTS Monica Narcisa Toba1,2, Patrick Cavanagh3, Paolo

Bartolomeo1,2,4,5; 1Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris6, Centre de
Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, UMR-S975, Paris,
France, 2Inserm, U975 (ex-U610), Paris, France, 3Laboratoire Psychologie de
la Perception, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 4AP-HP, PitiéSalpêtrière, Fédération de Neurologie, Paris, France, 5Catholic University,
Milan, Italy — Neglect patients demonstrate a bias in visual attention,
which tends to be captured by right-sided objects. They deviate rightwards when marking the center of a horizontal line, and misjudge
bisected lines with rightward-displaced centers as being symmetrical.
We examined whether there was an equivalent attentional bias effect on
bisection in normal subjects. We based our experiment on the attentional
repulsion effect (ARE, Suzuki & Cavanagh, 1997) where the perceived
location of a test is displaced away from a transient, attention-attracting
cue. To test this cueing effect in bisection tasks, we presented normal
participants with lines bisected either centrally or to the left or to the
right of the true midpoint, preceded by lateralized cues. Subjects indicated whether they saw the bisection mark at the left or at the right of the
midpoint. For each observer and experimental condition, we plotted the
proportion of ‘seen-at-right’ responses, and fit a sigmoid curve to the
data. Right-sided cues shifted the apparent bisection point to the left
(and vice versa), as predicted by the ARE. Specifically, the cue-induced
attention repels the perceived location of the bisection marker away
from the attentional focus so subjects required the mark to be nearer to
the attentional focus to be judged as lying at the midpoint. These results
obtained in normal subjects by manipulating the transient component of

92

Attention: Spatial
attention are similar to the behavioral pattern exhibited by neglect
patients, suggesting that their sustained attentional bias contributes to
the classic bisection errors of neglect.

C11

ADAPTATION TO LEFTWARD-SHIFTING PRISMS REDUCES THE GLOBAL
PROCESSING BIAS OF HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS Janet Bultitude1, Jill

Woods1; 1School of Psychology, Bangor Univeristy, UK — When healthy indi-

viduals are presented with figures in which small letters are arranged to
form a large letter, they are faster to identify the global than local level
information, and have difficulty ignoring global information when identifying the local level. The global reaction time advantage and global
interference effects imply biased processing of global information in the
normal brain. This contrasts with the local processing bias demonstrated
following lesions to the right temporo-parietal junction (TPJ), such as
those that lead to hemispatial neglect. Recently, we demonstrated that
adaptation to rightward-shifting prisms, which ameliorates many leftward performance deficits of neglect patients, improved the local processing bias of patients with right TPJ lesions (Bultitude, Rafal & List,
2009). Here we demonstrate that adaptation to leftward-shifting prisms,
which can induce neglect-like performance in healthy individuals, also
reduces the normal global processing bias. Forty-eight healthy participants identified the global or local forms of hierarchical figures before
and after adaptation to leftward- or rightward-shifting prisms. Prior to
prism adaptation, both groups had greater difficulty ignoring irrelevant
global information when identifying the local level (global interference)
compared to their ability to ignore irrelevant local level information
when identifying the global level (local interference). Participants who
adapted to leftward-shifting prisms showed a significant reduction in
global interference, but there was no change in the performance of the
rightward-shifting prism group. These results demonstrate, for the first
time, that in addition to previously-demonstrated effects on lateralised
attention, prism adaptation can influence non-lateralised spatial attention in healthy individuals.

C12

EFFECTS OF TASK DEMANDS ON TACTILE SPATIAL ATTENTION Elena

Gherri1, Bettina Forster1; 1City University — Previous

event-related-potential studies have demonstrated that the attentional modulations of early
visual components are different in discrimination and detection tasks.
While enhanced P1 components were present in both tasks, enhanced
N1 components to valid stimuli were found only in the discrimination
task, suggesting that the later N1 modulation might be related to indepth target processing (e.g. Mangun & Hillyard, 1991). The aim of the
present study was to test whether an analogous dissociation would be
found for the tactile modality. Participants were instructed to endogenously shift their tactile attention to the left or right hand as indicated by
a bilateral tactile cue. After a 1000 ms interval one of two different targets
(high and low frequency vibrations) was presented to the cued (80%) or
the uncued hand (20%). Participants vocally responded upon target presentation regardless of target type (detection task) or selected one of two
vocal responses according to target frequency (discrimination task). A
similar cuing effect emerged for vocal responses in both tasks with faster
responses for valid than invalid trials. ERP results revealed that an
enhanced N140 was elicited by valid compared to invalid targets in the
discrimination task. In contrast, in the detection task an enhanced positivity was found in the P100 time range. Our results demonstrate that
also in the tactile modality attentional ERP modulations depend on the
specific cognitive requirement of the task. However, the pattern of modulations is qualitatively different to that reported in vision suggesting
different underlying brain mechanisms in these tasks.

C13

MANUAL AND SACCADIC INHIBITION OF RETURN IN VISUAL NEGLECT

Alexia Bourgeois1, Ana Chica1, Paolo Bartolomeo1; 1Inserm U975 — When
two consecutive events appear at the same spatial location, responses to
the second event are slower than when the two events occur at different

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Attention: Spatial
spatial locations. This effect, known as Inhibition Of Return (IOR)
reflects a bias to preferentially attend to novel locations, necessary to
explore our environment efficiently. Patients with right brain damage
and left visual neglect explore their environment asymmetrically, with a
bias towards processing right-sided stimuli more efficiently than leftsided ones. Here we investigated the IOR phenomenon for manual and
saccadic responses in neglect patients. Our results demonstrated an
abnormal facilitation, instead of IOR, for repeated right-sided events,
with manual responses. However, saccadic IOR for the same stimuli was
preserved. This dissociation can result from the fact that manual and saccadic IOR involve distinct neural substrates, with parieto-frontal networks (which are dysfunctional in neglect) implicated in manual IOR
and subcortical structures in saccadic IOR.

C14

MAGNOCELLULAR AND PARVOCELLULAR INFLUENCES ON REFLEXIVE
ATTENTION Anthony Ries1, Joseph Hopfinger2; 1Army Research Laboratory,
2

University of North Carolina — There is currently disagreement regarding
the stimulus features capable of triggering a reflexive shift of attention.
One theory posits that features activating the magnocellular (M) visual
stream (e.g., abruptly appearing objects with luminance contrast and
low spatial frequencies) are responsible for activating the reflexive attention system (e.g. Steinman et al., 1997; Yantis and Egeth, 1997). However,
recent experiments suggest stimuli predominantly activating the parvocellular (P) stream (e.g., isoluminant colors with high spatial frequencies)
may be at least equally important for initiating reflexive shifts of attention (e.g. Lu, 2006; Yeshurun, 2004). Using behavioral and event-related
potential (ERP) measures, we tested whether differentially stimulating
the M versus the P pathway triggers the same reflexive attention mechanisms, or if mechanisms of attentional capture are engaged differently
depending on M or P activation. Our findings provide new evidence that
both systems are capable of triggering reflexive attention mechanisms
that enhance visual processing as early as the extrastriate generated P1
component of the ERP, when the inter-stimulus interval (ISI) is short.
However, at long ISIs where inhibition of return (IOR) typically occurs,
we found differences at later stages of processing. Our results show that
the M and P visual processing streams engage similar reflexive attention
mechanisms.

C15

MIND WANDERING PREFERENTIALLY ATTENUATES SENSORY
PROCESSING IN THE LEFT VISUAL FIELD Julia Kam1, Camila Fujiwara1,

Todd Handy1; 1University of British Columbia — An emerging theory in
visual attention is that it operates in parallel at two distinct timescales – a
shorter one associated with moment-to-moment orienting of selective
visual spatial attention, and a longer one (>10s) associated with more
global aspects of attention-to-task. Our question is whether this slower
fluctuation in task-related attention biases the same mechanism of early
attentional selection as selective attention. Given that past studies have
consistently revealed visual field asymmetries in selective attention,
with a right visual field advantage in attentional orienting, the objective
of the present study was to determine whether sensory processing in the
two visual fields is differentially modulated by whether or not one is
paying attention to the current task. Participants performed a simple target detection task at fixation while event-related potentials to (ERP) to
task-irrelevant visual probes presented in the left and right visual fields
were recorded. At random intervals, participants were asked to report
whether they were “on-task” or “mind wandering”. Our results demonstrated that sensory attenuation during periods of “mind wandering”
relative to “on-task”, as measured by the visual P1 ERP component, was
only observed in the left visual field. Alternatively, the magnitude of
sensory responses in the right visual field was insensitive to the two different attentional states. Taken together, our results point to a visual
field difference in task-related attention, one that mirrors asymmetry
found in selective visual attention.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session C
C16

ANTICIPATED REWARD CAN REDUCE SPATIAL NEGLECT Paresh
Malhotra1, David Soto1, Charlotte Russell2; 1Imperial College London, 2Brunel
University, West London — There has been a great deal of recent scientific
interest in the neural systems underpinning motivation and reward.
Investigators have begun to show that reward can modulate attention in
healthy individuals, with a number of brain regions being implicated in
this interplay between motivational and attentional networks. To ascertain whether reward can modulate cognitive function in patients with
focal brain damage, we examined the effects of anticipated monetary
incentives on impaired attention in individuals with right hemisphere
damage and chronic spatial neglect. Patients with right-sided stroke
were assessed on a number of occasions using search and extinction
tasks under three conditions: no reward, low reward, and high reward.
Increased anticipated reward significantly improved visual search performance on a modified cancellation task in a patient with temporoparietal damage but not in patients with lesions extending anteriorly into
frontal cortex. These results suggest that positive motivational modulation may only boost attention if frontal cortex is intact, and is in keeping
with research showing that frontostriatal circuits are necessary for
reward processing. The findings have significant implications for rehabilitation strategies, and potentially provide insight into the variable
response to dopaminergic therapy that has been observed in patients
with neglect.

C17

EXOGENOUS TACTILE ATTENTION IN DETECTION AND DISCRIMINATION
TASKS: EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS AND BEHAVIOURAL MEASURES
Alexander Jones1, Bettina Forster1; 1City University London — Exogenous ori-

enting is when our attention is automatically driven by external stimuli,
such as a flash of light or tap on our shoulder. Behavioural studies of
exogenous attention have demonstrated inhibition of return (IOR) in
detection of tactile targets and mixed results in discrimination tasks.
Event related potential (ERPs) experiment investigating exogenous
attention have highlighted possible neural correlates of IOR in vision,
however, no previous study has investigated how exogenous tactile
attention affects somatosensory processing. In the present study noninformative lateralized tactile cues followed by tactile targets were presented to the middle fingers and thumbs. Responses were made vocally
and in experiment 1 participants simply detected targets presented to
one of four possible locations while in experiment 2 they discriminated
the location (thumb/index) regardless of which hand the target was presented to. Behavioural results showed clear IOR in the detection task
whilst no difference between cued or un-cued targets in the discrimination task. ERPs from the detection and discrimination task showed an
early (N80) enhanced negativity for uncued compared to cued targets
suggesting exogenous attention affects early somatosensory processing,
possibly in primary somatosensory cortex. Overall ERP effects were
remarkably similar for both tasks, with the only difference relating to laterality of the P100 component where detection task yielded a contralateral P100 attention effect and discrimination task an ipsilateral P100
effect. To our knowledge, this study is the first to explore ERPs within
exogenous tactile attention, and shows that exogenous attention modulates somatosensory processing at earlier stages than reported in vision.

C18

MEG CORRELATES OF UNAWARENESS OF LEFT-SIDED STIMULI IN
VISUAL NEGLECT Federica Rastelli1,2, Catherine Tallon-Baudry1,3,4,

Monica Narcisa Toba1,2, Raffaella Migliaccio1,2,5, Christophe Duret7, Pascale
Pradat-Diehl6,8, Paolo Bartolomeo1,2,5,9; 1Université Pierre et Marie CurieParis6, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle epiniere,
UMR-S975, Paris, France, 2Inserm, U975, Paris, France, 3CNRS (Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique), UMR 7225, 4CENIR (Centre de
Neuroimagerie de Recherche), Hôpital de la Pitie´-Salpêtrière, Paris F-75013,
France, 5Catholic University, Milan, Italy, 6AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier PitiéSalpêtrière, Service de Médecine Physique et Réadaptation and INSERM
93

Poster Session C
U731, Paris, France, 7Médecine Physique et Réadaptation, Unité de
Rééducation Neurologique CRF “Les Trois Soleils” Boissise le Roi, France,
8
Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris6, France, 9AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France — Patients with right brain damage and
visual neglect typically fail to orient and respond to left-sided visual
stimuli. Dysfunctional inter-hemispheric interactions, with the left hemisphere taking charge of right-sided objects, but not of left-sided ones,
may contribute to neglect signs. However, neglect patients’ performance
is not always consistent. Identical left-sided stimuli may be either
detected or ignored on different trials. Fluctuations in left hemisphere
spontaneous activity might account for these variations in performance.
We analysed magnetoencephalographic (MEG) activity in the left hemisphere of five right brain-damaged patients with chronic left neglect during a lateralized detection test. The time of presentation of the stimuli
was individually titrated, in order to obtain for each patient a substantial
number of detections and omissions of left-sided targets. Pre-stimulus
MEG activity was separately explored for detected and for ignored leftsided targets. Only for omitted targets, but not for detected ones, there
was a left frontal pre-stimuls activity in the low beta band frequencies.
We concluded that spontaneous activity in left frontal regions, which are
perhaps no longer modulated by attentional regions in the right hemisphere, may interfere with awareness of left targets.

C19

SELECTIVE SUPPRESSION OF ATTENTIONAL COSTS WITH NONPREDICTIVE ENDOGENOUS CUES: EVIDENCE FROM FMRI AND ERPS
INVESTIGATIONS Fabrizio Doricchi1,2, Stefano Lasaponara1,2, Massimo

Silvetti1,2, Ana Chica3, Enrica Macci1,2, Juan Lupianez3, Emiliano Macaluso1;
1
Fondazione Santa Lucia IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 2Università degli Studi “La
Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 3University of Granada, Spain — The reaction time

advantage for valid as opposed to invalid targets is greater for predictive
than non-predictive cues (Doricchi et al., 2009). However, it is still unexplored whether cue-predictiveness has equivalent influence on attentional benefits and costs. In separate fMRI and ERPs investigations, we
contrasted the performance of a Posner task with predictive endogenous
cues (80% valid/20% invalid trials) with the performance of the same
task with non-predictive cues (50% valid/50% invalid trials). Our design
comprised also: a) trials with spatially neutral cues, allowing to separate
attentional benefits from attentional costs and to study the influence of
cue predictiveness on these; b) trials in which the cue was not followed
by any target, allowing the study of the influence of predictiveness on
endogenous orienting. We found that non-predictive cues caused selective abatement of attentional costs with upholding of attentional benefits. Invalid and neutral targets following non-predictive cues produced
equivalent P1 erp whereas invalid targets following predictive cues elicited smaller P1 erp than neutral ones (Luck et al., 1994). During endogenous orienting with predictive cues there was a significant deactivation
of the right Temporal-Parietal-Junction (TPJ), whereas no de-activation
was present during orienting with non-predictive cues. These findings
show that non-predictive endogenous cues selectively abolish attentional costs. This allows speeding up of attentional reorienting and preservation of attentional benefits in contexts characterised by a weak
probabilistic relationship between cues and targets. Doricchi F et al.
Cereb Cortex. 2009. Luck SJ et al. JEP: HPP. 1994.

C20

PERCEPTUAL LOAD MODIFIES PROCESSING OF DISTRACTOR STIMULI
BOTH IN THE PRESENCE AND ABSENCE OF TARGET STIMULI Jane

Couperus1, Erik Hoel1, Brittany Alperin1; 1Hampshire College — Previous

research has shown that perceptual load influences early visual processing by narrowing the focus of visual selective attention (Handy et al.,
2001). However, the paradigms utilized have measured changes in electrophysiological activity to unattended probe stimuli presented in the
absence of target stimuli (e.g. Barnhardt et al., 2008, Couperus, 2009;
Handy et al., 2001). This design does not allow for the effects of perceptual load to be fully appreciated. According to Lavie (1995), increases in

94

Attention: Spatial
perceptual load serve to narrow the focus of attention such that fewer
resources are available for processing distractor stimuli. Thus, this effect
should be seen both in the presence and absence of target stimuli. Moreover, the level of target processing should not be influenced by the presence of a distractor. To examine this, participants were presented with a
bilateral or unilateral display and asked to perform a discrimination task
at either low or high perceptual load. Electrophysiological responses to
the unattended (ie distractor) stimuli were then compared at the N100.
As in previous studies, processing of the distractor stimulus was
reduced when the target stimulus was presented at high perceptual load.
Moreover, this was true when the target and distractor appeared simultaneously in bilateral displays (F(1,10)=6.36, p=.03). In contrast, neither
target nor distractor processing differed between unilateral and bilateral
displays (F(1,10)=.147, p=.94; F(1,10)=.402,p=.54) supporting previous
studies that suggest effects of perceptual load are influenced by top
down processes (e.g. Couperus 2009, Theeuwes et al., 2004) and supporting Lavie’s theory more generally.

C21

NEUROANATOMICAL DISSOCIATION BETWEEN N2PC AND SPCN:
EVIDENCE FROM MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY Stephan Grimault1,

Benois Brisson2, Ulysse Fortier-Gauthier1, Douglas Cheyne3, Pierre Jolicoeur1;
1
Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives, Cernec, Université de Montréal,
Québec, 2Université Laval, Québec, Canada, 3Program in Neurosciences and
Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, ON, Canada —
The N2pc is argued to index visual spatial attention whereas the SPCN
(sustained posterior contralateral negativity) has been related to visual
short-term memory. The SPCN occurs later and is often separated from
the N2pc by an intervening return to baseline or even a contralateral positivity. Some evidence for a dissociation between the N2pc and SPCN
has been presented (e.g., Jolicoeur, Brisson, & Robitaille, 2008, Brain
Research), but questions remain as to the functional distinctiveness of
these two components. We examined this issue by focusing on the neural
generators of these components using magnetoencephalography (MEG).
A square with a gap in one side (up, down, left, or right) appeared in
each visual quadrant (upper left, upper right, lower left, lower right).
Each square was in a different (equiluminant) color (red, green, yellow,
blue) and target colour was counterbalanced across subjects. The task
was to report which side of the target contained the gap. We computed
group Event-Related Synthetic Aperture Magnetometry (erSAM) images
of the sources related to the activity peaks of the N2pc and SPCN. The
erSAM activation maps showed greater parietal activity during the
SPCN. These results are consistent with a greater involvement of superior parietal cortex during the retention of representations in visual
short-term memory and provides additional neuranatomical evidence
for a dissociation of the SPCN from the N2pc, even in speeded tasks that
are not explicitly defined as memory tasks.

C22

THE INFLUENCE OF EXOGENOUS CUING ON EYE MOVEMENTS
DISSOCIATES LOCATION- AND OBJECT-BASED INHIBITION OF
RETURN Conor Mullin1,2, Jared Allen1, Heather Jordan1,2,3, Mazyar

Fallah2,3,4; 1York University, 2Centre for Vision Research, York University,
School of Kinesiology and Health Sciences, York University, 4Canadian Action
and Perception Network — Inhibition of Return (IOR) – increased RTs to
3

previously cued, compared to uncued, targets is considered to reflect an
inhibitory mechanism which biases processing resources from returning
to a recently visited region. IOR manifests itself in both manual (Posner
& Cohen, 1984) and saccadic (Maylor, 1985) RTs. The locus of influence
of inhibition remains unclear. Posner & Cohen (1984) suggested that the
withdrawal of attention initiates an inhibitory “tag”, biasing attention
from returning. However, there is a close relationship between the oculomotor system and IOR as an oculomotor structure (SC) plays an
important role in generating the IOR effect (Sapir et al, 1999) and saccades deviate away from previously cued regions (Theeuwes & Godijn,
2004). Abrams and Dobkin (1994) suggested that IOR influences both

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Attention: Spatial
attention and eye movements. We note that IOR is associated with both
spatial locations, and the objects that occupy them (Tipper et al 1994; Jordan & Tipper, 1998), suggesting that these effects reflect independent
mechanisms. Abrams and Dobkin’s (1994) observation of attentional and
motoric inhibitory influences could be explained by the probing of location and object-based IOR in different experiments. Using a procedure
which measures location- and object-based IOR, in the same display, we
examined eye-movement RTs and metrics. We confirm that motoric
influences of IOR are only observed at the cued location, and identify
changes in the flight characteristics of the saccades. We find no effects of
object-based IOR on eye movements, indicating that the oculomotor system neither mediates nor is affected by this mechanism.

C23

THE EFFECT OF TMS ON THE INTER-HEMISPHERIC INTERACTION
BETWEEN LEFT AND RIGHT IPS: AN FMRI STUDY Lorella Battelli1,2, Ela

Bhatt2, Zaira Cattaneo3, Thomas Carlson4, Alvaro Pascual-Leone2; 1Italian
Institute of Technology, Italy, 2Harvard Medical School, 3Università degli Studi
balance
di Milano, Italy, 4University of Maryland — Inter-hemispheric
between homologous areas within the posterior parietal lobe is crucial to
perform visual tasks engaging attention in both visual fields simultaneously. We have recently conducted a 1 Hz TMS study (Battelli et al.,
2009) where the subjects were asked to perform a visual tracking task
immediately after the stimulation. We showed that after the intra parietal sulcus (IPS) was disrupted by TMS subjects were unable to perform
the task in the field contralateral to the stimulated side. The deficit was
selective for the bilateral tracking condition, thus replicating visual
extinction in parietal lesion patients. In the present study each subject
underwent two fMRI sessions immediately after 15 min low-frequency
offline TMS and Sham over the left IPS. We studied the hemodynamic
changes immediately after TMS or Sham in the stimulated and the nonstimulated homologous IPS. We also measured signal intensity changes
across all TMS and Sham runs. The results showed significant intracortical hemodynamic changes after TMS over the IPS. In particular the voxel
count after TMS was significantly higher in the non-stimulated IPS relative to the stimulated left IPS. We did not find such imbalance after
Sham stimulation. This result is in agreement with fMRI studies in neurological patients where they showed that in the acute stage after a unilateral stroke, areas in the healthy hemispheres were hyperactive and
such activity was comparable to normals only in the chronic stage (along
with improvement in behavioral measures). Our study mimicked a similar result in the normal population using TMS.

C24

VISUO-MOTOR DEFICITS AND DAMAGE TO WHITE MATTER TRACTS IN A
POSTERIOR CORTICAL ATROPHY PATIENT Raffaella
Migliaccio1,2,3,7,

Monica N. Toba1,2,3, Federica Agosta6, Fabian Corlier1,4, Leonardo Cruz De
Souza1,2,3, Stephane Lehericy1,2,3,5, Dalila Samri1,4, Marie Sarazin1,2,3,4, Bruno
Dubois1,2,3,4, Massimo Filippi6, Paolo Bartolomeo1,2,3,4,7; 1CR-ICM Centre de
Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moëlle Epinière, Paris, France,
2
Universite' Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, 3INSERM, France, 4Groupe
Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5CNRS UMR7225, 6Neuroimaging
Research Unit, Scientific Institute and University San Raffaele, Milan Italy,
7
Catholic University, Milan, Italy — OBJECTIVE: To explore anatomical correlates of cognitive and visuo-motor deficits in a patient with Posterior
Cortical Atrophy (PCA), by using Diffusion Tensor (DT) MRI-based tractography. BACKGROUND: PCA is a clinical syndrome characterized by
progressive complex visual and visuo-motor dysfunctions, associated
with grey matter atrophy in posterior brain areas. Few studies have
explored the involvement of white matter (WM) in PCA. DESIGN/
METHODS: Behavioral and imagery data were acquired in a 58-yearsold patient with PCA (woman, right-handed, disease duration 18
months). Tractography was used to assess the integrity of major WM
cerebral tracts. Brain structural and 18F-fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron
emission tomography (FDG-PET) were also obtained. RESULTS: PCA
patient had left visual neglect, optic ataxia, and left limb apraxia. Struc-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session C
tural MRI and FDG-PET showed respectively a pattern of focal atrophy
and hypometabolism in the parietal lobe bilaterally, with right side predominance. Tractography demonstrated severe WM damage in the right
inferior fronto-occipital (IFOF) and superior longitudinal (SLF) fasciculi,
while the left IFOF and SLF were relatively spared. Reduction of WM
structural integrity was also observed in parietal projections of corpus
callosum (CC). No damage was found in the inferior longitudinal fasciculus and corticospinal tract, bilaterally. CONCLUSIONS: This study
suggests that damage to IFOF, SLF and posterior CC contribute to the
development of cognitive deficits in PCA, consistent with evidences
from focal brain lesions that WM tracts are involved in neglect (IFOF and
SLF), optic ataxia (SLF), and limb apraxia (CC). Our findings might contribute to the understanding of anatomical correlates of the PCA clinical
syndrome.

C25

EFFECT OF PRISM ADAPTATION IN CORTICAL ACTIVITY IN NEGLECT
PATIENT Arnaud Saj1, Roland Vocat2, Patrik Vuilleumier3; 1Laboratory for

Behavioral Neurology and Imaging of Cognition, 2University Hospital of
Geneva, 3University Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Geneva — Hemispatial neglect is often resistant to rehabilitation. Recent
studies suggested that this disorder may be improved by prism-adaptation, with remarkable generalization and persistence of such effects, but
the underlying neural mechanisms remain unclear. functional neuroimaging in healthy volunteers indicates that prism-adaptation relies on a
distributed network including posterior parietal, temporal, and cerebellar regions, which is partly damaged in neglect patients. We used fMRI
to investigate the effect of (right-deviating) prism-adaptation on seven
patients with left neglect while they perform various cognitive tasks on
the same visual stimuli (bisection, search, and memory), before and after
a brief prism-adaptation session. Behavioural data showed significant
improvement (p<0.03) following prism-adaptation only for the bisection
and search tasks. Preliminary fMRI analysis comparing brain activity
after > before adaptation showed selective increases in the right posterior parietal cortex and right middle frontal cortex (p = 0.001) during
bisection, as well as increases in the right inferior parietal lobule and
right occipital cortex during visual search. No significant change was
observed for spatial memory. Our results provide new evidence that the
beneficial effects of prism adaptation on neglect are linked to a specific
modulation of brain regions crucially involved in spatial attention.

C26

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY OF SELECTIVE ATTENTION TOWARD GRASPABLE
SPACE David Leland1, Catherine Reed2, Michael Strom2, John Garza3;
1Pitzer College, 2Claremont McKenna College, 3University of Denver — Our

hands work in conjunction with our eyes to gather information from the
world and to act upon it. Part of this interaction involves a bias of attention toward visual events in the vicinity of the hands, leading to faster
reaction times (RT). Visual space near the palm in particular ("graspable
space") is associated with a greater RT bias than space just near the back
of the hand. We hypothesize a corresponding increase in the amplitude
of event-related potential (ERP) components associated with selective
attention. During electroencephalographic (EEG) recording, subjects
placed one hand near a target location on a monitor and used the other
hand to indicate target detection. The target could appear near either the
palm or the back of the hand. A purely visual condition, with the hand at
rest away from the monitor, served as a control. Preliminary analyses
suggest a graded effect of hand condition on the amplitude of a frontocentrally-distributed late positive ERP component peaking at 250 ms,
with palm > back > rest, measured from baseline and peak-to-peak from
an earlier negativity (170 ms). These findings are consistent with modulation of a N1-P2 type complex, which reflects the influence of attention
on sensory gating, feature detection, and/or working memory, and may
reflect enhanced selective attention for stimuli in the vicinity of the hand
in general and for graspable space in particular.

95

Poster Session C
C28

MIGRAINE IS ASSOCIATED WITH VISUAL FIELD ASYMMETRIES IN
COGNITIVE EXPECTANCIES Marla J. S. Mickleborough1, Andreea S.

Toma1, Raphaelle N. Roy1, Todd C. Handy1; 1University of British Columbia —

Migraine is a disabling neurological disorder that affects more than 10%
of adults worldwide. Heightened visual sensitivity is a hallmark of
migraine, both during and between attacks, and appears in the form of
photophobia, increased sensitivity to light, increased discomfort from
illusions, decreased critical flicker fusion rate, and decreased contrast
and global motion processing. Here we used event-related potentials
(ERPs) to examine whether these chronic visual sensitivities in migraine
translate into a difference in visual attentional expectancies between
migraine and non-migraine populations. Participants performed a spatial orienting task as ERPs were recorded. We compared 24 migraineurs
to 24 non-headache controls. We found that migraineurs have normal
visual sensory and visual discriminative processing as measured by the
lateral occipital P1 and N1, respectively. For the post-discriminative P3
component, both groups showed a normal attention effect, but the
migraine group also had visual field asymmetry. The P3 component is
considered a cognitive processing component, indexing expectation of
target stimulus. Our data suggest that, in addition to heightened visual
sensitivities, migraineurs have altered visual expectancies specifically
within the left visual field.

C29

A COMPUTATIONALLY EXPLICIT NEUROCOGNITIVE THEORY OF
OCULOMOTOR INHIBITION OF RETURN (IOR) BASED ON HABITUATION
OF EXOGENOUS SIGNALS Jason Satel1, Zhiguo Wang2, Raymond Klein1,

Thomas Trappenberg1; 1Dalhousie University, 2Chinese Academy of
Sciences — Inhibition of return (IOR) is an orienting phenomenon charac-

terized by slower behavioral responses to targets that have been spatially
cued, relative to uncued locations. Controversy and seemingly contradictory results have led to confusion in the literature regarding the neural generators and stages of cognitive processing involved in IOR. There
is, however, general agreement that at least a subset of IOR-like phenomena are mediated at the level of the superior colliculus (SC). Recent neurophysiological investigations have further demonstrated that IOR is
accompanied by reduced responses to exogenous inputs in the SC. Here,
we develop a neuroscientifically based neural field model of the intermediate layer of the SC which implements an early sensory habituation
account of IOR. The primary goal of this work is to examine the extent to
which behavioral and neurophysiological results in the literature might
be explained in terms of habituation at the level of the SC. A variety of
key findings in the literature are generated by this relatively simple
model, including the biphasic pattern of facilitation at short stimulus
onset asynchronies (SOAs) and IOR at long SOAs, vector averaging of
IOR, decreased IOR when fixation is removed before the target is presented (gap effect), and the co-existence of IOR and endogenous orienting at the same location. Experiments demonstrating IOR in cases with
little or no SC involvement could potentially be explained and modelled
in terms of additional cortical processes, such as habituation of input signals to frontal or parietal areas involved in orienting.

C30

P300 RESPONSES IN VISUO-SPATIAL NEGLECT REFLECT TASK
ACCURACY Sven P. Heinrich1, Michael Bach1, Árni Kristjánsson2, Styrmir

Sævarsson1; 1Albert-Ludwigs-Universität, Freiburg, 2Háskóli Íslands,
Reykjavík — Impairments of attentional mechanisms are thought to play a
key role in neglect. The P300 component of the event-related potential
(ERP) has been proposed as a measure for the allocation of attention,
making it a promising tool in the investigation of neglect. We recorded
ERPs from six participants with chronic unilateral neglect following
stroke who performed an oddball task. The stimuli consisted of pairs of
symbols presented in the left and right visual field. Infrequent targets
could appear either in the affected contralesional or the unaffected ipsilesional visual field. The participants indicated whether a predesignated

96

Attention: Spatial
target was present or not. Contralesional targets produced weaker average P300 responses than ipsilateral targets, but stronger responses than
distractor-only stimuli. In the contralesional visual field, missed targets
produced a smaller P300 than recognized targets, but slightly larger than
correctly identified distractor-only stimuli. The number of missed contralesional targets was positively correlated with the time required for
the completion of standard neglect tests. The results, in particular the
finding that the P300 reflects task accuracy, support an important role for
attentional impairments in neglect. (Supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and the Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst.)

C31

DON'T LOOK HERE: HIGH-DENSITY EEG RECORDINGS IN A PRO- AND
ANTI-SACCADIC TASK Daniel Belyusar1, Adam C. Snyder1, Hans-Peter

Frey1, Josh Wallman2, John J. Foxe1; 1Program in Cognitive Neuroscience, City
College of the City University of New York, NY, 2City College, City University of
New York, NY — Despite the wealth of research surrounding visual saccades, questions remain about the cognitive processes preceding the
actual movement itself. When distractors are presented along with targets, either the reaction time or the saccadic end-point can change
(Walker et al., 1997), but prior knowledge decreases behavioral cost of
the distraction (Ruff and Driver, 2006). If subjects are instructed to make
a saccade to a location at the same distance as the target but in the opposite direction (anti-saccade), reaction times are increased and subjects
erroneously make saccades to the target (pro-saccades) (Fischer and
Weber, 1991). Several electrophysiological features have been correlated
with preparation for attentional deployment and movement. Prior
research also suggests that changes in Alpha-band activity (8-14Hz)
band power may correlate to preparatory states when one is required to
suppress activation in tasks involving attentional shifts (Worden et al.,
2000). However, there has not been a thorough characterization of the
electrophysiological features invoked in the basic saccade task. The
present study looks at the effects of distractors and preparation in saccade tasks. High-density electroencephalography was performed while
participants made visual-stimulus-guided pro- or anti-saccades randomly presented to the left and right of fixation. Preliminary results suggest an increase in preparatory Alpha-band activity (~10 Hz) in the antisaccade task compared to pro-saccade. Increases in Alpha-band activity
are seen bilaterally, potentially indicating a preparatory suppression of
the pre-potent response. These results suggest that Alpha activity might
not only be related to covert attentional deployments, but also to preparation for explicit eye movements.

C32

HORIZONTAL-VERTICAL LENGTH COMPARISON AND THE PERCEPTUAL
Charras1,2,
Juan
SYMMETRY LAW IN LEFT VISUAL NEGLECT Pom

Lupiáñez1, Paolo Bartolomeo2; 1Universidad de Granada, 2Inserm U975,
CRICM, Paris — Left unilateral neglect usually arises after right parietal

damage and is characterized by a left-right imbalance in sensory processing. Typically, neglect patients deviate rightward when bisecting
lines. An underestimation of the left portion of the line and/or a right
overestimation could explain this effect. We aimed at dissociating their
respective contribution to patients’ performance, by using a line length
comparison task in which participants compared a vertical segment to
an horizontal segment either left or right-sided. Moreover, based on
recent evidence that normals underestimate lines symmetrically bisected
as compared to lines asymmetrically bisected, the present study also
aimed at testing whether this symmetry law was preserved in neglect.
We tested eight patients suffering from left unilateral neglect and eight
control participants. The results showed that controls and patients
underestimate symmetric as compared to asymmetric bisections, and
confirmed that neglect patients both underestimate left-sided stimuli
and overestimate right-sided stimuli. Our results suggest that left unilat-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Attention: Spatial

Poster Session C

eral neglect might reflect a deficit in attentional orienting to the left coupled with a disengagement deficit from right-sided stimuli, and that the
symmetry law is driven by pre-attentive mechanisms.

Montréal, 3Behavioral Neurosciences, Wayne State University, 4Unité de
Recherche en Santé Publique, CHUL, 5École de psychologie, Université Laval,
6
Université du Québec à Montréal — Environmental exposure to lead is a

C33

risk factor for attention deficits (e.g., Braun et al., 2006), even at very low
levels (e.g., Chiodo et al., 2004). We have reported that chronic lead
exposure may affect sustained attention at relatively low doses in 5-yearold Inuit children from Arctic Quebec (Plusquellec et al., 2009). The aim
of this study was to assess the impact of lead exposure on allocation of
spatial attention using a Posner cue-target paradigm in this same population at school-age (M = 10.8 yr). Blood lead concentrations were measured in 23 Inuit children at birth and 11 years, indicating pre- and
postnatal exposure (M=5.8, SD=3.9 and M=2.9, SD=1.7), respectively.
Children were instructed to detect a pre-cued target (horizontal grating)
as quickly as possible that appeared on the left or the right of a fixation
point. A valid trial consisted to present the target at the cued location, by
contrast to an invalid trial. The “Posner effect” was obtained by subtracting reaction time (RT) of valid trials (M=589, SD=107) from RT of invalid
trials (M= 655, SD=115). Results showed a negative correlation between
postnatal lead concentration and the Posner effect (r = -0.51, p = 0.03),
which remained significant (? = -0.58, p = 0.01) after adjustment for
methylmercury and PCBs, two other environmental contaminants to
which these children are exposed. These data indicate that chronic low
level lead exposure alters the ability to allocate spatial attention at school
age.

TIME-SERIES ANALYSIS OF EYE MOVEMENTS REVEALS INHIBITION OF
RETURN IN NATURAL SCENES Paul Bays1, Masud Husain1; 1University
College London — Active exploration of the visual world depends on
sequential shifts of gaze that bring prioritized regions of a scene into central vision. The efficiency of this system is commonly attributed to a
mechanism that inhibits return to previously examined locations. However, analysis of gaze patterns in naturalistic visual scenes appears to
contradict this hypothesis, instead revealing a surprisingly strong tendency to shift gaze back to the location of the previous fixation – suggesting that such refixations might even be facilitated under natural
conditions. Here we present a novel time-series analysis of eye movements during free-viewing and search of naturalistic scenes. We decompose the instantaneous influences on saccade selection into two
components: the attentional priority observers assign to different regions
of a scene, and their systematic bias towards certain amplitudes and
directions of eye movement. We demonstrate that the observed frequency of refixations is in fact substantially less than predicted for a
memoryless system of saccade selection, indicating that return fixations
are actively inhibited in natural viewing.
C34

IPSILESIONAL ATTENTIONAL DEFICITS IN RIGHT HEMIANOPIA Celine

Perez1,2,3, Celine Cavezian1,2,3, Isabelle Gaudry1,2,3, Mickael Obadia3, Olivier
Gout3, Monte Buchsbaum4, Sylvie Chokron1,2,3; 1Laboratoire de Psychologie et
NeuroCognition, CNRS, UMR5105, UPMF, Grenoble, France, 2ERT Treat Vision,
Fondation Ophtalmologique Rothschild, Paris, France, 3Service de Neurologie,
Fondation Ophtalmologique Rothschild, Paris, France, 4Radiology and
Neuroscience, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Mount Sinai Medical Center,
New York City — Most studies on homonymous hemianopia (HH) concentrate on the blind visual field and rarely investigate possible deficits
within the healthy, ipsilesional visual field. The present study tested the
hypothesis of an ipsilesional attentional deficit in patients with right HH
(RHH) following a left occipital lesion. Fifteen healthy, dextral males
(59.8 ± 33.5 years) and 4 male RHH patients (53.5 ± 18.7 years) completed
a letter-detection task in the left visual field (LVF). The target could
appear as a small letter surrounded by flankers (Surrounded) or alone as
a large letter (Alone). This task was previously used to demonstrate a left
hemisphere superiority for local selective attention but a right hemisphere superiority for global selective attention (Chokron, Brickman,
Wei and Buchsbaum, Cogn Brain Res, 9, 85-90; 2000). Overall, no difference in reaction time was seen between patients and controls in the LVF.
Regarding accuracy, controls did not exhibit a significant effect of the
stimulus, but patients were significantly less accurate to Surrounded targets (54% ± 40.9 of correct responses) compared to Alone targets (98% ±
2.7 of correct responses). Despite comparable processing time for stimuli
in the ipsilesional LVF, the processing quality is not equivalent in the
two groups. RHH patients presented poorer accuracy for selective attention in their ‘healthy’ LVF. These results support the assumption that
attention in unilateral occipital brain damaged patients’ ipsilesional field
is not “intact” as previously thought, and confirm the specific role of the
left hemisphere in local attention even in the ipsilateral visual field.

C35

EFFECTS OF CHRONIC LOW-LEVEL LEAD EXPOSURE ON ALLOCATION OF
SPATIAL ATTENTION IN 11-YEAR-OLD INUIT CHILDREN FROM ARCTIC
QUEBEC Audrey-Anne Ethier1,2, Joseph Jacobson3, Sandra Jacoson3, Gina
Muckle5, Célyne Bastien5, Eric Dewailly4, Pierre Ayotte4, Pierrich Plusquellec4,
Dave Saint-Amour1,6; 1Centre de recherche, CHU Sainte-Justine, 2Université de

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

C36

TO SEARCH OR NOT TO SEARCH: TRACKING THE DEPLOYMENT OF
ATTENTION IN RELEVANT AND IRRELEVANT VISUAL DISPLAYS John

McDonald1, Victoria Harms1, Jessica Green1, Ali Jannati1, Vincent Di Lollo1;
1Simon Fraser Univeristy — Visual search is believed to involve a dynamic

interplay between bottom-up and top-down factors (salience and intention, respectively), but there is no consensus about the stages at which
these different factors control the covert deployment of attention. Some
researchers have proposed that stimulus salience controls the initial
stages of visual search; others have proposed that an observer’s intentions can override salience at the earliest stages of visual processing. Evidence for salience-driven attention capture has come from studies in
which observers actively searched for a target in the presence of a salient
distractor. Here, we asked whether stimulus salience also controls attentional deployment when observers are not required to search for a target.
Participants viewed displays of blue lines and of yellow lines on randomly intermixed trials. In Experiment 1, they responded to orientation
singletons regardless of colour (all relevant displays); In Experiment 2,
they responded to orientation singletons when displays were of one
colour (relevant displays) but not the other colour (irrelevant displays).
Orientation singletons elicited the N2pc – an electrophysiological measure of attentional deployment – only when the display was relevant; the
very same stimuli failed to capture attention when participants were in a
don’t-search mode. Moreover, the decision to search in Experiment 2
delayed the N2pc relative to the N2pc in Experiment 1 (when observers
were always in search mode). This shows that an observer’s attentional
set can override salience-driven deployments of attention even at the
earliest stages of search.

C37

SIMILAR PERCEPTUAL COSTS FOR DIVIDING ATTENTION BETWEEN
RETINA- AND SPACE-CENTERED TARGETS IN HUMANS Robert

Niebergall1,2, Lawrence Huang1, Julio C. Martinez-Trujillo1; 1McGill University,
2
German Primate Center — One subject that has been a matter of debate in
studies of vision is whether attention is preferentially allocated to stimuli
fixed in a retina-centered reference frame, or whether it could be equally
allocated to stimuli fixed in other reference frames. We investigated this
issue by asking human observers to discriminate small changes in the
orientation of one of two sinusoidal gratings while pursuing a moving
dot under different experimental conditions. During the experiments,
one grating remained fixed in a retina-centered frame while the other

97

Poster Session C
remained fixed in a space-centered frame. In focused attention trials subjects attended to one grating while ignoring the other. In divided attention trials they simultaneously attended to both gratings. We found that
when focusing attention on one grating, orientation-change discrimination thresholds (ODTs) were lower for the retina-centered relative to the
space-centered grating. This effect was attributed to increases in ODT
with increases in the stimulus retinal velocity. However, when subjects
divided attention between both gratings, the ODT corresponding to
either stimulus decreased by a similar amount. These results demonstrate that humans can simultaneously allocate attention to equally relevant targets fixed in different reference frames without a significant bias
toward a particular frame.

C38

ALTERATION IN THE SPATIAL ORIENTATION OF VISUAL ATTENTION IN
AMBLYOPIA Judith Hotte-Bernard1,2,3, Mariline Pageau1, Franco

Lepore1,2,3, Dave Saint-Amour1,4; 1Centre de recherche CHU Sainte-Justine,
de Montréal, 3Centre de Recherche en Neuropsychologie et
4
Cognition, Université du Québec à Montréal — Amblyopia is classically
2Université

defined as reduced visual acuity in one eye not attributable to structural
ocular anomalies, suggesting a cortical origin. It has been recently suggested that visual attention may be affected in amblyopia. Using a Posner paradigm we tested the hypothesis that orienting spatial attention is
altered in amblyopia. Methods : Twelve adults with normal vision and
eight amblyopic adults participated in this study. Under monocular
viewing, participants were asked to detect a visual target as quickly as
possible following a valid, neutral or invalid auditory cue to its location.
The Posner effect was obtained by subtracting reaction time (RT) for
valid trials from RT for invalid trials. Results : The Posner effect is significantly observed in the amblyopic eye (mean RT difference = 78 ms, p =
.028) and control eye (mean RT difference = 77 ms, p = .001). Interestingly, it isn’t significantly present in the fellow eye of amblyopic participants. Conclusion : Our findings suggest a more noticeable alteration in
the spatial orientation of visual attention in the fellow eye of amblyopic
subjects. A larger dataset will allow us to distinguish amblyopic participants based on the severity of their visual deficit.

C39

GAZE-TRIGGERED ORIENTING WITH CONTRAST-INVERTED FACES

Chris
Kelland Friesen1, Heather Kay Wadeson1, Annie T. Ciernia2, Reiko Graham3;
1North Dakota State University, 2University of California, Irvine, 3Texas State
University, San Marcos — Although people are very accurate at judging the
gaze direction of others, studies have found that gaze direction perception is impaired (Ricciardelli, Baylis, & Driver, 2000; Olk, Symons, &
Kingstone, 2008) or even reversed (Sinha, 2000) when observers make
judgments about the gaze direction of a contrast-inverted face. It has
therefore been proposed that gaze perception might be accomplished by
means of a heuristic whereby gaze direction is simply derived from the
position of the dark (pupil and iris) within the white (sclera) region of
the eye. Here, we used a standard gaze-cuing paradigm to examine the
effect of contrast inversion on attentional orienting to gazed-at peripheral targets. We presented photographic negative images of a face that
looked straight ahead and then gazed nonpredictively to the left or right.
With a cue-onset to target-onset interval of 300 milliseconds, participants
were faster to detect a target appearing at a gazed-at location compared
with at a location opposite to where gaze was directed. With intervals of
100 and 600 ms, the cuing effect was not significant. Importantly, in contrast to the findings of Tipples (2005) with static computer-generated
faces, in no case was the cuing effect reversed. Our results indicate that
the "look for the black" heuristic is not the only means by which gaze
perception is efficiently accomplished, and that the geometry of the eye
is used in the perception of gaze and the subsequent rapid deployment
of spatial attention to where the eyes are looking.

98

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition
Interactions
C40

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN EMPATHY MODERATE REFLEXIVE
ORIENTING TO GAZE DIRECTION WITH EXPRESSIVE FACES Reiko
Graham1, Janine Harlow1, Chris Kelland Friesen2; 1Texas State University,

2North Dakota State University — Personality

differences, anxiety in particular, have been postulated to moderate reflexive orienting to gaze in
fearful faces. This study examined whether individual personality differences (anxiety, self-esteem, empathy) influence the magnitude of the
gaze-cuing effect to happy and fearful faces. Sixty-eight participants (22
males, 46 females, M age = 20.5 years) completed self-report questionnaires and a reflexive gaze-cuing task that used happy and fearful laterally gazing faces as cues and valenced objects (smiling baby, snarling
dog) as targets appearing at short and long stimulus-onset asynchronies
(SOAs). Analyses revealed an overall cuing effect (participants were
faster to identify validly-cued targets), mitigated by a SOA x emotion x
validity interaction. At short SOAs, the cuing effect was only significant
for fearful faces, while it was present for both fearful and happy faces at
long SOAs. Follow-up regressions indicated that cuing effects at short
SOAs were not related to personality differences. In contrast, cuing
effects at long SOAs were predicted by individual differences in empathy. High scores on the Fantasy subscale (Davis, 1980) were predictive of
enhanced cuing, while high scores on the Empathic Concern subscale
were predictive of attenuated cuing. Surprisingly, anxiety did not modulate cuing effects to fearful faces. Together, these results suggest that
reflexive orienting to expressive gazing faces is sensitive to the amount
of time that intervenes between the gaze cue and the target. Furthermore, individual differences in empathy appear to moderate this effect,
but only when there is sufficient time to process the face cue.

C41

THE DYNAMIC EFFECT OF EMOTION ON TIME PERCEPTION:
DIFFERENTIATING BETWEEN ATTENTIONAL AND ACTIVATIONAL
INFLUENCES Julie Anne Seguin1, Gina, M. Grimshaw1, David, N. Harper1;
1Victoria University of Wellington — A

stimulus’ emotional content can
affect its perceived duration. In recent studies, the powerful task known
as temporal bisection has revealed that emotion effects are in line with
activational theories of time perception. However, temporal bisection
has only been used for short durations (below 2 seconds). In the present
study, temporal bisection was used to determine whether activational
effects of emotion also prevail at longer durations. Participants were
assigned to a duration range (400-1600ms or 2000-6000ms) as well as to
one of four emotion categories created by combining arousal (high or
low) and valence (positive or negative). Participants were shown emotional and neutral images of varying durations and asked to decide
whether these durations were closest to the short or long anchor. Point of
subjective equality analyses revealed that in the short duration range,
results were in accordance with previously reported activational theories
(high arousal images were estimated to last longer than low arousal
images). In the longer range, however, the duration of high arousal
images as well as low arousal negative images was underestimated in
comparison to low arousal positive images. These findings are in
marked contrast with the activational account and instead, are in line
with attentional theories of time perception. Taken together, these contrasting results suggest a dynamic effect of emotion on time perception.
In short durations, time estimates are guided by the amount of stimulusinduced activation and arousing stimuli are overestimated. In longer
durations, activation subsides and attention-grabbing stimuli are underestimated.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions
C42

COGNITIVE AND METABOLIC SUBSTRATES OF EMOTIONAL
VULNERABILITY IN TEMPORAL LOBE EPILEPSY PATIENTS Laura

Lanteaume1,2, Eric Guedj3,4,5, Mireille Bastien-Toniazzo1,2, Olivier Mundler3,4,5,
Patrick Chauvel6,7,8, Fabrice Bartolomei6,7,8; 1Laboratoire Parole et Langage
CNRS, 2Université de Provence UMR 6054, Aix-en-Provence, France, 3CHU
Timone, Service Central de Biophysique et Médecine Nucléaire, 4CERIMED,
Université de la Méditerranée, 5CHU Conception, Centre d’Investigation
Clinique, INSERM, Marseille, 6CHU Timone, Service de Neurophysiologie
Clinique, 7INSERM, U751, 8Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille — Background: There is some evidence that emotional precipitants can induce
seizures in susceptible people with epilepsy. Nonetheless, the existence
of emotional vulnerability is mainly based on self-perception and little is
known concerning potential cognitive and brain dysfunctions associated
to the phenomena. We sought to identify a possible link between the
self-perception of affective precipitants, the cognitive responses modulated by aversive information (attentional bias), and the brain metabolic
modifications, in patients suffering from Temporal Lobe Epilepsy (TLE)
and reporting to have an emotional vulnerability (seizure precipitated
by stressful events). Methods: The extent to which seizures were elicited
or not by emotional precipitants was estimated using a self-reported
scale, allowing distinction of two groups: "Emo-TLE" group and "OtherTLE" group. Attentional biases were assessing with the Dot Detection
paradigm, using negative and neutral stimuli. Interictal brain metabolism was studied using FDG-PET. Cognitive and imaging comparisons
were made between healthy individuals, Control group, and either Emo
or Other TLE groups. Results: Approximatively 50% of patients have
reported an effect of emotional precipitants on seizure release. These
Emo-TLE participants disclosed specific attentional biases toward negative stimuli compared to neutral ones, and to Other-TLE and Control
groups. Emo-TLE also exhibited significant anterior temporal lobe
hypometabolism. Conclusion: This investigation therefore suggests that
Emotional Vulnerability in some patients is not only the results of selfperception but that it might be underlined by specific cognitive and
brain metabolic modifications, in response to stressful events.

C43

CAN ATTENTION MODULATE EMOTION? Noga Cohen1, Avishai Henik1,

Nilly Mor2; 1Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel — Interactions between emotion
and attention are shaped by evolution in order to produce adaptive
behavior. However, these interactions may take a different form depending on the attentional network in question and on the processing level of
the emotional stimulus. In the current research we used a modified version of the Attention Network Test (ANT) to examine the effect of emotion on each of three attentional networks: alerting, orienting and
executive functions. In two experiments, we found that presentation of
emotional stimuli altered task performance only in the absence of cognitive conflict. When the task required conflict resolution, emotional stimuli had no influence on performance. Moreover, this interaction was
modulated by exposure duration of the emotional stimuli. These results
strengthen prior findings from neuro-imaging studies regarding regulation of the effects of emotion during cognitive conflict; namely, when
executive processes are needed, inhibitory mechanisms are activated to
decrease the disruptive effect of emotions. The ability to inhibit emotions
when we need to quickly solve a cognitive conflict is crucial for survival.

C44

SELECTIVE ATTENTION AND CONFLICT PROCESSING UNDER PRIMARY
INCENTIVES: EVIDENCE FROM THE FLANKER TASK Kimberly S. Chiew1,
Todd S. Braver1; 1Washington University in St. Louis — Research

indicates
that motivational incentives can enhance cognitive control during taskswitching and working memory paradigms. Conflict resolution is
another commonly postulated control process, but may be engaged differentially from other control processes (i.e., reactively rather than proactively). We examined positive (reward) and negative (penalty)

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session C
motivational state effects on conflict processing in the Eriksen flanker
task. Reward and penalty blocks involved intermixed incentive and noincentive trials, with incentive value cued prior to trial onset. Primary
incentives (pleasant/unpleasant liquids) were used. Flanker trials were
incompatible (conflict), compatible, or neutral, permitting examination
of interference and facilitation effects. We observed the classic flanker
effect: performance (latency and accuracy) improved from incompatible
to neutral to compatible trials. Incentives improved both speed and accuracy of performance, but effects did not differ with incentive valence,
suggesting that both reward and punishment can enhance attentional
performance. Additionally, latency decreased in incentive blocks relative
to baseline, even in trials without incentives offered. This mirrors the
‘incentive context effect’ (Savine et al., in press), suggesting a sustained,
global impact of incentive on performance. However, incentives did not
reduce conflict-related interference, suggesting a limited reactive effect.
A second experiment examined whether proactive forms of conflict resolution might be differentially sensitive to incentives. Proactive control
was engaged by preparatory cues foreshadowing conflict (indicating
trial-type). Analyses examined whether incentive information interacted
with the presence/absence of trial-type foreknowledge, directly testing
whether the ‘incentive cue effect’ is due specifically to enhanced use of
such preparatory cues via motivation-based optimization of proactive,
rather than reactive, control.

C45

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF VIGILANCE AND
DISENGAGEMENT DIFFICULTIES TOWARDS FACES IN SOCIAL ANXIETY

Mandy Rossignol1, Philippot Pierre1, Campanella Salvatore2; 1Université
Catholique de Louvain, 2Université Libre de Bruxelles — Behavioral studies
have extensively used spatial cueing paradigms to investigate emotional
biases in clinical and sub-clinical anxiety. However, neural processes
underlying the generation of these biases remain uncertain. This study
explored the role of attentional disengagement in emotional processing
through electrophysiological activity. High and low socially anxious
individuals performed a spatial cueing paradigm: a single lateralized
cue consisting of an emotional or a neutral face was presented on the left
or the right hemi-field. Then, an arrow appeared at the site previously
occupied by the face or at the empty location, and the subject had to discriminate the orientation of the target as quickly and accurately as possible. Results showed on occipital locations that perceptual encoding of
faces, indexed by P100, and mobilization of attentional resources,
reflected in P200, were modulated by social anxiety. Moreover, socially
anxious participants displayed enhanced P100 component in response to
valid and invalid targets. Furthermore, behavioral results showed that
high socially anxious participants were not faster to detect targets
appearing in the attended location, while this expected validity effect
was observable in low anxious individuals. These results suggest that
social anxiety is associated with (1) an hypersensitivity to incoming
visual stimuli; and (2) an attentional anchorage leading to disrupted processing of subsequent targets. This support the thesis of an arbitrary
selection of relevant information coupled with a lack of control over their
processing.

C46

EFFECTS OF ANGRY FACE ON ATTENTION REVEALED BY N2PC
COMPONENT Shwu-Lih Huang1, Yu-Ju Chen1, Yu-Chieh Chang1; 1National
Changchi University — The N2pc component was measured as an electrophysiological indicator of attention orienting to investigate how a taskirrelevant angry face influences attention. Participants had to detect a
target dot presented in one of the six schematic faces arranged circularly
and discriminate whether the dot located in the left or right side of that
face. Six faces were all neutral faces or included an angry face among
them. Emotional content of the faces were irrelevant to the task, therefore could be ignored. Five conditions were manipulated inclusive of (1)
all-neutral condition: six neutral faces were presented; and (2) angry-target condition: target was presented in the only angry face. In the remaining conditions, target was not presented in the angry face but in a neutral

99

Poster Session C
face. That included (3) target and angry face were presented in the same
visual hemifields (same-side condition), or (4) in the laterally opposite
sides (opposite-side condition), and (5) target was presented on the vertical meridian while angry face was presented laterally (vertical-target
condition). Through a time-course analysis, firstly the result showed that
attention oriented to the target very early (220-240ms) in all-neutral condition. Secondly, the onset of N2pc component was earlier in angry-target condition (240-260ms) than in same-side condition (260-280ms). And
N2pc component was more delayed in opposite-side condition (280300ms). Finally, in vertical-target condition, attention could hardly be
guided to the angry face. In conclusion, effects of task-irrelevant angry
face on attention were revealed in the temporal aspect of N2pc component.

C47

LASTING EFFECTS OF EXPOSURE THERAPY FOR SPIDER PHOBIA:
ALTERED BRAIN ACTIVATION ASSOCIATED WITH REDUCED FEAR
Katherina K. Y. Hauner1, Susan Mineka1, Ken A. Paller1; 1Northwestern
University — Specific phobia, characterized by excessive fear of an object

or situation, is the third most prevalent mental disorder. Exposure therapy for specific phobia can lead to reduced fear following a single, 2hour session. Neural mechanisms associated with this remarkable therapeutic outcome are not understood. Furthermore, no study has examined whether patients’ neural responses to feared stimuli are altered by
this form of treatment, nor has any study examined the neural correlates
of this treatment’s long-term effects. The study’s goals were to: (a) identify functional neuroanatomical substrates of fear extinction immediately
following exposure therapy, and (b) compare initial results with those 6
months post-treatment. Participants (n=12) met diagnostic criteria for
spider phobia at baseline. Neural correlates of phobic fear were obtained
before therapy via fMRI contrasts to phobic images (spiders) versus neutral images (moths). Participants then successfully completed the 2-hour
treatment, followed by fMRI scanning with novel phobic/neutral
images. At 6-month follow-up, participants completed the fMRI paradigm with novel images. Pre-therapy results showed increased activity
for phobic versus neutral images in the amygdala, insula, and cingulate
gyrus. Results for this contrast immediately post-therapy showed
decreased differential activity in these areas, which was maintained at
follow-up. Differential activity in the superior frontal gyrus (potentially
indicative of cognitive control) increased following therapy for phobic
versus neutral stimuli, then decreased at follow-up. These findings are
relevant for hypotheses regarding neurocognitive mechanisms of fear
extinction, which may involve response inhibition (via superior frontal
gyrus) that is operative initially but not required for persistent fear
reduction.

C48

DISSOCIABLE EFFECTS OF RELAXATION AND MEDITATION TRAINING ON
THE EMOTIONAL REGULATION OF ATTENTION Norman Farb1, Zindel
Segal1,2, Adam Anderson1; 1University of Toronto, 2Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, University of Toronto — Our reactions to stressful events

have consequences for long-term well-being. Mindfulness training (MT)
is associated with reduced risk of depression relapse, perhaps by altering
stress reactions. Farb et al. (2009) demonstrated reduced neural reactivity
to mood challenge following MT relative to waitlisted controls, particularly in the right insula and posterior cingulate/precuneus. The present
study employed an active control group for MT in a true pre/post
design: relaxation training is isomorphic to MT in structure and practice
requirements, but without an emphasis on cultivating attentional control. In addition to assessing the consequences of mood challenge
through valenced film clips, we measured mood effects on attention
using a selective attention task employing indoor/outdoor judgments of
scenes with superimposed valenced face distracters. Consistent markers
of self-reported and neural reactivity to sad films were found across
mindfulness and relaxation groups, recruiting cortical midline systems
but reducing posterior insula and somatosensory activity. Neural indices
of reactivity were reduced following training, although most effects

100

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions
were nonspecific to training type. Consistent with attentional narrowing
during negative mood, sadness improved performance on the indoor/
outdoor judgment task. By contrast, sad faces increased distraction relative to neutral faces. However, a specific training difference was
observed, with MT participants less distracted by sad faces during neutral moods than relaxation participants. Evidence from extrastriate
regions sensitive to faces and places was consistent with reduced attention to faces following MT, but not relaxation training. These findings
demonstrate that mindfulness training effects extend beyond relaxation,
improving executive control over emotional interactions via selective
attention.

C49

P300 GREATER SENSITIVITY FOR EMOTIONAL FACE-VOICE
ASSOCIATIONS REVEALED BY A CROSS-MODAL ODDBALL PARADIGM

Salvatore Campanella1, Frédéric Joassin2, Mandy Rossignol2, Paul Verbanck1;
1
Laboratory of Psychological Medicine, University of Brussels, Belgium,
2
Cognitive Neuroscience Unit, University of Louvain, Belgium — Objective –
Studies exploring the neurophysiological correlates of main psychiatric
disorders commonly used event-related potentials (ERP) during a visual
or an auditory oddball task. Main results are focused on P3b amplitude
and/or latency modulations. The present study aims at increasing the
clinical sensitivity of these P3b modulations by using a more ecological
oddball design, defined with synchronized pairs of audio-visual emotional stimuli. Methods – Healthy participants and subjects with depressive and anxious tendencies were successively confronted with a visual,
an auditory and an audio-visual (cross-modal) oddball task, in which
they had to detect as quickly as possible deviant happy and sad stimuli
among neutral ones. Behavioral performance and P3b ERP data
(recorded from 32 electrodes) were analyzed. Results – Subjects displaying anxious and depressive tendencies showed a decrement of the P3b
amplitude as compared to controls, but only in the cross-modal oddball
task. Conclusions - We showed that even if the two groups of subjects
differed on their subclinical level of comorbid anxiety and depression,
unimodal visual and auditory oddball tasks did not allow us to index
this difference by P3b amplitude modulations, whereas the cross-modal
task did it. Significance - These results call for using cross-modal oddball
designs at a fundamental and clinical level in future studies, in order to
increase the sensitivity of P300 amplitude difference shown between
healthy and clinical participants.

C50

MODULATION OF ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSE TO UNPLEASANT
PICTURES BY FALSE EXPECTATION Kenta
Kimura12,
Toshikazu

Hasegawa1; 1The University of Tokyo, 2Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science — Previous studies have demonstrated that emotion regulation

such as reappraisal reduced subjective negative feeling and concomitant
electrophysiological response such as late positive potential (LPP).
Although reappraisal is one of the most well-researched regulation strategies, it is also known that modulation of expectations about how following unpleasant stimuli might feel can alter perceptions of the stimuli
in the context of pain. Although several studies showed that false expectation about upcoming pain modulates subjective and neural responses
to it, no study has examined it in visual system. Thus, present study
examined whether false expectation modulates subjective and electrophysiological responses to unpleasant pictures. Participants were asked
to view and rate neutral and unpleasant pictures following one of three
cues; unpleasant, misleading, and neutral cues. Unpleasant and misleading cues were followed by unpleasant pictures while neutral pictures
were presented after neutral cue. As a manipulation of expectancy, participants were instructed that the unpleasant cue predicted presentation
of highly unpleasant pictures while misleading cue did mildly unpleasant pictures. Actually, however, unpleasant pictures following these two
cues were controlled as they had same valence and arousal scores. Subjective unpleasant score and amplitudes of LPP during picture presentation were assessed. As a result, participants rated pictures following

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions
unpleasant cue more unpleasant compared to pictures following misleading cue. In addition, we found smaller amplitude of LPP during
unpleasant pictures following misleading cue than unpleasant cue.
These results suggest that not only pain perceptions, expectancy manipulation can modulate perception of unpleasant visual stimuli.

C51

DOES THE SEMANTIC RELATEDNESS OF CONDITIONAL CUES FACILITATE
THE TRANSFER OF LEARNED FEAR? Joseph E. Dunsmoor1, Allison

Bullock1, Kevin S. LaBar1; 1Duke University — In a typical fear conditioning
experiment, fear is acquired to a conditioned stimulus (CS) when it is
paired with an aversive unconditioned stimulus (US). However, fear can
also be acquired to cues that have never been paired with the US, but
share a previous association with the CS (sensory preconditioning).
While sensory preconditioning has served as an interesting explanation
for the development of anxiety disorders, human research on this topic
has received sparse attention. The present investigation developed a
novel sensory preconditioning paradigm with semantically related or
unrelated cues to determine whether higher-order human fear learning
is influenced by the semantic similarity of conditional cues. In a
between-subjects design, groups received paired fear-relevant cues that
were either semantically related (e.g., an image of a spider and an image
of a web), semantically incongruent, or unrelated. Similarly matched
control stimuli were presented for each group that were never reinforced. One of the cues from each pair was then fear conditioned in association with an electric shock US. Subsequently, the non-conditioned cue
in each pair was presented alone to test for the transfer of learned fear.
Results showed that all groups exhibited a transfer of conditioned fear
(as assessed by the skin conductance response) to the non-conditioned
cue that had undergone sensory preconditioning but not to the control
stimuli. However, the magnitude of fear was greater, and reaction times
faster, in the semantically congruent condition, suggesting an influence
of semantic relatedness on higher-order fear learning in humans.
C52

EMOTIONAL CONTRAST AND SELF-REPORTED ANXIETY PREDICT TARGET
ACCURACY IN AN EMOTIONAL ATTENTIONAL BLINK PARADIGM
Nicholas Van Dam1, Mitch Earleywine1, Jeanette Altarriba1; 1University at
Albany, SUNY — Manipulating emotional features of stimuli in rapid serial

visual processing presents a unique approach to investigate explicit and
implicit aspects of emotional perception. Psychopathology may be an
important moderating variable in emotion perception. We investigated
the effects of type of emotional stimuli and individual differences in psychopathology on emotion identification accuracy in an emotional attentional blink paradigm. Participants completed self-report measures of
anxiety, depression, and negative affect. They were then presented with
one of three first target (T1) stimuli (neutral, happy, or fearful face), followed at lag 3 (three intervening distracters) or lag 6 (six intervening distracters) by one of three second target (T2) stimuli (neutral, happy, or
fearful face). The outcome measure was accuracy of emotion identification for T2 stimuli. Emotion identification was strongly facilitated by a
contrast effect, where the two targets were of the opposite emotion (e.g.,
fearful vs. happy). Anxiety emerged as the only significant predictor of
T2 emotion identification accuracy when one of the targets was fearful.
However, when there was no fearful stimulus, negative affect was the
only predictor of T2 accuracy. These findings provide evidence that
emotional contrast influences identification accuracy of rapid emotional
visual processing. Additionally, they suggest that anxiety plays a significant role in rapid processing of threat-related stimuli, whereas negative
affect plays a role in rapid processing of emotional stimuli more generally. These data have important implications for visual processing of
emotional stimuli and for attentional control in emotional disorders.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session C
C53

DISSOCIABLE EFFECTS OF NEGATIVE EMOTIONAL DISTRACTERS
DURING HIGH AND LOW COGNITIVE INTERFERENCE CONDITIONS

Agnes J. Jasinska1, Kate D. Fitzgerald1, Stephan F. Taylor1; 1University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI — Daily experience suggests that negative emotional distracters impair cognitive task performance. However, research
reports have been inconsistent. The current study was informed by two
theoretical accounts. The perceptual load theory (Lavie 2005) proposes
that the impact of distracters depends on the level and type of processing
load involved in the task: high perceptual load decreases distracter
effects, whereas high cognitive load increases distracter effects. A contrasting view (e.g., Eltiti et al. 2005) holds that the impact of distracters
on task performance depends on distracter salience. The goal of the
present study was to test two hypotheses. First, that negative emotional
distracters will impair task performance in high interference condition to
a greater degree than in low interference condition. And second, that the
impact of distracters will increase with increasing negative emotional
salience of the distracters. We employed the Multiple-Source Interference Task (MSIT) (Bush et al. 2003) with high and low interference conditions (stimulus-response incompatibility). We modified the task by
adding 3 categories of task-irrelevant flanker distracters: Angry, Fearful,
and Neutral faces. 70 healthy females (mean age 22.9±4.06) performed
the task. We observed a robust interaction between interference condition and distracter type both in reactions times and in accuracy. As
hypothesized, the interference effect increased with increased emotional
salience of distracter types: Angry > Neutral > Null. Negative emotional
distracters impaired task performance when interference was high, but
unexpectedly, they enhanced task performance when interference was
low. These results add to our understanding of the processes underlying
negative emotional distraction.

C54

FUNCTIONAL ACTIVATION OF PERCEPTION AND ACTION AREAS PREDICT
EMOTIONAL RESPONSES TO MUSIC Psyche Loui1, Charles Li1, Juan Pablo
Bello2, Robert Rowe2, Gottfried Schlaug1; 1Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center and Harvard Medical School, 2New York University — The human emo-

tional response to music is complex and individually dependent, but
maps onto traditional features of sound, such as pitch, rhythm, and
loudness. A stable classification system from musical informationretrieval literature has provided us with testable predictions of human
arousal ratings based on combinations of sound features. To explore the
neural response to emotional arousal in music as manipulated by these
sound features, we conducted a parametric, event-related fMRI study
using the sparse temporal sampling technique. Short musical excerpts
(12s each) were presented to 19 subjects in the scanner. These excerpts
were predicted by the classification system to range from lowest to highest in arousal. Subjects' task was to rate the perceived arousal level of
each excerpt. In a control task, lateralized white noise was presented and
subjects rated the laterality of the noise - a feature of sound that we
assume to be unrelated to emotional content. Arousal ratings correlated
highly with the classifier but showed considerable between-subject variability. A BOLD signal comparison between all music and noise trials
showed widespread bilateral activity in superior temporal structures
(STG, STS, MTG) responsible for perception and categorization. Furthermore, a contrast between high-arousal and low-arousal music showed
enhanced activity in memory and action-sequencing areas (IFG, DLPFC,
and OFC) activity in high-arousal trials. Results suggest that combinations of perceptual features can elicit emotions by recruiting brain
regions responsible for perception and categorization, which must then
interface with working memory and action sequencing functions to
derive the emotional experience.

101

Poster Session C

Emotion & Social: Development & Aging
C55

AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN THE EFFECTS OF AUTOMATIC AND
DELIBERATE EMOTION REGULATION: A FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC
RESONANCE IMAGING INVESTIGATION Sanda Dolcos1, Keen Sung1,

Ekaterina Denkova1, Kristina Suen1, Jessica Li1, Roger A. Dixon1, Florin
Dolcos1; 1University of Alberta, Canada — Emotion regulation (ER) undergoes lifespan transformations, with an apparent peak in efficiency occurring in older adulthood. Recent evidence suggests that healthy aging is
associated with a “positivity bias” in processing emotional information,
which is reflected in lower ratings of negative information. Given that
this effect occurs even in the absence of explicit instructions to regulate
emotions, it is possible that ER may operate automatically in older
adults. However, little is known about the ER mechanisms involved and
the associated neural correlates. We investigated this issue by comparing
the effects of automatic/implicit and deliberate/explicit forms of ER in
healthy younger and older adults. The experimental design manipulated
both the goal to regulate emotion (implicit vs. explicit) and the intensity
of the emotional challenge (high vs. low). Participants rated the emotional content of negative and neutral pictures, while brain activity was
recorded using fMRI. Following a baseline run, subjects were instructed
or nonconsciously primed to suppress responses to pictures varying in
emotional content. Older adults had lower emotion ratings even during
the baseline, and this effect was maintained following implicit ER
manipulation. In contrast, for young adults a reduction in ratings
occurred only after the ER induction. Consistent with these findings,
fMRI data in older adults (N=15) showed automatic engagement of cognitive control regions (medial PFC) without ER manipulation, whereas
in young adults (N=21) this engagement occurred only after explicit ER
manipulation. The results shed light on possible mechanisms associated
with the automatic ER underlying the positivity bias in healthy aging.

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition
Interactions
C56

THE EFFECT OF INDIVIDUAL VARIATION IN TRAIT SOCIAL ANXIETY ON THE
NEURAL CORRELATES OF THE RESPONSE TO TRANSIENT ANXIETYINDUCING EMOTIONAL DISTRACTION Florin
Dolcos1,
Ekaterina

Denkova1, Gloria Wong1, Sanda Dolcos1, Nick Coupland1; 1University of
Alberta — Previous investigations linked individual differences in general
cognitive abilities to variation in the response to general emotional distraction. Here, we investigated the relationship between individual variation in specific personality traits linked to emotional responses (i.e.,
social anxiety [SA]) and brain activity to transient SA-inducing distraction. Event related fMRI data were recorded while 15 healthy subjects
performed a working memory (WM) task with angry face distracters
presented during the delay between the memoranda and probes; trait SA
was also measured with the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS).
Analyses focused on brain regions sensitive to processing emotional
facial expressions and experiencing the associated feelings (fusiform
gyrus [FG], amygdala [AMY] and medial prefrontal cortex [mPFC]) and
brain regions associated with cognitive control (dorsolateral PFC
[dlPFC]). We found evidence for dissociable effects of transient SAinducing distraction on brain activity associated with the subjective vs.
objective response to emotional distraction, which were linked to individual variation in trait SA and WM performance. Specifically, anxietyinducing distraction enhanced activity in FG, AMY, and mPFC while
disrupting it in dlPFC. Moreover, FG and mPFC activity showed positive correlations, while dlPFC activity showed negative correlations with
LSAS scores, possibly reflecting individual variation in the subjective
response to emotional distraction. However, only FG activity was also
negatively correlated with WM performance, thus reflecting individual

102

Emotion & Social: Development & Aging
variation in the objective impact of emotional distraction on WM performance. Our findings suggest dissociable roles of these brain regions in
the subjective response to task-irrelevant emotional distraction and its
actual impact on cognitive performance.

C57

IT'S IN THE CARDS: AN FMRI STUDY OF PROBABILISTIC
CLASSIFICATION LEARNING WITH EMOTIONAL AND NEUTRAL
OUTCOMES Steven Prince1, Laura Thomas2, Philip Kragel1, Steven Green1,

Kevin LaBar1; 1Duke University, Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, 2National
Institute of Mental Health, Mood and Anxiety Program — A variation of a
standard probabilistic classification task (weather prediction task) was
used to investigate the neural correlates associated with feedback based
learning. Two groups of participants viewed cue cards that varied in a
probabilistic manner in predicting one of two outcomes. For Group 1,
the outcomes were neutral (flowers/mushrooms) and for group 2, the
outcomes were emotional (snakes/spiders). Group 2 subjects were given
a phobic scale inventory to assess for individual differences in fearfulness. Participants were scanned at 4T and completed 2 runs of 50 trials
each. To minimize the impact of different outcome pictures, trials were
modeled separately for the cue and outcome portions. Consistent with
behavioral results of previous studies, reaction times (RT) became significantly faster over training blocks. Evidence for learning on this task was
revealed by a significant correlation between the change in RT and the
change in performance across runs. In a model that used RT as a parametric regressor, faster RTs were associated with increased activation
level in the caudate nucleus. In a direct comparison, this effect was
greater for the neutral compared to the emotional group. Finally, in a
simple regression model, activation level in the caudate nucleus was
negatively correlated with phobic scores. Together, these results provide
evidence for an impact of emotional outcomes on striatal activation level
and suggest that individual differences in outcome salience further modulate feedback learning circuitry.

C58

RECOGNIZING REWARDS: SEARCHING FOR INCENTIVES IMPROVES
SOURCE MEMORY ACCURACY Daniel Dillon1, Oliver Hager2, Diego

Pizzagalli1; 1Harvard University, 2University of Zurich — Research on the cognitive neuroscience of reward encoding and reward-guided decision
making has grown rapidly and provides insight into anhedonia, a symptom of multiple forms of psychopathology. However, this work has
largely overlooked possible contributions of memory to reward processing. This is important because in some cases anhedonia may be linked
with reward-related retrieval deficits. To begin to address this issue, we
used a cue-framing approach to investigate recognition memory for
rewards. Thirty-six healthy adults encoded 80 items. Each item was
paired with one of two outcomes, either 25 cents (a reward) or 0 cents (a
“zero”). Memory for item-outcome associations was tested by re-presenting the old items and 40 lures under one of two recognition cues,
either “Reward?” or “Zero?”. Participants made yes/no recognition
judgments and confidence ratings. The primary hypothesis was that,
although both cues direct participants to retrieve item-outcome associations, the “Reward?” and “Zero?” cues should prompt searches for
reward and zero encoding traces, respectively. Because rewards elicit
stronger affective and neural responses than zeros, source memory was
expected to improve under the “Reward?” cue. This hypothesis was supported. For new items and items paired with zeros, accuracy improved
under the “Reward?” cue relative to the “Zero?” cue. However, accuracy
for rewarded items did not differ by cue. Finally, reaction times were
faster under the “Reward?” cue across all sources. Results indicate that
searching for rewarded encoding traces can improve source memory,
and suggest that investigating reward-related retrieval deficits may illuminate a previously overlooked route to anhedonia.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions

Poster Session C

C59

C61

LaBar1,
Joseph Dunsmoor1, Philip Kragel1, Vishnu Murty1, Steven Prince1; 1Duke
University — The ability to generalize learned behaviors across separate

RIGHT HEMISPHERE ADVANTAGE IN MEMORY FOR FACES PRESENTED
IN EMOTIONAL BUT NOT NEUTRAL SCENES Shahnaz Koji1, Myra A.

but similar stimuli is typically considered an adaptive function. Stimulus
generalization can prove maladaptive, however, when previous learning
is applied towards inappropriate stimuli. The maladaptive nature of
stimulus generalization is perhaps best demonstrated by the overgeneralization of learned fear responses. To investigate the neural mechanisms involved in fear generalization, we adapted a novel conditioned
fear generalization paradigm (Dunsmoor, Mitroff, & LaBar, 2009) for use
with event-related fMRI. During fear conditioning, participants received
pairings of a face expressing moderate fear intensity (CS+) with an electrical shock unconditioned stimulus as well as a control stimulus (neutral face of the same identity) that was explicitly unpaired. The
generalized stimuli were gradations of the same individual’s facial
expression morphed incrementally between 100% neutral and 100% fearful endpoints. All faces were presented prior to conditioning to measure
baseline responses as well as after conditioning in a steady-state generalization test. Fear learning and generalization were assessed by measuring skin conductance response. Behavioral results showed a fear
generalization gradient along the dimension of emotional expression
that peaked at a more intense value than the CS+. Analysis of fMRI
responses during the generalization test showed two patterns of activity
-- activity in the insula increased with the emotional intensity of the generalized stimuli whereas the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and bilateral
parahippocampus showed a decreasing gradient of activity. These
results suggest that distinct neural circuitry signals the generalization
and control of learned fear responses.

sphere advantage in memory for faces. In the real world, we encounter
individuals within a visual scene or context, often laden with emotion,
and this may influence memory performance. The current study examined the hemispheric memory advantage for faces when these are presented within an emotional scene. During an encoding phase, neutral
faces were presented on either the left or right half of a computer monitor, and were embedded within emotional (positive, negative) or neutral
scenes, which spanned the entire computer monitor. At test, old and lure
faces were presented centrally on a white screen in a recognition memory test. Memory for faces initially presented in left space (processed in
the right hemisphere) was significantly higher compared to memory for
faces presented in right space, when the context was of an emotional
scene. No hemispheric advantage was observed for faces presented in
neutral contexts. Results demonstrate that the right hemisphere advantage for face memory was present, but only when faces were encoded
within emotional scenes, suggesting that emotional valence of the context in which a face is encountered influences hemispheric advantages in
later memory performance.

NEURAL MECHANISMS OF FEAR GENERALIZATION Kevin

C60

BEYOND HUMAN DESIRE: AN FMRI META-ANALYSIS Stephanie

Ortigue1, Francesco Bianchi-Demicheli2, Chris Frum3, James Lewis3; 1Syracuse
University, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York, 2University
Psychiatric Centre, Geneva University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Center
for Neuroscience, West Virginia University, Morgantown — While a fundamental aspect of human social behavior is the ability to feel desires
towards other people, little is known about the nature of sexual desire.
How does sexual desire differ from other biological drives, such as love
or aesthetic attractiveness? The answers to these questions are not trivial.
For decades, confusion between these three concepts (sexual desire, love,
and aesthetic attractiveness) has been rampant. Despite the astonishing
advances in neuroimaging techniques, there is a lack of direct comparison between the brain networks mediating these three concepts. Using a
meta-analysis of functional brain images derived from 53 paradigms
including a total of 615 participants, we unraveled the uniqueness of sexual desire (vs. love and physical attractiveness). the reported groupaveraged data from each paradigm were all converted to a common
Talairach coordinate space (AFNI-Talairach). Activation volumes were
approximated by spheres and then projected into a brain volume space
using AFNI software. These volumetric data were then projected onto
the PALS (Population-Average, Landmark and Surface-based) atlas cortical surface models (left and right hemispheres). Results revealed sexual
desire specifically involves the left inferior parietal lobule, bilateral caudal-anterior insula and occipital-temporal cortex--three main areas mediating subjective feelings, self-representation, and self-consciousness. The
specific involvement of brain regions involved in self-representation
during sexual desire reinforces the importance of body awareness in
desire, and suggests that one may feel desires for other people based on
past bodily self-reinforced experiences. This finding opens critical avenues for better understanding of the neurobiology of the desiring mind.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Fernandes1; 1University of Waterloo — Research has identified a right hemi-

C62

IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT LEVELS OF ANIMACY PERCEPTION IN ADULTS
WITH HIGH FUNCTIONING AUTISM Bojana Kuzmanovic1, Leonhard

Schilbach1, Alexandra L. Georgescu1, Natacha Santos1, Kai Vogeley1;
1University of Cologne, Germany — While adults with high-functioning

autism (HFA) are able to acquire an explicit understanding of other persons’ minds, they still show impairments in the ability to read minds
implicitly and intuitively. Animations of geometric shapes provide a
possibility to investigate the perception of animacy defined as implicating a mind ‘behind’ moving objects. Particularly subtle qualities in
movement patterns of the geometric shapes might convey the critical difference between rather personal or ‘mindful’ and rather physical or
‘mindless’ movements. Using such animations incorporated in an eventrelated functional magnetic-resonance-imaging paradigma, we focused
on the differences in the neural and behavioral correlates of the perception of animacy between individuals with HFA and healthy control persons. Assessments of the animations on a four-point rating scale showed
a less pronounced ability to differentiate between ‘mindful’ and ‘mindless’ animations in the HFA group only for ambiguous stimuli. In parallel with the behavioral results, a differential decrease of neural activity
was present in the anterior cingulate gyrus and the fusiform gyrus in the
HFA as compared to the control group only for ambiguous movement
patterns. Taken together, our results indicate that animacy perception
does not differ significantly between HFA and control participants when
obvious movement patterns allow explicit, rule-based reasoning. Only
when confronted with ambiguous cues that require intuitive processing,
HFA participants demonstrated reduced differentiation on the behavioral level and a weaker activation in neural regions associated with sensory and evaluative processing of social cues.

C63

INFLUENCE OF PEERS ON SOCIAL BEHAVIOR AND UNDERLYING NEURAL
CIRCUITRY Rebecca M. Jones1, Leah H. Somerville1, Erika J. Ruberry1,

Victoria G. Libby1, Jaclyn Jeffrey-Wilensky1, B. J. Casey1; 1The Sackler Institute
for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Cornell Graduate School of Medical
Sciences — The presence of peers has been associated with increases in

risk-taking behavior. It has been hypothesized that peers alter such
behavior because they act as secondary reinforcers; however, this
hypothesis has not been directly tested. We used a task that parallels
human and nonhuman primate studies of reinforcement learning to
determine whether peers act as secondary reinforcers to bias adult
behavior and neural activity. During fMRI scanning, participants saw
pictures of three age-matched peers who passed notes to them at varying

103

Poster Session C
probabilities (33%, 66%, 100%). Participants were instructed to press a
button when they saw the face of a peer, prior to receiving feedback of
whether they received a note from that peer. fMRI analyses allowed for
the direct comparison of receiving reinforcement in the form of a note
from a peer versus not, and determining whether the varied expectation
of receiving reinforcement altered neural activity. Behavioral results
showed that participants were significantly faster to respond to faces of
peers who interacted with them more (66%, 100%) and slower to peers
who interacted with them less (33%). Similar to prior studies using
money and juice as reinforcers, imaging results showed that reward circuitry, including ventral striatum and ventral medial prefrontal cortex
(vmPFC), were activated when participants received peer interaction in
the form of a note. Subsequent analyses revealed the vmPFC was sensitive to whether the interaction was expected or unexpected based upon
the interaction history with each peer. These results suggest that peers
influence behavior by acting as secondary reinforcers.

C64

SPATIAL ATTENTION MODULATION WITH UNMASKED FEARFUL FACES:
DELAYED DISENGAGEMENT Karen Reinke1, Josh Carlson2, Amy Quarton1;
1

University of Illinois Springfield, 2State University of New York at Stony
Brook — Previous work has shown that spatial attention can be modu-

lated with masked fearful faces by speeding the orienting rather than
delaying the disengagement of attention. The goal of the current work
was to examine attentional orienting and disengagement effects using
the same set of faces, but unmasked presentation. A dot-probe paradigm
was used. Participants viewed two face stimuli for 250 ms, one left and
the other right of fixation. These were immediately replaced by a target
dot presented in either location. Reaction times to the target were the
dependent measure. There were three trial types. Congruent: one fearful
face and one neutral face with the target appearing in the location of the
fearful face. Incongruent: one fearful face and one neutral face with the
target appearing opposite the fearful face. Baseline: both faces were neutral and the target could appear in either location. Participants
responded significantly slower to incongruent than congruent trials.
Additionally, participants responded significantly slower on incongruent than baseline trials while there was no difference between congruent
and baseline trials. Given that baseline trials should not affect attention
(both faces are neutral) and there wasn’t a significant difference from
congruent reaction times, this suggests that there was not an affect of orienting attention to unmasked fearful faces. However, the difference
between baseline and incongruent trials suggests that reaction times are
slowed during incongruent trials due to delayed disengagement from
the spatial location of the fearful face to that of the target dot.

C65

ERPS OF EMOTIONAL IMAGES Alana Campbell1, Deana Davalos1, Mike
Kisley2, Barbara Banz1; 1Colorado State University, 2University of Colorado at
Colorado Springs — Responses to emotional stimuli can be influenced by
valence and magnitude. Brain responses to categorization of these stimuli are seen in a robust late positive potential wave. Recent evidence suggests that the amplitude of these waves can be influenced by the framing
of the emotional conditions. These framing techniques were considered
with personality factors to explain patterns of activation in response to
emotional images. Participants’ brainwaves are recorded in response to
positive, neutral and negative images. Participants are split into two conditions; the positive condition must respond if the image viewed is positive or not while the negative are asked if the image is negative are not.
Participants completed a battery of personality questionnaires. Comparisons between the groups are made based on changes in amplitude and
latency of the late positive potential wave for the three types of images.
Preliminary results suggest that framing and degree of extraversion may
significantly alter the amplitude of ERPs.

104

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions
C66

SHARPER SOCIAL SIGHT: ACUTE THREAT PERCEPTION CONTRIBUTES TO
NEGATIVE INTERPRETATION BIAS IN SOCIAL ANXIETY David
Rozek1,

Emily Cahill1, Wen Li1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — A

hallmark
symptom in social anxiety is negative interpretation biases that describe
the tendency to judge neutral or ambiguous information as negative. The
mechanisms underlying negative interpretation bias remain unclear: a
primary proposition is that anxiety promotes negative high-level evaluative operations. We posit that early sensory perception of threat, which
can be facilitated in anxiety to the extent that anxious individuals readily
detect miniscule amounts of threat information often missed by non-anxious people, resulting in negative interpretations. Thus, we conducted
two brain electrophysiological event-related potential (ERP) studies
among pre-selected high- and low-anxious participants. The first study
presented a neutral face and a face containing small amounts of fear
(15%) simultaneously in the left and right visual fields, followed by a
dot-probe task (N=37). Occipital P1, a primary visual ERP, demonstrated
reliable discrimination between neutral and micro-fear faces (T=2.10, P <
0.05). The second study applied psychophysics in an affective judgment
task, wherein participants were presented with a neutral face or a face
containing small percentages of fear or disgust (6-30% in 4% increments)
and reported whether the face was neutral or negative. A sigmoid-function was fitted on behavioral responses and P1 mean amplitudes at different percentages of fear/disgust. Furthermore, the percentage
corresponding to the inflection point of the sigmoid-curve (detection
threshold) for each participant was submitted into a correlation analysis
with questionnaire measures of anxiety. A negative correlation between
the detection threshold and anxiety scores would support our hypothesis of superb threat perception in anxiety that drives negative interpretations.

C67

EFFECTS OF FEAR EXPRESSIONS ON EYE GAZE PERCEPTION

Daniel H.
Lee1, Joshua M. Susskind1, Adam K. Anderson1; 1University of Toronto — Evidence suggests that our facial expressions originated for sensory regulatory function (Susskind et al., 2008). For example, wider eye-opening in
fear expressions is associated with a subjectively larger visual field and
enhanced peripheral stimulus detection. Here we examined the Functional Action Resonance hypothesis (Susskind et al., 2008), which predicts that fear expressions’ direct benefits for the sender have parallel
indirect consequences for how receivers perceive and respond to their
environment. Using schematic eye gazes that represent actual wider
“fear” and narrower “disgust” eyes, without the remainder of the emotional expression, we examined the effects of eye aperture on gaze perception and target detection. Participants making forced-choice response
judgments of left vs. right gaze direction responded more accurately
with the increasing eye aperture characteristic of fear expressions. In a
Posner-cuing paradigm where gaze matched or mismatched the location
of a target, participants responded faster to the eccentric target when
viewing fear eyes. These benefits appear due to the enhanced physical
signals emitted by wider fear eyes, independent of emotional content, as
similar effects were found with schematic boxes that were not perceived
as eyes. Consistent with the Functional Action Resonance hypothesis,
these results demonstrate a link between how emotions are expressed on
the face and their influences on an observer’s behavioural and perceptual processes.

C68

JUDGEMENTS OF SOCIAL APPROPRIATENESS IN TOURETTE'S
SYNDROME Helena Drury1, Mary-Beth Young1, Roxanne Barrett1, Jeremy
Stern2, Shelley Channon1; 1University College London, UK, 2St George’s
Hospital London, UK — Tourette’s syndrome (TS) is a neurodevelopmental

disorder in which the core symptomatology consists of motor and vocal
tics. It has been linked to a range of everyday problems including social
difficulties and inappropriate behaviours, but these may be primarily
attributable to comorbid psychiatric symptomatology. Brain regions

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions
thought to be disrupted in TS have been linked to social-emotional processing and executive functions. The present study compared adults
with uncomplicated TS with a matched healthy control group on a faux
pas task requiring judgements of social appropriateness, and an emotional self-disclosure task, both previously found to be sensitive to deficits in orbitofrontal lesion patients (Beer, Heerey, Keltner, Scabini, &
Knight; Stone, Baron-Cohen, & Knight, 1998). The two groups did not
differ on appropriateness of emotional self-disclosures, as rated by independent judges, although the TS group showed reduced awareness of
the appropriateness of their disclosures. The TS group showed impaired
detection of faux pas situations relative to the control group, which may
reflect subtle difficulties in use of knowledge about social situations.
Implications of the findings for our understanding of TS are considered.

C69

SOCIAL PERCEPTION THROUGH MOTION: GENDER EFFECTS Marina
Pavlova1, Michele Guerreschi1,2, Samuel Krüger1, Arseny Sokolov1, Ingeborg
Krägeloh-Mann1; 1University of Tübingen Medical School, Germany, 2University
of Padua, Italy — The ability of humans to understand and explain other
people's actions is of immense value for adaptive behavior and social
communication. Gender differences are often evident in the visual processing of social signals, but the underlying basis for these differences is
unclear. Combining visual psychophysics with magnetoencephalography, we assessed gender differences in social perception revealed
through motion. The findings indicate that: (i) Gender affects accuracy of
body language reading. This effect, however, is modulated by emotional
content of actions. Females are better tuned to the lack of emotions in
body actions; (ii) Manipulation of gender stereotype messages affects
visual social cognition. This effect is more pronounced in females, with a
greater force of a negative stereotype message; (iii) Contrary to popular
wisdom, gender effects are not evident in the network engaged in visual
social interaction represented by motion of geometric shapes, but in the
regions engaged in perceptual decision making. Taken together, the
findings provide novel insights into understanding of gender effects in
social cognition, and shed light on the interplay between socio-cultural
and neurobiological factors.

C70

NETWORK DYNAMICS OF THE MESOLIMBIC DOPAMINE SYSTEM
DURING HUMAN REWARD ANTICIPATION: A DCM STUDY Ian Ballard1,

Vishnu Murty1, Jeff MacInnes1, R. Mckell Carter1, Scott Huettel1, R. Alison
Adcock1; 1Duke University — We used effective connectivity and fMRI to
investigate the dynamic network structure of a subset of the human
reward system (including the ventral tegmental area (VTA), nucleus
accumbens (NAcc), and left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG)). Specifically,
this study addresses whether the VTA, a source of dopamine the in
brain, or the left IFG, which has been implicated in the conscious representation of reward, drives the reward system during anticipation of
reward. We used Dynamic Causal Modelling (DCM) to explore this
question. This technique specifically models fMRI data in regions of
interest (ROIs) as a set of interconnected nodes whose connections can
change strength in different experimental contexts. Additionally, we
implemented Bayesian model selection to compare models with different driving inputs and connection structure. Models with the best fit
indicated driving inputs to the LIFG rather than the VTA. Thus, information about upcoming reward is first evident in the LIFG and then propagates through the network via reward-enhanced connections to the VTA
and NAcc. The VTA-NAcc loop has both the strongest intrinsic connections and the strongest increase in effective connectivity during the
reward context. Both of these regions have connections terminating in
the left IFG that are significantly enhanced during reward processing.
Together, these findings suggest that the left IFG initiates processing of
reward cues in the strongly coupled Nacc and VTA, which in turn provide feedback to the IFG. This is the first study to directly address the
question of how these regions dynamically interact during reward anticipation.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session C
C71

REACTIVE AND PROACTIVE CONTROL OF EMOTIONAL INFORMATION IN
HIGH AND LOW TRAIT ANXIOUS INDIVIDUALS Marie Krug1, Cameron

Carter1; 1University of California, Davis — While conflict inducing tasks such

as the color-word Stroop produce characteristic behavioral and neural
responses, the behavioral and neural underpinnings of response conflict
tasks involving emotional stimuli, and their modulation by individual
differences in trait anxiety, are less well understood. We manipulated
subjects’ expectancies for congruent and incongruent trials during performance of an emotional Stroop task. Subjects judged whether a face
was neutral or fearful in emotion while ignoring a superimposed word
(“fearful” or “neutral”) that could be either response congruent or
response incongruent. For the high expectancy block, 65% of trials were
incongruent to encourage a proactive control strategy, while in the low
expectancy block, only 35% of trials were incongruent to induce a reactive control strategy (Braver et al., 2007). Our behavioral results replicated previous findings using non-emotional Stroop tasks (Carter et al.,
2000), showing that interference is reduced, in both reaction time and
accuracy, for the high expectancy block in comparison to the low expectancy block. Analysis of the effects of individual differences in trait anxiety showed that high anxious (HA) subjects’ attempts to reduce
behavioral interference in the high expectancy task were differentially
successful depending on trial type. HA subjects showed evidence of
increased conflict during incongruent neutral face/fearful word trials
preceded by congruent trials when control was “proactively” engaged
during the high expectancy condition. fMRI analysis will test the
hypothesis that increased conflict with emotional distraction in HA individuals is associated with reduced activation in the prefrontal cortex and
increased activity in the anterior cingulate.

C72

DEPRESSION, RUMINATION, AND THE DEFAULT NETWORK Marc
Berman1, Scott Peltier1, Derek Nee2, Ethan Kross1, Patricia Deldin1, John
Jonides1; 1The University of Michigan, 2Indiana University — Previous
research indicates that Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is characterized by excessive default network activation and connectivity in the subgenual-cingulate. Hyper-connectivities are often interpreted as reflecting
excessive self-focused rumination, in which MDDs perseverate on negative, self-referential thoughts. However, no prior research has examined
how connectivity in this network covaries with individual differences in
rumination and whether these differences persist when participants are
distracted by a task. Neural functional connectivity between the posterior-cingulate cortex and the subgenual-cingulate cortex was explored in
15 MDDs and 15 Healthy Controls (HCs) during rest periods and shortterm memory task periods using a seed-based connectivity approach.
MDDs showed more neural functional connectivity between the posterior-cingulate cortex and the subgenual-cingulate cortex than healthy
individuals during rest periods, but not during task engagement itself.
Additionally, scores on a standardized scale of depressive rumination
correlated positively with the amount of connectivity between the subgenual-cingulate and posterior-cingulate during rest periods across all
participants.

C73

DISSOCIABLE ROLES FOR EMPATHY AND SYMPATHY IN WILLINGNESS
TO SHARE: AN FMRI STUDY K. Richard Ridderinkhof1, Johannes

Fahrenfort1, Ben Pelloux2, Frans van Winden2; 1Acacia, University of
Amsterdam, 2CREED, University of Amsterdam — Willingness to share monetary benefits has been argued to relate to empathy. Empathy involves
activation in neural networks including most prominently the anterior
insula (AI) and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). Sympathy, or caring
about the interests of others based on positive interactions with those
others, involves activation in neural networks including most prominently the superior temporal sulcus (STS) and posterior cingulate cortex
(PCC). Here we show that willingness to share monetary benefits
increases after positive interaction in a public goods game, and that this

105

Poster Session C
increased willingness to share is predicted by activation of the STS and
PCC. Activation of the AI and ACC did not predict willingness to share,
not even for people scoring high on empathy scales. These patterns suggest dissociable roles for empathy and sympathy in one’s willingness to
share monetary benefits with others.

C74

TRAIT ANXIETY MODULATES THE NEURAL EFFICIENCY OF ATTENTIONAL
CONTROL Ulrike Basten1, Christine Stelzel1, Christian J. Fiebach1;
1University of Heidelberg, Germany — In

the current study, we used fMRI to
investigate whether or not the neural efficiency of attentional control
processes is modulated by trait anxiety. An impairment of attentional
control in the face of threat-related distractors is well established for
high-anxious individuals. Beyond that, it has been hypothesized that
high trait anxiety more generally impairs the neural efficiency of cognitive processes requiring attentional control – even if the task at hand
does not contain threat-related stimuli (Eysenck et al., 2007). We assessed
anxiety in 46 subjects (using the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory) and
examined the correlation of trait anxiety with brain activation and functional connectivity, for incongruent as compared to congruent trials in a
color-word Stroop task. High- as compared to low-anxious individuals
showed stronger activation for the Stroop incongruency effect in the lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC). In addition, we observed reduced functional connectivity of LPFC with the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex
(dACC) and the so-called visual word form area in the left fusiform
gyrus. Taken together, both the increased activation in a circumscribed
region associated with attentional control and the decreased functional
coupling of this region with other task-related regions support the
assumption of reduced neural processing efficiency in anxious individuals. The stronger LPFC activation in anxious subjects is interpreted as an
attempt to compensate for suboptimal coupling within the cortical network subserving Stroop task performance. Observing these effects in an
affectively neutral task, we conclude that the impairment of attentional
control in anxious people is indeed general and not threat-specific.

C75

THE EFFECTS OF NEGATIVE EMOTION ON SPATIAL AND VERBAL
WORKING MEMORY Pan Liu1,2, Renlai Zhou1,3,4; 1State Key Laboratory of
Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, China,
of Communication Sciences and Disorders, McGill University,
Montréal, 3Key Laboratory of Child Development and Learning Science,
Southeast University, Nanjing, China, 4Beijing Key Lab of Applied Experimental
Psychology, Beijing Normal University, China — To explore the effects of neg2School

ative emotion on spatial and verbal working memory (WM), we manipulated participants’ negative arousal level (high, low) in relation to their
WM task load (high, low). The International Affective Pictures System
(IAPS) was used to induce different levels of negative arousal, and the
Delayed Match to Sample Task was used to modulate WM task load.
Both behavioral and Event Related Potentials (ERP) data were analyzed.
Results showed that negative emotion selectively affected spatial but not
verbal WM; one reason for this pattern is that emotions induced by the
IAPS were little involved with verbal processes, but overlapped with
visual-spatial resources. Furthermore, on spatial WM there was a significant interaction between negative arousal and task load. High negative
arousal impaired spatial WM in the task with high load, but facilitated
spatial WM in the low load task. In contrast, low negative arousal facilitated spatial WM task of high load, but had no effects on that of low
load. These effects were revealed by both accuracy and three ERP components, P2, P350, N2, which were considered to reflect the stages of
attention allocation, attention maintenance, and executive control of spatial WM process, respectively. Our results demonstrate that both negative arousal and WM task load affect spatial WM, perhaps due to
competition for visual-spatial attention resources. Moreover, this interaction is a successive and dynamic process involving different cognitive
stages, as reflected in different ERP components.

106

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions
C76

HUMAN FRONTAL BETA ACTIVITY FOR MONETARY REWARD MOTIVATION
INCREASES VISUAL WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY Masahiro
Kawasaki1; 1RIKEN, BSI-Toyota Collaboration Center — Human

cognitive
performance is influenced by several motivational changes. Previous
studies have identified the midbrain dopaminergic system and limbic
cortex for reward motivations and the fronto-parietal cortical networks
for higher cognitive functions, such as working memory (WM). However, little is known about how these two systems are interacted. To
address the issue, the present study investigated the electroencephalograph (EEG) oscillations during a monetary incentive WM tasks. In this
task, the subjects were required to maintain several objects’ colors (3 or
6) for a short retention interval (2sec), and if this trial is correct, they got
the reward which value (0, 10, or 50 Japanese yen) was indicated before
each trial. Behavioral results showed that the WM capacity increased
under the high monetary rewards, as compared with no or low rewards.
EEG results showed that the frontal beta activity increased when the
positive feedback signal was presented (i.e. the subject’s answer is correct) and subjects confirmed receiving reward values, relative to no
reward condition. This result indicates the involvement of the beta local
synchronizations in reward system. Moreover, the parietal alpha activity
significantly varied among the numbers of the presented objects during
retention interval under no reward condition, which is consistent with
previous findings that the parietal activity related to the WM capacity.
Interestingly, under high reward conditions, the frontal beta activity
alternatively increased during retention interval. These results indicated
that the interactions between the beta and alpha activities would be associated with increasing WM capacity under high reward motivations.

C77

PLEASANT STIMULI FACILITATE LEXICAL DECISIONS-AN EEG STUDY
Johanna Kissler1, Susanne Koessler1; 1University of Konstanz — We

investigated the influence of briefly (100 ms) presented pleasant and unpleasant emotional pictures on a subsequent lexical decision in an affective
priming task. Reaction times, error rates, and brain event-related potentials (ERPs) were analyzed. In the behavioural data, two independent
main effects emerged: Subjects responded faster and more accurately to
pleasant adjectives. Moreover, pleasant pictures also accelerated the subjects’ responses. In the stimulus locked ERP, the centro-parietal N400 in
response to the target words showed the well-known pseudo-word
effect, but was insensitive to the valence of either the primes or the targets or their interaction. In the response locked ERPs, an effect of target
valence was observed with a larger readiness potential preceding
responses to pleasant words. Overall, in line with some other previous
studies of affective priming using the lexical decision task, no congruency effects emerged. However, in general pleasant stimuli facilitated
lexical decisions. This facilitation apparently at least partly by-passed
full semantic analysis and acted rapidly on response preparation.

C78

REMEMBERING BEAUTY: ROLE OF ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX IN
SUCCESSFUL MEMORY ENCODING OF ATTRACTIVE FACES Takashi

Tsukiura1, Roberto Cabeza2; 1Tohoku University, 2Duke University — Humans

display a strong preference for attractive faces, and this bias can be
observed even in infant babies. Attractive faces also have a processing
advantage in various social and cognitive domains, including memory.
Although these effects are well established, the underlying neural mechanisms are largely unknown. In the current study, we used event-related
functional MRI (fMRI) to investigate the effect of attractiveness on memory for faces. Female participants were scanned while rating the attractive of male faces, and after scanning they performed an old/new
recognition test with confidence ratings. Using the subsequent memory
paradigm, encoding success activity (ESA) was identified by comparing
study-phase activity for faces that were subsequently remembered (hits)
vs. forgotten (misses). As expected, attractive faces were remembered
better than unattractive faces. fMRI analyses yielded three main find-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions
ings. First, in the medial orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), ESA was greater for
attractive faces than for unattractive faces. This effect occurred for highbut not for low-confidence responses, suggesting it is linked to recollection rather than to familiarity. Second, ESA for high-confidence
responses was found in the hippocampus across levels of facial attractiveness. Finally, ESA in OFC and the hippocampus were significantly
correlated across all levels of attractiveness. Taken together, these findings suggest that better memory for attractive faces reflects the interaction between a region previously associated with processing reward, the
OFC, and a region associated with successful encoding and recollection,
the hippocampus.

C79

BRAIN MECHANISMS UNDERLYING THE INTRUSIVE NATURE OF
PREVIOUS EMOTIONAL ASSOCIATIONS Michiko Sakaki1, Kazuhisa Niki2,

Mara Mather1; 1University of Southern California, 2National Institute of
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology — In life, we must often learn

new associations to people, places or things we already know. Recent
studies indicate that learning new associations to old items is harder
when those old items are either emotional themselves (Novak & Mather,
2009) or were previously associated with emotional items (Mather &
Knight, 2008). The current study employed functional MRI to address
the neural mechanism underlying this emotion-enhanced proactive
interference. Nineteen participants learned associations between pictures and neutral objects or between pictures and encoding tasks in the
first phase of the study. Half of the pictures were negative and the others
were neutral. This first learning session was followed by a memory
updating session, in which participants were presented with old pictures
(i.e., pictures previously associated with tasks or objects) or new pictures
(i.e., pictures that they had not seen in the first phase) and asked to memorize their location. We found a significant interaction between picture
novelty and valence in the lateral orbitofrontal cortex. The lateral orbitofrontal cortex showed greater activity when participants attempted to
learn the location of old emotional items than when they attempted to
learn the location of novel emotional items. In addition, the orbitofrontal
cortex was activated more when learning locations of old emotional
items than old neutral items. Lateral orbitofrontal cortex is involved in
inhibiting responses to previously rewarded stimuli in reversal learning
paradigms (e.g., Elliott et al., 2000); our findings suggest that lateral OFC
plays a more general role in updating associations to emotional stimuli.

C80

NEURAL CORRELATES OF TRAUMATIC MEMORY INCONSISTENCY IN
POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER Erin Dickie1,2, Alain Brunet1,3,

Annie-Claude David1, Vivian Akerib1, Jorge Armony1,2,3; 1Douglas Mental
Health University Institute, 2Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill
University, Montréal, Quebec, 3McGill University, Montréal, Quebec — In the
treatment of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, it has been proposed that
the completeness and consistency of patients’ autobiographical memory
for their traumatic event is an important clinical consideration. One
quantifiable measure of traumatic memory inconsistency is the amount
of change between testing sessions on scales measuring the subjective
experience of the traumatic event such as the Peritraumatic Distress
Inventory (PDI) and the Peritraumatic Dissociative Experience Scale
(PDEQ). We recently reported that increased change on these two scales
is associated with poorer clinical prognosis. We analysed functional and
structural magnetic resonance imaging data collected from a subset of
these patients (n=27) to identify the neural correlates of this memory
inconsistency. Two neural markers were explored: 1) functional data collected while participants encoded emotional stimuli (fearful and neutral
faces) into memory and 2) gray matter volume analysed using voxel
based morphometry. Memory inconsistency was associated with
increased left amygdala/hippocampus and decreased right ventral lateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC) involvement in successful emotional memory
encoding
(Fearful
[Remembered-Forgotten]
–
Neutral
[Remembered-Forgotten] contrast). Additionally, memory inconsistency

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session C
was associated with decreased gray matter volume in the right anterior
insula and bilateral posterior cingulate cortex. These findings suggest
that long-term traumatic memory inconsistency may be a marker of dysfunctional activity of brain structures thought to be critical for emotional
memory encoding. These results also suggest a cognitive mechanism by
which known decreases in gray matter volume in PTSD patients may
contribute to PTSD pathology.

C81

THE EFFECT OF RETRIEVAL FOCUS DURING RECOLLECTION OF
AFFECTIVE AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORIES: A FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC
RESONANCE IMAGING INVESTIGATION Ekaterina Denkova1, Trisha
Chakrabarty1, Kristina Suen1, Sanda Dolcos1, Florin Dolcos1; 1University of
Alberta, Canada — One of the core debilitating features of mood disorders

is ruminating on negative autobiographical memories (AMs). Although
there has been significant progress in understanding the brain mechanisms underlying AM retrieval, little is known about how focusing on
vs. distracting from the emotional content during recollection of life
experiences might influence the subjective re-experience of AM and the
associated neural correlates. The present study investigated this issue by
manipulating the retrieval focus while healthy participants recollected
AMs and fMRI data were recorded. Participants were asked to retrieve
forty AMs and to focus either on emotional (Emo condition) or non-emotional (e.g., spatial) contextual aspects (NonEmo condition); cues for
these memories were collected prior to scanning by means of an AM
questionnaire. Preliminary analyses of data from 10 participants showed
that Emo condition was associated with increased subjective experience
of emotion and enhanced activity in limbic regions (e.g., the amygdala
and anterior cingulate cortex). By contrast, the NonEmo condition was
linked to decreased self-reported affect and diminished activity in the
amygdala, coupled with enhanced activity in brain regions associated
with processing of spatial information (parahippocampal gyrus) and
inhibitory processes (ventrolateral prefrontal cortex). These findings
suggest that distracting from emotion leads to effective inhibition of the
feelings originally associated with AMs, and have relevance for understanding the negative affective bias observed in mood disorders (possibly linked to a failure to inhibit negative aspects of AMs). These findings
also provide support for cognitive behavioural therapies involving training to distract from emotional aspects of personal memories.

C82

RELEVANCE DETECTION AS A KEY DETERMINANT OF MEMORY
FACILITATION FOR EMOTIONAL STIMULI Alison Montagrin1,2, David

Sander1,2; 1Laboratory for the study of Emotion Elicitation and Expression,
University of Geneva, Switzerland, 2Swiss Center for Affective Sciences,
University of Geneva, Switzerland — Several studies have shown that mem-

ory can be facilitated for emotional as compared to neutral stimuli. This
modulation of memory has typically been explained in terms of two
affective dimensions: valence and arousal. However, it is unclear
whether these dimension represent necessary conditions for memory
facilitation. In particular, an appraisal-based approach suggests that
arousal is a typical response elicited by self-relevant stimuli, but that it is
the appraised relevance of the stimuli that facilitate memory rather than
the fact that these stimuli are arousing. With respect to valence, one can
also argue that it is not the intrinsic valence of a stimulus (i.e. its pleasantness or unpleasantness) that is responsible for the memory-enhanced
effect, but rather the motivational relevance of the stimulus (e.g., its goalrelevance). In this experiment, we aimed at testing the hypothesis
according to which there is a memory facilitation for neutral stimuli that
are goal-relevant. We used an incident task memory paradigm in which
we manipulated the relevance of neutral stimuli. Participants were presented with two main conditions: a neutral stimulus (e.g., a chair) could
be either relevant (i.e. goal-obstructive or goal-conducive) or irrelevant
(i.e. neither goal-obstructive nor goal-conducive). Results showed that
stimuli presented in the relevant condition were better recognized than
those presented in the irrelevant condition. This memory effect was even

107

Poster Session C
stronger after a delay than during an immediate recognition task. These
results suggest a long-lasting effect of a relevant event on memory, independently its intrinsic valence or arousing property.

C83

EPISODIC MEMORIES OF EMOTIONAL PHOTOGRAPHIC PICTURES: AN
Glaser2,
ERP COMPARISON BETWEEN MEN AND WOMEN Emma

Adrianna Mendrek1,2, Emmanuel Stip1,2, François Guillem1,2, Marc Lavoie1,2;
de Montréal, QC, Canada, 2Centre de Recherche Fernand Seguin,
Louis-H Lafontaine Hospital, Montréal, QC, Canada — Context: It is com-

1Université

monly believed that men and women react differently to emotion.
Women have been found to react more strongly to negative pictures than
men, to be more sensitive to threatening stimuli, whereas men have been
seen to be more sensitive to positive and erotic stimuli. Differences for
emotional effects on memory have been recently studied through brain
imaging techniques and Event-Related Potentials (ERP). However, comparisons between pleasant and unpleasant pictures were not balanced
across arousal values. In addition, men and women were often mixed or
studied separately. Goals: The current study aims at comparing men and
women’s emotional memory to photographic stimuli and explores ERP
components of interest that are activated. Methods: ERP components
were compared in 11 men and 16 women. ERPs were obtained from 56
EEG electrodes during the presentation of 200 pictures from the International Affective Picture System according to four categories (pleasant
low arousal - unpleasant low arousal - pleasant high arousal - unpleasant high arousal). The episodic memory task was to identify pictures that
had been seen previously (old) from those not yet been seen (new) by a
button press. Results: From ERPs, the Late Positive Component showed
that the episodic memory old-new effect in women was more important
in the right hemisphere, while for the men, it was larger in the left hemisphere. Conclusion: Especially with women, emotional arousal affected
memory significantly while valence did not and suggest that, between
genders, different cerebral networks are involved in emotional memory
processing.

Perception & Action: Multisensory
C84

THE RIGHT DORSAL OCCIPITAL STREAM MAINTAINS ITS FUNCTIONAL
SPECIFICITY FOR SPATIAL PROCESSING IN ABSENCE OF VISUAL
EXPERIENCE Olivier Collignon1,2,3, Gilles Vandewalle4,5, Patrice Voss1,

Geneviève Charboneau1, Maryse Lassonde1,2, Franco Lepore1; 1Centre de
Recherche en Neuropsychologie et Cognition (CERNEC), Université de
Montréal, Canada, 2Centre de Recherches CHU Sainte-Justine, Montréal,
3Institute of Neuroscience, Université Catholique de Louvain, Belgique, 4Unité
de Neuroimagerie Fonctionnelle, Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de
Montréal, Canada, 5Centre d’étude du sommeil de l’hôpital du Sacré Cœur de
Montréal, Canada — Several studies have demonstrated that the occipital
cortex of early blind individuals reorganizes itself and becomes massively involved in the processing of auditory information. However, it is
still unclear whether the topographical functional organization observed
in sighted individuals is maintained in the rewired occipital regions of
early blind individuals. In the present fMRI study, 11 early blind and 11
matched sighted subjects were asked to process either the spatial location or pitch properties of sounds that were identical in both conditions.
Groups (Blind > Sighted) by conditions (Spatial > Pitch) interactions
analysis revealed that the spatial processing of sounds in blind participants selectively recruited the right dorsal occipital stream, in regions
well known to be involved in visuo-spatial processing in sighted subjects. These results represent a compelling demonstration that the “dorsal occipital stream” is not only crossmodally recruited for the
processing of sounds, but also maintains its functional role for spatial
processing in the absence of any visual input since birth.

108

Perception & Action: Multisensory
C85

A COMPUTATIONAL MODEL OF WORD LEARNING IN INFANCY: EARLY
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN VISUAL AND AUDITORY PROCESSING ENABLE
CATEGORICAL PERCEPTION Nadja Althaus1, Denis Mareschal1;

1
Birkbeck, University of London — We introduce a computational model
which simulates the interaction between auditory and visual processing
that enables learning mappings between words and objects. The model’s
architecture consists of two self-organizing maps (Kohonen, 2001) representing the visual and auditory domain, interconnected by Hebbian
links (Li et al., 2004). The maps are trained with pairs of words and
objects. During training, input patterns in each domain produce activation patterns in the respective map. Hebbian links are established
between co-activated map elements. Our analysis focuses on the differences between non-interactive and interactive training. In the non-interactive scenario, the Hebbian links develop passively, precluding crossmodal influences. In the interactive scenario, the Hebbian links propagate activation from both domains to the opposing map, producing indirect activation patterns. The combination of direct and indirect activation
provides additional information which is exploited by the learning
mechanism. By enhancing the activation in map areas co-activated by
direct and indirect input, and inhibiting activation in areas activated
only by direct input, the interactive model develops a qualitatively better
representation of exemplar space than the non-interactive model. The
representation emerging from interactive training exhibits the characteristics of categorical perception. This result is consistent with experimental findings of verbal labeling facilitating object categorization in infants
(Waxman & Markow, 1995). Based only on unsupervised learning, the
model presents a neurally plausible implementation of this facilitation
effect. The results suggest that the label’s strength are its cross-modal
characteristics, which enable control over the relevance of visual features
in category formation.

C86

THE NEUROANATOMY OF BODILY SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS: DISTINCT
NEURAL CORRELATES FOR ILLUSORY OWN BODY PERCEPTIONS WITH
AND WITHOUT DISEMBODIMENT OF NEUROLOGICAL ORIGIN Lukas

Heydrich1,2, Olaf Blanke1,2; 1Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience, EPFL,
Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Presurgical Epilepsy Unit, University Hospital Geneva,
Switzerland — The everyday sensation of spatial unity between body and

self and the experience we have of identifying ourselves with this body
may break down during illusory own body perceptions in neurological
patients (Brugger et al., 1997). We have recently argued that the study of
these neurological conditions and related experiments in healthy subjects is important for the development of a neurobiological model of selfconsciousness (Blanke and Metzinger, 2009). Here, we studied lesion
location in 24 patients suffering from one of the three major types of illusory own body perceptions (out-of-body experience, heautoscopy, autoscopic hallucinations) and compared them to a control group consisting
of patients with complex hallucinations of bodies and faces without
own-body illusions. The out-of-body experience was associated with
damage to the right angular gyrus (centered on Talairach and Tournoux
coordinates x = 54, y =-52, z = 26), heautoscopy was associated with
lesions to the left posterior insula (centred on coordinates x = -40, y = 1, z
= -10), and autoscopic hallucinations with the right occipital cortex (centred on coordinates x = 20, y = -84, z = 20). Given normality of bodily
self-consciousness during autoscopic hallucinations (Blanke et al., 2004)
these lesion findings confirm the importance of the right temporo-parietal junction in spatial and multisensory aspects of self-consciousness.
The novel implication of the left insula in this patient population is compatible with its involvement in interoceptive, emotional, and motivational aspects of self-consciousness (Craig, 2009). Based on these data we
propose an extended model of bodily self-consciousness.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Multisensory
C87

IS DURATION PROCESSING A SENSORY-INDEPENDENT (AMODAL)
PROPERTY? John S. Butler1,2, Sophie Molholm1,2, Ian C. Fiebelkorn1,2, John

J. Foxe1,2; 1City College of New York, 2Albert Einstein College of Medicine —

This study investigated whether pre-attentive duration processing is
similar for different sensory modalities, and therefore shines a light on
the question of whether duration is a sensory-modality independent
property. To understand these processes, high-density electrical recordings were collected from subjects while they participated in an auditory
alone and somatosensory alone duration mismatch paradigm. The
MMN is an electrophysiological response to an oddball stimulus presented in a regular stream of stimulation, and the loci of its generators
are believed to correspond with the representation of the eliciting feature. Subjects (n=8) viewed a silent movie while they were presented a
stream of tones consisting of standard stimuli (200Hz, 50ms) and deviant
stimuli (200Hz, 100ms). There were a total of 1200 standards and 400
deviants per block. The experiment was blocked by sensory modality
and counterbalanced across participants. The mismatch waveforms were
calculated by subtracting the standard evoked potential from the deviant
evoked potential. The somatosensory mismatch had two distinct phases,
firstly a negative amplitude peak at ~125ms followed by a positive
amplitude peak at ~230ms. While the auditory mismatch had only one
phase, a negative peak amplitude at ~234ms. Furthermore, there were
very different scalp topographies at a latency of 236ms for the somatosensory and auditory mismatch. The findings show that the generators
of the duration mismatch for auditory and somatosensory are not the
same, implying that the processing of duration is modality independent.

C88

TEMPORAL CORTEX TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION
(TDCS) MODULATES COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE, VISUAL SEARCH, AND
PUPIL DILATION Paulo Boggio1, Claudia Valasek1, Allan Snyder2, Felipe

Fregni3; 1Mackenzie Presbyterian University, 2University of Sydney, 3Harvard
Medical School — Recently, we showed that transcranial direct current
stimulation (tDCS) is able to induce behavioral changes in tasks such as
the Deese, Roediger and McDermott’s paradigm (DRM). We showed
that temporal tDCS induces a diminishment in semantic-based errors.
Here, we aimed to investigate the effects of tDCS not only using behavioral measures, but also measuring pupil dilation, saccadic movements
and time of fixation. Therefore, we conducted a double-blind, sham, randomized study in which 15 subjects, aged between 17 and 28 years,
received active or sham tDCS over the superior temporal cortex. During
tDCS, subjects performed the following tasks: a) letters detection, b)
errors detection between pairs of pictures, and c) DRM task. All tasks
were performed using an eye-tracking system (Tobii). With regard to the
DRM task, we found the same behavioural effect (reduction on false
memory errors). Interestingly, we found an increased pupil dilatation
when subjects present mistakes by semantic association during active
tDCS as compared to those who received sham tDCS. In the test of letters
counting, active tDCS group found more letters in comparison to the
sham group, but at the same time spent less time of fixation at the areas
of interest. In the test of errors detection, the same results were observed:
better behavioral performance in a lesser time of fixation. This study
reinforces the evidence found in our previous study on the behavioral
effects of stimulation, and extend it showing that tDCS interferes in the
processes and strategies of visual search and pupil dilation.

C89

INTEGRATION OF AUDIOVISUAL SPEECH DOES NOT RELY ON BROCA'S
AREA Jonathan Venezia1, Feng Rong1, Christopher Dale Maddox1, Kourosh

Saberi1, Gregory Hickok1; 1University of California, Irvine — Several lines of

research suggest that auditory speech perception is influenced by visual
speech. For example, auditory comprehension is improved by the presence of visual speech in noisy environments or when the auditory signal
is degraded. It has been proposed that there are two potential sources of
this visual influence: sensory-sensory interaction, whereby auditory and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session C
visual sensory signals are integrated directly, and sensory-motor interaction, whereby visual speech accesses motor representations that influence auditory perception. The neuroimaging literature has implicated
the superior temporal sulcus (STS) and Broca’s area as possible sites for
sensory-sensory and sensory-motor interaction, respectively. The
present fMRI experiment investigates whether both mechanisms are
involved during perception of synchronous audiovisual speech. Subjects
were presented with blocks of CV syllables in the following conditions:
auditory speech alone (A), visual speech alone (V), and audiovisual
speech (AV). Consistent with previous studies, all three conditions activated posterior STS bilaterally. A conjunction analysis of [AV-A] with
[AV-V] revealed active voxels in STS showing a preference for multisensory information. However, while Broca’s area was significantly active
to auditory and visual speech alone, it was not active to audiovisual
speech. These results suggest that audiovisual integration can take place
without the sensory-motor mechanism. This is consistent with previous
results suggesting an increased, top-down role for Broca’s area when the
sensory signal is difficult to resolve, e.g. when audiovisual speech is perceptually unfused, phonetically incongruent, or temporally offset. The
properties of this top-down mechanism were further assessed using
Granger causality and multivoxel pattern classification analyses.

C90

VISUAL PREDICTABILITY MODULATES NEUROMAGNETIC AUDITORY
EVOKED RESPONSES TO SPEECH SYLLABLES Ariane E. Rhone1, William

J. Idsardi1, David Poeppel2; 1University of Maryland, College Park, 2New York
University — Previous work has established that auditory evoked
responses N1 and P2 to audiovisual speech and nonspeech stimuli peak
earlier than responses to the same auditory stimuli presented unimodally (van Wassenhove et al., 2005; Stekelenburg & Vroomen, 2007). For
speech stimuli, it has been suggested that the amount of latency reduction (facilitation) for a particular segment is dependent on its visual predictability (i.e., bilabial segments like [b] are most visually distinct and
show greatest facilitation). In this study, we aim to replicate the audiovisual facilitation effect and to test the hypothesis that visual predictability
modulates the amount of facilitation. In a simultaneous MEG and behavioral identification task, participants (n=12) were presented with randomized auditory-alone and audiovisual stimuli in two blocks: BlockA
contained [ba da ga] (where [ba] is visually distinct from [da ga] as
reflected in RT and accuracy); BlockB contained [ba pa da] (where distinctness of [ba] decreases and [da] becomes most visually distinct
within the set of alternatives in the block). If visual predictability modulates this effect, facilitation should be greatest for [ba] in BlockA and for
[da] in BlockB. Alternatively, if increased facilitation is segment-specific,
bilabials should have greatest facilitation in both blocks. Auditory M100
responses show latency reduction for audiovisual relative to audio-alone
stimuli (p<0.05), with significantly greater facilitation for [ba] in BlockA
and for [da] in BlockB. This suggests that the audiovisual speech perception process is flexible; the greater advantage previously shown for bilabials reflects relative visual predictability rather than a fixed, segmentspecific property.

C91

DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF MAGNIFIED VISION OF THE ARM ON TACTILE
AND MOTOR TASKS Jared Medina1, Jennifer Benson1, H. Branch Coslett1;
1

University of Pennsylvania — Motivated by the previous demonstration
that viewing one’s hand magnified improves tactile two-point discrimination (Kennett et al, 2001), we addressed three issues regarding the
effects of vision on tactile and motor function. First, we assessed the
effect of magnification on a different measure of tactile acuity (grating
orientation). Second, we assessed the effect of magnification on simple
motor tasks. Third, we assessed the time course of tactile and motor
changes. We presented subjects with three tasks (tactile grating orientation discrimination, speeded finger tapping, and grip strength) after
viewing the hand minimized (.5x), magnified (2.2-2.5x) or with no
manipulation. Furthermore, subjects either had 5 minutes or 30 minutes
to view and use the hand before testing. In the short view condition, sub109

Poster Session C
jects demonstrated significant improvement with magnification on the
tactile grating orientation task, but not the motor tasks. The opposite pattern was observed in the long view condition: a modest but significant
improvement with the hands magnified on both motor tasks (finger tapping and grip strength), but no change in tactile grating orientation task.
Analyses revealed significant interactions between magnification and
viewing conditions for all three tasks. Inconsistent results were observed
in the minimization conditions. These data extend the findings of effects
of visual-tactile interactions by revealing magnification induced
enhancement with a different paradigm and demonstrate that magnification of the hand can influence motor function on tasks for which vision
is not needed. Finally, the data suggest that visuo-motor and visuo-tactile interactions have different time courses.

C92

THE DEVELOPMENT OF AUDITORY-SOMATOSENSORY MULTISENSORY
INTEGRATION IN CHILDREN BETWEEN THE AGES OF 6 AND 17 YEARS: A
HIGH-DENSITY EEG STUDY Sophie Molholm1,2,3, Natalie Russo1,2, Alice B.
Brandwein3, John J. Foxe1,2,3; 1City College of New York, 2Albert Einstein School
of Medicine, 3The Graduate Center of the City University of New York — Infor-

mation from multiple sensory modalities can serve to enhance discrimination and detection in relation to its unisensory counterparts (e.g.
Molholm, 2002). Behavioral studies have established that the manner in
which multisensory inputs are treated and integrated develops over
infancy and childhood (e.g. Barutchu, 2009; Lewkowicz, 1998; Gori,
2008); however, there are few studies that consider the developmental
changes in related brain activity. In a preliminary investigation, we
probe the neurophysiology of the integration of simple stimuli in a passive paradigm. Specifically, we used high-density electrophysiology to
chart the developmental trajectory of auditory-somatosensory integration in children and adolescents. 45 children between the ages of 6 and
17 years completed a passive paradigm in which they watched a silent
movie while holding a vibrotactile device and listened to sounds.
Sounds and vibrations could occur alone (unisensory conditions) or
together (AS condition). MSI was defined as significant deviation in the
electrophysiological signal between the sum of the unisensory responses
and the AS condition. Children were divided into 3 groups: 6-10 years
(N = 15), 11-13 years (N = 14) and 14 -17 years (N = 14). Results indicated
that two time periods of MSI, a first around 120 ms and a second around
300ms emerged and were common to the three age groups. However,
MSI appeared more diffusely distributed in younger children and more
organized and focal in the older groups. This may reflect a tuning of
multisensory integration processes over the course of development.

C93

WITHIN-AND CROSS-MODAL MODULATION OF THE AUDITORY
BRAINSTEM RESPONSE W. David Hairston1, Tomasz Letowski1, Kaleb

McDowell1; 1US Army Research Lab — Interactions between sensory modalities have been described across both cortical and sub-cortical levels,
with some studies showing visual influence even in brainstem level
auditory structures (1). Recent evidence for enhanced auditory brainstem response when paired with concurrent visual stimulation is particularly intriguing, especially considering work suggesting attentionrelated mediation of the frequency-following response (FFR) component
(2), pointing to cortical top-down influence on fairly low levels of auditory processing. Here, we examine potential modulation of the FFR to
background, non-task-relevant tones in light of which sensory modality
(auditory, visual, no task) controls the task at hand. Subjects (N=18) perform fairly difficult visual and auditory duration-discrimination tasks
within separate blocks. Stimuli are adjusted according to each subject’s
perceptual threshold to ensure equivalent difficulty and sufficient attention to the target modality. Background non-task relevant tones (220Hz)
are used to elicit the brainstem FFR, with occasional oddball stimuli
(259Hz) providing a cortical mismatch-negativity response. Fourier
power for the principle background (220Hz) frequency is compared for
each modality, in addition to resting (no-task) baseline. While results
show little modulation in 220Hz power when performing visual tasks
110

Perception & Action: Multisensory
relative to a no-task baseline, there was a significant decrease in power
observed when subjects focused on an auditory task instead. This suggests frequency-specific intra-modal inhibition, without cross-modal
suppression in FFR during sustained task performance as might be
expected. (1) Musacchia, Sams et al. (2006) Exp Brain Res 168(1-2): 1-10.
(2) Galbraith, Olfman et al. (2003). Neuroreport 14(5): 735-8.

C94

NEURAL INTEGRATION OF AUDIO-VISUAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVENTS

Jean Vettel1, Adrian Nestor2, Chris Bird3, Laurie Heller2, Tim Curran3, Michael
Tarr2; 1Army Research Laboratory, 2Carnegie Mellon University, 3University of
Colorado — Prior behavioral and neural research on multimodal integration has identified the critical role of spatial, temporal, and semantic congruency between modalities as factors guiding the integration between
modalities (Meredith & Stein, 1993; Doehrmann & Naumer, 2008). We
generated a novel stimulus set of audio-visual movies of environmental
events, such as tapping a pencil or cutting paper. These movies allowed
us to manipulate congruency between the temporal structure of the
auditory and visual signals independently from the semantic labeling of
the same auditory and visual signals. The first study, employing functional neuroimaging (fMRI), identified separable networks of regions for
each of the integration cues, including a preference in the right hemisphere for time and a preference in the left hemisphere for semantics.
The second study, employing EEG, complemented the fMRI findings by
finding that each of the integration cues influenced the integration process at different time windows. The effects of temporal synchrony preceded the effects of semantic congruency. Together, these two studies
effectively isolated the separable effects of both signal-based (time) and
high-level (semantic) integration cues, finding that these two cues rely
on functionally specialized neural substrates as well as different timescales during the process of multimodal integration. By identifying the
separable components of the multimodal processing network, our study
advances the understanding of how modality-specific information is
bound into coherent event percepts.

C95

EVALUATING THE ROLE OF AWARENESS AND RECOGNITION IN
SYNAESTHESIA: EVIDENCE FROM A PITCH- AND GRAPHEME-COLOR
SYNAESTHETE Shujen Kung1,2, Rocco Y. C. Chiou1,3, Ovid J-L. Tzeng1,4,

Daisy L. Hung1,3, Denise H. Wu1,3; 1Laboratories for Cognitive Neuroscience,
National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, 2Institute of Neuroscience, National
Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, 3Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National
Central University, Taiwan, 4Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taiwan —
Synaesthesia is an unusual condition in which one sensory event elicits
sensations in multiple modalities. There is an ongoing debate concerning
the prerequisite of synaesthesia. Some researchers contend that being
aware of the inducer is critical while others emphasize the role of recognition of the inducer’s meaning. In this study we report an amateur
musician with absolute pitch, TD, who experiences color in association
with letters, pitches, and musical keys. Interestingly, TD’s color sensation elicited by a pitch was not dependent on the pitch itself but on TD’s
subjective identification of the pitch. In a priming task, TD’s color naming performance was facilitated by both letters and symbols of musical
keys when the inducer could be clearly perceived but not when the
inducer was quickly masked. Moreover, the priming effect resulting
from an inducing letter was greater than that from an inducing musical
key, presumably because the former is easier to recognize than the latter.
Consistent results were also obtained from a Stroop naming task. On the
one hand, TD’s color naming performance was influenced by the synaesthetic color elicited by letters but not the color elicited by symbols of
musical keys. On the other hand, the synaesthetic congruency effect was
larger for musical symbols than for letters when TD was required to
name the identity of the inducer of synaesthetic experience. The findings
from the current study indicate that although awareness of the inducer is
necessary for synaesthetic experience, recognition of the inducer’s meaning determines the synaesthetic sensation.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Multisensory

Poster Session C

C96

C98

ANALGESIC EFFECTS OF ILLUSORY SELF-PERCEPTION Bigna

FEELING OF WEIGHT: PERCEPTION OF WEIGHT IN THE SOMATOSENSORY
CORTEX Nikola Valchev1,2, Emmanuele Tidoni3, Antonia Hamilton4, Valeria

Lenggenhager1, Alexander Hänsel2, Roland von Känel2, Michele Curatolo2,
Olaf Blanke1,3; 1Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland,
2
University Hospital of Bern, Inselspital, Switzerland, 3University Hospital of
Geneva, Switzerland — Pain is a classical example of a first-person experience that necessarily requires a subject of conscious experience, thus a
“self”. Basic foundations of the self lie in brain mechanisms representing
the body (Blanke & Metzinger 2009). Thus, recent studies showed that
aspects of the self can be manipulated by exposing healthy participants
to conflicting multisensory input about their body (e.g. Ehrsson 2007).
We here investigated whether such alterations of the bodily self may
modulate pain perception. Participants saw through a head-mounted
display two meters in front of them either a body (from the back) or an
object being stroked either synchronously or asynchronously with their
own back. Synchronous stroking of the body has previously shown to
lead to changes in basic aspects of the self such as self-identification and
self-location (Lenggenhager et al. 2007). Here, we measured pressureinduced pain thresholds at the participant’s finger during the four conditions. Our results show that the pain threshold was highest and significantly differed from baseline (t=2.7; p=0.02) during synchronous
stroking of the body where the participants also self-identified (measured by questionnaire) strongest with the shown object. Furthermore
the data show in this condition a significant correlation between the pain
threshold and the self-identification score (r=0.55; p=0.03). The data suggest that alteration of self through conflicting multisensory bodily input
can increase pain-thresholds significantly. This confirms the idea that the
conscious sense of our bodily self and physiological regulation are
closely linked. We believe these findings might be useful to develop
novel behavioral pain therapies.

C97

NEURAL CORRELATES OF PERSON IDENTITY REPRESENTATION
EMERGING FROM FACES AND VOICES Shahin Zangenehpour1,2, Martha

Shiell2, Pascal Belin3, Robert Zatorre2,4; 1McGill University, 2Montréal
Neurological Institute, McGill University, 3Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging,
University of Glasgow, 4BRAMS Laboratory — Faces and voices are normally

experienced simultaneously, and convey important information about
speech, affective content and person identity. Little is known about how
person identity is represented as a result of binding of faces and voices.
We designed behavioural and neuroimaging experiments to study this
phenomenon systematically. Thirteen healthy adults (8 females), aged
20-29 years, participated. The experiment involved two training sessions
and one fMRI session, that were 1-3 days apart. The stimuli consisted of
short video clips of unfamiliar faces saying single numbers which
matched or mismatched across trials. We implemented two tasks: In the
content task, participants indicated if the face and voice were saying the
same number. The purpose of the content task was to allow participants
to implicitly associate face-voice pairs with specific individual identities
during training. In the identity task, participants indicated whether or
not a given face-voice pair belonged to the same person, based on the
pairs learned during the content task. Participants performed both tasks
during each training session and during scanning, and the identity task
was repeated after scanning to measure degree of retention. Accuracy on
the identity task improved over the two training sessions, and remained
consistent during and after scanning. Preliminary imaging results suggest group-level hemodynamic responses associated with the identity
task in anterior portions of superior temporal sulcus (bilateral) and the
right putamen. We discuss these findings in the context of a global
model of face-voice interaction for the processing of speech, affective
and identity information.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Gazzola1,2, Alessio Avenanti5,6; 1BCN Neuroimaging Center, University of
Groningen, The Netherlands, 2Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Royal
Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
3University of Rome La Sapienza, Rome, Italy, 4School of Psychology, University
of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK, 5University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 6Centre
for studies and researches in Cognitive Neuroscience (CsrNC), Cesena, Italy —
Most of us might have experienced, while seeing backpackers hiking, the
weight of their backpacks on our shoulders and our legs becoming
heavier. A network of, parietal and premotor cortices, active both during
action execution and observation (mirror neuron system), suggests that
we understand the actions of other people by simulating what we would
do in the same circumstances (Rizzolatti and Craighero, 2004). Although
neurophysiological studies show an involvement of somatosensory cortices (S1) during action observation and execution (Avikanen et al., 2002;
Raos et al., 2004; Gazzola, Keysers, 2008), it is not clear whether activity
in S1 plays a crucial role in understanding the observed action. To test
the role of S1 in action perception we used off-line continuous thetaburst stimulation (cTBS) by means of transcranial magnetic stimulation
in a weight judgement task (Pobric, Hamilton, 2006). Participants
observed an actor lifting a box and judged the box weight. In counterbalanced sessions, we delivered sham- and real-rTMS over the hand region
of S1 and M1. Real-cTBS over S1, but not over M1, impaired the task performance relative to sham conditions. Moreover, cTBS over S1 delivered
just before the participants were asked to evaluate the weight of a bouncing ball did not alter performance. These findings indicate that S1 plays a
causal role in extracting somatosensory features (heavy/light) from
observed action kinematics. We can therefore understand the backpackers' hiking through motor simulation, but we can only feel the weight of
his backpack through S1, supporting the existence of a sensori-motor
simulation.

C99

NEURAL BASIS OF EMOTIONAL MODULATION OF SIMULATED DRIVING
PERFORMANCE: AN FMRI MULTITASKING STUDY Li Hsieh1, Sean

Seaman1, Quan Jiang2, Susan Bowyer2, John Moran2, Richard Young3; 1Wayne
State University, 2Henry Ford Hospital, 3School of Medicine, Wayne State
University — This fMRI study investigated the role of emotion in multitasking using a multi-modal task designed to assess the effect of emotional speech on visual event detection during simulated driving. Ten
participants were asked to respond to visual stimuli in a go/no go
design while covertly answering spoken questions. Behavioral results
showed longer visual reaction times during a concurrent speech task
than with no speech; however this effect was moderated by presenting
speech questions in an angry voice. fMRI analysis indicated increased
activations (t > 3.2; p < 0.0014) associated with both neutral and angry
speech tasks, compared to no speech, in the bilateral temporal lobes, the
left inferior frontal gyrus, and the left middle frontal gyrus; and
decreased activations in the right inferior parietal lobe and the right
cuneus. Direct comparisons between angry and neutral speech tasks
showed increased activations (t > 2.8; p < 0.0051) in the right prefrontal
gyrus, the right middle frontal gyrus (BA10), the right insular, the right
superior temporal gyrus, the right paracentral lobule (BA5), the right
claustrum, and the right inferior parietal lobe (BA40). Decreased activations were found in the left frontal operculum, the left lingual gyrus
(BA18), and the left parahippocamal gyrus (BA28). These results suggest
that speech compared to no speech causes slightly longer behavioral
reaction times and increased brain activation in language areas. Moreover, an angry emotional tone improves behavioral reaction time performance compared to a neutral tone, while eliciting the right frontoparietal
networks and dampening the left frontal activity.

111

Poster Session C

Perception & Action: Multisensory

C100

THE
TIMING
OF
ACTIVATION
IN
MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY STUDY David

SYNESTHESIA:

A

Brang1, Edward M.
Hubbard2, Seana Coulson1, Mingxiong Huang1, Vilayanur S. Ramachandran1;
1
University of CA, San Diego, 2Vanderbilt University — Grapheme-color synesthesia is a neurological phenomenon in which particular letters and
numbers (graphemes) consistently evoke particular colors (e.g. A=red).
The neural basis of synesthesia has been thoroughly explored, but a
debate lingers into the underlying mechanisms. The cross-activation theory proposes that the experience of colored letters arises as a result of
cross-activation between grapheme areas in the fusiform gyrus and
neighboring color area V4. In contrast, the disinhibited feedback theory
proposes a disinhibition of pre-existing, 'latent' feedback connections
among areas in the hierarchy of visual processing; the two models thus
make different predictions about the time course of neural activity in
color area V4 (early vs. late). In order to resolve this debate, we used
magnetoencephalography (MEG) to test whether V4 and grapheme
regions activate nearly simultaneously, as predicted by the cross-activation theory, or whether V4 activation occurs only after the initial stages
of grapheme processing, as predicted by the disinhibited feedback theory. Here we show that differences in V4 activation between synesthetes
and non-synesthetic controls arise between 140 and 160ms, immediately
after the earliest stages of letter and number processing. The excellent
spatial and temporal resolution provided by MEG complements earlier
neuroimaging studies of synesthesia using methods with poor temporal
resolution (fMRI), and those with less precise spatial resolution (EEG).
Overall, these data argues against the disinhibited feedback theory of
synesthesia, suggest that the perception of synesthetically colored letters
involves cross-activation of V4 and grapheme areas, and that the conscious perception of graphemes in all individuals arises after 130ms.

C101

BACKWARD PRIMING OF BISTABLE ILLUSIONS AND AUDITORY
CONDITIONING OF MOTION PERCEPTION: TWO NOVEL PRIMING
EFFECTS V. S. Ramachandran1, Laura K. Case1; 1University of California,
San Diego — While forward priming of visual images is well documented, backward priming, in which a prime temporally follows the target, has been reported only for lexical tasks. Similarly, auditory cues can
prime perception, but conditioning has not been reported based on arbitrary sound-motion pairings. Here we report two new priming effects:
backward-priming of bistable visual illusions, and auditory conditioning
of ambiguous motion. In Study 1, participants in the priming group saw
a bistable visual illusion (target) followed temporally by a prime, an
unambiguated version of the image. The control group saw only the target image. When a backward prime is congruent with the less frequently
perceived version of the target, significant backward-priming is
achieved. When the prime is the more frequently perceived version,
however, perception is not affected, possibly due to a ceiling effect. This
demonstrates, for the first time, a backward priming effect for bistable
visual illusions. In study 2 participants underwent a training period in
which unambiguated left or right rotation of the popular spinning
dancer illusion was paired with a high or low tone. After three minutes
of distraction, we presented the ambiguous spinning dancer with a tone
(priming group) or without a tone (control) and compared rates of perception of left or right rotation. We also tested the effect of explicitly trying to see left or right rotation and found significant but independent
effects of volition and tone on motion perception. This suggests that
motion perception can be influenced both through cross-modal conditioning and by volition.

C102

AUDITORY-VISUAL

INTERACTIONS

AND

RHYTHMIC

STRUCTURE

Victoria Cheah1, Fruzsina Soltesz1, Denes Szucs1, Usha Goswami1; 1University
of Cambridge, Centre for Neuroscience in Education — Meaningful sounds in

ity, and its effects on perception are unclear. It has been suggested that
neuronal assemblies in the brain entrain their pattern of excitability to
temporally-structured stimuli in the environment (Schroeder & Lakatos,
2009). Previous studies also indicate that the phase of ongoing neural
oscillatory activity affects behavioural reaction times (Lakatos et al, 2008;
Senkowski et al, 2006). This suggests a potential role for temporal rhythmicity in constraining perception and action via the mechanism of neuronal oscillatory entrainment. In this study, we characterized the effect of
rhythmic (auditory) entrainment on performance in an active visual
flash detection task. We find that participants’ behavioural reaction time
profile shows key differences in slope and periodicity when the task is
performed with and without a rhythmic context. These differences are
compatible with previous findings of the effects of neuronal oscillatory
activity on reaction time. We conclude that the presence of a strong
rhythmic context produces characteristic effects on performance, even
when the rhythmic stimuli (tones) are irrelevant to the main task (visual
flash detection). These effects are mainly facilitatory in nature (they
decrease reaction time), and show a temporal dependency on the
entraining rhythmic period. These results support the hypothesis that
temporal rhythmicity may constrain perception and action by enhancing
readiness or expectancy during certain ‘phases’ of the rhythmic interval.

C103

TEMPORO-PARIETAL CORTEX ENCODES LOCATION OF THE SELF:
JOINING FMRI WITH NEUROSCIENCE ROBOTICS TO STUDY BODILY SELFCONSCIOUSNESS Silvio Ionta1, Bigna Lenggenhager1, Michael Mouthon1,

Dominique Chapuis2, Roger Gassert2, Olaf Blanke1,3; 1Laboratory of Cognitive
Neuroscience, Brain Mind Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
(EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich
(ETH), Zurich, Switzerland, 3University Hospital (HUG), Geneva, Switzerland —
Neuroscience of the self has focused on high-level mechanisms related to
language, memory or imagery of the self and implicated a widely distributed brain network. Yet recent evidence suggests that low-level
mechanisms such as multisensory and sensorimotor integration may
play a fundamental role in self-related processing (Blanke and Metzinger, 2009). In the present study we used visuo-tactile multisensory conflict, techniques from robotics and virtual reality to study such low-level
mechanisms by experimentally inducing changes in self-location
(Lenggenhager et al., 2009) during fMRI recording. Subjects saw a video
of a person’s back (Body) or an empty room (No Body) being stroked
while a MR-compatible robotic device stroked their back (tactile input)
matching (synchronous) or not (asynchronous) the direction and speed
of the seen stroking. Self-location was estimated using the mental ball
dropping (Lenggenhager et al., (2009) and confirmed these previous
behavioral results by showing that self-location only differed between
the two Body conditions. fMRI results showed the bilateral activation of
the temporo-parietal cortex with a significantly higher BOLD signal
increase in the Synchronous/Body condition with respect to the other
conditions (Synchrony x Object interaction). Sensorimotor and supplementary motor areas were also active. The temporo-parietal activity
reflects illusory disembodiment as induced experimentally. These data
are compatible with clinical data in neurological patients with out-ofbody experiences (Blanke et al., 2004; deRidder et al., 2007). We discuss
that the experience of the conscious “I” as embodied and localized
within bodily space is reflected by an activation of these components of
the default network.

C104

MULTIMODAL PERCEPTION OF WHISPERED AND VOICED PROSODY IN
FRENCH: A PRELIMINARY FMRI STUDY Marion
Dohen1,
Hélène

Loevenbruck1, Akiko Callan2, Daniel Callan3,4, Monica Baciu5, Cédric Pichat5,
Harold Hill2,6; 1GIPSA Laboratories, 2Cognitive Information Science
Laboratories, ATR, 3National Institute of Information and Communication

the natural world such as language and music have a rhythmic structure.
However, the neural mechanisms underlying the detection of rhythmic-

112

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Multisensory
Technology, Kyoto, 4Computational Neuroscience Laboratories, ATR,
5
Laboratoire de Psychologie et Neurocognition, 6School of Psychology,
University of Wollongong — After long being considered to be right-lateralized, the processing of prosody appears to be bilateral. Moreover, prosody is traditionally considered as an auditory process, but we have
shown that it is multisensory (Dohen & Lœvenbruck, 2009). This fMRI
study examines the processing of prosodic contrastive focus (emphasizing a constituent in an utterance). Previous studies (Wildgruber et al.
2004, Tong et al. 2005) have shown the involvement of bilateral or leftonly temporal and parietal regions and bilateral or right-only frontal
regions. In this study, 12 subjects were asked to judge whether part of an
utterance was focused or not. The stimuli were presented in 3 modalities:
auditorily, audiovisually or visually and in normal (voiced) speech or
whispered speech. The event-related pseudo-random design included 4
functional scans (half voiced, half whisper). Each scan included 12
events per condition (6 conditions: 3 modalities x 2 prosodic cases) and
14 null-events. The behavioural results show that subjects were able to
identify focus from non-focus cases. The processing of focus vs. baseline
in voiced speech yields bilateral auditory activations in BA22, 41-42, and
left temporal gyrus, inferior frontal gyrus, supplementary motor area
and cingulate gyrus. Whispered speech additionally activates the right
BA6. Furthermore, for both voiced and whispered speech, identifying
focus vs. non-focus involves the left supramarginal gyrus and the left
inferior temporal gyrus (BA37). Perception of prosodic focus (vs. no
focus) appears to be essentially processed in left associative areas. This
illustrates the necessity of associating various types of information to
detect focus.

C105

MODULATION OF THERMAL PAIN FROM MAGNIFIED AND MINIMIZED
VISUAL FEEDBACK Luke Miller1, David Brang1, Vilayanur S.

Ramachandran1; 1Center for Brain and Cognition, University of California San
Diego — Research has shown that visual capture can reduce the noxious
experience of pain in select patient populations, including those with
phantom limbs, reflex sympathetic dystrophy, and chronic hand pain.
While this finding has profound implications for the novel treatment of
pain, research to date has only examined instances of long-term pain. To
see the effects of visual capture on the modulation of acute pain, we
tested the tolerable threshold to temperature-induced pain in 10 neurotypical individuals using copper bars heated to 50.0 degrees Celsius.
Three different lenses were used: a neutral lens, a magnifying lens which
increased perceived limb size twice that of normal vision, and a minifying lens, which decreased perceived limb size twice that of normal
vision. Subjects were asked to hold one finger at a time on one of the copper bars for as long as the pain was tolerable and reaction time in milliseconds was measured. This was done twenty four times for each of the
three lenses, which were presented in randomized order. Results
showed that the magnifying lens significantly decreased the amount of
pain subjects were able to tolerate compared to both the minifying and
normal lens. However, there was no significant difference in reaction
time between the minifying lens and the neutral lens. While this contradicts previous data found in patients experiencing chronic pain, results
from the magnifying lens condition have profound implications for the
neural mechanisms of pain, and its integration with visual capture.

C106

ORDINAL SEQUENCES AND SPACE: CONSISTENCY OF MAPPINGS OVER
TIME Laura Gibson1, Daphne Maurer1; 1McMaster University — A majority
of both synaesthetes and non-synaesthetes perceive ordinal sequences
on a mental “number” line that is oriented from the left to the right side
of space (Dehaene et al., 1993; Sagiv et al., 2006). Although the consistency of ordinal-space associations over time in synaesthetes is wellestablished, the reliability of these ordinal-space mappings in non-synaesthetes has not been investigated. We studied the stability of ordinalspace associations for numbers, days of the week, and months of the year
in non-synaesthetes (n=60), who were tested on two separate occasions

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session C
1-3 weeks apart. Participants decided whether a presented number was
greater or less than 5 by pushing buttons with the congruent (e.g. left
hand for low digits) or incongruent hand (e.g. left hand for high digits).
We designed similar tasks for weekdays and months. Participants exhibited a significant SNARC effect for numbers and days on both visits, and
a significant SNARC effect for months on visit two. Pearson r correlations indicated that the size of the SNARC effect was modestly consistent
across the two visits for numbers and months (both rs > 0.3), with a similar trend for days of the week (r=0.26). The consistency of non-synaesthetes over time supports the hypothesis that synaesthetes and nonsynaesthetes may share a common underlying neural architecture linking ordinal sequences and space.

C107

LATERAL OCCIPITAL COMPLEX: A SITE FOR SUPRAMODAL SHAPE
REPRESENTATION AS REVEALED BY SENSORY SUBSTITUTION
LEARNING Jung-Kyong Kim1,2,3, Robert J. Zatorre1,2,3; 1Montréal
Neurological Institute, 2McGill University, 3BRAMS Laboratory — Part of the

lateral occipital complex (LOC) is known to be engaged in processing of
shape recognized by vision and touch, the sensory modalities where
shape is an inherent property. Given the bi-modal nature of this region, a
question can be asked how robust the LOC activity is to different sensory
modalities. We addressed this question by examining brain activity
involved in processing of tactile shape that is artificially coded in sound
(by using the image-to-sound conversion algorithm called the vOICe).
Nine blindfolded sighted subjects participated in five sessions during
which they learned the tactile-auditory relationship between raised
abstract shapes and their corresponding shape-coded sounds. Using
functional magnetic resonance imaging, subjects were scanned before
and after training during the task where they first listened to a shapecoded sound-transformation, touched a raised figure, then responded
whether or not the stimuli matched in shape. The post-training session
involved an additional condition where the tactile part of the task was
replaced by vision. We found that behavioral scores improved after
training, and that LOC was commonly activated during the auditory and
tactile conditions before and after training, with a trend for increase in
the post-training activity. Subjects showed complete transfer of learning
on the matching task where shape was presented auditorily and then
visually . These results suggest that shape can be represented at an
abstract level that transcends the sensory modalities from which it is
originally accessed, and that LOC is a supramodal region where shape
information from different modalities converges.

C108

HEARING FACIAL IDENTITIES: BRAIN CORRELATES OF FACE-VOICE
INTEGRATION IN PERSON RECOGNITION Stefan Schweinberger1,2, David
Robertson1, Nadine Kloth1,2; 1DFG Person Perception Research Unit, Friedrich
Schiller University of Jena, Germany, 2Friedrich Schiller University of Jena,
Germany — Audiovisual integration is well-known in speech perception.

However, the integration of facial and vocal information is also important for speaker recognition. We recently demonstrated audiovisual integration in the recognition of familiar speakers (Schweinberger,
Robertson, & Kaufmann, 2007, QJEP; Robertson & Schweinberger, 2009,
QJEP). Specifically, we observed systematic behavioral benefits and costs
for the recognition of familiar voices when these were combined with
time-synchronized articulating faces of corresponding or noncorresponding speaker identity, respectively. These effects are strong for
familiar voices but weak or absent for unfamiliar voices, suggesting that
the effects depend on the previous creation of a multimodal representation of a person’s identity. For the first time, the present study investigated event-related brain potentials (ERPs) in this novel paradigm, while
participants recognized familiar speakers which were presented in (1)
voice only, (2) voice with corresponding, or (3) non-corresponding timesynchronized visual speakers, or (4) visual speaker only conditions.
Speaker identity correspondence influenced later ERPs from 250 ms
only. Of particular interest, when compared with the summed ERPs

113

Poster Session C
from both unimodal conditions, both audiovisual conditions led to a
much earlier onset of fronto-central negativity, with maximal differences
around 50-80 ms. This suggests that the perception of a time-synchronized face and a voice triggers a surprisingly early and mandatory mechanism of audiovisual integration, although the correspondence or
discrepancy in auditory vs. visual speaker identity may only be computed ~200 ms later.

C109

CATEGORY-SPECIFIC DIFFERENCES IN MULTISENSORY INTEGRATION:
AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF SEMANTIC CONGRUENCY EFFECTS FOR
LIVING AND NONLIVING ITEMS Elena K. Festa1, William C. Heindel1;
1Brown University — This

study investigated the degree to which category
membership of objects (living vs. nonliving) influences the binding of
audiovisual sensory features into meaningful, multimodal object representations. Subjects were shown pictures of objects that were either
upright or inverted, and asked to identify the orientation of the object by
pressing one of two response buttons. A sound that was either semantically congruent or incongruent to the object was presented with each picture. Half the pictures were of living objects (e.g., horse) and half nonliving objects (e.g., telephone). Within each category object set, half the
pictures were shown in the upright orientation and half in the inverted
orientation. For upright pictures, participants identified the objects faster
when they were paired with semantically congruent rather than incongruent sounds, regardless of category membership. For inverted pictures, response times were slower and did not differ across congruency
conditions for either category. For living objects, semantic congruency
modulated the amplitude of the P2 ERP component for both upright and
inverted pictures, and additionally modulated the N4 component for
upright but not inverted pictures. For nonliving objects, semantic congruency failed to modulate the P2 or N4 component regardless of orientation, but rather elicited a late frontal negativity for upright but not
inverted pictures. Taken together, these results suggest living items are
processed and bound automatically on the basis of audiovisual sensory
feature representations within semantic memory, whereas the binding of
audiovisual features of nonliving items is dependent on the controlled
processing of semantic context.

C110

TIME REFERENCE IN TURKISH AGRAMMATISM Elif Bamyaci1, Roelien

Bastiaanse2; 1European Master’s in Clinical Linguistics (EMCL), 2Center for
Language and Cognition Groningen (CLCG) — Time reference in Turkish

agrammatic speakers Elif Bamyaci (EMCL) & Roelien Bastiaanse (CLCG)
Introduction In Agrammatic speech verb inflections seem to be particularly vulnerable, although not each verb inflection morpheme is
impaired to an equal extent. It has been shown that Tense features are
particularly prone to errors (Friedmann&Grodzinsky,1997). Within the
Tense domain reference to the past seems to be more impaired than reference to the present (Bastiaanse, 2008; Stavrakaki&Kouvava,2003; Simonsen&Lind,2002) and future (Yarbay Duman&Bastiaanse,2009).
Interestingly, Turkish has two forms of past Tense, ‘seen past’ and ‘heard
past’. The aims of this study are two-fold: to evaluate whether in Turkish, with the rich verb inflection paradigm present Tense is better preserved than past Tense; to see whether there is a difference between
heard and seen past Tense. Methods 7 agrammatic and 7 non-brain-damaged speakers were tested through a ‘sentence completion with prompting’ paradigm with three conditions. Results According to Fisher’s exact
tests Present Tense is significantly better than both past Tenses
(p=0.0001). Seen past tense is more difficult than heard past Tense
(p=0.0012). Discussion In contrast to present Tense, establishing the truth
value of a past event is not self-evident, which might make verb inflection for the past more difficult. ‘Heard past’ needs to be checked with
someone else’s or general knowledge that is usually taken for granted.
However, in ‘seen past’ the speaker has to think about the truth value
and check it against his memory. This personal involvement makes coding for such an event more difficult.

114

Perception & Action: Multisensory
C111

SENSORY REFERRAL IN TEMPORARILY ANESTHETIZED ARMS: THE
MIRROR NEURON DISINHIBITION HYPOTHESIS Laura K. Case1, V. S.

Ramachandran1; 1University of California, San Diego — If the mirror neuron
system maps other people's sensory and motor activity onto our own
sensory and motor cortices, why do we not feel it in our own body? One
idea is that our own sensory and motor activity inhibits conscious perception of mirror neuron activity. This generates the hypothesis that an
amputee, lacking sensory and motor activity in one arm, should directly
and consciously experience tactile sensations in his phantom while
observing touch to another person’s arm. Ramachandran & Brang
recently reported this (2009). However, does disinhibition immediately
follow amputation, or is longer term rewiring of sensory cortex necessary? Referred sensation from the face to the phantom arm has also been
observed after amputation; is cortical rewiring the cause, or rapid disinhibition of neighboring cortical regions? We systematically examined
five orthopedic surgery patients with brachial plexus blocks approximately 30 minutes post-surgery. Three of five patients reported sensory
referral from a model to the blocked arm, intermanual referral from the
intact arm to the blocked arm, and referral from the ipsilateral face to the
blocked arm. These observations support the disinhibition hypothesis
that mirror neuron activity is normally suppressed from conscious representation by input from ones own body, but incorporated into ones
body representation in its absence. Intriguingly there was some referral
to the intact arm as predicted from transcallosal effects in animals. The
result is a radical new view of the brain: fluctuating mosaics in a perpetual state of dynamic equilibrium with each other and indeed with other
brains.

C112

INTERACTIONS BETWEEN HANDEDNESS AND OBJECT ORIENTATION ON
MANIPULATION JUDGMENTS INVOLVING COMMON TOOLS Evangelia G.

Chrysikou1, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Neu-

roimaging and neuropsychological evidence supports theories of
embodied cognition that highlight the relations between sensorimotor
and cognitive systems, particularly in tasks involving everyday objects.
Successful object use requires knowledge retrieval that incorporates
information about the object’s function and potential for action. Previous
research has shown that factors such as an object’s size, the degree of
rotation from an object’s canonical position, or the participant’s viewpoint influence object recognition. Few studies, however, have examined
object knowledge in left-handed participants. In this experiment we
examined whether the orientation of an object (right/left) interacts with
participants’ sensorimotor experience as indicated by the type (right/
left) and degree (strong/weak) of their handedness. Thirty-three participants (15 left-handed) were presented with pictures of graspable everyday items that were oriented either for a right- or left-handed grasp.
They were asked to identify the type of grasp they would employ (i.e.,
clench or pinch) when using each object for its typical function. The analysis of voice-onset reaction times showed a significant interaction
between handedness and object orientation, such that right-handed participants were faster to decide on the type of grasp they would use when
the objects were oriented to the right, whereas left-handed participants
were faster to make such decisions when the objects were oriented to the
left. We discuss these findings in the context of the results of two earlier
experiments in which interactions between handedness and object orientation were absent when participants were simply asked to either name
the objects or identify the objects’ canonical function.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Multisensory

Poster Session C

C113

C115

MULTISENSORY
INTERACTIONS
FACILITATE
CATEGORICAL
DISCRIMINATION OF OBJECTS Celine Cappe1, Micah Murray1,2,3;

MAKING SENSE OF SCENTS: THE COLOUR AND TEXTURE OF ODOURS

1Radiology

& Neuropsychology, CHUV and University Lausanne, Switzerland,
Electroencephalography Brain Mapping Core, Center for Biomedical Imaging
of Lausanne and Geneva, Switzerland, 3Sciences, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN — This study investigated the extent to which
2

the discrimination of objects is affected under multisensory conditions.
Research investigating integration of synchronously presented auditoryvisual objects has focused on effects of attention and/or has limited the
stimulus set. It thus remains unknown whether categorical discrimination of environmental objects, and object recognition generally, benefits
from multisensory stimulation either at a behavioral or neurophysiologic
level. We focused here on the categories of living and non-living objects
given previous research demonstrating these to engage (partially) dissociable brain networks. Participants were presented with auditory, visual,
or simultaneous auditory-visual stimuli during a living/non-living discrimination task. Reaction times (RTs) were slower for auditory than
other conditions, but there was no evidence that RTs differed between
visual and multisensory conditions. There was no difference between
RTs for either category. Thus, there was no support for multisensory
facilitation of behavior, perhaps due to visual stimuli being highly effective. Nevertheless, our ongoing electrical neuroimaging analyses
revealed facilitation of discrimination of object categories with multisensory versus either unisensory condition. Both auditory and visual conditions exhibited topographic differences between living and non-living
object at ~140ms, indicative of configuration changes in the intracranial
sources active in response to these object categories when presented
visually or acoustically. However, following multisensory stimulation,
this differential effect occurred ~20ms earlier. While not necessarily facilitating the earliest stages of categorical discrimination, these results
nonetheless suggest that object recognition processes in vision and audition interact and can facilitate one another under multisensory conditions.

C114

WHEN WHAT WE HEAR IMPACTS WHAT WE FEEL: AUDITORY INPUT
MODULATES NEURAL ACTIVITY IN PRIMARY SOMATOSENSORY
CORTEX Gabriella Musacchia1, Peter Lakatos1,2, Aimee Mills1, O'Connell

Monica1, Schroeder Charles1,3; 1Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric
Research, 2New York University School of Medicine, 3Columbia University —

Several lines of research have shown that both visual and somatosensory
input can greatly impact the neural encoding of sound; even in primary
auditory areas. However, less is known about the converse: e.g. how
visual or somatosensory encoding is affected by auditory input. The current study examines effects of auditory input on laminar profiles of neural activity in primary somatosensory cortex using linear array
multielectrodes positioned so as to record from all cortical layers concurrently. Our main findings are, first, that auditory stimuli elicit a modulatory pattern of neural response in somatosensory cortex such that
ongoing neural oscillations in the superficial layers of area 3B are reset.
Second, we find that spatially-matching and non-matching bimodal
stimuli have opposing effects on the amplitude of the somatosensory
response. And finally, our data show that bimodal enhancement of neural activity in primary somatosensory cortex is greatest for low (near
threshold) and middle intensity levels of tactile stimulation. These findings parallel the input patterns and principles of multisensory interaction in auditory cortex. Specifically, somatosensory and bimodal stimuli
elicit evoked neural responses and reset neural oscillations in primary
somatosensory cortex, while auditory stimuli induce a mainly modulatory phase concentration effect with little evoked activity. Together with
earlier studies, the current study suggests that multisensory mechanisms
operate through similar mechanisms and according to analogous principles across primary sensory cortices.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Ferrinne Spector1,2, Daphne Maurer1; 1McMaster University, 2University of
Wisconsin, Madison — The purpose of this study was to document colour
and texture associations to odours using a variety of odours including
some likely to be unfamiliar, and both pleasant and unpleasant odours.
We asked non-synaesthetic adults (n = 78) to make colour and shape/
texture associations to 22 odours. A subset of the participants (n = 41)
smelled the odours a second time in order to identify them. Each odour
stimulus was associated consistently to one or more specific colours
and/or textures (all ps < .01 by binomial probability statistics). Associations to the four odours that were identified accurately (cinnamon,
lemon, peppermint and licorice) seemed to be based on learning/memory (e.g., lemon = yellow). The associations to the 18 odours that were
not identified accurately are less likely to be based on learning/memory
(e.g., ginger = black, rough, sharp; lavender = green, white, liquid,
sticky). The results suggest that sensory associations to odours, like those
to pitch and letters (e.g., Mondloch & Maurer, 2004; Spector & Maurer,
2008), may result from the joint influence of learning and natural biases
linking dimensions across sensory systems. Such links may reflect inherent neural organization that is modifiable with learning and that can
manifest as cross-modal associations or synaesthetic percepts.

C116

SEVERE MULTISENSORY SPEECH INTEGRATION DEFICITS IN CHILDREN
WITH AUTISM Daniella Blanco1, Rebecca K. Reed1, Lars A. Ross2, Dave

Saint-Amour3, Sophie Molholm1, John J. Foxe1; 1The Childrens Research Unit
(CRU), Program in Cognitive Neuroscience, City College of New York, New York,
2
The Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, Temple University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, 3CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, Université du Québec à
Montréal, Quebec — Visualizing a speaker’s articulations substantially
improves the intelligibility of spoken speech and this is especially so
when listening conditions are very noisy. This multisensory integration
of speech inputs is crucial to effective communication, and appropriate
development of this capacity will have major impact on a child’s ability
to successfully navigate educational and social settings. It has long been
speculated that children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have particular deficits in multisensory integration abilities, and yet there is a surprising scarcity of hard empirical evidence to this effect. Here, we
assessed the abilities of a cohort of high-functioning ASD children
(N=15) to integrate seen and heard speech as environmental noise levels
were systematically manipulated, comparing them to an age-matched
typically developing (TD) cohort (N=15) and also to a group of adult
observers. We uncovered a severe deficit in the ability of the ASD children to benefit from visual inputs relative to TD children, a deficit that
became more and more severe as background noise levels were
increased. In our view, these results have important implications for
educators and clinicians working with ASD children. The severity of the
deficit in multisensory integration for the ASD children makes it clear
that special efforts should be made to ensure that the environment in
classrooms and other rehabilitative settings, as well as in the home, be
specifically controlled so that information can be effectively communicated. Interventional strategies that work to specifically promote the
development of multisensory speech integration mechanisms are clearly
called for.

C117

SENSORIMOTOR RHYTHM ON HEALTHY BABIES OF 4 AND 8 MONTH
OLD Minerva Moguel-Gonzalez1, Milene Roca-Stappung1, Thalia
Fernandez1, Thalia Harmony1; 1Instituto de Neurobiologia, UNAM Campus
Juriquilla — Objective: To study sensoriomotor rhythm on healthy babies

of 4 and 8 month old. Sensorimotor rhythm (SMR) has been described in
babies between 6 and 8.8 Hz in central and frontal leads during an attentive and no movement condition. The main purpose of this study is to
assess SMR during attentive and no movement condition and also characterize the contralateral desynchronization of SMR when movement is

115

Poster Session C
exclusively on the right or the left upper limb. EEG was recorded in F3,
F4, C3, C4, Fz and Cz leads using as reference short-circuited ear lobes;
four conditions were recorded – free movement, attentive and no movement, exclusive movement of the right upper limb and exclusive movement of the left upper limb-. SMR frequency range was taken between 6
and 8.8 Hz and a narrow band analysis of the absolute power was carried out to each test condition, geometric power was applied to each
value. Preliminary results show that 4 month old babies have highest
SMR absolute power values on frontal region in the band around 7 Hz
while 8 month old babies present highest SMR absolute power values on
frontal and central regions on the band around 8 Hz. Contralateral
desynchronization on 4 month old babies is not conclusive but 8 month
old babies show contralateral desynchronization of SMR on central leads
in the band around 8 Hz. These results suggest that SMR frequency
increases with age and SMR desynchronization could be a maturational
EEG sign. Supported by CONACyT

C118

THE RECOGNITION OF ACTIVELY VS. PASSIVELY LEARNED AUDIOVISUAL
ASSOCIATIONS Andrew J. Butler1, Karin H. James1; 1Indiana University,
Bloomington — In everyday experience we often learn about objects
actively, using physical exploration, through multiple senses. After these
experiences we can recognize objects using both unisensory and multisensory associative information. Theoretical accounts and empirical evidence suggest that regions involved in perception and motor processes
during encoding are reactivated during subsequent recognition. Active
learning enhances later memory performance, and leads to the involvement of motor systems during recognition. Twenty participants were
included in a study using fMRI that explored the neural correlates of two
types of recognition under two different types of training. Half of the
participants learned actively, using novel visual objects to make a novel
associated sounds, and the other half passively viewed another perform
this task. Unisensory old/new recognition tests, and multisensory associative recognition tasks were administered to these two groups during
fMRI. There were four main results: A) Active learning significantly
speeded both unisensory and multisensory associative recognition, and
increased the accuracy of multisensory associative recognition. B) Evidence was found for crossmodal perceptual reactivation during the recognition of the unisensory aspects of the multisensory objects in both
groups C) Activation of motor and premotor regions was specifically
associated with the presentation of audiovisual associations after active
learning. D) Active learning was specifically associated with the activation of a know site of audiovisual integration (Superior Temporal Sulcus) during the presentation of multisensory information relative to
unisensory information. These results suggest that active learning
enhances performance, and modulates the involvement of motor and
multisensory systems during recognition.
C119

MULTISENSORY INTEGRATION IN SENSORY CORTICES: INTRACRANIAL
EVIDENCE IN HUMANS Manuel Mercier1,3, Sophie Molholm1,2, Jonathan

P. Dyke3, Theodore H. Schwartz3, John J. Foxe1,2; 1Program in Cognitive
Neuroscience, The City College of the City University of New York, 2The
Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, Program in Cognitive Neuroscience and
Schizophrenia, Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg,
3
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York —
Over the past decade, evidence supports the view that multisensory integration occurs at the level of early sensory cortices. Furthermore, it has
been shown that this interplay occurs before the involvement of well
known multisensory areas further up the processing hierarchy. In the
present study, we investigated the dynamic activation subsequent to the
presentation of visual, auditory, and audio-visual stimuli in the human
brain. To do so we recorded intracranial EEG from implanted epileptic
patients undergoing pre-surgical evaluation, while they performed a
stimulus detection task. We collected intracranial electrophysiological
responses to each of the stimulus types (visual, auditory, and bisensory

116

Perception & Action: Multisensory
audio-visual) and computed the sum of the unisensory responses. In a
preliminary analysis of data from 3 subjects, the responses revealed multisensory integration beginning at about 100ms in both visual and auditory cortices, when multisensory and summed unisensory responses
were compared; whereas multisensory integration effects in higherorder multisensory regions (IPS and STS) were not observed until
between 200 and 300ms. These intracranial data provide direct evidence
for early onset multisensory integration in cortical areas that have traditionally been considered unisensory, effects that precede those found in
higher-order multisensory regions.

C120

I KNOW WHAT YOU’RE DOING BECAUSE I DID IT BEFORE: SENSORYMOTOR EXPERIENCE INDUCES PERIPERSONAL SPACE MODIFICATIONS
Brozzoli1,2,3,
Lucilla
DURING ACTION OBSERVATION Claudio

Cardinali1,2,3, Francesco Pavani4,5, Alessandro Farnè1,2,3; 1INSERM, U864,
Espace et Action, Bron, France, 2Université Claude Bernard Lyon, France,
3
Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Neurologique, Mouvement et Handicap, Lyon,
France, 4University of Trento, Italy, 5Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, University
of Trento, Italy — Electrophysiological and brain imaging studies support
the existence of a mirror neurons system in humans, activated during
action execution and observation of another individual’s execution of the
same action. We recently documented in humans a Peripersonal Space
(PpS) involvement into action execution, showing on-line multisensory
modulations induced by grasping objects. Here we investigated whether
similar multisensory modulations may arise when merely observing the
execution of prehension movements. Subjects were tested in pairs,
(Observer and Actor) in each session (overall N=16). Both were
requested to perform the same visuo-tactile task while fixating the centre
of an object: to discriminate the elevation of tactile stimuli delivered on
their right hand (up-index finger, down-thumb), while ignoring visual
distractors appearing from the upper or lower part of the object. While
the Actor was asked to grasp the object, the Observer passively observed
the grasping action. In a separate session, the subjects’ role was inverted.
Results showed that Observers presented PpS modulations similar to
those induced in the Actor by grasping execution. However, this effect
arose only after Observers had previously experienced the Actor’s role.
These findings provide evidence that action perception can induce in the
observer not only a motor resonance, but also a resonance of the perceptual consequences of the observed action. Intriguingly, this effect
appears dependent on the observer’s prior actual experience, suggesting
a differential role for enacted vs. merely potential actions in the subject’s
motor repertoire.

C121

INVESTIGATING MECHANISMS FOR MULTISENSORY ENHANCEMENT OF
VISUAL-TARGET DETECTION Ian Fiebelkorn1,2, John Foxe1,2, Hans-Peter
Frey1,2, John Butler1,2, Sophie Molholm1,2; 1City College of New York, 2Albert
Einstein College of Medicine — Task-irrelevant sounds improve the detection of visual targets. Here we asked whether spatial alignment is a necessary condition for such auditory enhancements of visual processing.
While a number of studies have shown that spatially aligned receptive
fields are required for multisensory effects, an auditory-tactile study that
measured redundant-target effects suggested otherwise. In the present
study, participants were asked to maintain central fixation and deploy
their attention equally across three possible target locations: a location
just below central fixation, and locations 14 degrees to the right and left
of central fixation. Low-contrast visual targets were sometimes paired
with a task-irrelevant sound presented either from a “nearby” speaker
positioned on top of the monitor, or from a “distant” speaker positioned
in line with the participant's left shoulder. Participants were instructed
to press a button when a visual stimulus occurred at any of the three
possible target locations, regardless of sounds. Visual-alone, audiovisual, and auditory-alone stimuli were equiprobable, so sounds could not
be used to predict the presence of visual targets. Our results reveal that
task-irrelevant sounds indeed improved the detection of visual targets

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Vision
despite wide spatial separations. Further, facilitation was equivalent for
sounds presented from the nearby and the distant speaker. Multisensory
effects on visual-target detection at the central location, however, were
seemingly diminished compared to effects at the peripheral locations,
particularly when a central visual target was paired with a sound that
was presented at the more distant speaker. Additional experiments will
probe the neurobiological underpinnings of these behavioral effects.

C122

DANCING TO THE BEAT: MEASURES OF MUSICAL BEAT-FINDING IN
PERCEPTION AND ACTION Jessica Phillips-Silver1, Petri Toiviainen2,

Nathalie Gosselin1, Olivier Piché1, Sylvie Nozaradan3, Isabelle Peretz1;
University of Montréal, 2University of Jyväskylä, 3Catholic University
of Louvain — Musical movement and dance are observable in almost
1BRAMS,

every individual, regardless of age, culture or type of musical experience, yet this ability has received little attention from the scientific literature. The present study has three goals. First, we document the ability
possessed by adults in the general population to synchronize their body
movement with real music. We use a motion capture device to measure
full-body movement, and demonstrate that adults are highly precise; at
least as precise as they are at tapping. Second, we measure the ability of
the same people to judge whether a model is dancing in time to the same
music. We use a novel perceptual asynchrony detection paradigm, in
which subjects judge audiovisual movies of the dancer, that are either
synchronous or asynchronous to varying degrees. We show that people
are proficient at this activity, though their performance on this perceptual task is less precise than on the production task. Third, we report a
case of an individual with self-reported rhythm problems, who is significantly impaired on both tasks. We conclude that beat-finding in perception and action is a widespread ability that does not rely on special
training. However, there exist rare cases of individuals who are impaired
on beat perception and synchronization in the context of music. We
explore the present case as a new form of congenital amusia, specific to
beat perception and synchronization: beat deafness.

Poster Session C

Perception & Action: Vision
C124

FUNCTIONAL COMMUNICATION WITHIN A PERCEPTUAL NETWORK
PROCESSING FAMILIAR AND UNFAMILIAR VISUAL OBJECTS Anthony

Herdman1; 1Simon Fraser University — Many

studies have identified
regions within human ventral visual stream to be important for object
identification and categorization; however, knowledge of how perceptual information is communicated within the visual network is still limited. Current theories on object identification posit that incoming
perceptual information about an object is matched to internal representations. If there is a high correspondence then the object is identified, if
there isn’t then the object requires more detailed processing. This extra
processing should manifest as additional activity and neural communication amongst multiple cortical regions. I examined this by using timefrequency and functional connectivity analyses of brain source data estimated from magnetoencephalographic recordings. I found that, as compared to familiar letters, unfamiliar letter-like characters (pseudoletters)
elicited significantly prolonged gamma-band (50-80 Hz) activity and
delayed communication between 245-375 ms amongst regions in a more
distributed visual network. I also found that viewing letters produced
alpha-band (9-12 Hz) desynchronization and gamma-band synchronization as early as 85 ms that wasn’t evident when viewing pseudoletters.
The right fusiform gyrus was a central hub of connectivity in both frequency bands, thereby illustrating the concept that neural regions
decrease communication within one network while increasing it in
another. These findings indicate that familiar object processing begins by
at least 85 ms and doesn’t persist as long as that for unfamiliar object
processing. Moreover, the extra activity and distributed communication
for pseudoletters might reflect perceptual binding of their novel line configurations in order to begin consolidating them into unitized templates
used on subsequent viewings.

C123

CO-VARIATION OF EEG SYNCHRONIZATION AND SELF-ESTIMATION OF
SPONTANEOUS EMOTIONAL STATES Miroslaw Wyczesany1, Jan Kaiser1;
1Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland — The

current study addresses the
issue of associations between cortical activity and the experiential aspect
of emotional state. The focus on subjective reports differs from the typical approach where emotions are operationalized by the experimental
procedure. Our previous studies have shown that EEG power patterns
were specifically related to such estimation. The goal of the present
study was to investigate the role of cortical emotional systems, as postulated by Heller (1993), in the emotional states experience. This model distinguishes two main cortical areas involved in emotion: the frontal
region related to valence, and the right posteriotemporal region related
to non-specific emotional arousal. In order to determine their functional
relationships, the Synchronization Likelihood (SL) index, based on EEG
generalized synchronization, was applied. Subjects rated their spontaneous emotional state with the University of Minnesota Adjective Checklist, which yielded three measures: valence, energy arousal, and tension
arousal. The scores of the subjective scales were correlated with SL levels
for all electrode pairs within the regions of interest. The results only
partly confirmed the hypotheses based on Heller's theory. The level of
negative valence was associated with increase of long-range synchronizations between T8 and many frontal and right parietal electrodes in
high alpha and low beta frequency bands, while at higher frequencies,
the center of synchronization was the CP2 electrode. Tension arousal
was found to be negatively correlated with synchronizations within the
frontal area in the alpha band. We discuss the role of cortical systems in
the experience of different qualities of emotional state.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

117

Language: Other
D1

EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS REVEAL THE INTERPLAY OF NATIVE AND
SECOND LANGUAGE DURING BILINGUAL WORD PRODUCTION Yanjing
Wu1, Guillaume Thierry1,2; 1Bangor University, 2ESRC Centre for Research on
Bilingualism in Theory and Practice — Language production in bilinguals

requires the selection of words in the intended language for articulation.
Although fluent bilingual speakers do not make random errors when
using one of their languages, it has been suggested that they access information in both languages. However, the mechanism of word selection in
bilingual speech production is a matter of debate, as argued by contradictory models. Here, we manipulated word sound repetition in picture
name of the first (Chinese) and the second (English) language of proficient bilingual participants independently, while they engaged in a
covert speech production (rhyming judgment) task. Event-related potentials showed that, when rhyming judgments were performed in English,
target pictures rhyming in English with the prime elicited a reduction in
ERP amplitude around 400 ms as compared to the control condition.
Critically, target picture which rhymed in Chinese with the prime (i.e.,
the unintended language condition) revealed a delayed priming effect at
600 ms. When rhyming decision were made in Chinese by the same participants, picture names rhyming in Chinese elicited an N400 priming
effect, but picture names rhyming in English had no effect. While the
current results are consistent with previous studies showing activation
of words in the unintended language, they demonstrate that word selection in bilingual speech production is asymmetrical: The intention to
produce words in the second language hinders, but does not seal off,
activation of the first language featuring a serial-processing mechanism.
The intention to produce words in the first language appears to eliminate competition from second language.

D2

LISTENERS’ PROCESSING OF PITCH ACCENTS IN ON-LINE REFERENTIAL
COMMUNICATION: THE ROLE OF VISUAL AND LINGUISTIC
CONTRASTS Sara Bögels1, Herbert Schriefers1, Wietske Vonk2,3, Dorothee
J. Chwilla1; 1Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud
University Nijmegen, 2Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen,
3
Center for Language Studies, Radboud University Nijmegen — Previous

research on referential communication has shown that speakers mark
linguistic contrasts with a pitch accent. After producing “the red ball”,
they will produce “the BLUE ball”, accenting the new, contrastive information. Conversely, speakers do not mark visual contrasts with an
accent; when a red ball is simultaneously present in the visual context,
they will not accent the color in “the blue ball”. We investigated whether
listeners are sensitive to the congruous or incongruous marking of either
kind of contrast with pitch accents, using Event-Related Potentials. In
one block, participants were presented with linguistic contrasts (e.g., the
referential utterance “the red ball” in trial N-1), followed by a congruous
(“the BLUE ball”), incongruous (“the blue BALL”), or neutral referential
utterance in trial N. In another block, participants were presented with

118

visual contrasts (e.g. a display with a red and blue ball) followed by the
same utterances. The results for the linguistic contrast seem to show that
listeners are sensitive to accentuation; the ERPs showed a negativity for
incongruous as compared to congruous accents on the adjective, but no
effect for deaccented adjectives. For accents on the noun and in the visual
contrast condition, no effects of congruity of the accent could be shown.
Instead, we found negativities that seem to reflect other factors such as
overspecification and word repetition. In conclusion, listeners seem to be
more sensitive to marking of linguistic than visual contrast with pitch
accents. This suggests that listeners can use exactly these markers that
speakers actually produce.

D3

NEURAL CORRELATES OF PHONOLOGICAL AND SEMANTIC PRIMING

Isabelle Deschamps1, Pascale Tremblay2, Natalie Phillips3, Shari Baum1,
Vincent Gracco1,4; 1McGill University, Montréal, Quebec, 2The University of
Chicago, Chicago, 3Concordia University, Montréal, Quebec, 4Haskins
Laboratories, New Haven, CT — Differences in brain activation between
semantic or phonological priming are often observed in studies requiring a lexical decision. The brain areas most often reported include the
middle temporal lobe, the inferior frontal gyrus and the left posterior
temporal cortex. In this fMRI study, we examined the neural correlates
of passive semantic and phonological priming, as well as priming in a
task of target word production. The goal of the study was three-fold: 1)
to investigate the cortical networks associated with word recognition
mechanisms during semantic and phonological priming; 2) to discover
whether evidence of passive phonological and semantic priming would
emerge (in the absence of a task); and 3) to investigate whether the cortical areas associated with phonological or semantic priming differ when
the target word is verbally produced(articulated) or not. Stimuli consisted of pairs of words presented visually in succession in three conditions (semantically related, phonologically related, unrelated) across two
tasks (passive reading and word naming). A resting baseline was also
acquired via a 1.5T Siemens scanner. Results demonstrated that passive
semantic priming activated frontal and prefrontal regions in the LH,
including BA 9, 45 and 46, along with multiple distributed activations
along the STS. Passive phonological priming also resulted in LH activation, stronger than in the semantic priming condition. Two areas of overlap along the STS were noted, along with two areas which were only
activated in the phonological condition. Fewer differences were
observed in the production task, although semantic priming resulted in
greater activation than phonological priming.

D4

SENSOR AND SOURCE SPACE CORRELATES OF PREDICTION VIOLATIONS
IN PHONOLOGICAL PROCESSING So-One Hwang1, Philip Monahan1,2,

William Idsardi1; 1University of Maryland, 2Basque Center on Cognition, Brain
and Language — Listeners use fine acoustic cues in the speech signal to
make predictions about upcoming segments (Hwang et al. 2008). On single vowel tokens, Obleser et al. (2004) demonstrated that the M100
latency and equivalent current dipole source location are sensitive to featural differences between vowels. We expect that these measures will

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Other
also reflect on-line processing of featural information. Here, we compare
the neuromagnetic response to phonologically identical vowels in contexts where the preceding consonant is either predictive or misinformative of that vowel. In English, the dorsal consonant [g] is produced
further forward in the mouth ([g+]) when preceding FRONT vowels
(e.g., [? e]) than BACK vowels (e.g., [? ?]). We constructed matched or
mismatched stimuli by splicing or cross-splicing [V?] frames onto [g]
and [g+]. Subjects were asked to identify the vowel while their brain
activity was recorded (157-channel whole head axial gradiometer MEG,
KIT, Japan). For the back vowel tokens, a significantly shorter M100 peak
latency was elicited to the match compared with the mismatch token
(LH: n=13, p<0.01; RH: n=11, p<0.001) but no difference between the
front vowel tokens (LH: p=0.33; RH: p=0.08). Consistent with this asymmetry, we find a significant difference in the ECD source estimation,
where only back vowel mismatches elicited a reliably more posterior
center of activation along the posterior-anterior axis in the left hemisphere (p<0.05). In conclusion, listeners use fine acoustic cues to generate predictions about the upcoming speech signal, and these are reflected
in both sensor and source space analyses.

D5

LANGUAGE INVARIANT VERB PROCESSING REGIONS IN SPANISHENGLISH BILINGUALS Joanna L. Willms1,2, Kevin A. Shapiro1,3, Petra E.

Pajtas1, Lauren R. Moo1,2, Alfonso Caramazza1,4; 1Harvard University,
General Hospital, 3Children's Hospital Boston, 4Center for
Mind/Brain Sciences, University of Trento, Italy — Nouns and verbs are uni2Massachusetts

versal components of language. The differential processing of these
grammatical categories has been documented in many languages in
patients and in healthy participants. Following up studies of bilingual
patients who show impairment for either nouns or verbs in both languages, we investigated the cortical organization of grammatical categories in healthy bilinguals using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI). Highly proficient Spanish-English bilinguals completed a simple
morphosyntactic task in both languages. Four regions showed greater
activity for verbs than for nouns across languages: left posterior middle
temporal gyrus (BA 22/39), supplementary motor area (BA 6 and 8), left
middle frontal gyrus (BA 9, 46, and 6), and a small cluster in the right
middle occipital gyrus (BA 18). While in region of interest analyses (but
not whole brain analyses) overall activity was higher for Spanish, this
may be due to participants’ more frequent use of English as adults. The
absence of interactions between language and grammatical category in
these regions indicates that the increased activity for processing verbs
compared to nouns is driven by both languages. Thus, the processes
underlying the differential response to nouns and verbs may have a language invariant neural basis.

D6

LOCALIZATION OF SUBLEXICAL SPEECH PERCEPTION COMPONENTS

Peter Turkeltaub1, H. Branch Coslett1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Models
of speech perception are in general agreement with respect to the major
cortical regions involved, but lack precision with regard to localization
and lateralization of processing units. To refine these models we conducted two Activation Likelihood Estimation (ALE) meta-analyses of the
neuroimaging literature on sublexical speech perception. Based on foci
reported in 18 fMRI experiments comparing sublexical speech perception to nonspeech auditory stimuli, we identified significant activation
likelihoods in left and right superior temporal cortex and the left precentral sulcus, corresponding to the premotor mouth area. Subanalysis of
phonetic perception studies revealed a single cluster in the left superior
temporal sulcus. A lateralization analysis demonstrated clear left lateralization of the temporal lobes in terms of magnitude, extent, and consistency of activity. A second ALE analysis of eight fMRI studies on
perception of differences between phoneme categories revealed significant activation likelihood in the left supramarginal gyrus and angular
gyrus. The results are consistent with a speech processing network in
which the bilateral superior temporal cortices perform acoustic analysis
of speech and nonspeech auditory stimuli, the left superior temporal sulCognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session D
cus performs early phonetic analysis, and the left inferior parietal lobule
is involved in detection of differences between phoneme categories.
These results modify current speech perception models in three ways: 1)
specifying peak locations and extents of dorsal stream processing units,
2) clarifying that phonetic superior temporal sulcus processing is left lateralized, and 3) demonstrating that both the supramarginal gyrus and
angular gyrus are involved in phoneme discrimination.

D7

NEURAL
SUBSTRATES
OF
SIMULTANEOUS
LANGUAGE
INTERPRETATION Alexis Hervais-Adelman1, Barbara Moser-Mercer1,

Christoph Michel1,2, Frédéric Grouiller1,2, Narly Golestani1; 1Universté de
Genève, 2Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève — Twelve trainee simultaneous

language interpreters (mean age: 27 years; 4 female; 11 right-handed)
took part in a functional magnetic resonance imaging investigation of
simultaneous interpretation. They were presented with sentences during
silent intervals of a sparse imaging paradigm (TA: 2040ms, TR: 9s; 36
slices, 3mm thick, 0.6mm interslice gap). Participants were asked to
either listen to, shadow (repeat sentences as they heard them) or to
simultaneously interpret (into their native language) the stimuli,
between scans. Stimuli were divided into mini-blocks of 4 thematicallylinked sentences (simulating a more natural interpretation scenario). We
also included null-events (silence), to measure baseline activation. Conditions were pseudo-randomized such that a given condition never
occurred more than twice in succession. We acquired 3 blocks of 65 scans
(13 quartets of sentences and 13 null-events), each lasting 10 minutes. A
comparison of the interpretation versus shadowing conditions revealed
significantly (familywise error-corrected p<0.05) greater activation in a
left-prefrontal network, comprising the left pars triangularis (a subregion of Broca’s area), left supplementary motor area and ventral left precentral gyrus. These regions have previously been implicated in speechmotor planning, and Broca’s area has been associated with grammatical
processing and verbal working memory. At a lower significance threshold (uncorrected p<0.001) additional activations are seen in the left anterior insula, and bilateral caudate nuclei. The caudate nuclei have
previously been shown to be involved in language switching. Results
suggest that simultaneous interpretation implicates additional involvement of regions involved in speech-motor control, language switching,
verbal working memory, and grammatical processing than simultaneous
repetition.

D8

‘HELLO’ IS ALL YOU NEED: NEUROMAGNETIC EVIDENCE OF DIALECT
EXTRACTION Mathias Scharinger1, Philip Monahan1,2, William Idsardi1;
1University

of Maryland, 2Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language —

The time-course and cortical mechanisms underlying speaker dialect
perception remain poorly understood. We present evidence suggesting
that dialect information is extracted in pre-attentive speech processing
and reflected in the evoked mismatch negativity response (MMN/
MMNm; Näätänen, et al. 2007). The MMN has been elicited to talker
change (Titova & Näätänen, 2001; Beauchemin, et al. 2006) and has also
been used to identify parallel processing of word and voice information
(Knösche, et al. 2002). Here, participants (n=12; mean age = 22.9 yrs) passively listened to 20 acoustically distinct, randomly presented tokens of
‘hello’ produced in two separate dialects by a single bi-dialectal speaker
(10 Standard American English (SAE); 10 African-American Vernacular
English (AAVE)). We employed a many-to-one mismatch oddball paradigm (deviant p=0.125) with tokens from each dialect serving as the
deviant in half the session. Neuromagnetic activity was recorded by a
157-channel whole-head MEG system (KIT, Japan). Based on 10 left
hemisphere channels sampled per participant, we calculated the grand
average RMS waveforms to the standards and deviants of each dialect.
In the first MMNm time window (125-175ms) we find a reliable MMNm
in the AAVE standard-deviant comparison (p<0.001) but no difference in
the SAE comparison (p=0.19). In the second MMNm time window (175225ms), we find a difference in both the AAVE (p<0.001) and the SAE
comparison (p<0.001). Since the deviants shared talker, voice and lin-

119

Poster Session D
guistic properties with the standards, differing solely on dialect, the elicited MMNm demonstrates that dialect information is extracted in preattentive speech processing.

D9

POSTERIOR N1 ASYMMETRY TO ENGLISH AND WELSH WORDS IN EARLY
AND LATE ENGLISH-WELSH BILINGUALS Giordana Grossi1, Nicola

Savill2, Enlli Thomas2, Guillaume Thierry2; 1State University of New York at New
Paltz, 2Bangor University — We investigated the lateralization of the poste-

rior event-related potential N1 component (120-170 ms) to written words
in two groups of bilinguals. Fourteen early English-Welsh bilinguals and
14 late learners of Welsh performed a semantic categorization task on
English and Welsh words presented in separate blocks. Words in the two
languages were matched on length, frequency, within-language neighborhood density, cross-language neighborhood density, and bigram frequency. In both groups, the N1 was strongly lateralized towards the left
posterior scalp for both languages. A robust correlation was found
between N1 asymmetry for English and N1 asymmetry for Welsh words
in both groups. Furthermore, in late bilinguals, there was a trend for the
N1 asymmetry for Welsh to correlate with years of experience in Welsh.
These data suggest that, in late bilinguals, the degree of lateralization of
systems involved in written word recognition for the second language is
associated with the neural organization for the first language, and that
increased experience with a second language is associated with a larger
left-right functional asymmetry. Future research will investigate
whether the correlations in the two groups reflect similar or different
mechanisms depending on the age of acquisition of the second language.

D10

THE PHONEMIC RESTORATION EFFECT REVEALS PRE-N400 EFFECT OF
SUPPORTIVE SENTENCE CONTEXT IN SPEECH COMPREHENSION David
M. Groppe1, Marvin Choi1, Tiffany Huang1, Ben Topkins1, Joseph Schilz1, Marta
Kutas1; 1University of California, San Diego — The phonemic restoration

effect (Warren, 1970) refers to the tendency for people to hallucinate a
phoneme that has been replaced by a non-speech sound (e.g., a tone) in a
word. This illusion can be influenced by preceding sentence context that
provides information about the likelihood of the missing phoneme (Samuel, 1981). The saliency of the illusion suggests that supportive sentence
context can affect relatively low levels of speech processing (e.g., the
phonemic level or lower). Indeed, an event-related potential (ERP) investigation of the phonemic restoration effect by Sivonen et al. (2006) found
that the processing of coughs that replaced high probability versus low
probability phonemes in sentential words differed from each other as
early as 120-180 ms post-stimulus. However, this result was confounded
by physical differences between the high and low probability speech
stimuli. Thus, their effect could have been caused by factors such as
habituation and not by supportive sentence context. We conducted an
ERP experiment similar to that of Sivonen et al., but we avoided a confound of auditory stimulus differences by using the exact same auditory
stimuli preceded by text that made critical phonemes more or less probable. As with their previous study, we found a robust N400 effect of phoneme/word probability, but no early 120-180 ms effect. We did however
observe a left posterior effect of phoneme/word probability around 190225 ms -- clear evidence of an early effect of supportive sentence context
in speech comprehension distinct from the N400.

D11

AN ERP STUDY OF CROSS-MODAL RHYMING: INFLUENCES OF
PHONOLOGY AND ORTHOGRAPHY Priya Mitra1,2, Donna Coch2; 1Tufts

University, 2Dartmouth College — Previous visual and auditory eventrelated potential (ERP) studies using prime-target pairs of word and
pseudoword stimuli have reported a robust rhyming effect such that
nonrhyming targets elicit a larger N400 than rhyming targets. Few studies have investigated this ERP rhyming effect in cross-modal paradigms,
or have explored the possible influences of orthography on the N400
rhyming effect for auditory stimuli. We presented college students (N =
20) with visual pseudoword primes and auditory real word targets, half

120

Language: Other
of which rhymed and half of which did not rhyme with the primes. Half
of the auditory targets in the rhyming condition also shared rime spellings with the visual primes (e.g., nain-gain) while half were orthographically mismatched with the primes (e.g., tain-sane). A typical N400
rhyming effect was apparent in mean amplitude analyses within the 350600 ms time window following onset of the target words, especially at
right hemisphere, posterior, medial sites (p < .01). Comparison of ERPs
to rhyming trials for targets orthographically matched and orthographically mismatched to primes revealed that orthography affected mean
amplitude at left hemisphere sites within the 350-600 ms window (p <
.05). These results demonstrate that pseudoword-word pairs can elicit a
typical N400 rhyming effect between modalities. Further, they indicate
that fluent adult readers access orthographic information during the
phonological analysis of auditory words in a rhyme judgment task. The
different topographical distributions of the orthographic effect and the
phonological effect suggest different underlying neural generators for
these concurrent effects.

D12

A BROKEN LINK WITH THE BROCA’S AREA IN PERSISTENT
DEVELOPMENTAL STUTTERING Chunming Lu1, Wenping You1, Xuhui

Zhang1, Guosheng Ding1, Danling Peng1; 1State Key Laboratory of Cognitive
Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, P. R. China — Despite

the extensive neuroimaging studies on persistent developmental stuttering (PDS), the neurological genesis of PDS is still unclear. While the
severity of stuttering always changes, task-induced brain abnormalities
could not reveal the common neural bases of PDS across various speech
conditions. The present study, for the first time, examined the resting
state functional connectivity (rsfc) of 15 PDS participants and 13 controls
by using an ICA approach, and validated the rsfc data by cortical thickness examination. The rsfc results revealed reduced rsfc strength in the
left Broca’s areas (BA44/45) and superior temporal sulcus (BA21), and
increased rsfc strength in the left inferior parietal gyrus (BA7) and
declive of the cerebellum relative to the controls. Cortical thickness
results confirmed the rsfc results in the left Broca’s area by showing significant cortical thinning. Further, there was a significant correlation
between the cortical thinning data and the reduced rsfc strength data
across participants. These results reliably indicate that the neural abnormality in the Broca’s area may play a key role in the neurological genesis
of PDS. This finding is helpful in understanding the pathology of PDS
and evaluating the treatment methods of PDS.

D13

ERP AND FMRI REFLECTIONS OF LANGUAGE MONITORING: THE CASE OF
SPELLING ERRORS Nan van de Meerendonk1, Peter Indefrey1,2,3, Herman

H. J. Kolk1; 1Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, 2HeinrichHeine-Universität Düsseldorf, 3Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics —
According to the monitoring theory of language perception (e.g., Kolk et
al., 2003) competing representations that are caused by strong expectancy violations can trigger a conflict. This conflict elicits reprocessing of
the input to check for possible processing errors, which is reflected by
the P600 component in the EEG. The present study was set up to investigate this monitoring process, both in the EEG and fMRI, comparing syntactic and spelling violations. In addition, to assess the effect of conflict
strength, misspellings were embedded in sentences that were either
highly or lowly predictive for a critical word. In the EEG, both spelling
and syntactic errors elicited similarly distributed P600 effects. In accordance with the monitoring theory, the P600 effect was larger to misspellings in the highly compared to the lowly predictive sentences. In the
fMRI study, spelling and syntactic errors led to a stronger activation in
the same subregion of the left inferior frontal gyrus (lIFG); the strength
of the two activation levels did not differ. For the misspellings, there was
no difference between highly and lowly predictive sentences, as was
observed in the EEG. Furthermore, misspellings activated other areas,
besides lIFG. The results suggest that the P600 effects and lIFG activation
reflect processes of monitoring and control of language, rather than lan-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Other
guage processing as such. In addition, they might reflect different components of the monitoring process; while the P600 component is
sensitive to conflict strength, the LIFG directs reprocessing whenever the
strength of this conflict is of a sufficient size.

D14

SPEECH PERCEPTION AND LANGUAGE LEARNING EXPERIENCE:
COMPARING MONOLINGUALS, BILINGUALS AND MULTILINGUALS

Marie-Claude Tremblay1; 1University of Ottawa — Studies have shown that
bilinguals and multilinguals have superior learning and processing skills
(Nation & McLaughlin, 1986; Nayak et al., 1990; Thomas, 1988; 1992; M.C. Tremblay, under review). The aim of the present study is to determine
whether language learning experience also contributes to the development of greater perceptual sensitivity to non-native speech contrasts. To
date, the limited body of research, which is comprised of behavioural
data only, provides mixed results, sometimes showing advantages for
bilinguals/multilinguals over monolinguals (Enomoto, 1994), other
times not (Gallardo del Puerto, 2007). Moreover, these studies only look
at initial perceptual abilities, ignoring the potential impact of learning
experience on learning rates (Werker, 1986). Combining behavioural (i.e.
AX discrimination task) and electrophysiological (i.e. event-related
potential experiment using an oddball paradigm) methods, monolinguals, bilinguals and multilinguals are compared in their ability to discriminate a non-native contrast (voiceless aspirated dental/retroflex
stop) before and after receiving training as well as in their ability to
transfer this training to a new but similar contrast (voiceless unaspirated
dental/retroflex stop). The results of the behavioural experiment indicate that performance on the discrimination task improves as a function
of language learning experience after training only. At the neurophysiological level, the effect of experience is observed both initially and after
training. The results confirm that language learning experience boosts
perceptual abilities and learning rates. The results also indicate that neurophysiological changes may transpire before or in the absence of behavioural changes (K. L. Tremblay et al., 1998; present study).

D15

RHYTHMIC REGULARITY IN CONTINUOUS SPEECH PROCESSING
Nicolas Planet1, Kimberly Ethridge1, Lisa D. Sanders1; 1University of
Massachusetts, Amherst — Previous event-related brain potential (ERP)

research has shown that lexical recognition allows listeners to preferentially process the initial segments of words in continuous speech, as
indexed by N1 amplitude. However, these studies employed artificial
languages with words composed of a regular number of syllables such
that training may have made both rhythmic regularity and familiarity
available as cues to boundaries between words. The current study
manipulated rhythmic regularity by employing two artificial languages:
one comprised six three-syllable words and the other two two-syllable,
two three-syllable, and two four-syllable words. EEG was recorded as
participants listened to a continuous stream of one of the languages. A
behavioral recognition test was given before participants were explicitly
trained to recognize the words and EEG was recorded as the same language was presented again. Participants who heard the consistent wordlength language evidenced a larger N1 and N400 time-locked to word
onsets after compared to before training, replicating previous results.
The other group showed a larger N400 after training, but no differences
in the early perceptual processing of the word onsets in continuous
speech. These results suggest that rhythmic regularity plays an important role in the preferential processing of sequence-initial information in
continuous streams of newly-learned nonsense words.

D16

PHONOLOGICAL REPRESENTATION IN CHILDHOOD APRAXIA OF SPEECH
(CAS): AN ERP STUDY Reem Khamis-Dakwar1, Mellisa Randazzo2, Karen

Froud2; 1Adelphi University, 2Teachers College, Columbia University — Child-

hood Apraxia of Speech (CAS) is commonly defined as a motor planning
disorder (Edwards, 1984). However, it has been suggested that CAS may
result from overspecification of phonological representations (Dogil,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session D
Mayer, & Vollmer, 1994). To evaluate this hypothesis, we investigated
auditory MMN responses from children with CAS and typically-developing controls (aged 6-7 years). CV syllables were presented in randomized order in two passive-listening oddball paradigms, phonemic (/ba/,
/pa/) and allophonic (/pa/, /pha/), with /pa/ always representing the
standard (145 trials per condition, 17% deviants). MMN was derived
from high-density EEG recordings by averaging and montaging to
fronto-central sensors, and subtraction of averaged standard responses
from averaged deviant responses within each condition. In the phonemic
contrast condition, increased MMN amplitude was associated with deviant stimuli for children in the control group but not children with CAS.
The control group also showed a significant later negativity (300-400
msec) in this condition, but the CAS group showed a positivity in the
same time window. The allophonic condition did not elicit MMN effects
for either group, but the CAS group showed a positivity throughout the
epoch (up to 400 msec) in this condition. Since positive-going potentials
are sometimes observed in the MMN time window during early language development (Conboy, Rivera-Gaxiola, Silva-Pereyra, & Kuhl,
2008), this result may index an immature pattern of MMN responses by
children in the CAS group. We propose that these preliminary findings
are consistent with a view of CAS as a disorder affecting underlying
phonological representations.

D17

EARLY NEURAL RESPONSES SHOW SENSITIVITY TO SONORITY
DIFFERENCES IN CONSONANT CLUSTERS Pedro Alcocer1, William
Idsardi1; 1University of Maryland — To what extent does our knowledge of

the constraints governing the sequencing of speech sounds influence
early auditory cortical processing? Sonority is a property of speech
sounds that is associated with their relative loudness and resonance.
Across languages, it has been observed that word-initial consonant clusters with increasing sonority are more frequent that those with decreasing sonority (e.g., [dl] is more common than [ld]). This preference has
been called the sonority sequencing constraint. Using MEG and the magnetic mismatch field response (MMF), we investigate whether a preference for rising sonority is reflected in early automatic processing in
auditory cortex. We employ an MMF-eliciting design comparing the
neural response to [dlif] and [delif] in the rising sonority condition and
[ldif] and [ledif] in the falling sonority condition. Stimuli were created by
recording disyllabic tokens ([delif] and [ledif]) and splicing out the first
inter-consonantal vowel ([dl], [ld] do not exist in English). Native
English-speaking participants passively listened to stimuli presented in
an oddball paradigm during MEG recording. Four blocks were run: two
using monosyllabic tokens as the standard and two using disyllabic
tokens as standard. We find that the rising sonority tokens consistently
elicit an MMF with an onset at 200ms, suggesting that participants are
able to perceptually distinguish [dlif] from [delif]. Crucially, however,
we find an asymmetrical MMF response, suggesting that participants do
not perceive [ldif] and [ledif] differently. This finding indicates that the
SSC is operative early in phonological processing and can influence early
automatic responses in auditory cortex.

D18

FREQUENCY, NOT UNDERSPECIFICATION, DRIVES MMF ASYMMETRIES
TO DEVIANT SYLLABLES Joshua Riley1, Mary Ann Walter2, Valentine

Hacquard1, William Idsardi1; 1University of Maryland, College Park,
2Northwestern University — The magnetic mismatch field (MMF) response,
an electrophysiological measure of perceptual distance and the MEG
equivalent of the mismatch negativity response, exhibits order-of-presentation asymmetries when naturally-produced syllables are used. For
example, a deviant /ga/ following a sequence of /ba/ elicits a greater
amplitude MMF than a physically identical deviant /ba/ following a
sequence of /ga/[1]. We present a series of studies that we argue support an explanation for this phenomenon that relies crucially on segmental frequency, namely a transition from a low probability stimulus to a
high probability stimulus eliciting a larger amplitude MMF than vice
versa. This contradicts previous accounts of perceptual ordering asym-

121

Poster Session D
metries relying on phonemic underspecification [1,2]. While segmental
frequency and featural underspecification have proved difficult to disentangle, English and Amharic have different relative frequencies for phonologically similar syllables, thus making different predictions for
Amharic and English speakers listening to the same stimuli. We present
a series of studies that suggest that frequency differences explain these
asymmetries in English and Amharic. Our first finding that coronal deviants produce larger amplitude MMFs than labial deviants is inconsistent
with underspecification accounts. Our second study contrasts across
manner of articulation (nasal v. oral) rather than place with the same
stimuli and suggests that frequency effects drive the previous result.
Finally, we present our cross-linguistic evidence and find a significant
effect of native language on these MMF asymmetries. Taken together,
underspecification accounts cannot explain our pattern of results for
English and Amharic speakers.

D19

GRASPING TIME – HOW TEMPORAL ALIGNMENT AFFECTS GESTURE
SPEECH INTEGRATION Christian Obermeier1, Thomas C. Gunter1; 1Max
Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany —
In everyday face-to-face conversation, speakers not only use speech to
convey information but also rely, amongst others, on co-speech gestures.
Various studies have shown that, for instance, iconic gestures can affect
speech comprehension. Although being widely recognized as one of the
crucial factors for gesture-speech integration, the temporal aspects of this
process have been understudied so far. In the present experiment, we
explored the significance of timing for gesture-speech integration using a
disambiguation paradigm. Participants were presented with short video
clips of an actress uttering sentences like ‘She was impressed by the
BALL, because the GAME/DANCE…’. The ambiguous noun was
accompanied by a dynamic iconic gesture fragment containing the minimal necessary amount of information to disambiguate the noun. We
used four different temporal alignments between the noun and the gesture fragment: the uniqueness point of the noun was either prior (+120
ms condition), synchronous with (0 ms condition) or lagging behind the
end of the gesture fragment (-600 ms/-200 ms conditions). ERPs triggered to the uniqueness point of the noun (i.e. BALL, immediate integration) showed that integration with the gesture fragment depended on
timing, as all but the -600 ms condition resulted in N400 effects. In contrast, ERPs elicited at the later target word position (i.e. GAME/DANCE,
delayed integration) showed N400 effects independent of timing. Thus,
although there seems to be a crucial time window for immediate gesture
speech integration, even gesture information present beyond this time
window can exert a disambiguating influence.

D20

TASK MODULATED NEURAL ACTIVATION PATTERN IN CHRONIC STROKE
PATIENTS WITH APHASIA Rajani Sebastian1, Swathi Kiran2; 1University of

Texas at Austin, TX, 2Boston University, MA — Functional
neuroimaging
(fMRI) studies on post stroke aphasia suggest that when perisylvian
regions are damaged in stroke, their linguistic functions may be taken
over by other areas, supporting recovery from aphasia. In patients with
aphasia, both perilesional and contralesional activations are commonly
observed, with much variability across individuals. The significance of
contralesional activation is hotly debated due to variation in a number of
factors, including lesion site, phase of recovery, difficulty of the task, and
performance accuracy. The relationship between task with varying difficulty level and neural activation patterns have seldom been assessed
within the same individuals. In the present study, we examined neural
activation patterns with two tasks with varying level of difficulty ( picture naming and semantic judgment) on 8 high functioning chronic participants with aphasia with varying site/size of lesion (anterior lesion,
posterior lesion and anteroposterior lesion). In healthy control participants, semantic judgment task elicited robust left-lateralized frontal activation, where as picture naming task elicited bilateral activation. For
participants with aphasia, activation during semantic judgment task
involved mainly the perilesional or undamaged regions in the language
122

Language: Other
dominant hemisphere. During picture naming task, participants with
aphasia showed increased right temporoparietal and/or right frontal
activation in addition to the perilesional/ipsilesional activation irrespective of the site of lesion. The additional activation observed in the temporoparietaland/or right frontal region during picture naming for the
participants could be attributed to increased processing demands. The
results of this study revealed a complex relationship between task difficulty, site of lesion, and size of lesion.

D21

WORD RECOGNITION AFFECTS EARLY PERCEPTUAL PROCESSING OF
SUBSEQUENT ONSETS IN CONTINUOUS SPEECH Lori B. Astheimer1, Lisa
D. Sanders1; 1University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Event-related

brain
potential (ERP) evidence indicates that listeners preferentially process
word onsets during continuous speech perception, as indexed by a
larger N1 elicited by word-initial compared to physically similar wordmedial syllables. The current study explored the mechanism by which
word recognition affects the processing of word onsets using an artificial
language training paradigm. EEG was recorded in an initial exposure
phase while participants listened to a 30-minute stream of twelve threesyllable nonsense words presented as continuous speech. Participants
were then trained to recognize half of the words. Upon reaching a strict
learning criterion, participants underwent a second EEG recording while
listening to the same syllable stream again, which at that point contained
six trained words arranged randomly among six untrained words.
Behavioral results indicate that participants were only able to recognize
trained words; performance on untrained words remained at chance
even after the second exposure phase. ERP results demonstrate that early
perceptual processing of word onsets is modulated by recognition of the
words that precede them. That is, after training, early ERP differences
were observed in response to both trained and untrained words that
were preceded by trained words. These differences were absent for
words preceded by untrained words. Conversely, later effects (N400)
were observed in response to trained items only. Results indicate that the
recognition of one word directs processing resources to upcoming
onsets, a mechanism which is likely important for preferentially processing the most relevant information in rapidly changing streams of continuous speech.

D22

MORPHOLOGY AND TOPOGRAPHY OF THE MISMATCH RESPONSE
(MMR) TO NONLINGUISTIC AND BASIC SPEECH STIMULI IN 7-MONTHOLD INFANTS Cynthia P. Roesler1, Teresa Realpe-Bonilla1, Naseem

Choudhury1,2, Jennifer T. Friedman1, Zhenkun Gou1, April A. Benasich1;
1Rutgers University, 2Ramapo College of New Jersey — An infant’s ability to

efficiently detect transient changes in the auditory environment has been
shown to be predictive of language abilities. These effects have been
demonstrated with basic speech stimuli (consonant-vowel [CV] discrimination) as well as nonlinguistic stimuli (tone frequency discrimination).
However, the question remains as to whether processing of complex
tones is concurrently associated with speech discrimination abilities.
Thus, we compared differences in waveforms of event related potentials
(ERPs) to tones and CV stimuli, in the same typically developing 7month-old infants (N=11), to determine how tone processing might be
associated with language-based discrimination abilities. Two passive
auditory oddball paradigms were presented: a complex tone-pair block
(Standard stimulus = 800-800 Hz [85%]; deviant stimulus = 800-1200 Hz:
interstimulus interval = 70 ms) and a CV-discrimination block (standard
stimulus = /da/ [85%]; deviant stimulus = /ta/). Peak latencies and
amplitudes of the P1, N1 and MMR were obtained from standard and
deviant waveforms. Results suggest significant associations in peak
latency (rs=.67-.80) and amplitude (rs=.67-.74) for obligatory responses
(P1 and N1) to the standard stimuli. Significant associations in peak
latency to the deviant stimuli were also found for P1 and N1 (rs=0.73 and
0.80, respectively) and for amplitude of the MMR (r=0.78). Most of the
associations for standard and deviant peaks were located in midline and
left frontal and frontocentral areas. These findings suggest that individ-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Other
ual differences in tone processing are most robustly associated with
speech discrimination abilities in areas that are traditionally associated
with language processing.

D23

SHORT- AND LONG-TERM MEMORY CONTRIBUTIONS TO AUDITORY
CHANGE DETECTION: A NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL MODEL Max
Garagnani1, Friedemann Pulvermuller1; 1MRC Cognition & Brain Sciences
Unit — The critical ability of the brain to automatically detect rare, salient

auditory events amongst common ones is well-illustrated experimentally by the mismatch negativity (MMN), an event-related response elicited in oddball experiments which is larger for rare (deviant) acoustic
events than for frequently repeated ones. Recent evidence, however,
indicates that amongst the deviant stimuli, familiar items (e.g., words)
produce larger MMN responses than unfamiliar ones (e.g.,
pseudowords). While several mechanistic models can explain the former
(change detection, or CD-MMN) data, no computational account exists
for the latter. To explain these findings, we propose that the brain
response to sounds includes two components: one resulting from shortterm memory (STM) processes (neuronal adaptation, lateral inhibition),
producing the former (CD-MMN) effects, and one reflecting re-activation of long-term memory (LTM) traces for familiar sensory material,
underlying the latter (long-term memory, LT-MMN) effects. Taking language as our working domain, we implemented a neurobiologicallygrounded neural-network model of the areas involved in speech processing, modelling both short- (adaptation, inhibition) and long-term
(Hebbian synaptic plasticity) cortical mechanisms. After teaching the
network a limited set of artificial words, we simulated MMN responses
in it, modulating strength of adaptation and inhibition. While both of
these mechanisms produced CD-MMN effects, adaptation-only networks failed to replicate LT-MMN data. The present model of memory
and perception provides the first unifying account for CD- and LT-MMN
neurophysiological data, elucidates the role of putative mechanisms
underlying LTM and STM components, and shows how inhibition- (but
not adaptation)-based accounts can explain brain responses reflecting
auditory change detection.

D24

THE SYLLABLE AS A RELEVANT UNIT FOR SPEECH PERCEPTION – AN ERP
STUDY Heidrun Bien1, Pienie Zwitserlood1,2; 1Institute for Psychology,
University of Muenster, Germany, 2Otto-Creutzfeldt Center for Cognitive and
Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Muenster, Germany — Recently, there

is a revival of interest in the syllable as a relevant pre-lexical unit in
speech perception, mediating between the acoustic speech input and the
word form representations in the mental lexicon, with varying findings
across languages and methods. In a lexical decision task, German native
participants had to decide, by button press, whether a stimulus they had
just heard was a word or a pseudo-word. Each target stimulus (such as
lustig – engl. funny)) was preceded by a spoken prime fragment with
varying overlap to the target: a) identical to its first syllable (/lus/), b)
overlap (/lu/ or /lust/), and c) no overlap (/haf/). The latter condition
was more frequent than the others, and we added a few trials with only
initial overlap (/lop/). In order to study the pre-lexical locus of syllabic
effects, the same logic of priming was applied to both words and
pseudo-words, which occurred equally often in the experiment. We analyzed both the response latencies and the ERPs to the target words,
expecting faster responses and reduced amplitudes in the P350 component in overlapping compared to none-overlapping conditions, with an
extra bonus for syllabic overlap. As expected, words were generally
responded to faster, and with less negative ERPs than pseudo-words. In
the latencies, effects of overlap were significant for words only, while in
the P350, they showed for both words and pseudo-words. For German,
this suggests a status of syllables as representational categories in speech
perception.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session D
D25

THUMBS-UP FOR A HAPPY FACE: EMOTIONAL EMBLEM PRIMING

Thomas Gunter1, Christian Obermeier1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — Emotion plays an important role during communication. During a positive event (e.g. a woman
won a prize), one would not be too surprised to see someone having a
happy expression on her face while simultaneous expressing her happiness soundless by using the thumbs-up emblem. This experiment
explores in how far emotional faces can prime certain emblems. We used
happy and angry faces of 5 male and female persons as prime stimuli.
They were presented for 800 ms. After an ISI of 300-400 ms (random) an
emblem (positive: thumbs up, ok-sign; negative: thumbs-down, middlefinger) or a meaningless hand posture was presented for 800 ms. The
emblem was either congruent or incongruent with the emotion
expressed in the face. After 500 ms participants had to decide whether
the hand posture had meaning or not. A completely balanced design was
used with the factors face (2), meaningfulness (2), and emblem type (2).
The ERPs on the hand postures showed a long lasting negativity for the
incongruent condition which started around 300 ms with a fronto-central
scalp distribution. This effect was most prominent for the negative hand
postures. These data show that emblems can be primed by faces and that
emotional content plays a role. Implicitly, one could argue that part of
the complex informational content of emblems is emotionally in nature.

D26

CAN ABSTRACT POINTING GIVE YOU DIRECTIONS IN A VERBALLY
AMBIGUOUS SITUATION? J. E. Douglas Weinbrenner1, Thomas C. Gunter1;

1
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences — It
was
explored whether abstract pointing gestures (APs) can resolve an ambiguous situation during speech comprehension. Contrary to concrete
pointings, APs are directed to physically empty space while talking
about a certain object. The object’s meaning is assigned to the empty
space by the pointing gesture itself. Participants watched a video, where
an interviewer and an interviewee talked about various dualistic topics
like “Donald Duck and Mickey Mouse”. During her responses, the interviewee conducted APs and established a certain gesturing order, e.g.
“Donald – left pointing” and “Mickey – right pointing”. Verbally, her
last response to a particular topic was at first ambiguous, but finally
explicit. Asked for who is more popular with kids, for example, she
answered “Maybe this character? I think I have read once that there is a
higher circulation for Donald Duck comic books.” At the ambiguous part
(“this character”), the interviewee made an AP, which was either congruent with the later on verbal disambiguation (“Donald”) or incongruent. In a third condition, the gesture could not be seen, as the camera was
still on the interviewer. Event-related potentials triggered to the onset of
the disambiguating word were analyzed. Preliminary results of 30 subjects show a positive deviation for the incongruent condition compared
to the no-gesture condition between 550 and 750 ms after word onset.
This finding indicates that APs were processed when presented during
the ambiguous phase of the context. We interpret this P600-like effect as
reflecting a reanalysis process.

D27

PROSODY AND RHYTHMIC REGULARITY DIFFERENTIALLY AFFECT
CONTINUOUS SPEECH PROCESSING Ifedolapo Bamikole1, Lisa D.
Sanders1; 1University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Previous

event-related
brain potential (ERP) studies indicate that listeners preferentially process
the initial segments of words in continuous speech. Specifically, word
onsets elicit a larger amplitude N1 after compared to before training on
an artificial language. The current study explored the effects of lexical
stress and rhythmic regularity on ability to learn words through exposure to continuous speech and on the modulation of early perceptually
processing of word onsets. EEG was initially recorded while one group
listened to six three-syllable words and another group heard two twosyllable, two three-syllable, and two four-syllable words. Both ‘languages’ were presented as continuous speech with the first syllable of

123

Poster Session D
each word 5 dB louder to indicate stress. After taking a behavioral test to
assess word learning through mere exposure, participants were explicitly trained to recognize the items and then asked to listen to the continuous stream while EEG was recorded again. Participants who heard the
nearly isochronous streams evidenced similar ERPs before and after
training; those who heard the language with variable word length
showed significant training effects. Specifically, word onsets elicited a
larger amplitude N1 and N400 after compared to before training. These
results suggest that rhythmic regularity marked by a strong prosodic cue
is sufficient for listeners to both segment speech and preferentially process word onsets. Lexical familiarity is necessary to observe modulation
of early perceptual processing of word onsets in the absence of nearly
isochronous rhythms.

D28

WHAT’S THE STORY WITH THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX? HOW STORY
SCHEMA INFLUENCES NARRATIVE COMPREHENSION: AN FMRI
STUDY Michael Cannizzaro1, Julie Dumas1, Patricia Prelock1, Paul

Newhouse1; 1University of Vermont — The clinical examination of discourse
is a useful tool for studying communication skills in both children and
adults with or without neurological impairments. The comprehension
and production of discourse represents complex behavior in that integrated knowledge of linguistic principles, organizational structure, and
pragmatic rules, are required to create a coherent message. Current neuroimaging data support the activation of a bilateral network (i.e., anterior prefrontal cortex, medial prefrontal cortex and the precuneus)
involved in narrative discourse processing. However, it is not known
how this network is influenced by the organizational structure of the
story. Twelve right-handed native English speaking subjects (4 females),
over the age of 18 (mean (SD) = 25.67 (2.5)), participated in this fMRI
study. Structurally simple 60 word narratives containing a single complete episode were created to conform strictly to story grammar conventions (i.e., the schematic mental model). These were presented as either
story narratives or unrelated sentences in a block design. Across all brain
regions previously reported to be activated during narrative processing,
we found reduced activation for cohesive schematically organized narratives compared to the unrelated sentences. This finding is consistent
with structured event complex (SEC) knowledge framework (e.g., organizational rules and patterns related to mental schema) of the prefrontal
cortex, at least in the case of linguistically based story narratives. In
essence, the stimuli in the present study created a condition that reduced
workload by the neural substrates previously associated with discourse
processing, by using familiar organizational patterns based on theoretical mental schema.
D29

THE SOUND OF SILENCE: INVESTIGATING THE CONSEQUENCES OF
DISFLUENT SILENT PAUSES IN SPEECH USING EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS Lucy J. MacGregor1, Martin Corley2, David I. Donaldson3;
1University

of Leeds, 2University of Edinburgh, 3University of Stirling —

Although little attention has been paid to them in the literature, silent
pauses are a common form of disfluency in speech. Here we report an
event-related potential (ERP) investigation into the consequences of such
silences for listeners. Participants heard utterances ending in predictable
or unpredictable words, some of which included a disfluent silence
before the target. In common with previous findings using er disfluencies, the N400 difference between predictable and unpredictable words
was attenuated for the utterances that included silent pauses. An earlier
relative negativity, topographically distinct from the N400 effect and
identifiable as a Phonological Mismatch Negativity (PMN), was found
for fluent utterances only. This suggests that only in the fluent condition
did participants perceive the phonology of unpredictable words to mismatch with their expectations. By contrast, for disfluent utterances only,
unpredictable words gave rise to a late left frontal positivity, an effect
previously observed following er and repetition disfluencies. We suggest that this effect reflects the engagement of working memory pro-

124

Language: Other
cesses that occurs when fluent speech is resumed. Using a surprise
recognition memory test, we also show that listeners were more likely to
recognise words which had been encountered after silent pauses, demonstrating that silence affects not only the process of language comprehension but also its eventual outcome. We argue that from a listener's
perspective, a critical feature of disfluency is the temporal delay which it
adds to the speech signal.

D30

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN COGNITIVE CONTROL PREDICT USE OF
SEMANTIC AND SYNTACTIC INFORMATION Raechel Steckley1, Kerry

Ledoux2, Tamara Y. Swaab1,3; 1University of California, Davis, 2Cognitive
Neurology/Neuropsychology, Johns Hopkins University, 3Center for Mind and
Brain, University of California, Davis — This study examined if individual
differences in cognitive control (measured by an AX-CPT task) influenced the interplay of semantic and structural factors during discourse
processing. Participants read sentences in which implicit causality and
discourse prominence were manipulated, e.g., 1) “…Robert amused Alison because Robert/Alison…”, 2) “…Amy thanked Joe because Joe/
Amy…”. ERPs were measured to coreferentially repeated names that
were consistent (Robert in (1); Joe in (2)) or inconsistent (Alison in (1);
Amy in (2)) with the verb’s bias, and that coreferred with a prominent
(name in 1st NP) or non-prominent (name in 2nd NP) antecedent. A
verb’s implicit causality has been demonstrated to lead to immediate
processing costs when a coreferential expression is inconsistent with the
bias of the verb. Prominence of an antecedent (a structural factor of a
sentence) influences processing of repeated name coreference: Names
that corefer with a prominent antecedent are more difficult to process
than names that corefer with a non-prominent antecedent. Low control
subjects showed costs of violation of bias regardless of whether or not
names coreferred with a prominent antecedent; inconsistent names elicited a greater N400 than consistent names. High Control subjects showed
an interaction of consistency and prominence; processing costs were
higher for consistent names that coreferred with a prominent antecedent,
but for inconsistent names that coreferred with a non-prominent antecedent (greater P2 and P600). Thus, initial processing of the critical
names was only influenced by semantic factors in low control subjects,
but by both semantic and structural factors in high control subjects.

D31

AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF PHONOTACTIC CONSTRAINTS ON NATURAL
RECEPTIVE LANGUAGE PROCESSING Erica Y. Shen1, Lisa D. Sanders1;
1

University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Phonotactics define permissible
sequences of adjacent sounds in a language. For example, in English, the
morpheme “ed” on regular past-tense verbs and the morpheme “s” on
regular plural nouns, have different phonological realizations depending on the last segment in the stem. Specifically, the appropriate consonant is voiced unless the stem-final phoneme is voiceless. The current
study employed event-related brain potentials (ERPs) to investigate the
effects of phonotactic constraints on natural receptive language processing. Participants were asked to listen to four short stories for comprehension. The stories included a small proportion of phonotactic violations
introduced by replacing single phonemes in critical sentences with phonotactically legal (n=40) and illegal (n=40) sounds (e.g., ‘cat-/s/’ became
‘cat-/s/’ in the canonical version and ‘cat-/z/’ in the violation version).
Simple subject-verb agreement violations were also included (e.g., ‘the
cat licks’ vs. ‘the cat lick’) to provide a direct comparison between phonotactic and syntactic processing. Participants who were asked to press a
button in response to any abnormalities in the sentences in a separate
behavioral study detected the syntactic violations (d’ = 2.7), but not the
phonotactic violations (d’ < 0.1). However, the phonotactic violations
elicited an anterior positivity 30-180 ms after onset, suggesting that listeners have veridical representations of the phonotactically illegal
strings early in processing. ERPs elicited by the phonotactic violations
differed in polarity, latency, and distribution from the anterior negativity
elicited by the syntactic violations, indicating that these two types of processing rely on distinct neural populations.
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Other
D32

ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC RESPONSES TO SMS SHORTCUTS

Lesya Ganushchak1, Andrea Krott1, Antje S. Meyer1; 1School of Psychology,
University of Birmingham — As the popularity of sending messages electronically increases, so does the necessity of conveying messages more
efficiently. One way of increasing efficiency is to abbreviate words and
expressions by combining letters with numbers such as gr8 for “great”,
using acronyms such as lol for “laughing out loud”, or clippings such as
msg for “message”. The present study compares the processing of shortcuts to the processing of closely matched pseudo-shortcuts. ERPs were
recorded while participants were performing a lexical decision task.
Response times showed that shortcuts were categorized more slowly as
non-words than pseudo-shortcuts. The ERP results showed no differences between shortcuts and pseudo-shortcuts at time windows 50 – 150
ms and 150 – 270 ms, but there were significant differences between 270
– 500 ms. These results suggest that at early stages of word recognition,
orthographic and phonological processing is similar for shortcuts and
pseudo-shortcuts. However, at the time of lexical access the shortcuts
diverge from pseudo-shortcuts, suggesting that shortcuts activate lexical
representations.

D33

GENDER STEREOTYPES AND IMPLICIT VERB CAUSALITY IN LANGUAGE
COMPREHENSION: AN FMRI STUDY Evelyn C. Ferstl1, Christina

Manouilidou1,2, Alan Garnham1; 1University of Sussex, UK, 2University of
Patras, Greece — In an fMRI study, we investigated pronoun resolution
processes. Two distinct types biases were employed with the goal to disentangle lexical and pragmatic effects in text comprehension. Implicit
causality refers to the fact that many verbs describing interpersonal
events orient causal attribution. For example, the reason for the event
“John frightened Mary” is likely to be something John has done. These
verb biases are considered to be stored with the lexical entry of the verb.
In contrast, gender stereotypes are at play in sentences like “Mark kissed
the footballer because she was attractive” whose interpretation requires
overriding the expectation that footballers are male. There is evidence
that this type of information is not lexical but part of the readers’ general
world knowledge. The experiment had a 3 x 2 design, using neutral, consistent and inconsistent sentences for each of the two bias types. All sentences were plausible and contained an unambiguous pronoun referent.
The sentences were visually presented in short phrases, and comprehension questions ensured the participants’ attention. The results included a
left dominant fronto-temporal network for the comparison of language
trials against a non-word baseline, and the visual word form area, showing increased activation for the slightly longer gender stereotype sentences. There was no main effect of consistency. Significant interactions
between consistency and bias type were found bilaterally in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and parietal areas, in the left superior temporal
lobe, and in the precuneus. These results will be discussed in light of theories of language comprehension.

D34

WHEN PROSODIC PERCEPTION IS OVERRIDDEN: AN ERP STUDY OF THE
COMPOUND/PHRASAL STRESS DISTINCTION IN ENGLISH Stewart

McCauley1, Arild Hestvik1, Irene Vogel1; 1University of Delaware — The

present study examined listeners' ability to distinguish between compound and phrasal stress (e.g., hótdog vs. hot dóg) in English. Previous
research using picture-word matching tasks has demonstrated a tendency to incorrectly interpret phrasally stressed strings as compounds
(cf. Atkinson-King, 1973; Vogel & Raimy, 2002; Vogel et al., 2009). We
used event-related potentials (ERPs) to investigate whether this pattern
stems from poor perceptual sensitivity to the compound/phrasal stress
distinction, or from post-perceptual bias in behavioral response selection
(e.g., due to frequency, plausibility, or preference for analyzing strings as
lexical items). 20 adults participated. Test items were pairs of segmentally identical phrases and compounds. In each trial, an image (e.g., a
sweating canine) established context and was followed by a sentence

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session D
including either the congruent or incongruent stress pattern (e.g., hótdog
or hot dóg), resulting in a 2 (stress pattern) x 2 (congruency) within-subject design. Participants indicated whether the item depicted was named
correctly. The behavioral results replicated previous findings of greater
accuracy for compound stress. However, a right-anterior positivity was
observed for both stress patterns when incongruent with the context,
most likely in response to the prosodic expectancy violation (cf. Paulmann & Kotz, 2008). A left-anterior negativity (LAN) was observed for
incongruent compound stress, whereas incongruent phrasal stress elicited a larger LAN followed by a P600-like posterior positivity. The
LAN/P600 response may reflect the computation of unanticipated syntactic structure. The ERP results suggest that listeners are equally sensitive to both stress patterns but possess a strong post-perceptual bias for
compounds.

D35

COMMON MECHANISMS UNDERLYING LEXICAL AND SYNTACTIC
AMBIGUITY RESOLUTION Ranjani Prabhakaran1, David J. M. Kraemer1,

John C. Trueswell1, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill1; 1University of Pennsylvania —
Within the domain of language processing, an important unresolved
question is whether lexical and syntactic ambiguities are resolved via
similar mechanisms. Neuroimaging studies have implicated common
regions of prefrontal cortex (PFC) as serving a critical role in resolving
both of these types of linguistic ambiguities (e.g. Bedny, McGill, &
Thompson-Schill, 2008; Mason et al., 2003). Additionally, constraint-satisfaction approaches to language processing suggest that similar mechanisms underlie the resolution of both lexical and syntactic ambiguities
(e.g. MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994). However, the extent
to which there is correlated variation in individuals’ abilities to resolve
lexical and syntactic ambiguities has not yet been investigated. In the
current study, the same subjects were tested on separate syntactic and
lexical ambiguity resolution tasks. In the lexical ambiguity resolution
task, subjects made relatedness judgments for word pairs containing
ambiguous words with multiple meanings (Bedny et al., 2008). In order
to tap syntactic ambiguity resolution, subjects performed an eye-tracking
visual world paradigm task (Farmer et al., 2007; Trueswell et al., 1999).
In this task, subjects’ eye movements were recorded as they carried out
spoken instructions that contained a temporary syntactic ambiguity. A
significant relationship was found between subjects’ ability to resolve
ambiguities across both tasks. In particular, those subjects who had more
difficulty resolving lexical ambiguities also demonstrated greater difficulty in revising their initial interpretation of syntactically ambiguous
sentences. These results support constraint-satisfaction models of language processing and suggest that similar processing mechanisms are
employed to resolve both lexical and syntactic ambiguities.

D36

ACTIONS SPEAK LOUDER THAN WORDS: LOCATION WORDS MODULATE
THE SPATIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF REACHING MOVEMENTS Ada

Kritikos1, Nerisa Dozo1, Andrew Bayliss1, David Painter1; 1Psychology,
University of Queensland — An intriguing speculation is that the language

and motor systems are tightly interlinked. In particular, the conceptual
knowledge about the real-world attributes of words is said to be
“embodied” within the sensori-motor system (Gallese & Lakoff 2005).
There is behavioural evidence for the impact of language on action, both
in response times and in kinematic parameterisation: response times are
slowed during concurrent action and articulation. Moreover, reading
action words of the face, leg, or arm differentially activated areas along
the motor strip that either were directly adjacent to or overlapped with
areas activated by actual movement of that body part (Hauk et al 2004).
We argue, however, that if sensori-motor concepts are embodied, the
impact of language on action execution should be systematic, and specifically evident in spatial parameters: up-incongruent words should cause
hand trajectories to be lower than up-congruent words. Using motion
capture, we tested this idea by having participants reach and grasp the
top or bottom of a vertical bar, while saying top- or bottom-congruent or
incongruent action words. We recorded and analysed movement initia-

125

Poster Session D
tion time and the vertical trajectory deviation of the hand. Articulation of
top-incongruent words was associated with a lower trajectory deviation
than articulation of top-congruent. The same pattern in reverse was evident for bottom-congruent and –incongruent words. Response times,
conversely, showed generalised disruption during concurrent articulation and action. We argue that spatial attributes of action are indeed
embodied within language, and that this is most clearly measured with
spatial parameters.

Perception & Action: Audition
D37

COORDINATING SPEECH AND TAPPING: EFFECTS OF RHYTHMIC
STRUCTURE Pascale Lidji1,2,3, Michele Morningstar1, Isabelle Peretz2,

Caroline Palmer1; 1Sequence Production Laboratory, McGill University, 2Brams
Laboratory, Université de Montréal, 3Fonds National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Brussels — We investigated whether linguistic rhythm influences listeners’ sensorimotor synchronization of tapping with speech.
Sensorimotor research in music has shown that listeners tend to synchronize better with temporally regular music than with expressive music,
and that they tap slower to familiar musical styles than to unfamiliar
music. Are sensorimotor integration patterns similar when participants
coordinate their tapping with speech? We asked monolingual speakers
of French and English to tap along to the subjective beat they perceived
in French and English spoken sentences. English is generally classified as
a stress-timed language, perceived in terms of stresses equally spaced in
time, and French as a syllable-timed language (syllables are equally
spaced in time). If participants’ ability to tap in synchrony with speech is
influenced by the rhythmic differences between languages, participants
should tap more regularly with English than with French speech, irrespective of their native language. In addition, if, as in music, participants’ linguistic expertise affects their sensitivity to hierarchical
relationships, they should tap at a slower rate for sentences in their
native language than in a foreign language. Preliminary results suggest
that participants tend to tap at a slower rate to French than to English
sentences, and that both groups of speakers tap less frequently to sentences in their native language. Further acoustical analyses of the stimuli
will reveal what component of the French and English sentences (e.g. relative vowel duration, intonational phrase length) explains the effects of
linguistic rhythm on speech synchronization.

D38

HOW IS PROSODIC PROCESSING LATERALIZED IN THE BRAIN?
Jurriaan Witteman1, Niels Schiller1, Vincent Van Heuven1; 1Leiden University —

How suprasegmental (prosodic) information is processed in the brain is
still a matter of debate. A central question within this discussion is to
which extent prosodic processing is lateralized in the brain. There are
three non-mutually exclusive hypotheses regarding lateralization of prosodic processing: (1) Acoustic lateralization hypotheses state that lateralization of prosodic processing is dependent on the acoustic nature of
prosodic information (2) The functional lateralization hypothesis posits
that it is the emotional versus linguistic function of prosodic material
that drives lateralization (3) The attraction hypothesis extents the functional hypothesis by adding that the size of the prosodic unit is of importance To test the differential explanatory power of these three
hypotheses, it is crucial that they are compared in one study. Therefore,
in the present study two dichotic listening experiments were designed
that systematically varied the function of prosodic material while keeping acoustics constant for different prosodic unit sizes. Through this
design the three hypotheses of prosodic lateralization could be tested in
one study. Results showed greater right hemispheric involvement for
bigger prosodic units, in partial support of the attraction hypothesis. No
evidence was found for acoustic or functional lateralization of prosodic
processing. It is concluded that the idea of continuous close cooperation
between the two hemispheres in the processing of prosodic information

126

Perception & Action: Audition
is supported. This is in keeping with the emerging picture from the
recent literature, which suggests bi-hemispheric involvement in prosodic processing.

D39

IS THE REDUCED N1 TO SELF-GENERATED TONES AN EFFECT OF
TEMPORAL PREDICTABILITY? Kathrin Lange1; 1Heinrich Heine Universität
Düsseldorf — Self-generated stimuli are processed differently from stimuli that are externally triggered. In the auditory event-related potential
(ERP), this shows in an attenuated N1. There is, however, evidence that
the auditory N1 is also reduced if the timing of the eliciting tone is predictable versus unpredictable. Since, typically, the timing of self-generated tones is more predictable than the timing of externally triggered
tones, the present study investigated, whether the reduced N1 to selfgenerated tones can be explained by predictability alone. Participants listened to tones that were either externally triggered, self-generated by
key-presses, or preceded by visual cues. In the generated and cued conditions, tones followed the key presses or cues, respectively, after a fixed
(predictable timing) or variable delay (unpredictable timing). Consistent
with the idea that the attenuation of the N1 is related to the temporal
predictability of the stimulus, the auditory N1 was smallest in the selfgenerated predictable condition, next larger in the self-generated unpredictable condition, and largest in the externally triggered condition. Consistent with the idea that the attenuation of the N1 depends crucially on
the involvement of the motor system, an enhancement rather than a
reduction of the N1 was observed when temporal predictability was
based on a predictive cue rather than on a motor act. These findings suggest that temporal predictability only has a modulating effect on the N1
attenuation observed for self-generated tones, whereas whether or not
an attenuation is observed seems to depend crucially on how exactly
predictability is achieved.

D40

DOES PHONOLOGICAL SHORT-TERM MEMORY CAPACITY CORRELATE
WITH RHYTHMIC ABILITY? A BEHAVIOURAL AND FMRI STUDY OF
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES Jessica Grahn1, Dirk Schuit2; 1MRC Cognition

and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge UK, 2Maastricht University, The
Netherlands — Rhythmic abilities vary widely in the general population,
but little is known about the underlying causes of this variability. The
current study examines how differences in phonological short-term
memory (pSTM) and ability to detect beat structure correlate with individual differences in the ability to reproduce short, novel rhythms. Phonological STM was measured using digit span and pseudoword span
tasks, in which participants heard short strings of digits or pseudowords
and repeated them back verbally. Ability to detect beat structure was
measured using the Beat Alignment Test (BAT), which requires participants determine whether beeps played along to musical stimuli are ‘on
the beat’ or ‘off the beat’. To measure rhythm reproduction, participants
heard single presentations of rhythms that varied in length (~2-4.7 seconds), then tapped them back on a computer keyboard. Effects of musical training were covaried out of all analyses. Digit span and BAT score
both significantly correlated with the percentage of accurately reproduced rhythms. Digit span and BAT score did not significantly correlate
with each other, suggesting phonological short-term memory and ability
to detect beat structure both relate to rhythmic ability, but independently
from each other. Digit span, BAT, and rhythm reproduction scores were
used as regressors in an fMRI study in which participants performed
rhythmic and verbal auditory discrimination. Preliminary analysis indicates that activity during stimulus presentation was negatively correlated with digit span left posterior superior temporal gyrus. Positive
correlations with BAT score were found bilaterally in the superior temporal sulcus.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Audition

Poster Session D

D41

D43

BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL BASIS FOR AUDITORY-MOTOR
INTERACTIONS IN MUSIC PERFORMANCE Rachel Brown1, Joyce Chen2,

DOUBLE DISSOCIATION OF PITCH PRODUCTION AND PERCEPTION

Hollinger1,

Penhune3,

Palmer1,

Zatorre1;

Avrum
Virginia
Caroline
Robert
McGill University, 2Oxford University, 3Concordia University — Speech

1

and
music performance rely on interactions between the auditory and motor
systems to transform sounds into movements. Recent research suggests
that distinct regions of the auditory-motor network, particularly the premotor cortex, may mediate different types of auditory-motor transformations. The ventral premotor cortex (vPMC) could mediate the direct
mapping of specific sounds (e.g. musical pitches) to specific effector
movements, while the dorsal premotor cortex (dPMC) may extract
higher-order timing information from sounds to produce correctlytimed movements (indirect auditory-motor mapping). We tested the
behavioral and neural dissociation between direct and indirect auditorymotor transformations in music performance using a repetition suppression paradigm. Trained pianists underwent fMRI scanning while they
performed an auditory-motor mapping task. Pianists listened to musical
sequences, which consisted of varying pitch and timing information, and
subsequently played them back on an fMRI-compatible piano keyboard.
We manipulated the repetition of pitch and timing information in the
musical sequences across series of trials such that the pitch or timing
information either repeated (remained constant) or did not repeat
(changed). Pianists performed better on repeating versus changing pitch
and timing elements. We predict that functional activation in the vPMC
will selectively decrease in response to repeated pitch information and
that activation in the dPMC will selectively decrease in response to
repeated timing information. These predictions follow from the wellestablished finding that repeating events cause neural activity to
decrease in neurons that process those events. The results will clarify
how the auditory and motor systems integrate different types of information.

D42

AN ERP STUDY OF THE PERCEPTION OF MANDARIN TONES WITH
TEMPORAL CUES: IMPLICATIONS FOR COCHLEAR IMPLANTS Yu-ching

Kuo1, Shih-kuen Cheng2; 1Taipei Municipal University of Education, Taiwan,

2National Central University, Taiwan — Event-related

potentials (ERPs) were
recorded while normal-hearing participants listened to cochlear implant
simulations of different channel numbers, aiming to examine the relation
between the number of channels in cochlear implants and the discrimination of lexical tones in Mandarin Chinese. Participants watched silent
films while monosyllabic sounds of /yi/ in level and falling tones were
played via loud speakers in different probabilities (level tone: 87.5%; falling tone: 12.5%). The mismatch negativity (MMN) component of auditory ERPs was used as an index of the discrimination between lexical
tones under different channel numbers. The number of channels was
manipulated across blocks. In one block, the speech sounds of /yi/ in
level and falling tones recorded from a Mandarin Chinese speaker
served as the stimuli. In the other blocks, the stimuli simulated the
recorded sounds being transformed through 1-channel, 4- channel, and
8-channel cochlear implants, respectively. The MMN was observed in
the speech sound condition: the waveforms elicited by the deviant stimuli were more negative than those elicited by the standard stimuli over
frontal-central recording sites around 150-250 ms post stimulus onset. In
the cochlear implant simulations, the MMN was observed in the 8-channel conditions but not in 1-channel and 4-channel conditions. The MMN
elicited in the 8-channel condition was of smaller magnitude than that in
the speech sound condition. These findings suggest that 8 channels in
cochlear implants may provide sufficient information for the auditory
system to differentiate between lexical tones in Mandarin Chinese.

Sean Hutchins1, Isabelle Peretz1; 1International Laboratory for Brain, Music,
and Sound Research (BRAMS), Université de Montréal — Dual-route models
propose that sensory information is segregated into perception and
action streams, and may account for the perception / action dissociations found, for example, in blindsight. Recent studies have shown similar dissociations in pitch perception and production (Hafke, 2008; Loui et
al., 2008). In the current study, we focus on the pitch production and perception abilities of one congenital amusic participant, ML, who shows
very good pitch production abilities despite her severe pitch perception
deficit. We directly compare vocal pitch matching abilities to pitch perception abilities using a novel instrument-based pitch matching task.
This instrument is touch sensitive, requires no musical experience, and
can produce a continuous set of pitches. Unlike singing, it should not be
reliant on pathways directly linking musical pitch perception and action.
ML and a set of non-musicians used this instrument and their voices to
match musical pitches presented to them. Non-musicians showed very
good instrumental pitch matching, but a range of abilities in vocal pitch
matching. In contrast, ML was very impaired in instrumental pitch
matching, but was very accurate at vocal pitch matching. These results
indicate a double dissociation between vocal pitch matching, a natural
form of pitch production which utilizes action pathways, and instrumental pitch matching, which utilizes perception pathways for its comparisons. This double dissociation provides further support for a dual route
model of pitch production and perception that may correspond to the
operation of the dorsal and ventral neural pathways that relate the auditory and inferior frontal cortex, respectively.

D45

HIERARCHICAL RHYTHM PERCEPTION IN ACOUSTIC SIGNALS – AN FMRI
STUDY Eveline Geiser1, Elsa Sägesser2, Martin Meyer2, John Gabrieli1, Lutz

Jäncke2; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2University of Zurich,
Switzerland — The perception of timing is immanent in all sensory
domains. One of the most basic timing perception capacities is the distinction between temporally regular and irregular signals. Recent neuroimaging evidence suggests that the basal ganglia, supplementary
motor gyrus (SMA), and superior temporal gyrus are involved in attentional timing perception. The specific function of these brain areas for
timing perception remains unclear. The present functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiment was aimed at investigating the perception of temporal regularity in auditory signals in an implicit
(unattentional) processing task. Participants listened to tonal sequences
consisting of regular (metrical) rhythms and to tonal sequences without
a regular rhythm (control condition). We manipulated the strength of the
perceived regularity in different rhythm conditions by adding an
increasing number of temporal subdivisions to the basic beat structure.
This resulted in a parametric increase of ‘metrical hierarchies’ between
regular rhythm conditions. The subjects had to identify different pitch
changes within these tonal stimuli. Results revealed that the basal ganglia (putamen) are stronger activated in the processing of regular as
compared to irregular rhythms. Interestingly, activity in SMA increased
with stronger regularity perception. These findings suggest that BG and
SMA serve complementary roles in the perception of auditory regularity.

D46

MATURATION OF AUDITORY CORTEX THROUGH ADOLESCENCE AND ITS
RELATIONSHIP TO DETECTION OF 2-HZ FREQUENCY MODULATION

Mary Elizabeth Sutherland1,2, Robert Zatorre1,2, Pierre-Yves Hervé3, Kristina
Martinu1, Gabriel Leonard1, Kate Watkins4, Tomas Paus1,3; 1Montréal
Neurological Institute, McGill University, 2BRAMS Laboratory, 3Brain and Body
Centre, University of Nottingham, UK, 4University of Oxford — Adults
show
great variation in their aptitude for different auditory tasks, such as discriminating between foreign speech-sounds. Previous research has demonstrated that structural features of auditory cortex can predict auditory
abilities; we are interested in the maturation 2-Hz frequency-modulation

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

127

Poster Session D

Perception & Action: Audition

(FM) detection, a task thought to tap into mechanisms underlying language ability. We hypothesized that an individual’s FM threshold will
correlate with greater grey-matter density in left Heschl’s gyrus (HG),
and that this correlation will change through adolescence. To test this
hypothesis, we collected anatomical magnetic resonance imaging data
from participants who were tested and scanned at three time points: at
10, 11.5 and 13 years of age (n=~45). Participants judged which of two
tones contained FM; their threshold was calculated based on the geometric mean of several trials. Using voxel-based morphometry, we found
that FM threshold was significantly correlated with grey matter in left
HG pre-puberty (lower thresholds were associated with greater concentration of grey matter); this correlation weakened after the onset of
puberty (ages 11 and 13). Our results confirm that the structure of the
auditory cortex can predict temporal processing abilities, in particular
that grey-matter density in left HG can predict 2-Hz FM detection
threshold. This ability is dependent on the processing of rapidly changing sounds, a skill believed necessary for speech processing. The weaker
correlation between these regions and 2-Hz FM processing at age 11.5
and 13 may indicate the effect of maturational processes that occur during adolescence on this particular brain-behaviour relationship.

D47

CATEGORY SPECIFICITIES IN THE NEURAL PROCESSING
ENVIRONMENTAL SOUNDS: ACTIVATION-BASED MAPPING Bruno

OF

Giordano1, Stephen McAdams1, Robert Zatorre2,3,4, Niko Kriegeskorte5, Pascal
Belin4,2; 1CIRMMT - Schulich School of Music, McGill University, 2BRAMS
Laboratories, Universite de Montréal & McGill University, 3Montréal
Neurological Institute, McGill University, 4Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging,
University of Glasgow, 5MRC-CBU, Cambridge — Two drawbacks are common among previous studies on the category-specific processing for
environmental sounds. Firstly, subjective choices are made relative to
the reference categories against which a specificity is assessed (e.g., nonliving action sounds contrasted against living vocal sounds but not nonliving nonaction sounds). Secondly, potential confounds are seldom
controlled (e.g., low-level factors such as stimulus duration or higherlevel factors like semantic heterogeneity). We addressed these issues in a
study on 32 3-sec highly heterogeneous environmental sounds. Stimuli
spanned several different categories: living vs. nonliving; human vs.
nonhuman; vocal vs. nonvocal; action vs. nonaction. Categories were
equalized in sound duration and level, identifiability and semantic heterogeneity. In an event-related design, 20 right-handed, normal-hearing
participants responded to rare subsequent repetitions of a stimulus randomly selected from the set. Functional scans (2X2X2.75 mm) were
acquired at 3T. Contrasts were carried out within a group-level randomeffects model. As expected, all sounds activated bilaterally the auditory
cortices. Strong category-specificities for human and nonhuman vocal
sounds emerged in the right TVA and in the left STG, independently of
the reference category. Additional significant category specificities
appeared to be driven by the vocal vs. nonvocal distinction (e.g., living
vs. nonliving). All of the contrasts that did not include vocal sounds
were nonsignificant (e.g., nonliving action sounds vs. nonliving nonaction sounds such as thunder). We speculate that the cortical discrimination of vocal and nonvocal sounds is far more robust than that for any
other category of environmental sounds.

D48

CATEGORY-SPECIFICITIES IN THE NEURAL PROCESSING OF
ENVIRONMENTAL SOUNDS: INFORMATION-BASED MAPPING Pascal

Belin1,2, Bruno Giordano3, Stephen McAdams3, Niko Kriegeskorte4, Robert
Zatorre2,5; 1Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, University of Glasgow, 2BRAMS
Laboratories, Universite de Montréal & McGill University, 3Schulich School of
Music, McGill University, 4MRC-CBU, Cambridge, 5Montréal Neurological
Institute, McGill University — In a companion poster, we investigated the

activation-based mapping of a set of 32 heterogeneous environmental
sounds. Here we tested for category-specificities within the framework
of Representational Similarity Analysis (RSA, Kriegeskorte et al. (2009)

128

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience). This multivariate statistics approach
has the potential to reveal category specificities unconstrained by prior
assumptions, and to relate the pattern of neural activity to acoustical and
behavioural data for these sound stimuli 20 subjects were scanned with
3T fMRI in two functional runs: i) a 10-min functional localizer of the
temporal voice areas (TVA) (cf. http://vnl.psy.gla.ac.uk) contrasting
vocal vs. non-vocal sounds to individually localize primary auditory cortex (A1) and the TVA; ii) a 40-min scan during which each of 32 3-sec
long auditory stimuli were presented 16 times each in a pseudo-random
order, while subjects were performing a 1-back task. Analyses were performed using SPM8 and ad-hoc matlab scripts. After scanning, subjects
rated all possible pairs of stimuli on their perceived dissimilarity. A
group-level random-effects map was generated for each of the 32 sound
stimuli. These were used to build neural representational dissimilarity
matrices (RDM) at different stages of the cortical processing architecture:
4 locations of auditory cortex: left and right A1, and left and right TVA.
These neural RDMs are in turn related to corresponding acoustical and
behavioural RDMs. Preliminary results indicate that multivariate patterns of response to the 32 stimuli in A1 contain information sufficient to
discriminate living vs. non-living sounds, although the univariate-level
response is not different.

D49

“VIRTUAL LESION” OF THE LEFT VENTRAL PREMOTOR CORTEX DISRUPTS
PREFERENCE FOR MUSICAL BEAT RATE Katja Kornysheva1, Anne-Marike
Schiffer1, Ricarda I. Schubotz1; 1Max Planck Institute for Neurological
Research — Although a universal human behavior, from a neuroscientific

perspective, it remains unclear why people often feel the urge to move
their body or hum to a musical beat. A preceding functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) study (Kornysheva et al. 2009) revealed an
activity boost in the left ventral premotor cortex (PMv), particularly,
when subjects listened to rhythms with a preferred beat rate (tempo) – a
principal cue when it comes to synchronizing body movements to music.
Left PMv activity positively correlated with how strongly the subjects
preferred a particular tempo. However, it remained uncertain whether
left PMv activity is causally relevant for tempo preference strength. To
directly address this question, we conducted an offline repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) study with a new group of subjects.
0.9 Hz rTMS (900 pulses) was applied over the left ventral premotor cortex and a control site to temporarily disrupt activity in the stimulated
areas. Results demonstrate that activity in the left PMv determines the
strength of tempo preference. This effect was specific to the preference
for tempo and could not be explained by a general impairment of tempo
recognition. To our knowledge, this is the first study to provide evidence
for the influence of neural activity on musical tempo preferences. We
suggest that the left PMv, being a node of audiomotor integration, drives
the urge to move or hum to a musical beat.

D50

CEREBRAL ACTIVITY IN THE TEMPORAL VOICE AREAS (TVA) PREDICTS
MEMORY FOR VOICES Rebecca Watson1, Frances Crabbe1, Ileana

Quinones2, Ian Charest1, Patricia Bestelmeyer1, Marianne Latinus1, Pascal
Belin1; 1Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, University of Glasgow, United
Kingdom, 2Cuban Neuroscience Centre, Havana, Cuba — BACKGROUND:
The Temporal Voice Areas (TVA) of the auditory cortex are known to
respond selectively to human voices, but their relation to voice perception remains unclear. Here we investigate the relation between cerebral
activity in the TVA and performance at voice perception tasks.
METHOD: 36 participants were subjected to the Voice Perception
Assessment (VPA), a short battery of voice and auditory perception
tasks, and were scanned in a 10-min TVA functional localiser on a 3T Siemens Trio fMRI scanner. TVA localiser scans were analysed using SPM5,
and the related scores of the participants included as separate covariates.
The VPA and TVA localiser are available at: http://vnl.psy.gla.ac.uk.
RESULTS: We found a highly significant correlation between TVA
response to sounds (both vocal and non-vocal) and immediate recall per-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Audition
formance for the voice memory subtest of the VPA (global maximum:
T34 = 3.97, p < 0.0001 (uncorr.)). Notably, the relation between auditory
cortical activity and performance at a control task – memory for bells—
was much less significant (global maxima: T34 = 2.46, p < 0.02 (uncorr.).
Additionally, this region was outwith the TVA. CONCLUSION: Results
indicate that inter-individual variation in TVA activity explains a significant proportion of the variance in voice memory performance. They
have strong implications for the functional role of the TVA.

D51

MUSICAL TRAINING ENHANCES IMPLICIT LEARNING OF COMPLEX TONE
PATTERNS – AN MEG STUDY Sibylle C. Herholz1, Bastiaan Boh1, Claudia

Lappe1, Christo Pantev1; 1Institute for Biomagnetism and Biosignalanalysis,
University of Muenster, Germany — The separation of meaningful sound
patterns from random noise in the acoustical environment is an important aspect of auditory processing. The aim of the present studies was to
investigate the effect of long-term musical training on the encoding of
higher-order regularities within short-term auditory memory from a global context within human auditory cortex. By means of magnetoencephalography (MEG) activity within auditory cortex was recorded in two
studies using auditory oddball paradigms. Mismatch negativity (MMN)
responses to violations of a predominant sequential tone pattern, which
indicate that the pattern was encoded in auditory short-term memory, as
well as the development of the pattern MMN over time were compared
between musicians and nonmusicians. Despite the relatively low probability of the pattern within the stimulation sequence, violations of the
pattern elicited a pattern MMN response in both groups. This response
was stronger and more left-lateralized in musicians compared to nonmusicians. Only in musicians a constant increase of the pattern MMN
amplitude was observed over the course of the measurement session.
The findings indicate that higher-order regularities contained in tone
sequences are encoded in auditory cortex on a very early level of processing, based on probabilistic information extracted from the global
context. The observed leftward lateralization of the effect in musicians
might be a result of cortical reorganization due to their long-term musical training. The amplitude increase over time indicates an increasingly
stable neuronal representation of the regularity and enhanced implicit
short-term learning in musicians.

D52

MAPPING PERIODICITY IN HUMAN AUDITORY CORTEX USING REPEATED
FROZEN NOISE Paul Fillmore1, I-Hui Hsieh2, L. Tugan Muftuler1, Kourosh

Saberi1, Gregory Hickok1; 1University of California, Irvine, 2National Central
University, Taiwan — Generally, the fundamental organization of the audi-

tory system is thought to be centered around the principle of tonotopy,
or place mapping based on sound frequency. However, since frequency
cannot be represented without a period of time over which to integrate
it, time must also be a fundamental factor in sound organization. Indeed,
animal work has demonstrated duration tuning, and has suggested a
periodotopic organization orthogonal to tonotopy. Though many studies
have examined temporal organization in the human auditory system, a
primary focus has been on differences between the two cerebral hemispheres, and less is known about general organization within-hemisphere. To this end, we conducted an fMRI study using repeated frozen,
or periodic, noise, covering timescales from 2.5 – 40 Hz (25, 50, 100, 200
and 400 ms repeat durations) to investigate the neural regions involved
in periodicity coding within each hemisphere. Though each duration
activated primary auditory cortex well, each had differing regions of
maximal activation throughout the temporal plane. Additionally, we
found regions in the superior temporal gyrus bilaterally, just anterior to
primary auditory cortex, which responded linearly to increasing period
duration.

Poster Session D
D53

SPECTRAL FEATURES OF SPEECH DRIVE THE INDUCED EEG BRAIN
RESPONSE: PARAMETRIC CHANGES IN ALPHA- AND THETA-BAND
POWER Jonas Obleser1, Nathan Weisz2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human

Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2University of Konstanz,
Konstanz, Germany — This study investigates the oscillatory brain dynamics in human EEG in response to acoustic features of speech. We specifically hypothesized that an event-related suppression of alpha power
should reflect the effortful yet successful comprehension under adverse
listening conditions. Spectral and temporal features of acoustically
degraded words were parametrically varied. We analysed evoked and
induced (non-phase-locked) EEG responses in 24 healthy German participants, who listened and rated comprehensibility after each trial. Trials
were grouped according to spectral detail (2-, 4-, 8-, 16-band vocoding)
or temporal detail (2-, 4-, 8-, 16-Hz lowpass filtering of the vocoding
envelopes). Parametric t-statistics were run on wavelet transforms,
flanked by conventional evoked potential analyses. Rating scores and
EEG measures confirmed the predominance of spectral detail in comprehension. The evoked N100 amplitude to word onsets showed a linear
increase with less spectral detail (i.e., decreasing intelligibility). In turn, a
permutation test for time-frequency-electrode clusters in the induced
brain oscillations revealed a circumscribed left-posterior theta (4--6 Hz)
enhancement, showing a linear increase of theta power with increasing
intelligibility. This was followed by a first left-lateralized, then broadening cluster of alpha suppression (8--13 Hz) from 600--900 ms after word
onset: Alpha power appeared linearly suppressed for more spectral
detail in a trial, and hence a more likely success of comprehension.
Results tie suppression of alpha as well as brief increases of left-scalp
theta activity to speech intelligibility and offer a new link between
speech perception mechanisms and oscillatory brain dynamics.

D54

CONGENITAL AMUSIA : PERCEPTION WITHOUT AWARENESS FOR SMALL
PITCH DIFFERENCES Patricia Moreau1, Pierre Jolicoeur1, Isabelle Peretz1;

1BRAMS, CERNEC, Université de Montréal — Congenital amusia is a lifelong disorder characterised by a difficulty in appreciating and producing
music despite normal intelligence and hearing. Behavioral data have
indicated that congenital amusia originates from a deficit in fine-grained
pitch discrimination. A recent electrophysiology study has demonstrated that this deficit can be traced to an abnormal right-lateralised N2P3 brain response for pitch differences smaller than a semitone. However, a recent electrophysiological study indicates that the amusic brain
can detect quarter-tone changes in melodies without awareness, by
exhibiting a normal mismatch negativity (MMN) brain response. Here,
we re-examine the event-related MMN and P3 components in an acoustical context to investigate further the pitch discrimination deficit underlying congenital amusia. In two separate recording periods, we
measured the MMN and the P3 to tones that deviated by a quartertone
and a whole tone from a repeated standard tone. The results show a normal MMN but no P3 for the small pitch differences. These results indicate that the amusic brain responds to small pitch differences at a preattentive level of processing, revealed by a normal MMN, but is unable
to detect those same pitch differences consciously at a later attentive
level of processing, inferred from the absence of the P3. The results are
consistent with the idea that the auditory cortex of amusic individuals is
functioning normally and that their music perception deficit results from
an abnormal connectivity with the inferior frontal cortex.

D55

NEURAL SYNCHRONIZATION AND STOCHASTIC RESONANCE IN THE 40HZ TRANSIENT RESPONSE Lawrence Ward1, Shannon Maclean1, Hiroshi

Ueda1, Keiichi Kitajo2, Aaron Kirschner1, Nicolas Thorne1; 1University of British
Columbia, 2Riken Brain Science Institute — Neural synchronization is a
mechanism whereby functionally specific brain regions establish transient networks for perception, cognition, and action. Direct addition of
weak noise (fast random fluctuations) to various neural systems

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

129

Poster Session D
enhances synchronization through the mechanism of stochastic resonance (SR). Moreover, SR also occurs in human perception, cognition,
and action. We speculated that SR-mediated neural synchronization in
auditory and other areas is responsible for behavioural SR. To test this
we measured the 40-Hz transient response of the human auditory cortex
to brief pure tones. This response arises when the ongoing, randomphase, 40-Hz activity of a group of tuned neurons in the auditory cortex
becomes synchronized in response to the onset of an above-threshold
sound at their “preferred” frequency. We presented a stream of nearthreshold standard sounds (5 dB SL at 500 or 1000 Hz) in various levels
of added broad-band noise (zero, and -5 dB SL to 20 dB SL) and measured subjects’ 40-Hz response to the standards in a deviant-detection
(deviants 20 dB SL) paradigm using high-density EEG. We used independent component analysis and dipole fitting (EEGLAB) to locate neural sources of the 40-Hz response in both auditory cortices, left posterior
cingulate, and left orbitofrontal cortex. We found in all of these areas an
enhanced 40-Hz response at low levels of added auditory noise, thus
demonstrating behaviourally-relevant neural SR. Moreover, long-distance synchronization between pairs of these regions increased both during and after the 40-Hz response for the same noise levels, implying that
SR facilitates formation of networks of brain regions.

D56

COMMON IPS ACTIVATION FOR TWO TYPES OF MENTAL MUSICAL
TRANSFORMATION Nicholas E. V. Foster1,2, Andrea R. Halpern3, Robert J.

Zatorre1,2; 1Montréal Neurological Institute, McGill University, 2International
Laboratory for Brain, Music, and Sound Research (BRAMS), 3Bucknell
University — Visuospatial transformation tasks like mental rotation are

associated with BOLD activation in the anterior intraparietal sulcus
(IPS). In previous studies in separate groups, we found similar IPS activity during two mental musical transformation tasks: temporal reversal
and transposition from one pitch level to another. These two transformations are quite different, but we hypothesized that they may rely on a
common IPS mechanism for systematic transformation from one reference frame to another. In this experiment we sought to determine
whether both of these auditory transformations recruit overlapping subregions of IPS in individual subjects. Twelve highly trained musicians
underwent fMRI while performing same/different judgments on short
melody pairs, where the second melody was either untransformed,
reversed in time or transposed in pitch. We performed a per-subject conjunction analysis on the contrasts (reversed - untransformed) and (transposed - untransformed) and found common bilateral activation in
anterior IPS. This finding supports the hypothesis that the IPS performs
transformations in both time and frequency, the two parameters upon
which auditory processing depends. We were also interested in the
behavioral correlates of transposition magnitude, since in visuospatial
rotation tasks, correlations between rotation magnitude and accuracy
have been observed. We predicted that greater transposition distance
would be associated with elevated error rates, and that the musical key
distance (i.e. number of shared pitches between the original and transposed key) would have more influence than the pitch interval distance.
We found that the key distance was indeed more predictive of behavior,
except for the smallest pitch distance (1-semitone).

D57

WHY MUSIC MOVES US: PARALLEL MOTOR NETWORKS IN ? AND HIGH-?
NEUROMAGNETIC OSCILLATION ACTIVATED ACCORDING TO THE TEMPO
OF REGULARLY REPEATING SOUNDS Takako Fujioka1,2, Laurel Trainor2,1,

Edward Large3, Bernhard Ross1; 1Rotman Research Institute, University of
Toronto, 2McMaster University, 3Florida Atlantic University — Moving in synchrony with music or a periodic rhythm as in dancing is easy for most
people, even in those with Parkinson’s Disease patients, although the
underlying mechanism is not well understood. Based on hypotheses
about movement-related neural oscillations, we examined beta- (1325Hz) and high-gamma-band (70-90Hz) activity in magnetoencephalography (MEG) recorded from healthy young adults during passive listen-

130

Perception & Action: Audition
ing to isochronous tones with an inter-onset interval of either 390, 585 or
780 ms. The non-phase-locked beta power in auditory and motor-related
cortices decreased after each tone, followed by an increase, replicating
each stimulus rate. A brief burst of phase-locked high-gamma activity
was found 36 ms after stimulus onset in all conditions in thalamus, hippocampus, auditory cortex and anterior cingulate. We propose that two
parallel basal-ganglia-thalamo-cortical loops for beta and high-gamma
oscillations are involved in auditory-motor synchronization, such that
the beta-high-gamma interaction facilitates precise timing encoding and
predictive movement initiation.

D58

CONGENITAL AMUSIA IN CHILDHOOD: A CASE STUDY Marie-Andrée

Lebrun1,2, Patricia Moreau1,2, Andréane McNally-Gagnon1,2, Geneviève
Mignault Goulet1,2, Isabelle Peretz1,2; 1University of Montréal, 2The
International Laboratory for BRAin Music and Sound (BRAMS) — Congenital
amusia is a developmental disorder characterized by impaired pitch perception that compromises music perception and production. This disorder has been documented in the adult population only. Here, we report
the first documented case of congenital amusia in childhood. AS is a tenyear-old girl who was referred to us by her choir director for persisting
difficulties in singing. We tested her with a new version of the Montreal
Battery for the Evaluation of Amusia (MBEA) for children that confirmed AS’s severe problems in discrimination and memory of melodies.
She cannot detect pitch changes that are smaller than a quarter of a semitone, whereas a majority of children of her age can. This pitch disorder
may account for the fact that AS sings out of tune but relatively in time.
AS’s attentional and intellectual functions are normal. Thus, AS represents a clear case of musical disorders in childhood that cannot be
explained by peripheral hearing loss, lack of exposure, or intellectual
deficiency.

D59

2D:4D DIGIT RATIO FAILS TO PREDICT COGNITIVE ABILITY IN FOUR
DOMAINS Mark Schmidt1, Tiffany Livingston1, Amanda Gesselman1,

Cassandra Hranek1; 1Columbus State University — The length ratio of the
2nd and 4th digits (2D:4D) is sexually dimorphic, with males having a
smaller ratio than females. The dimorphism is believed to be induced by
prenatal testosterone exposure, and has been popularized as an indicator
of performance in a variety of areas including sports, financial trading,
and cognitive ability. It has been linked to cognitive sex differences in
some studies. Males typically outperform females in tests of right hemispheric function (e.g., mental rotation) while females typically outperform males in tests of left hemispheric function (e.g., verbal fluency). It
has been suggested that testosterone exposure in utero slows development of the left hemisphere, resulting in a more highly developed right
hemisphere. The goal of the present study was to further investigate the
putative relationship between the 2D:4D ratio and sex-linked cognitive
abilities. Digit ratios were correlated with performance on mental rotation, verbal fluency, and spatial memory tasks (N = 85) and a numerosity
perception task (N = 30). As expected, males had a significantly smaller
2D:4D ratio than females. However, 2D:4D did not predict performance
in either verbal fluency, visual spatial memory, or numerosity perception. Digit ratio did predict performance in mental rotation, but the correlation was positive, with lower digit ratios associated with lower
mental rotation scores. These results suggest that 2D:4D is not a reliable
predictor of cognitive ability in tasks where sex-differences are typically
found, nor in numerosity perception, an ability in which sex differences
have not previously been documented.
D60

NEURAL ACTIVITY LOCALIZATION BY PREDICTIVE MAPPING BETWEEN
IMAGING MODALITIES Yaroslav Halchenko1, Michael Hanke1, James

Haxby1, Stephen Hanson2, Christoph Herrmann3; 1Dartmouth College,
2
Rutgers University, 3University of Magdeburg — There is growing interest in
combining signals from multiple neuroimaging data modalities -- often
with the primary goal of achieving superior temporal and spatial resolu-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Audition
tion. Here we show that an analysis of data from multiple imaging
modalities also offers a way to segregate neural information from physiological and acquisition noise. Given the notion that both modalities
reflect the same underlying neural signal, we are suggesting a novel
methodology to reliably localize brain areas engaged in neural processing, by constructing a predictive mapping of data from one modality
(electroencephalography, EEG) into the other (functional magnetic resonance imaging, fMRI). Neural activity is localized where a significant
proportion of the fMRI signal can be reliably reconstructed (assessed via
cross-validation) solely from simultaneously recorded EEG data, hence
the signal appears to be common to both imaging modalities. We validate this method on artificial and real data from an auditory experiment.
We show that areas engaged in the auditory tasks extend beyond brain
activity foci detected with unimodal model-driven approaches such as
general linear model (GLM). Moreover, a sensitivity analysis of the
cross-modal mapping allowed us to associate particular brain areas with
certain features of EEG signal (e.g. alpha-rhythm). The mapping neither
relies on an explicit specification of experimental conditions, nor does it
impose strict EEG/fMRI modeling assumptions. Thus we suspect that
our approach is especially suitable for the analysis of experiments with
loose designs (e.g. resting state studies). Furthermore, the predictive
mapping can also be used for EEG-guided temporal upsampling and filtering of fMRI.

D61

ELECTRICAL BRAIN RESPONSES TO PITCH CHANGES IN CHILDREN WITH
CONGENITAL AMUSIA Geneviève Mignault1, Patricia Moreau1, Isabelle
1 1

Peretz ; BRAMS, University of Montréal — Congenital amusia is a disorder
that affects mainly the processing of pitch, preventing individuals from
developing basic musical skills. It has been shown that this disorder can
be traced down to an abnormal right-lateralized N2-P3 brain response
elicited by pitch changes smaller than a semitone. However, it has also
been demonstrated that the amusic brain processes these same pitch differences accurately at a preconscious level, as reflected by the eventrelated mismatch negativity (MMN). These results, obtained with adult
amusics, suggest that the pitch deficit found in congenital amusia may
not originate from a neural anomaly in the auditory cortex but rather
later, along the temporo-frontal auditory pathway. The brain responses
to pitch changes in congenital amusia have not yet been studied in children. In this study, we examined the brain responses to pitch in amusic
children. First, we examined these responses at a pre-conscious level,
with a MMN paradigm. We further examined the conscious detection of
pitch changes with an oddball task paradigm. We compared 8 amusic
children with 10 normal children. The results reveal a pattern of electrical brain responses that is comparable to the one obtained in adult amusics. That is, we found an abnormal right-lateralized P3 elicited by pitch
changes smaller than a semitone, but a normal mismatch negativity for
the same pitch changes. This indicates that the neurofunctional origins of
the pitch deficit found in congenital amusia in children are similar to
those observed later in life, at the adult age.

D62

FUNCTIONAL MRI AND PSYCHOPHYSICAL INVESTIGATIONS OF
FREQUENCY-MODULATION SELECTIVITY IN HUMAN AUDITORY
CORTEX I-Hui Hsieh1, Paul Fillmore2, L. Tugan Muftuler2, Gregory Hickok2,

Kourosh Saberi2; 1National Central University-Taiwan, 2University of CaliforniaIrvine — Evidence from animal neurophysiology and human psychophys-

ics suggest that the primate cortical auditory system is well equipped for
identifying the direction of frequency-modulated (FM) sweeps, a critical
acoustic component of speech and other conspecific communication signals. Though the notion that there exist specialized populations of FM
direction-sensitive neurons in the human cortex is highly plausible, no
direct neuroimaging or psychophysical evidence of such populations
exists. We investigated the ability of the auditory system to selectively
code FM sweep direction in both psychophysical and fMRI experiments.
Among our psychophysical findings were counterintuitive reversals in
sound-source localization induced by reversing the FM sweep direction

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session D
(up or down in frequency). These reversals were uniquely associated
with FM sweeps, directly dependent on sweep direction, and not
observed with spectrally stationary stimuli. These findings were complemented with an fMRI experiment that used multivariate pattern analysis
to assess whether neurons in the human auditory cortex can discriminate
upward from downward frequency sweeps. Stimuli were brief (e.g., 100
ms) multitone logarithmic FM sweeps consisting of a 5-tone complex
with 1/3 octave spacing. In a sparse-sampling procedure, speakers of
Mandarin Chinese determined the direction of successive presentations
of FM sweep complexes in a random-block design. Substantial activation
was observed in primary auditory cortex, as well as differing levels of
maximum activity in several other core auditory regions including the
superior temporal gyrus, superior temporal sulcus, and sylvian fissure.
Findings have implications for speech encoding and lexical distinction in
tonal-language processing.

D63

AUDITORY AND COGNITIVE DEFICITS ASSOCIATED WITH ACQUIRED
AMUSIA AFTER STROKE: A MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY AND
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL FOLLOW-UP STUDY Teppo Särkämö1,2, Mari

Tervaniemi1,2, Elina Pihko3,4; 1Cognitive Brain Research Unit, University of
Helsinki, Finland, 2Finnish Centre of Excellence in Interdisciplinary Music
Research, University of Jyväskylä, Finland, 3BioMag Laboratory, Helsinki
University Central Hospital, Finland, 4Low Temperature Laboratory, Helsinki
University of Technology, Finland — Acquired amusia is a common disorder
after damage to the middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory. However, its
neural mechanisms, especially the relative contribution of perceptual
and cognitive factors, are still unclear. We studied auditory and cognitive processing in the amusic brain by performing magnetoencephalography (MEG) measurements of neural sound discrimination, indexed by
the magnetic mismatch negativity (MMNm) response to frequency and
duration changes, and neuropsychological testing in 53 patients with a
left (n = 24) or right (n = 29) hemisphere MCA stroke 1 week, 3 months,
and 6 months after the stroke. Amusia was evaluated using the Montreal
Battery of Evaluation of Amusia (MBEA). We found that amusia caused
by right hemisphere damage (RHD), especially to temporal and frontal
areas, was more severe than amusia caused by left hemisphere damage
(LHD). Correlation analysis also showed that the severity of amusia was
related to weaker MMNm responses only in amusic RHD patients.
Within the RHD subgroup, the amusic patients who had damage to the
auditory cortex (AC) showed worse recovery on the MBEA as well as
weaker MMNm responses than non-amusic patients or amusic patients
without AC damage throughout the 6-month follow-up. In contrast,
amusic patients both with and without AC damage performed worse
than non-amusic patients on tests of working memory, cognitive flexibility, and attention throughout the follow-up period. These findings suggest domain-general cognitive deficits to be the primary mechanism
underlying amusia without AC damage whereas amusia with AC damage is associated with both auditory and cognitive deficits.

D64

DEVELOPMENT OF CORTICAL REPRESENTATIONS FOR SOUND LOCATION
IN INFANCY Laurel Trainor1, Ranil Sonnadara1,2, Kristin Tonus1; 1McMaster

University, 2University of Toronto — The ability to localize sounds enables us
to locate objects in space, and also helps us identify objects through creating separate representations for simultaneously-sounding objects. We
have shown that in adults event-related potential responses derived
from EEG recordings to a change in sound location as measured by the
mismatch negativity (MMN) component occur earlier than for changes
in other sound features such as pitch and duration (Sonnadara et al.,
2006). Thus, one might predict early developmental emergence of MMN
for changes in sound location. We presented 5- 8- and 12-month-old
infants with a frozen burst of white noise (200 ms) from in front (80% of
2400 trials) and from 90o to the right and left (10% each). In previous
work we have shown that mismatch responses to pitch changes shift
between 3 and 6 months of age from an increase in a slow positive wave

131

Poster Session D
(not present in adults) to an adult-like negative wave (He et al., 2007,
2009). If this shift reflects the general maturation of auditory cortex,
responses to changes in sound location should follow the same developmental trajectory. Contrary to expectations, we measured a significant
immature positive mismatch response and no adult-like MMN at any of
the ages tested. We conclude that sound localization mechanisms remain
immature past 12 months. Perhaps it is advantageous to maintain immaturity while interaural time and intensity cues to location change dramatically as head size increases rapidly over the first year after birth.

D65

CONFUSING YOUR MOTHER FOR A HORSE? AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF
PURE TONE PITCH DISCRIMINATION IN NATIVE SPEAKERS AND SECOND
LANGUAGE LEARNERS OF A TONAL LANGUAGE Mai-Anh Tran Ngoc1,
Ryan J. Giuliano1, Nicole Y. Y. Wicha1,2; 1University of Texas, San Antonio,
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio — Languages
are

2

classified as “tonal” when pitch conveys word meaning. The use of lexical tone in one’s native language elicits behavior and brain differences to
perceived lexical tone and non-speech tones compared to non-tone language (nTL) speakers. In Experiment 1, we explored whether a person’s
ability to discriminate between pairs of non-speech tones would be
affected by native tone-speaking experience (tone vs. non-tone speakers).
In Experiment 2, we examined whether any similarities could be
observed in beginner learners of Mandarin Chinese (learners vs. nonlearners). Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) were recorded while participants with minimal musical experience listened to pairs of non-speech
tones and determined by button press if the tones differed or not. Tone
language (TL) speakers were more accurate than nTL at discriminating
change versus no-change trials at several levels of pitch change, while
exhibiting larger P1 amplitude and earlier peak latencies for the N1 and
P300, indicating facilitated perceptual processing of pitch as compared
to nTL. Although behaviorally there was no difference between learners
and non-learners, learners elicited smaller P300s to pitch change trials
after a month of Mandarin coursework than before exposure to the language, whereas no significant change was observed in non-learners over
the same period. Interestingly, the training-related decrease in P300
amplitude observed for learners paralleled that elicited by TL relative to
nTL, suggesting facilitation in the categorization processes indexed by
the P300. Overall, the findings indicate that experience with a tone language can impact both early bottom-up and later top-down processes for
discriminating non-linguistic tones.

D66

IDENTIFICATION OF A NOVEL PSYCHOPHYSICAL PHENOMENON WITH
TONE INTERVALS Yune-Sang Lee1, Jay Hull1, Richard Granger1; 1Dartmouth
College, Hanver, NH — People predominantly have very poor absolute
pitch (ability to identify a tone frequency) but very good relative pitch
(intervals between two tones). It has long been observed that melodies (>
two tones) are better recognized than two-tone intervals, but it remains
unknown what features render melodies more readily recognized than
intervals. We tested two simple extensions of intervals: (i) elongating the
duration of the interval’s two tones, or (ii) adding repetitions of the two
tones. The only difference is that the tones are continuous in (i) whereas
silent gaps are interposed between tone repetitions in (ii): (i) long-C –
long-E; vs. (ii) short-C – short-C – short-E – short-E. Subjects were presented with two intervals, either major 3rds or perfect 4ths transposed to
any of the 12 keys, and were asked whether the sequences (regardless of
key) were the same or different. For interval transpositions that were difficult to match, continuous note extension (i) resulted in slight recognition improvement. In contrast, note repetition (ii) yielded large and
significant recognition improvement. Most subjects also reported a subjective phenomenological difference between conditions i and ii. Since
the conditions are identical except for the presence of gaps between the
notes, it is presumably the presence of new note “attacks” that triggers
the substantial measured recognition improvement. We forward the
finding as a novel primary psychophysical phenomenon: adding gaps to

132

Perception & Action: Audition
tone sequences of identical duration causes the sequence to become significantly easier to recognize, and to become subjectively perceived as
melodic.

D67

DECODING THE REPRESENTATION OF COMPLEX SOUNDS IN THE BRAIN
WITH MACHINE LEARNING Lysiane Bouchard1, Marc Schönwiesner1,

Douglas Eck1, Pascal Vincent1; 1Université de Montréal — The application of

machine learning classifiers to brain imaging data is a growing trend.
These classifiers uses information in the distributed pattern of voxels to
detect and categorize different brain states. Conventional fMRI analysis
treats these patterns as unwanted noise. Recently, Kamitani & Tong
(2005) located orientation filters in the human primary visual cortex (V1)
using fMRI. Neurons in V1 capture spatial brightness modulations in
images projected onto the retina. The authors trained a classifier that
uses linear combinations of voxel responses to decode which modulation
was perceived by the subject. The existence of analogous modulation filters for spectral and temporal modulations in sound has been proposed
in the auditory system. In order to investigate this assumption, we use
fMRI recordings of brain responses of 7 subjects listening to 49 different
spectrotemporal modulations. We analyze the data by applying and
comparing several standard machine learning classification algorithms,
i.e. support vector machines, naïve Gaussian models and sparse logistic
regression (LASSO). We construct classifiers that decode the modulations in the sounds presented to the subjects and identify regions of
auditory cortex that encode these spectrotemporal features. A sideline of
this project is the development of new machine learning algorithms specialized for neuroimaging.

D68

EXAMINING THE TEMPORAL REPRESENTATION OF PITCH IN AUDITORY
CORTEX Blake Butler1, Laurel Trainor1; 1McMaster University — Pitch
is
derived in the auditory system through complex spectrotemporal processing involving both spatial and temporal mechanisms. Although the
temporal mechanism is particularly important for pitch perception in
adult listeners, little is known about its function or development. The
current study evaluates the temporal representation of pitch at the cortical level in adults using EEG and iterated rippled noise (IRN). The IRN
samples consisted of a segment of frozen white noise, repeated in 5 and 6
ms intervals to create 450 ms sounds with 200 and 167 Hz pitch sensations, respectively. The stimuli were high pass filtered to remove the
resolvable harmonics. On 85% of trials (standards) the 167 Hz sound was
presented, while the remaining trials (deviants) consisted of the 200 Hz
sound. EEG waveforms were collected and a significant mismatch negativity (MMN) component was found in response to occasional changes
in the perceived pitch of the IRN. This response was shown to be modulated to some degree by attention. MMN is thought to reflect the updating of auditory sensory memory traces and indicates that adults were
able to discriminate the pitches of the two IRN stimuli. Since both stimuli
contained information in the same spectral range, and there were no
resolvable harmonics present, the brain must have based this pitch sensation largely on the temporal information coded in the IRN stimuli. We
are now conducting this experiment with infants in order to investigate
the development of the temporal mechanism for pitch.

D69

THE INFLUENCES OF TASK LOAD AND PREPARATION ON ENCODING AND
Dyson1;
RETRIEVAL FOLLOWING COMPLEX AUDITORY SCENES Ben
1

Ryerson University — In order to successfully interact within our environment, we must fine-tune our perceptual and memorial systems to cope
with ever-changing demands. Task load is a critical influence on processing but the degree to which increases in task load may be offset by preparation is less well understood. The current data provide insights into
the neural correlates of working memory by examining variations in
scalp recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) as a function of both
encoding selectivity (cued, uncued) and retrieval load (0, 1, 2) following
complex auditory scene presentation. When encoding the auditory
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Audition
scene, neural responses in uncued conditions were critical in establishing
that the pattern of data for N2 and P3 amplitude were best characterised
by the degree of perceptual selectivity rather than magnitude of task
load. When retrieving information from the auditory scene on the basis
of visual prompts, an effect of cueing in P2 amplitude was followed by
an effect of load in P3 amplitude, with the effects of task load being offset
by cueing at later stages of retrieval. The reversal of the direction of ERP
modulation between encoding and retrieval stages may reflect the principle of cognitive closure in that the greater the selectivity during encoding, the smaller the workload required during retrieval. The present
study confirms the utility of ERP in collectively addressing central questions regarding encoding and retrieval processes, and the particular benefits of observing neural activity under passive and / or ambiguous
demands.

D70

NEURAL ACTIVITY ASSOCIATED WITH SPORT AND NON-SPORT SOUNDS
IN ATHLETES Elizabeth Woods1, Pilar Archila1, Sian Beilock2, Arturo
Hernandez1; 1University of Houston, 2University of Chicago — The

age
at
which an individual begins to learn a new skill or concept has been
shown to have an effect on acquisition of bird song, musical abilities, and
first and second language. All of these domains have something in common: they require processing of auditory stimuli. However studies of
auditory processing in another field, athletics, are lacking. Some evidence is now emerging that expertise in a sport can modulate both
behavioral and neural responses and that expert athletes process information related to their own sport differently than other sports. Furthermore, it seems that the best professional athletes began playing their
respective sport at an early age. Thus, the present study examined neural
response to familiar and unfamiliar sport and non-sport environmental
sounds in collegiate athletes. During the functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) experiment, tennis and basketball players were presented with ten sport, (Ntennis = 5, Nbasketball = 5) and ten non-sport
(Nfamiliar = 5, Nunfamiliar = 5) sounds that were repeated four times
each. Preliminary analyses showed that age of acquisition of a sport
modulated neural activity when processing sounds in that sport. Furthermore, athletes demonstrated differential neural activation for familiar and unfamiliar sport as well as non-sport sounds. This study has
important implications for theories of athletic training, auditory processing, learning, and brain plasticity.

D71

TITLE: EFFECTS OF AUDITORY EXPERTISE ON TEMPORAL VOICE
AREAS Jean-Pierre Chartrand1, Guylaine Bélizaire1, Isabelle Peretz1, Pascal

Belin1,2; 1International Laboratory for Brain, Music and Sound (BRAMS),
University of Montréal, Canada, 2Voice Neurocognition Laboratory, Center for
Cognitive Neuroimaging, University of Glasgow, UK — The cerebral regions
involved in face perception and expert object recognition have been
much studied, leading to a large debate about the modularity of face perception. In the auditory domain, the existence of ‘temporal voice areas
(TVA)’ suggests that analogous questions on the domain specificity of
voice perception and its role in expert auditory recognition can be asked.
The goal of this study was to assess the extent to which the TVA are
recruited in auditory experts by stimuli of expertise. Sixteen healthy participants (8 bird experts; 8 guitar makers) were recruited based on their
respective auditory expertise. They first performed four auditory memory and discrimination tasks. Afterwards, they were scanned on a 3Tesla scanner while 1) passively listening to vocal and non-vocal sounds
(10-minutes “voice-localizer” scan) 2) performing a one-back auditory
task with birdsongs, guitar sounds and vocal sounds presented in an
event-related design. At the behavioural level, auditory expertise
resulted in a significant interaction between expertise group and stimulus category. Individual voice-selective maps were created from the first
fMRI run (vocal vs non-vocal). fMRi data revealed a corresponding
interaction (p<0.001 uncorr.) between expertise group and stimulus category in the left TVA with greater response of voice-selective cortex to the
category of expertise. These results indicate that expertise with an audi-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session D
tory category enhances response of voice-selective cortex to stimuli of
expertise. These results reinforce the suggestion that voice-selective cortices could in fact reflect expertise - or prolonged exposure- with those
stimulus categories, rather than pure voice-selectivity per se.

D72

FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION OF THE PLANUM TEMPORALE FOR SPATIAL
VERSUS SENSORY-MOTOR PROCESSES: COMBINED DTI AND FMRI A.

Lisette Isenberg1, Kenneth Vaden1, Kourosh Saberi1, L. Tugan Muftuler1, Greg
Hickok1; 1University of California, Irvine — There has been much debate
recently over the functional role played by the planum temporale (PT)
and its capacity in the dorsal auditory processing stream. Some studies
indicate that regions in the PT support spatial hearing, whereas others
demonstrate sensory-motor response properties. This multifunctionality
has led to the claim that the PT is performing a common computational
pattern matching operation, then routing the signals (spatial, object, sensory-motor) into an appropriate processing stream. An alternative possibility is that the PT is functionally subdivided with separate regions
supporting various functions. We assess this possibility using a within
subject fMRI block design. DTI data was also collected to examine connectivity. There were four auditory conditions: stationary noise, moving
noise, listening to pseudowords, and shadowing pseudowords (covert
repetition). Contrasting the shadow and listen conditions should activate
regions specific to sensory-motor processes, while contrasting the stationary and moving noise conditions should activate regions involved in
spatial hearing. Subjects (N=17) showed greater activation for shadowing in left posterior PT, area Spt, when the shadow and listen conditions
were contrasted. While the motion vs. stationary noise contrast revealed
greater activation in a more medial and anterior portion of left PT. Seeds
from these two contrasts were then used to guide the DTI analysis in an
examination of connectivity via probabilistic tractography. More robust
projections to anterior frontal regions are seen from area Spt. Findings
support a heterogeneous model of the PT, with functionally distinct
regions for sensory-motor integration and processes involved in auditory spatial perception.

D73

ARE GAPS THE SOUNDS WITH ZERO INTENSITY? A STUDY OF EMPTY AND
FILLED INTERVAL TIMING IN SUB-SECOND RANGE IN HUMAN AUDITORY
SYSTEM Maria D. Evstigneeva1, Daniel S. Kislyuk2, Alexander A.

Alexandrov1; 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Russia, 2Helsinki University of
Technology, Finland — Aim of the study was to compare the mechanisms
of empty (gaps) and filled (sounds) interval duration processing in subsecond range. Fist, we examined whether the state-dependent network
model (SDNM), which appears to work well for sub-second range silent
intervals, can explain sounds duration processing. The model’s prediction, that a certain contraction of the interval between the comparison
and the test stimuli will the impair accuracy of discrimination, fulfilled
for silent, but not for filled intervals. Second, using auditory eventrelated potential (ERP) recording in the oddball-paradigm, we obtained
a mismatch negativity response (MMN) to change in duration of the
silent gaps (standard 25 ms, deviant 50 ms and vice versa) in the continuous tone. This response, never reported earlier, was compared to “classical” MMN elicited by duration change of a sound of the same temporal
characteristics (25 and 50 ms). Both for sounds and gaps when the deviant was longer than the standard MMN had shorter latency than in the
reversed setup, suggesting change detectors existence. Third, comparing
ERPs to short and long gap, we found higher positivity in response to
longer gaps at the frontal electrode sites in the 24-40 ms time window
after gap offset (sound renewal after the gap). Thus, at the early stages
gap duration processing is explained well by SDNM, with duration represented, e.g., by magnitude of response to sound renewal; dramatically
different mechanisms seem to underlie sound duration processing. Further discrimination seems to be based on similar gap or sound change
detector activity.

133

Poster Session D

Thinking: Decision Making

Thinking: Decision Making
D75
Lauren A. Leotti1, Michael A.
Niznikiewicz , Mauricio R. Delgado ; Rutgers University, Newark — Individu-

THE INHERENT REWARD OF CHOICE
1

1 1

als exercise control over the environment by making choices. Behavioral
studies in animal and human decision-making illustrate that choice is
highly desirable, however little is known about whether choice, itself, is
rewarding. Using fMRI, we characterize the hedonic experience of choice
by examining brain activity during the anticipation of choice (vs. nonchoice). Participants were informed that their goal was to earn as much
play money as possible, which would be translated into bonus cash. On
each trial, participants were presented with a selection of two keys
which could lead to a gain of $0, $50, or $100. On some trials, participants would have the opportunity to choose between the two keys
(choice condition). On other trials, however, they were forced to accept
the computer-selected key (no choice condition). Participants learned to
associate symbolic cues with upcoming choice or non-choice trials.
Because choice and non-choice trial types are matched in expected value,
any differences in behavioral ratings and BOLD activity between conditions can be interpreted as affective valuation of choice itself. Participants reported liking the choice trials better than the non-choice trials.
Relative to the non-choice cue, the choice cue elicited increased activity
in a network of regions involved in reward processing and goal-directed
behavior, including the orbital frontal cortex, striatum, inferior parietal
lobule and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex. As converging evidence suggests the perception of control is integral for an individual's general
well-being, these preliminary results have important implications for
understanding how exercising control modulates affective responses.

D76

MATURATION OF LIMBIC CORTICOSTRIATAL ACTIVATION AND
CONNECTIVITY ASSOCIATED WITH DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN
TEMPORAL DISCOUNTING Anastasia Christakou1,2, Mick Brammer2,

Katya Rubia2; 1University of Reading, 2Institute of Psychiatry, King's College
London — Temporal discounting matures with age, alongside other markers of increased impulse control, and coherent, self-regulated behaviour.
Discounting paradigms quantify the ability to refrain from preference of
immediate rewards, in favour of delayed, larger rewards. As such, they
measure temporal foresight and the ability to delay gratification, functions which develop slowly from late childhood into adulthood. We
investigated the neural maturation that accompanies the previously
observed age-related behavioural changes in discounting, from early
adolescence into mid-adulthood. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging of a hypothetical discounting task with monetary
rewards, delayed in the week to year range. We show that age-related
reductions in choice impulsivity were associated with changes in activation in ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC), ventral striatum (VS), insula, parahippocampal and inferior temporal gyrus, and posterior parietal cortex. Limbic corticostriatal activation changes were specifically associated with age-dependent reductions
in impulsivity, as part of a more extensive network of brain areas showing age-related changes in activation (including dorsolateral PFC, parietal cortex, and additional subcortical areas). The maturational pattern of
functional connectivity included strengthening in activation coupling
between ventromedial and dorsolateral PFC, parietal and insular cortices during selection of delayed alternatives, and between vmPFC and VS
during selection of immediate alternatives. We conclude that maturational mechanisms within limbic corticostriatal circuitry underlie the
observed post-pubertal reductions in impulsivity with increasing age,
and that this effect is dependant on increased activation coherence
within a network of areas associated with discounting behaviour and
inter-temporal decision-making.

134

D77

IS THE GAIN WORTH THE PAIN? THE WILLINGNESS TO SUFFER FOR
MONETARY GAIN Soyoung Q. Park1,2,4, Thorsten Kahnt3,4, Jörg

Rieskamp2,5, Hauke R. Heekeren1,2,4; 1Cluster of Excellence “Languages of
Emotion,” Freie Universität Berlin, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Human
Development, Berlin, Germany, 3Bernstein Center for Computational
Neuroscience, Berlin, Germany, 4Berlin School of Mind and Brain, Humboldt
Universität zu Berlin, Germany, 5Institute for Psychology, Universität Basel,
Switzerland — In everyday situations, we usually face options that have

more than one dimension. Each dimension can implicate either losses
(e.g., costs to buy a bike) or gains (e.g., technical benefit of a bike). It has
been suggested that these different dimensions are converted into a single internal common value currency to facilitate the comparisons of the
valuation of diverse future behavioral acts or stimuli, thereby enabling
successful decision making. This common value currency of an option
can be referred to as the subjective value, incorporating individual
weighting of each dimension. The goal of the present study is to examine
the neural representation of such integrated subjective values and the
decision-making mechanism underlying choices among multi-dimensional options. We investigated 23 healthy male subjects using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while they chose among multidimensional options. Each option consisted of physical pain (electrical
pulse) and monetary gain. Crucially, subjects received both the amount
of money and strength of pain of the chosen option. Different subregions of the prefrontal cortex correlated with the magnitude of money
and the severity of pain, respectively. Furthermore, we fitted individual
behavioral data to economic models simulating the cost benefit integration to estimate the subjective value for each complex option. Using
these subjective values, we demonstrate that the medial prefrontal cortex, a region that has been previously shown to code single dimensional
reward value, also codes the integrated subjective value.

D78
Yin-Fang Chang1, NaiShing Yen1,2, Chia-Yuan Lin1, Chun-Yu Chen1, Chang-Hao Kao1; 1National
Chengchi , Taipei, Taiwan, 2Research Center of Mind, Brain, and Learning,
National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan — Feedback-related negativity

THE FRN IS ASSOCIATED WITH THE EXPECTATION

(FRN) is a brain potential peak at 250-300ms after feedback. In particular,
FRN has been shown to reflect the evaluation of monetary loss, negative
feedback and unexpected feedback. The present study is designed to
evaluate the role of expectation on FRN. By varying the probability of
positive feedback, expected or unexpected gains were manipulated. In
this study, the probability of positive feedback was divided into two
conditions. In high gain condition, the probability of receiving positive
feedback is 75%. In low gain condition, the probability of receiving positive feedback is 25%. That means, the positive feedback is expected in
high gain condition but unexpected in low gain condition, whereas the
negative feedback is unexpected in high gain condition but expected in
low gain condition. A 2(condition) X2(feedback) X3(electrode) ANOVA
was performed and revealed that a significant interaction of condition
and feedback. A greater FRN was found in positive feedback in low gain
condition than in high gain condition. That is, the FRN is greater when
the positive feedback is unexpected than expected. However, P300, an
ERP component which reflects the event probability, might result in the
interaction difference. To clarify this confounding, the difference wave
was used. Unexpected feedback (loss in high gain condition - gain in low
gain condition) was significantly greater than expected feedback (loss in
low gain condition - gain in high gain condition). These findings suggest
that the FRN is sensitive to unexpected events. The reinforcement learning theory of FRN is supported.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Thinking: Decision Making

Poster Session D

D79

D81

PAVLOVIAN-TO-INSTRUMENTAL TRANSFER – NEURAL MECHANISMS
AND RELEVANCE FOR OBESITY Sanne de Wit1, Paul Fletcher2, Reinout

THE INFLUENCE OF EXPECTED VALUE AND RISK LEVEL IN A REVERSED
VERSION OF MODIFIED IGT Chang-Hao Kao1, Nai-Shing Yen1,2, I-Chen

Wiers1, Richard Ridderinkhof1; 1University of Amsterdam, 2University of
Cambridge — Outcome-specific Pavlovian-to-Instrumental Transfer (PIT)
takes place when environmental cues that predict reward bias behaviour
towards actions associated with that same reward. To investigate the relevance of PIT effects for human food-seeking we conducted three experiments that build on previous demonstrations of this effect in humans
(Hogarth et al., 2007; Bray et al., 2008). In the paradigm common to all
experiments, participants received two separate training phases. During
Pavlovian training, visual stimuli on the computerscreen signalled the
free presentation of food pictures and points towards the actual food
reward. During instrumental training, participants were required to
make responses (either right or left key press) to earn these same food
rewards. Subsequently, in the critical extinction test, participants were
asked to choose between pressing either the right or left key as quickly
and spontaneously as possible upon presentation of the Pavlovian stimuli. The results of Experiment 1 show that Pavlovian cues bias choice
towards the commonly associated food reward regardless of post-training reward devaluation through specific satiety, although participants
did react significantly slower to cues that signalled pre-fed food. In
Experiment 2, overweight adolescents showed a stronger PIT effect for
high- than for low-calorific food rewards, in contrast to their lean peers.
Finally, in Experiment 3, participants were tested inside the fMRI scanner while performing the extinction test, and putamen (extending into
pallidum) was implicated in outcome-specific PIT (see also Bray et al.,
2008). The results of these experiments suggest that PIT may contribute
to excessive food-seeking in an obesogenic environment.

D80

PROPOSERS WITH THE SAME NATION ELICIT GREATER CONFLICT IN AN
ULTIMATUM GAME: A FRN STUDY Nai-Shing Yen1,2, Yin-Fang Chang1, Li-I

Hsu1, Kuan-Ying Lin1, Chang-Hao Kao1; 1National Chengchi , Taipei, Taiwan,
Center of Mind, Brain, and Learning, National Chengchi University,
Taipei, Taiwan — In the Ultimatum Game, participants (responders) can

2Research

either accept or reject the offer that is proposed by another person (proposer). It is typically found that participants reject offers that are more
unfair and accept offers that are fairer. In our experiment, the gender and
nationality of the proposer were manipulated. In nationality, the proposer could be either a Taiwanese (the same nation with the responder)
or a Foreigner (different nation with the responder). The reaction time
and EEG data were recorded. Eighteen undergraduates from National
Chengchi University were recruited as participants. In reaction time
data, a 2(nationality) X2(gender) X5(offer) ANOVA was performed. The
main effect of offer was observed. The difference of reaction time in different offers might reflect the level of conflict of the offers. That is, low
conflict offers are easier to react, but high conflict offers are more difficult to react. According to this hypothesis, high conflict offers and low
conflict offers are differentiated. A 2(nationality) X2(gender) X2(level of
conflict) ANOVA was performed and revealed a significant difference of
the level of conflict. The FRN, a component of ERP, which is related to
error and conflict detection, was analyzed. A 2(nationality) X2(level of
conflict) ANOVA revealed that the interaction of nationality and the
level of conflict was significant. It shows that, in high conflict offers, the
proposers who are Taiwanese can elicit greater FRN than the foreign
proposers. It suggests that the conflict offer proposed by people on their
own side is more difficult to react.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Chou1, Hui-Kuan Chung1, Bie-Shuein Chu1; 1National Chengchi University,
Taipei, Taiwan, 2Research Center for Mind, Brain, and Learning, National
Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan — Bechara et al. (1994) designed an
Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) to examine the somatic maker hypothesis
(SMH) and the similar result was also found in a reversed version of IGT
(Bechara et al., 2000). However, Windmann et al. (2006) used an original
IGT and a reversed IGT to examine framing effects in IGT. Their results
showed that different behaviors and brain activation in original and
reversed IGT. Recently, Yen et al. (2009) developed a modified IGT (IGTM) to clarify the effects of risk level and expected value in decision making. They found significant interaction between expected values and risk
level in behavioral and physiological data. Thus, in the present study, a
reversed IGT (IGT- M’) with reversed contingency schedule of IGT-M is
used to clarify the framing effect in a modified IGT. In IGT-M’, the good
decks consisted of high immediate loss and high delayed gain, whereas
the bad decks consisted of low immediate loss and low delayed gain.
Other designs were the same as IGT-M and physiological data were also
collected. In the present study, a significant interaction between
expected values and risk level was shown in IGT-M but not in IGT- M’.
The different pattern was also found in physiological data. In IGT-M’,
higher SCR was induced before and after choosing the preferred deck.
Additionally, similar result in EEG data showed higher alpha-band
power before the selection of the preferred deck.Therefore, the SMH is
not supported.

D82

INTERACTION BETWEEN IN ACTION AND VALENCE ANTICIPATION IN THE
HUMAN STRIATUM AND DOPAMINERGIC MIDBRAIN Marc
Guitart-

Masip1,2, Lluis Fuentemilla1, Dominik Bach2, Quentin Huys3, Peter Dayan3, Ray
Dolan2, Emrah Duzel1,4; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University
College London, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging,
Institute of Neurology, University College London, United Kingdom, 3Gatsby
Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London, United
Kingdom, 4Institute of Cognitive Neurology and Dementia Research, Otto-vonGuericke-Universität, Magdeburg, Germany — The midbrain dopaminergic
system and the striatum have a prominent role in reward learning, but
the involvement of this system in punishment processing is more controversial. Recent evidence suggests that the dopaminergic system may be
related to action learning and execution regardless of the valence of the
associated outcomes. To test this hypothesis, we scanned subjects with a
high resolution fMRI protocol while they performed a new task in which
action and valence were independently manipulated. Behaviourally,
subjects were faster and more successful at doing a task to win than to
avoid losing money. The fMRI results showed that the striatum mainly
responded to action anticipation. In the midbrain we found a dorsolateral cluster that mainly responded to action anticipation and a more ventromedial cluster that showed increased activity to the anticipation of
action in the win condition and decreased activity to the anticipation of
action in the lose condition. Confirming our hypothesis, the midbrain
dopaminergic system and the striatum mainly encoded the anticipation
of motivationally driven action irrespective of whether the associated
outcomes were positive or negative. However, we also show that midbrain dopaminergic system is heterogenous and have anatomically distinct functional areas with different sensitivity to reward and
punishment.

135

Poster Session D
D83

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN RELATIVE SUSCEPTIBILITY TO SELF AND
CHARITY FRAMING EFFECTS David V. Smith1, Vinod Venkatraman1, R.

McKell Carter1, John A. Clithero1, Justin R. Meyer1, J. H. Pate Skene1, Michael
L. Platt1, Scott A. Huettel1; 1Duke University — People can exhibit marked
differences in their choices depending on how a decision is presented.
Many real-world decisions differ in their consequences, with some decisions impacting the individual making the decision and other decisions
impacting other individuals. Yet, little is known about how economic
preferences change depending on the specific target of a decision. Here
we used fMRI to measure brain activation while participants (n = 64)
engaged in a financial decision-making task that has been previously
used to study framing. On each trial, participants were shown a starting
amount ($10, $20, $30, $40) before choosing between “sure” and “gamble” options. The sure option was framed such that the participant could
keep (gain frame) or lose (loss frame) a fixed proportion of the starting
amount. The gamble option did not differ according to frame and was
represented by a pie chart reflecting the probability (25%, 50%, 75%) of
winning or losing the entire starting amount. On half the trials, participants played for themselves, and on the other half of the trials, they
played for a charity of their choice. Consistent with a framing effect, we
observed increased gambling in loss frames compared to gain frames, an
effect that was greater during charity trials. Strikingly, an individual’s
relative susceptibility to self and charity framing effects was predicted
by activation in ventromedial prefrontal (vmPFC) during an analogous
contrast (self trials > charity trials). These results suggest vmPFC mediates individual differences in relative decision biases for self and charity
framing effects.

D84

NEURAL SIGNALS OF SOCIAL BIAS IN DECISION MAKING Simon
Evans1, Bruno Averbeck1, Steve Fleming2, Ray Dolan2; 1UCL Institute of
Neurology, 2Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, UCL — Real-world
decision-making usually involves at least some social considerations;
consequently, the social value of stimuli can induce bias effects in how
choices are made. We investigated how smiling and angry face stimuli
influenced the way subjects behaved in a stochastically-rewarded decision-making task. Subjects were asked to determine through trial and
error which of two emotional faces were associated with a higher probability of reward. The task was performed in an fMRI scanner. Subjects
were reliably biased in favour of smiling faces, presumably reflecting the
social value of such stimuli as approving or trustworthy. We then referenced behaviour to a Bayesian RL model which predicted subject choice
confidence on each trial. Two models were used: an ideal-observer
which behaved optimally, and a biased model which incorporated a
prior and learning bias towards the emotional expression. Trial–by trial
predictions from each of the models were regressed on the fMRI data.
Activity in striatal reward processing areas correlated with the idealobserver, whereas the additional expression bias correlated with the
dmPFC which has been implicated in the computation of social value.
We also examined between-subject differences in behaviour; amygdala
activity was associated with the level of prior bias towards smiling faces,
activity in insula and ventral striatum reflected negative and positive
feedback learning performance respectively.

D85

BEAUTY OR FAME: UNCOVERING THE POWER OF CELEBRITY SOCIAL
INFLUENCE Adam Craig1, Stacy Wood1, David Smith2, Scott Huettel2,

Jennifer Vendemia1; 1University of South Carolina, 2Duke University — Attractive faces have been suggested to be rewarding (or positive reinforcers).
Yet, the effect of social factors, including familiarity and social status, on
the rewarding properties of attractive faces remain unclear. Although
repeated exposure increases attractiveness, familiarity arising from cultural status may differentially impact attractiveness. Here we examine
how activation generated by rewarding faces may be moderated by type
of familiarity: novel, familiarity based on conditioning, and recognized

136

Thinking: Decision Making
celebrity. Celebrity status may be due to repeated exposure however, we
predict that the combination of social status and attractiveness will be
more impactful than familiarity based on conditioning. To build on prior
studies of attractiveness and demonstrate sensitivity to social characteristics, we utilized a 2 (Attractiveness: high, low) x 3 (Social Category:
Celebrity, Familiar, Novel) functional magnetic resonance imaging
design wherein participants rated faces for attractiveness. Faces were
rated by a prior cohort to determine “high” and “low” categorization.
Familiar and Celebrity manipulations were implemented by presenting
faces three times during a viewing task 5 minutes prior to functional
scanning. Within the FFA, the high-attractive, familiar condition evoked
larger activation compared to low-attractive, familiar whereas highattractive celebrity and low-attractive, celebrity did not differ. Within the
dACC, high-attractive, celebrity evoked larger activation compared to
low-attractive, celebrity whereas low and high attractive familiar conditions did not differ. Overall, this study has implications for social information processing: the brain may treat cultural constructs such as
celebrity differently than familiarity.

D86

THE DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF RISK AND AMBIGUITY ON EVALUATING
FUTURE REWARDS Marianna Blackburn1, Rebecca Elliott2, Wael ElDeredy1; 1School of Psychological Sciences , The University of Manchester, UK,

2Neuroscience and Psychiatry Unit, The University of Manchester, UK — It

has
been argued that delayed rewards are discounted as a function of time
because they incorporate increased uncertainties; however, there are no
studies to date which have demonstrated this experimentally. We investigated whether participants incorporated uncertainty into their evaluation of a delayed reward, or whether their judgments were based on
absolute reward magnitudes. Thirty-two participants completed three
computerised discounting tasks for small and large delayed rewards.
The tasks included a standard delay discounting paradigm in conjunction with two modified versions: in one, delayed rewards were framed
in terms of risk (known reward magnitude but with large variance of
decision outcome), whereas the other task framed delayed rewards in
terms of ambiguity (definite rewarding outcome but with large variance
in the reward magnitude). The expected value of rewards in the three
tasks was kept the same, such that changes to the parameters of the discounting curve (area under the curve and k - the rate of discounting)
could be stipulated to arise from framing effects. Results: There was no
significant difference in area and the curve between the risky task and
the standard delayed discounting task. However, ambiguously framed
rewards were less discounted than both standard and risky (F = 11.59; p
= 0.00), suggesting a shift of the discounting curve towards a more selfcontrolled choice behaviour. Further, the findings suggest participants’
automatically evaluate delayed rewards by incorporating risk, and that
impulsive choice may be modified more by framing of delayed rewards
than time preferences.

D87

BEHAVIOURAL AND NEURAL RESPONSES DIFFER BETWEEN
PARKINSON’S DISEASE PATIENTS WITH AND WITHOUT DOPAMINE
AGONIST-ASSOCIATED PATHOLOGICAL GAMBLING: AN FMRI STUDY

Crystal Erickson1, Lauren Templeton1, Brigitte Stemmer2, Michel Panisset2,
Alain Dagher1; 1Neurol and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montréal, Quebec,
2
Hopsitalier de l’Université de Montréal., Montréal, Quebec — One increasingly common side effect to the administration of dopaminergic medication to Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients is pathological gambling (PG),
reported in up to 8% of patients, which is well above the 1% prevalence
rate in the normal population. The underlying neural mechanism of PG
susceptibility is not clear, therefore, this study aimed to investigate the
neural response to gambling in 12 PD and 12 age-matched (AM) controls
with no history of PG, and 11 PD patients diagnosed with PG (PGPD
group). Behaviourally PGPDs differed from PD and AM controls, showing a shift toward higher or riskier bets, supporting our lab’s previous
findings in PG’s without PD. Young, healthy controls show significant

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Thinking: Decision Making
BOLD activation in the NAc and VTA in response to the gambling task,
while PDs do not. We saw neither a hyperactive nor hypoactive response
in the NAc or VTA in the PGPDs, and what neural differences we did see
was most likely explained by age or PD, but not PG. We did find that the
PGPD’s differed significantly from PD and AM controls in the ACC,
PFC, and Insula in both the anticipation phase of winning, and the feedback phase of losing. These areas are involved in adaptive decision making, processing of risk, loss and error prediction. Therefore, our study
suggests that PGPDs do not differ from AM and PD controls in the typical NAc/VTA reward circuitry involved in gambling. Instead they differ
in other regions involved in decision making, processing of risk, loss and
error prediction.

D88

INFLUENCE OF INSTRUCTED KNOWLEDGE ON REINFORCEMENTLEARNING Jian Li1, Mauricio Delgado2, Elizabeth Phelps1,3; 1New York

University, NY, 2Rutgers University, Newark, NJ, 3Center for Neural Science,
New York University, NY — Proper decision-making with uncertain outcomes is influenced by various factors and reinforcement learning (RL) is
a powerful tool in understanding behaviors in tasks with trial and error,
and its neural underpinnings have been extensively studied using both
neurophysiology and functional neuroimaging (fMRI) techniques.
Explicit memory system, however, can exert its influence by providing a
strong prior in guiding subjects’ choices. We designed two two-arm bandit tasks together with fMRI to test how these two systems might be differentially involved. Subjects can only learn through trial and error in the
first task (task 1), while in second task (task 2) we provided subjects with
extra explicit knowledge: the probability of each choice that leads to
reward. Subjects’ choice behavior and neural activities are well captured
using RL algorithms in task 1 but not task 2. More specifically, prediction
error signals are well correlated with neural activities in the ventral striatum in task 1 but not task 2. Also, activation in the nucleus accumbens
(NAc) is significantly higher to the positive outcome in task 1 than task 2,
which corresponds well with the fact that subjects in task 1 are more
likely to stick with current choices when the outcome is positive than in
task 2. The activities of bilateral hippocampus are consistently engaged
in task 2, irrelevant of trial difficulty, while they negatively correlate
with trial difficulty in task 1. Our findings showed how different decision-making machineries are enacted and balanced to guide choices
when available information varies across tasks.

D89

INSTRUCTIONAL CONTROL OF REINFORCEMENT LEARNING: A
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL AND GENETIC ACCOUNT Bradley
Doll1,
Michael Frank1; 1Brown University — Much research suggests that the brain

learns to maximize reward and minimize punishment through dopaminergic prediction error signals. Though such a learning system is adaptive, it is slow and time consuming, requiring repeated experience with
outcomes. A quicker way to learn is through rules, instructions, and
advice from others. Such learning, however, comes at the cost of sensitivity to true reward contingencies. Here we explore the neurocomputational underpinnings of how simple verbal information affects
reinforcement learning. Subjects were given accurate or inaccurate information about how to best perform a probabilistic selection task. Instruction-consistent responding was persistent and specific to the instructed
stimulus. Neural network simulations suggest two possible neural circuits produce the effect. In the first, verbal information representations
in prefrontal cortex directly project to and bias striatal action-values
through dopaminergic prediction errors, constituting a confirmation
bias. In the second, the striatum learns the true reward contingencies
through feedback, but does not express this learning in behavior because
it is overridden at motor cortex by prefrontal instruction representations.
We collected DNA and analyzed genes implicated in controlling dopaminergic efficacy in striatum and prefrontal cortex. Biological support for
the candidate models is indicated by the extent to which prefrontal cortex and striatum compete in following instructions rather than contingencies (override model) or cooperate by combining instruction with

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session D
task contingent feedback in assigning value to the stimuli (bias model).
Preliminary analysis lends support for both interpretations, suggesting
that multiple mechanisms may be at play either within or across individuals.

D90

ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX UNDERGOES THETA-BAND PHASELOCKING WITH RIGHT FRONTAL CORTEX DURING FEEDBACK
PROCESSING IN A GAMBLING TASK Gregory Christie1, Matthew Tata1;

1The University of Lethbridge — The neural mechanisms for processing
rewarding and punishing feedback can be studied using free-choice
gambling-type tasks with variable risk and reward. In a previous study
we adapted the Iowa Gambling Task to investigate the effect of implicit
risk on the neurophysiology of feedback processing. We observed a
characteristic increase in theta-band (4 – 7 Hz) EEG power in medialfrontal cortex that was modulated by the riskiness of the selected bet but
not by its outcome (i.e. it was not affected by valence). This increased
theta-band activity may reflect phase-locking of distinct cortical regions
as they dynamically exchange and process information. In the present
study we replicated our previous findings and have extended our analysis by investigating theta-band phase locking between anterior cingulated (ACC) and a number of candidate regions in frontal cortex known
to be electrically active during feedback processing. EEG was recorded
using 128 scalp electrodes while participants played a simulated gambling game. We used a source montage approach to model theta-band
activity in ACC, bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), and
bilateral mediofrontal gyrus (MFG). Phase-locking was measured
between ACC and each of the frontal sources. We observed significant
phase-locking between ACC-dlPFC and ACC-MFG that was modulated
by the riskiness of the selected choice. This theta phase-locking was also
right-hemisphere lateralized across experimental conditions. These
results suggest that feedback processing engages a synchronous thetaband network in right-hemisphere frontal cortex, and that this network
is sensitive to the perceived riskiness of a chosen action.

D91

THE NEURAL OPERATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH DIETARY SELF-CONTROL
ARE MODULATED BY THE SALIENCE OF TASTE AND HEALTH
INFORMATION Jonathan Malmaud1, Todd Hare1, Colin Camerer1, Antonio

Rangel1; 1California Institute of Technology — We tested the hypothesis that
the salience of taste and health information affects the brain’s ability to
deploy the processes that have been associated with successful self-control. Subjects were scanned using fMRI while they made decisions about
whether or not to eat healthy and unhealthy food items. The salience of
health or taste factors was manipulated by having subjects focus on
either the healthiness or the taste of a food before making the decision. In
a third, baseline condition subjects were told to focus on whatever came
naturally to them. We found that subjects made more healthy choices in
the health saliency condition. Furthermore, activity in ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC), an area that has been shown to encode the value
of stimuli at the time of choice, was modulated by the saliency condition:
the correlation with health ratings was strongest during health saliency
trials, and the correlation with taste ratings was strongest during the
taste saliency trials. We also found that there was greater dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) activity when subjects exercised self-control
in the taste focus condition, and less DLPFC activity when subjects used
self-control in the health focus condition as compared to baseline.
Together, these data suggest that increasing the salience of health-related
factors might facilitate self-control during dietary choice.
D92

THE NEURAL CODE OF REWARD ANTICIPATION IN HUMAN
ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX Thorsten Kahnt1,2,3, Jakob Heinzle1, Soyoung

Park3,4, John-Dylan Haynes1,2,3; 1Bernstein Center for Computational
Neuroscience, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany, 2Max Planck

137

Poster Session D
Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 3Graduate
School of Mind and Brain, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Germany, 4Max
Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany — An
optimal
choice among alternative behavioral options requires precise anticipatory representations of their possible outcomes. A fundamental question
is how such anticipated outcomes are represented in the brain. Reward
signals arising from dopaminergic midbrain neurons have been suggested to broadcast value information to the prefrontal cortex. However,
the exact format of reward representations in cortical areas has remained
unclear. Reward coding at the level of single-cells follows a more heterogeneous coding scheme than suggested by studies using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in humans. Using a combination of
multivariate pattern classification and fMRI we show that the reward
value of sensory cues is encoded in distributed response patterns in the
orbitofrontal cortex. This distributed encoding is compatible with previous reports from animal electrophysiology showing that reward is
encoded by different neural populations with opposing coding schemes.
Importantly, the response patterns encoding specific values during
anticipation are similar to those that emerge during the receipt of
reward. Furthermore, we show that the degree of this similarity is
related to subjects’ ability to use value information to guide behavior.
These results bridge the gap between reward coding in human and animals and corroborate the notion that value representations in prefrontal
cortex are independent of whether reward is anticipated or actually
received.

D93

THE ROLE OF THE NORADRENERGIC SYSTEM IN THE EXPLORATIONEXPLOITATION TRADE-OFF: A PHARMACOLOGICAL STUDY Marieke

Jepma1,2, Eric-Jan Wagenmakers3, Erik te Beek4, Joop van Gerven4, Sander
Nieuwenhuis1,2; 1Leiden University, 2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition,
3University of Amsterdam, 4Centre for Human Drug Research — Animal
research and computational modeling have indicated an important role
for the locus coeruleus-norepinephrine (LC-NE) system in the regulation
of attention and behavior. According to the adaptive gain theory of LC
function, the LC-NE system is critical for the optimization of behavioral
performance by regulating the trade-off between exploitative and
exploratory behavioral strategies (Aston-Jones & Cohen, 2005). However, crucial direct empirical tests of this theory in human subjects have
been lacking. We made use of a pharmacological manipulation of the
human noradrenergic system to test predictions of this theory in
humans. In a double-blind parallel-groups design, participants received
4 mg reboxetine (a selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor), 30 mg
citalopram (a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor) or placebo. By
inhibiting the reuptake of NE, reboxetine increases the tonic NE level.
We assessed the effects of reboxetine on performance in several cognitive
tasks designed to examine exploitative versus exploratory behavior. The
adaptive gain theory would predict that the increased tonic LC level
induced by reboxetine promotes exploratory behavior. In contrast to the
prediction of the adaptive gain theory, we did not find differences in
exploratory behavior between the three experimental groups. Our findings suggest that multiple factors, such as individual differences in personality, motivation, stress and other neuromodulatory systems, have to
be taken into account in order to increase our understanding of the noradrenergic modulation of behavioral strategy.

D94

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN ANTICIPATION OF AND PREFERENCES FOR
DISTINCT REWARD CATEGORIES John A. Clithero1, Crystal C. Reeck1, R.

McKell Carter1, David V. Smith1, Vinod Venkatraman1, Justin R. Meyer1, J. H.
Pate Skene1, Michael L. Platt1, Scott A. Huettel1; 1Duke University — Humans

respond to a wide range of rewards. Although prior research shows that
modality alters sensitivity to different types of reward, the role of individual differences in shaping neural reward circuitry remains unclear.
We scanned 63 participants using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while they performed a modified version of the

138

Thinking: Decision Making
monetary incentive delay (MID) task. At the start of each trial, participants viewed one of five cues that indicated a potential reward of cash
($1 or $5), candy (small or large amount), or nothing. Then, after a short
anticipation interval, participants pressed a button to a visual target to
receive the reward. We collected saliva samples for assessment of genetic
contributions to reward processing. Reward anticipation robustly
increased blood-oxygenation-level-dependent (BOLD) signal in ventral
striatum, confirming prior hypotheses. This anticipatory activation was
present in both reward modalities. Consistent with the hypothesis that
reward anticipation shares a common neural substrate across modalities,
participants with greater anticipation sensitivity on money trials also
had greater anticipation sensitivity on candy trials. We also found significant variation in reaction times within participants and across reward
modalities, which can be used as an inferred measure of relative preference. Strikingly, relative BOLD signal changes in both the striatum and
medial prefrontal cortex tracked those within-participant differences in
inferred preferences. These results point to individual differences in a
common reward substrate and are evidence for variation in motivation
for primary and secondary rewards that may have genetic underpinnings.

D95

STIMULUS AND ACTION VALUE REPRESENTATIONS DURING SIMPLE
ECONOMIC CHOICE Todd Hare1,2, Wolfram Schultz3, Colin Camerer1,2,

Antonio Rangel1,2; 1Division of Humanities and Social Sciences, California
Institute of Technology, 2Computation and Neural Systems Division, California
Institute of Technology, 3Development, and Neuroscience, University of
Cambridge — We tested the hypothesis that the brain computes and utilizes both stimulus and action values during economic choice. Stimulus
values represent the reward associated with an object regardless of the
action required to obtain the object. Action values denote the value of
performing a given action regardless of the identity of the reward
obtained. Subjects were scanned using fMRI while they made choices
between juice rewards. On each trial, subjects were shown two cues representing a particular flavor and amount of juice on each side of the
screen. Subjects were instructed to make their choice between the two
options while the cues were on the screen. After a delay of 3-6 seconds, a
response prompt appeared and subjects pressed with the right thumb to
obtain the right option and the left thumb to obtain the left option. The
selected juice was delivered to the subject following a 3-6 second delay.
Stimulus and action values for each subject were derived from the choice
data and used as parametric regressors in the fMRI analysis. We found
that both stimulus and action value were represented at the time of
choice. Stimulus value positively correlated with activity in the medial
orbitofrontal cortex. The values of the right and left actions were positively correlated with activity in contralateral primary and supplementary motor cortex. Thus, neural activity reflects both stimulus and action
value computations during economic choice. An important next step will
be to determine the functional pathways between networks computing
stimulus and action values.

D96

REWARD AND RISK REPRESENTATION DIFFERENCES FOR SELF AND
OTHERS R. McKell Carter1, John A. Clithero1, Vinod Venkatraman1, David V.

Smith1, Adrienne A. Taren1, Justin R. Meyer1, O'Dhaniel A. Mullette-Gillman1,
Elizabeth T. Cirulli1, David B. Goldstein1, J. H. Pate Skene1, Michael L. Platt1,
Scott A. Huettel1; 1Duke University — Making a decision in a social context

requires neural representations of risks and rewards for both oneself and
others. In some circumstances, rewards for self and others may evoke
similar neural representations. However, whether self-regarding and
other-regarding risks and rewards share common neural substrates has
not been demonstrated. Here, we sought to identify differences in risk
and reward representation that may be common across participants and
that may reflect trait differences. We acquired functional magnetic resonance imaging data (fMRI) in 62 adult participants during a passive
gambling task. Participants viewed a series of risky gambles with a prob-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Thinking: Decision Making
ability of winning a prize for either themselves or a chosen charity. To
examine individual trait differences, we also collected behavioral measures of attitudes toward risk and reward as well as saliva samples for
genetic analysis. Regressors representing risk on self trials correlated
with activation in the inferior prefrontal cortex (PFC), posterior parietal
cortex, and temporal-occipital junction, consistent with previous work.
On charity trials, the representation of risk was similar to that for self.
Examination of activation during gamble outcome presentation for self
reveals significant activation in areas normally associated with reward
including ventral striatum and medial prefrontal cortex. We also found
evidence of brain areas where risk-related activation differences between
individuals covaried with a behavioral measure of participants' risk
preferences.

D97

LEARNING AND GENERALIZATION IN HUMAN REINFORCEMENT
LEARNING G. Elliott Wimmer1, Daphna Shohamy1, Nathaniel D. Daw2;
1

Columbia University, 2New York University — The responses of primate
dopamine neurons and BOLD signals in human striatum are well
accounted for by reinforcement learning (RL) models. The simplest such
models are blind to higher-order task structure, such as the relation
between multiple cues or events. However, organisms do encode relational knowledge and use such knowledge to guide decisions. Converging evidence suggests that this kind of relational learning depends on
the hippocampus. It is unclear whether the putative striatal RL system
enjoys this sophistication: RL models often view the striatum as lacking
such capacity and also as competing against hippocampal processes. We
used fMRI together with computational modeling to examine striatal
and hippocampal activity while subjects made repeated choices in a
‘four-armed bandit’ task with a hidden relational structure provided by
correlated payoffs between cues. Behavioral and fMRI results suggested
that subjects' valuations were influenced by the equivalence between
gambles, such that information about reward outcomes for one gamble
generalized to its partner. Behaviorally, subjects' choices were better predicted by an augmented RL model that permitted such generalization.
Value-related BOLD activity was found in the mPFC and additionally in
the hippocampus, and prediction error activity was found in the striatum. The striatal prediction error signal was better explained by a model
that included relational information. These results suggest that sensitivity to higher-order structure is present in subcortical RL systems and that
this learning may be aided by the hippocampus, consistent with models
that posit cooperation between RL systems and relational learning via
learned stimulus representations.

D98

ATTITUDE COMPLEXITY AND THE ROLE OF EVALUATIVE PROCESSES: AN
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Ray Johnson Jr.1,2, Heather Henkell1,2,

Elizabeth J. Simon1,2, John Zhu1,2; 1Queens College/CUNY, 2The Graduate
Center of CUNY — Evaluative judgments are an important aspect of everyday behavior because they provide a basis for decisions about whether
to approach or avoid particular people, places or things. Because little is
known about the processes used to make evaluative decisions, we examined how decision complexity affects the nature and timing of cognitive
processes used during evaluations. Participants were interviewed to
obtain: 1) ratings of their attitudes and beliefs and 2) specific episodes
from their autobiographical (AB) memory. In the Attitude condition,
subjects classified items as “agree” or “disagree” via a speeded response.
In the AB condition, subjects classified episode cues as “you” or “not
you.” ERPs were recorded from 32 scalp sites. A median-split analysis,
based on reaction time, was used to create low- and high-complexity categories. While evidence of episodic retrieval was apparent in both conditions (i.e., presence of a parietal EM effect), its timing relative to the
response varied with attitude complexity but not with AB memory
retrieval speed. Although responses to low-complexity attitudes were
made immediately after retrieval, as is typical in episodic memory studies, the retrieval-response interval was nearly 400 milliseconds for complex attitudes. Increased attitude complexity was also associated with

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session D
increased pre- and post-response ERP activity over medial frontal scalp
that was related to decision complexity and residual response conflict,
respectively. ERP activity was present for complex attitudes over dorsolateral frontal scalp in the prolonged retrieval-response interval, which
likely reflects processing used to modify the retrieved attitude representation based on current goals and situational information.

D99

THE ROLE OF DECLARATIVE MEMORY IN GAMBLING TASK DECISION
MAKING Paul Whitney1, John Hinson1, Melissa Mehalick1; 1Washington
State University — Performance on the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) is often
used to assess decision making or executive function in clinical and nonclinical settings. The IGT and similar decision making tasks require
tracking outcomes of choices over trials. Recent evidence from memory
impaired subjects suggests that declarative memory systems may play
an important role in IGT decision making. The present study is intended
to begin to clarify the role of declarative memory in IGT performance. A
critical distinction within the declarative memory literature is memory
for an item versus memory for its source. Based on this distinction, we
reasoned that good performance on the IGT would depend on source
memory, which would be reflected in the ability to bind particular choice
outcomes to the deck that produced the outcome. In our study, healthy
undergraduate volunteers performed one of several versions of the IGT.
After 75 trials we tested item memory (recognition of which outcomes
had been seen) and source memory (identification of the deck that produced an outcome). Some subjects passively observed deck choices generated by the computer for the first 75 trials and then made choices
actively for the remaining 25 trials. Other subjects made active choices
throughout all 100 trials. Item memory performance was unrelated to
asymptotic IGT performance, but good source memory was associated
with better IGT performance. The data indicate that impairments in IGT
performance in patient populations could be due to problems of source
memory processing, a temporal lobe function, rather than problems in
frontal lobe functions.

D100

IMPLICIT MODULATION OF PREFERENCES FOR ODORS BY EXPLICIT
CHOICES IN LONG-TERM MEMORY Géraldine
Coppin1,2,
Sylvain

Delplanque1,2, Charlène Fournier1,2, David Sander1,2; 1Swiss Center for
Affective Sciences, University of Geneva, Switzerland, 2Laboratory for the study
of Emotion Elicitation and Expression (E3 Lab), University of Geneva,
Switzerland — Several studies have shown that preferences can be
strongly modulated by cognitive processes such as decision making and
choices. Remarkably, it has been demonstrated that explicit choices, traditionally considered as a reflection of preferences, can in fact create
them. However, it is still unclear whether choices can influence preferences of sensory stimuli in an implicit way and if such a modulation is
stable over time. This question was addressed here by asking participants to evaluate odors, to choose their preferred odors among pairs, to
re-evaluate odors, and to perform an unexpected memory test concerning their choices. After one week, participants were asked to evaluate
one more time the odors, and to do choices between pairs similar to
those presented the previous week. Results revealed the existence of
post-choice preference changes, in the sense of an overvaluation of chosen odors and a devaluation of rejected ones, even when choices were
forgotten. These results suggest that chemosensory preferences can be
modulated by explicit choices and that such modulation might rely on
implicit mechanisms. This finding rules out any explanation of postchoice preference changes in terms of experimental demand and
strongly challenges the classical cognitive dissonance reduction account
of such preference changes. Moreover, preliminary results showed that
this choice-induced preference modulation was still present after one
week and the congruence between the choices made the first time and
after one week was high. This result invites to further consider the
importance of implicit processing in preference acquisition and stability
across time.

139

Poster Session D
D101

COOPERATIVITY BETWEEN THE HIPPOCAMPUS AND VENTROMEDIAL
PREFRONTAL CORTEX UNDERPINS CONCEPTUAL DECISION MAKING IN
HUMANS Dharshan Kumaran1,2, Jennifer Summerfield1, Demis Hassabis1,

Eleanor Maguire1; 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging at University
College London, London, 2Stanford University, Palo Alto, California — Concepts lie at the very heart of intelligence, providing organizing principles
with which to comprehend the world. Surprisingly little, however, is
understood about how concepts are acquired, and influence decision
making. To address this question, we developed a paradigm, previously
shown to be hippocampal-dependent, where participants received monetary reward by accurately predicting the outcomes associated with individual fractal patterns. Importantly, efficient performance on this task
necessitated a conceptual understanding of the task structure, which
could be achieved by integrating associative information across related
fractal patterns. Using a combination of functional magnetic resonance
imaging, and on-line behavioral indices of associative and conceptual
learning, we demonstrate that a functionally coupled circuit involving
the hippocampus and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vMPFC) underpins the emergence of conceptual knowledge, and its effect on choice
behavior. Critically, activity in the hippocampus alone showed a robust
correlation with participants’ ability to transfer this knowledge schema
to a perceptually novel setting, consistent with a role for this brain region
in housing abstract conceptual representations of the task structure.
These findings provide evidence that the hippocampus supports conceptual learning through the networking of discrete memories, and reveal
the nature of its interaction with downstream valuation modules such as
the vMPFC. Our study offers neurobiological insights into the remarkable capacity of humans to discover the conceptual structure of related
experiences, and use this knowledge to solve exacting decision problems.

D102

AN INVESTIGATION INTO CATEGORY LEARNING SYSTEM SWITCHING

Brian Spiering1, Carol Seger1; 1Colorado State University — Much recent evidence suggests that human category learning is mediated by multiple
systems. The present study investigates participants’ ability to switch
between these category learning systems. One group of participants
were initially trained on three different rule-based categories. At transfer
the participants switched between the three rule-based categories every
10-15 trials. A second group of participants followed the same procedure
with three different unstructured categories. A third group of participants followed the same procedure with three different informationintegration categories. Performance during transfer was higher for both
participants switching between the rule-based and unstructured categories compared to participants switching between information-integration categories. The participants switching between informationintegration categories performed above chance during transfer. A final
group followed the same procedure with one rule-based, one unstructured, and one information-integration categories. Participant performance during transfer was higher during rule-based and unstructured
categorization compared to information-integration categorization.
Information-integration performance was still greater than chance. Collectively, these results suggest that humans have the ability to rapidly
switch between different categorization strategies and subsequent systems.

D103

THE TIME COURSE OF THE VALUE SIGNAL AT THE TIME OF CHOICE

Alison Harris1, Ralph Adolphs1, Colin C. Camerer1, Antonio Rangel1; 1California
Institute of Technology — It is widely thought that the brain makes decisions by first assigning values to the stimuli under consideration, and
then comparing those values to select the best one. While a growing
body of work has shown that the medial orbitofrontal and dorsolateral
prefrontal cortices play a key role in computing these value signals, the
time profile of such signals remains largely unknown. We investigated

140

Thinking: Decision Making
this question by measuring brain activity using event-related potentials
(ERP), while subjects made choices for the right to eat or avoid having to
eat a variety of appetitive (e.g., chocolate) and aversive (e.g., baby food)
foods at the end of the experiment. We have found that while early (170250 ms post-stimulus-onset) peaks in the whole brain trial-averaged ERP
signal already carry coarse information about the value assigned to the
stimuli, neural responses consistent with actual choices only appear
beginning at latencies of about 400 ms, primarily over central sensors. In
line with previous work on perceptual decision-making, these results
not only place decision processes within a set time window, but also provide a first step in characterizing valuation networks in the human brain
within the temporal domain.

D104

PASSIVE VALUATION SIGNALS PREDICT POST-HOC CHOICES WITH
HIGH-ACCURACY Alec Smith1, Sean Jezewski1, B. Douglas Bernheim2,

Colin Camerer1, Antonio Rangel1; 1California Institute of Technology, 2Stanford
University — An open question in neuroeconomics is whether the brain is
constantly evaluating stimuli on the environment, or if it does so only
when the value signals are necessary to make a choice. We investigated
this question using an fMRI task that has two parts. First, subjects were
scanned while they passively viewed images of snack foods. Second, in a
surprise post-scanning task they were asked to make real choices
between subsets of the snacks shown in the scanner. Using a semi-parametric 'searchlight' procedure we found that the relative BOLD
responses to the passive exposure of foods in the anterior cingulate cortex, medial orbitofrontal cortex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and portions of the visual cortex predicted with high-accuracy the behavior in
the post-scan choice task. The results point to the existence of pervasive
valuation in the human brain.

D105

REWARD EXPECTATION MODULATES MOTION DISCRIMINATION
PERFORMANCE VIA SETTING THE DECISION-MAKING THRESHOLD AND
EVIDENCE-ACCUMULATION-SPEED: A DOPAMINE DEPLETION FMRI
STUDY Atsuko Nagano1, Paul Cisek2, Andrea Perna3, Fatemeh Shirdel1,

Marco Leyton3, Chawki Benkelfat3, Alain Dagher1; 1Brain Imaging Centre,
Montréal Neurological Institute, 2University de Montréal, 3Neurology and
Neurosurgery, McGill University — We aimed to investigate how dopamine
and prior information modulates task-related brain activity during a
motion discrimination task. 17 subjects underwent fMRI scans on two
different days: once after drinking an amino acid mixture deficient in the
dopamine precursors tyrosine and phenylalanine (TPD), and once after
drinking a balanced amino acid mixture (BAL). The task involved detecting the motion direction of a random-dot motion stimulus. Prior to each
trial, auditory and visual (AV) cues informed whether there would be a
monetary reward for a correct decision. We hypothesized that the decision to choose either left or right direction is based on a linear accumulation of evidence from an initial level related to prior probability. A
decision is made when evidence reaches a certain threshold. We used the
method of Carpenter and Williams (Nature 1995) to estimate a decisionmaking-threshold index (T-index), and an evidence-accumulation-speed
index (A-index). When comparing rewarded to non-rewarded trials,
reward expectation was associated with greater activation in extensive
cortico-striatal areas (dorsolateral prefrontal, anterior insula, bilateral
caudate) and visual areas while observing the random-dots motion stimulus. The former was observed only in the BAL session. T-index difference was positively correlated with activity in the cortico-striatal areas.
This suggests that the cortico-striatal system may be involved in setting
the decision-making threshold or the initial activity level using cue information, and that this phenomenon is dopamine-dependent. In the BAL
session, the A-index difference (rewarded versus non-rewarded trials)
was negatively correlated with activation in the inferior parietal sulcus
during the response period.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Thinking: Decision Making
D106

BOLD FMRI ACCUMULATION SIGNALS MODULATE BASED ON THE
CONSISTENCY OF EVIDENCE DURING PERCEPTUAL DECISIONS

Elisabeth Ploran1, Joshua Tremel1, Mark Wheeler1; 1University of Pittsburgh —
A previous study (Ploran et al., 2007) has shown that an extended recognition paradigm in which objects are slowly revealed can create accumulating BOLD signals prior to recognition. These effects were observed in
select parietal, temporal, and frontal areas as recorded through functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in humans. However, the
quantity of perceptual evidence throughout the trial increased in the
original study, limiting interpretation of the data. The current study further examined the accumulation response during perceptual decisionmaking by maintaining a constant amount of perceptual evidence and
sometimes altering the consistency of the evidence. Greyscale objects
were presented underneath a checkerboard-like mask with randomly
spaced transparencies that changed in sync with each new whole brain
image. This produced high quality but consistent limited quantity evidence throughout the trial. In addition, on certain trials the object underneath the mask alternated between two similarly shaped, but not
identical objects. This manipulation tested whether accumulation occurs
due to attentional needs even without consistent evidence. Despite a
consistent limited quantity of evidence, accumulation was still found in
bilateral inferior frontal gyrus, bilateral fusiform, and left intraparietal
sulcus. Furthermore, changing the picture underneath the mask as an
alteration of available evidence decreased the overall magnitude of accumulation, but did not affect sensory or execution processes. These findings support the possibility that accumulating BOLD signals reflect
signal integration over time.

D107

A MODEL-FREE APPROACH TO QUANTIFYING REWARD RELATED BOLD
RESPONSES IN HUMAN STRIATUM AND MIDBRAIN Eric DeWitt1, Paul

Glimcher1; 1New York University — Recent work in humans and animals has

demonstrated that the phasic activity of the midbrain dopamine neuronal activity correlates with the reward prediction error (RPE) of standard reinforcement learning (RL) models. While functional MRI results
suggest that the BOLD response is also correlated with RPE in similar
tasks, no attempt as been made to to quantitatively describe the BOLD
response during RL tasks. We use a novel RL task designed to elicit continuous RPEs and a model-free linear analysis to quantitatively describe
the BOLD RPE response as a function of the history of reinforcement
received by the subject. Traditional approaches assume highly constrained parametric RL models to locate RPE related BOLD responses.
To quantitatively assess the reinforcement related BOLD response we
adapt the approach used in Bayer and Glimcher (2004). Using a novel RL
task where the optimal policy is known and is approximated by standard RL models, we fit a linear model that predicts subjects’ choices
from the history of received reinforcement. We then fit a linear model
that predicts BOLD response from the history of reinforcement. We then
can perform a psychometic-neurometric match of the learning functions.
Assuming only linearity in reward history, we can quantitatively test the
hypothesis that the BOLD response reflects an RPE signal by comparing
the linear weighting to the signature of standard RL learning: an exponential weighting of prior reinforcement. We observe both chosen value
and the RPE computations in the anatomically defined nucleus accumbens as predicted by RL theory.

D108

A META-ANALYSIS OF NEURAL REACTIVITY TO FOOD AND SMOKING
CUES: DOES OUR BRAIN RESPOND TO FOOD AND DRUG CUES IN THE
SAME WAY? Deborah Tang1,2, B. Hello1, L. Fellows1, A. Dagher; 1Montréal

Neurological Institute, Montréal, Canada, 2McGill University, Montréal,
Canada — In healthy individuals, food cues can trigger hunger and feeding behaviour. Likewise, smoking cues can trigger craving and relapse in
smokers. Research suggests a common neural response following exposure to food or nicotine cues in rats, suggesting that addictive drugs and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session D
natural rewards such as food both elicit one system—the appetitive
reward system of the brain. While this has been established in rats, it is
not known whether visual food or visual nicotine (smoking) cues elicit a
common neural response in humans. Here we investigate the neural network activated by: 1) food versus neutral cues 2) smoking versus neutral
cues, by carrying out a meta-analysis of human neuro-imaging studies.
PubMed was used to identify all cue-reactivity imaging studies. Thirteen
articles were identified for the food meta-analysis and thirteen articles
were identified for the smoking meta-analysis. Meta-analyses were carried out using activation likelihood estimation. Food cues were associated with increased BOLD response in the left amygdala, bilateral insula,
bilateral orbital frontal cortex (OFC), and the striatum. Smoking cues
were associated with increased BOLD response in the same areas. These
brain areas are commonly found to be involved learning, memory and
motivation. Using meta-analytic techniques to combine a series of studies, we found that food and smoking cues activate comparable brain networks. This suggests that food and drug cues both activate an appetitive
system of the brain, and that there is significant overlap in brain regions
moderating neural responses to conditioned cues associated with natural
and drug rewards.

D109

THE TASK MATTERS: SENSITIVITY OF THE FRN TO FEEDBACK VALENCE IN
GAMBLING VERSUS NONGAMBLING PARADIGMS Angela Dzyundzyak1,

Diane Santesso1, Sidney Segalowitz1; 1Brock University, St. Catharines, ON —
The feedback-related negativity (FRN) is a negative-going component in
the ERP following the P200 component in response to feedback that
shows greater amplitude when the feedback indicates a failure to
achieve task goals. Our study examined FRNs with respect to the
valence of feedback in two differing tasks: (1) a pure gambling task
(PGT) where participants chose between two cards of different magnitude, the valence (win/loss) of their choice being revealed in feedback
after the choice; and (2) a speeded response task (SRT) where participants were presented with a cue indicating whether the trial's outcome
could potentially involve winning or losing money. Responding quickly
enough earned money on "win" trials and avoided losing money on
"loss" trials. Slow responses earned nothing on win trials and incurred
losing money on loss trials. We compared the FRN's sensitivity to
valence of the feedback within and across the tasks. In the PGT task, the
FRN was larger to feedback indicating a loss, as expected; however, in
the SRT task, the FRN was larger to feedback indicating success. Thus,
while the FRN is sensitive to the valence of the feedback, this relationship is modulated by the context. Theoretical implications for understanding the FRN are discussed.

D110

THE EFFECT OF TESTOSTERONE ON BRAIN FUNCTION ASSOCIATED WITH
MENTAL ROTATION IN SCHIZOPHRENIA WOMEN Jose Jimenez1,2, Nadia

Lakis1,2, Adham Mancini-Marië1,2, Annie Dubé1,3, Pierre Lalonde1,2, Marc
Lavoie1,2, Adrianna Mendrek1,2; 1Centre de Recherche Fernand Seguin, LouisH Lafontaine Hospital, Montréal, Canada, 2University of Montréal, Montréal,
Canada, 3Concordia University, Montréal, Canada — The effects of testosterone on visuo-spatial abilities have been relatively well documented in
healthy individuals. Investigations of the influence of sex steroid hormones on visuo-spatial abilities in schizophrenia patients are lacking.
Our objective was to examine the effect of testosterone on performance
and brain activation during a mental rotation task (MR) in schizophrenia
women (SZ-W) and in healthy women (HW) during two different phases
of the menstrual cycle. 15 SZ-W were compared to 15 HW during performance of a classic MR adopted from Sheppard & Meltzer. The subjects
were scanned twice, two weeks apart at two stages of their menstrual
cycle. Hormonal levels were determined from blood samples taken
before each scan. We found that SZ-W demonstrated significantly higher
levels of testosterone relative to HW and a significant negative correlation was observed between accuracy and testosterone levels in SZ-W.
Also, we found a negative correlation in SZ-W between testosterone and

141

Poster Session D
brain function in the first half of the cycle that included the bilateral frontal gyrus, left(L)-cuneus, and right(R)-middle temporal gyrus and in the
second half of the cycle in the R-precentral and R-postcentral gyrus. In
contrast, a positive correlation was observed between testosterone and
cerebral activity in HW in the L-superior temporal cortex and in the Lcaudate but only in the second half of the cycle. The results observed in
HW are congruent with previous reports in the general population. In
SZ-W, the findings suggest that testosterone might have a deleterious
effect on performance and brain activation during mental rotation.

D111

FUTURE DECISION-MAKING WITHOUT EPISODIC MENTAL TIME
TRAVEL Donna Kwan1, Carl F. Craver2, Leonard Green2, Joel Myerson2,

Pascal Boyer2, R. Shayna Rosenbaum1,3; 1York University, Toronto, Canada,

2Washington University in St. Louis, MO, 3Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest,

Toronto, Canada — Both neuroimaging and patient studies show that the
ability to remember events from one’s past (episodic memory) and the
ability to envision events in one’s future (episodic future thinking) are
tightly interconnected: Both activities recruit similar brain regions, and
the loss of one ability due to an injury is typically accompanied by loss of
the other ability. However, it is unclear if all aspects of future-oriented
thought are lost in the event of such injury, or whether some aspects
including future decision-making are spared. The present study investigates whether lost ability for mental time travel precludes the ability to
consider the future in the context of economic decision-making. To
address this question, we tested an episodic amnesic person and
matched controls on an established behavioural economics task (temporal discounting) that gauges participants’ ability to forgo smaller shortterm gains for larger long-term gains. Performance is taken to reflect
one’s evaluation of future rewards and how value decreases as a function of delay. Variability in performance was assessed by having the
patient and controls complete the task several times over a period of
approximately one week. Results show that despite lost ability for mental time travel (i.e. remembering his past or envisioning his future) the
episodic amnesic person nonetheless evaluated future outcomes in a
fashion similar to controls. Variability in his performance across testing
occasions did not differ from the inter-subject variability of controls.
These results indicate that some types of future-oriented thought such as
decision-making do not require mental time travel.
D112

RISKY DECISION-MAKING IN YOUNG CHILDREN ACTIVATES
PREFRONTAL AND POSTERIOR PARIETAL REGIONS David Paulsen1,2,3,

McKell Carter2,3, Michael Platt2,3,5, Scott Huettel1,2,3,4, Elizabeth Brannon1,2,3;
Psychology & Neuroscience, Duke University, 2Center for Cognitive
Neuroscience, Duke University, 3Center for Neuroeconomic Studies, Duke
University, 4Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, Duke University,
5
Neurobiology, Duke University — Previous imaging studies with adult par1

ticipants have found specific regions of prefrontal cortex (PFC) and posterior parietal cortex to be associated with risky decision-making.
However, studies of risky decision-making in children have been relatively few in number, with little yet known about individual differences.
Young children (6-7 years old) made decisions about probabilistic and
certain rewards (i.e., tokens that could be later traded for toys) while
event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging data were
acquired. On Sure Bet trials, participants chose between two certain
options that differed in value, whereas the Gamble trials involved a
choice between two options with similar expected value but different
levels of Risk. For each participant, we calculated economic risk preferences that were used as covariates in the general linear model of the
imaging data analysis. Activation in orbitofrontal cortex, dorsolateral
PFC, and medial PFC regions was negatively correlated with risk preference during active decision making. Posterior parietal cortex was also
active when children made decisions and was more active during Gamble than Sure Bet trials. Furthermore, winning and losing outcomes elicited activation in regions associated with reward and executive function.

142

Thinking: Decision Making
Together, these results indicate that the neural systems involved with
adult decision-making are already present in young children, and that
individual differences in children’s risk preferences shape the activation
of these regions.

D113

DECISION-MAKING IN OLDER ADULTS: SOMETIMES OLDER IS WISER

Darrell Worthy1, Tanya Chotibut1, Jennifer L. Pacheco1, W. Todd Maddox1;
1
University of Texas at Austin — Previous work in our lab demonstrated
that younger adults were more efficient than older adults at exploiting
short-term gains in a decision-making task. Experiment 1 of the current
study examined the performance of healthy younger (aged 18-24) and
older adults (aged 61-87) in the same decision-making task but one that
required efficient exploration of options with lower expected values for
optimal long-term performance. The results from Experiment 1 indicated that older adults are more willing to sample from options with
lower expected values which led to better overall decision–making performance. Experiment 2 examined the performance of younger and older
adults in a dynamic decision making task that required exploring longterm increasing options that had worse short term gains, but that eventually yielded higher rewards. Preliminary results from Experiment 2 indicate that older adults are more willing to sample the long-term
increasing option earlier in the task than the Younger adults. Within the
Older adult groups in both Experiments there was a positive relationship between age and long-term advantageous choices. These results
coincide with behavioral and neuroimaging data that suggest that older
adults may develop less stringent stimulus-reward relationships , possibly due to age-related decline in the striatum and areas of the prefrontal
cortex (Mell et al., 2005; Schott et al., 2007; Samanez-Larkin et al., 2007).
While, under some conditions this leads to poorer decision-making in
older adults, under other conditions (e.g., when performance was contingent on full exploration of the decision-space), older adults outperformed their younger counterparts.

D114

VENTROMEDIAL FRONTAL LESIONS DISRUPT THE OUTCOME, BUT NOT
THE TIMING, OF SIMPLE PREFERENCE JUDGMENTS Alexandre HenriBhargava1,2, Alison C. Simioni3,4, Lesley K. Fellows3,4; 1University of Toronto,
2
Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, 3McGill University, 4Montréal
Neurological Institute — Several lines of evidence suggest that the ventro-

medial frontal lobe (VMF) represents the economic value of options.
Work from our lab has shown that patients with lesions to VMF are less
consistent than controls in making simple preference judgments. Deliberation time in such decisions is known to relate to the “distance”
between the values of the options under consideration: Items of similar
value take longer to choose between. We investigated whether this relationship would hold true in patients with VMF damage. Sixteen VMF
and 10 non-VMF frontal injured participants were recruited from databases at McGill University and the University of Pennsylvania. These
were compared to 24 demographically-matched healthy controls. A preference task was administered requiring subjects to indicate their preference for 12 stimuli (pictures of puppies) presented two at a time, in all
possible combinations. Participants were asked to make their preference
decisions accurately, but as quickly as possible. Choices were analyzed
for internal consistency and reaction time was recorded as a function of
the “value distance” between the choices presented at each trial, inferred
from the overall pattern of choices. VMF patients were significantly
more erratic than both non-VMF injured and healthy control participants
in their judgments. There was a non-significant trend towards slower
decisions in the VMF group, but the relationship between decision time
and value distance was preserved. VMF damage thus leads to impaired
decision-making without equivocation. This may be a useful starting
point for understanding the link between poor judgment and poor
insight in such patients.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Thinking: Decision Making
D115

HOW POST-DECISION CONFIDENCE MODULATES PERFORMANCE
MONITORING: EVIDENCE FROM THE FEEDBACK-EVOKED POTENTIALS

Karim N'Diaye1,2,3, Iris Knierim1,2,3, Valentin Wyart1,2,3, Catherine TallonBaudry1,2,3; 1Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, Centre de Recherche de
l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle epiniere, UMR-S975, Paris, France,
2
Inserm, U975, Paris, France, 3Cnrs, UMR 7225, Paris, France — Investigations in animal neurophysiology have recently identified neural correlates of post-decisional confidence, however human data on this topic
remain scant. In particular, it is still unclear how subjective confidence
may be used as a internal source of information on one's performance
and interact with external sources, such as feedback. We therefore studied how feedback-evoked potentials would be modulated by the degree
of subjective confidence while healthy human participants were performing a visual numerosity judgment task. On each trial, after giving
their response on the number of dots in an array, participants rated their
subjective confidence on a scale; then a feedback was displayed indicating whether they were correct or not on their numerosity judgment. By
mean of online adjustment, objective performance for each individual
was maintained constant. This allowed us to obtain enough trials with
relatively high and low confidence ratings for both correct and incorrect
responses for computing event-related potentials from the EEG. As
expected, the difference wave between potentials evoked by incorrect
minus correct feedback revealed a feedback-related negative potential
around 300ms after feedback onset, the feedback-negativity. Interestingly, this response was located both over parietal and frontal regions
and its amplitude was significantly increased in high-confidence trials.
The topography of this modulation showed a right frontal peak occuring
slightly later in time (~320ms) revealing a significant interaction between
confidence and feedback. These data shed light on the time-course of
performance monitoring showing that external information is first processed and then integrated with internal indices, such as subjective confidence.

D116

VISUAL ATTENTION GUIDES THE COMPARISON OF VALUE IN MULTI-ITEM
CHOICE Ian Krajbich1, Johannes Pulst-Korenberg1, Antonio Rangel1;
1California Institute of Technology — Most

organisms make choices by first
assigning values to the options under consideration and then comparing
them. However, little is know about how values are compared or about
the role of attention in this process. Here we propose a computational
model of how visual attention guides the comparison process in choices
between any number of items and test it using eye-tracking. The model
is a variant of the race-to-barrier models of perceptual decision-making
with an important modification: visual attention guides the path of integration of the relative value signal. We test the model using a 3-item
choice task, where hungry subjects make choices by looking at pictures
of snacks. The results show that visual attention plays a strong role in the
comparison of values even though the pattern of fixations is largely
independent of the underlying values. This leads to various choice biases
that result in systematic suboptimal decision making.

D117

WHEN YOU KEEP CHANGING YOUR MIND: THE NEURAL BASIS OF
PREFERENCE REVERSALS Jessica Stump1, Joseph Kable1; 1University of
Pennsylvania — Systematic inconsistencies in people’s choices provide a
central challenge to rational choice theories. One example of such an
inconsistency is the task-induced preference reversal, in which people
choose one option over another, but then bid a higher price for the nonchosen option. Such inconsistencies have been attributed either to context-dependent changes in valuation, or to mistakes caused by simplifying heuristics. We gathered neuroimaging data to inform the debate
about the cause of preference reversals. Preference reversals were elicited using a risky gamble paradigm in 20 subjects undergoing fMRI.
Given the choice between a gamble with a high probability of winning a
small amount of money (termed the P-bet, e.g., 84% chance of $20) and a

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session D
gamble with a low probability of winning a greater amount (termed the
$-bet, e.g., 24% chance of $70), subjects chose the P-bet 70% of the time.
However, when asked to provide separate bids for the paired gambles,
subjects assigned a higher dollar value to the $-bet 64% of the time. Preliminary analyses suggest that during bids but not choices, anterior dorsolateral prefrontal regions exhibited greater activity for $-bets
compared to P-bets. Furthermore, the size of this effect was correlated
across subjects with the number of preference reversals. To the extent
that dorsolateral prefrontal cortex has been implicated in heuristic- or
rule-based decision-making, these results support the argument that
task-induced preference reversals arise due to a heuristic that leads to
overbidding on $-bets.

D118

THE ERP STUDY IN A MODIFIED IGT Hui-kuan Chung1, Nai-Shing Yen1,2, IChen Chou1, Chang-Hao Kao1, Tsung-Han Yang1, Bie-Shuein Chu1; 1National
Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Research Center for Mind, Brain, and
Learning, National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan — The present study
used a modified Iowa Gambling Task (IGT-E) and recorded eventrelated potential (ERP) to investigate the brain mechanisms. The IGT-E
presented gain, loss and accumulation of money sequentially. The feedback-related negativity (FRN) is the ERP component reflecting the negative feedback and prediction conflict. Thus, FRN after gain feedback, loss
feedback, and accumulation of money were analyzed. The behavioral
data revealed the same result as Bechara’s study (Bechara et al., 1994).
Moreover, in loss condition, there were main effects in expected value
and in risk level. The risk level is defined as the frequency of loss and the
amount of loss on each trial. In specific, the high risk deck is the one with
lower frequency but greater amount of loss. The higher FRN was
observed in the deck with positive expected value than the deck with
negative expected value. In addition, the higher FRN was observed in
the deck with high risk level than with low risk level. Further analysis
showed that the higher FRN was induced in the deck with positive
expected value and high risk level than the other decks. This result consisted with the past studies for prediction conflict. The deck with positive expected value is expected to be good, and therefore a big loss is
unexpected, which resulted in higher FRN. However, no significant
effect was found on FRN in gain condition and accumulation of money
condition. Compared with three different brain regions, the FRN was
higher in Fz than in Cz and Pz.

D119

DISSOCIATED DECISION PROCESSES UNDER TIME PRESSURE IN THE
IOWA GAMBLING TASK I-Chen Chou1, Nai-Shing Yen1,2, Chang-Hao Kao1,

Hui-Kuan Chung1, Tsung-Han Yang1; 1National Chengchi University, Taipei,
Taiwan, 2Research Center for Mind, Brain, and Learning, National Chengchi
University, Taipei, Taiwan — The Iowa Gambling Task is widely used to
investigate the relationships between emotions and decision making in
behavioral and neuropsychological research. A different concept is proposed that the performance in the IGT reflects two dissociated processes:
analytic reasoning process and heuristic judgments process. The analytic
reasoning process tracks the long-term payoff of each option, while the
heuristic judgments process is sensitive to the frequency of losses under
risk. There were two variables manipulated in the present study,
namely, the phase of the card selection (learning and decision phases)
and the time pressure. A modified IGT (IGT-M) is used in this experiment. In IGT-M, all participants took part in two phases (the learning
and the decision phases). After the learning phase with feedback display,
participants would perform a ‘‘blind’’ card selection phase without
receiving any feedback in the decision phase. The time pressure is design
to enhance participants ‘ cognitive loading. Each of them was randomly
assigned to the time pressure condition or no time pressure condition.
The result revealed that the first learning phase required central cognitive resources to assess long-term payoff. Moreover, under the time pressure, participant made more risk decisions in the decision phase.

143

Poster Session D
D120

NEURAL SUBSTRATE OF ANTICIPATORY TIME PERCEPTION AND TIME
DISCOUNTING Li Jiang1, B. Kyu Kim1, Gal Zauberman1, Joseph W. Kable1;
1University of Pennsylvania — People

often face decisions, such as saving
for retirement, that involve choosing between payoffs that occur at different points in time. Such decisions are called intertemporal choices.
Previous research has suggested that the subjective perception of future
time intervals might explain anomalies in intertemporal choice. However, while the neural substrates of perceiving experienced time have
been well studied, we know little about the neural mechanisms involved
in judging future time, or how these mechanisms might relate to those
involved in intertemporal choice. We scanned subjects with fMRI while
they performed anticipatory time perception and intertemporal choice
tasks. In the anticipatory time perception task, we asked subjects to mark
on a horizontal line their subjective sense of a future duration, from
“very short” to “very long.” In intertemporal choice, we asked subjects
what amount of money now would be subjectively equivalent to receiving $75 dollars after a certain delay. Consistent with previous work, we
found that anticipatory time perception follows a power law and that
intertemporal choice follows hyperbolic discounting. We also observed
that brain activity in right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex was correlated
with each person’s subjective percept of future durations, even after
accounting for its relationship with objective duration. These regions do
not overlap with those that track the subjective value of future rewards
in the intertemporal choice task, but they do include regions previously
implicated in experienced time perception. Ongoing work is investigating interactions between brain regions involved in anticipatory time perception and in intertemporal decision-making.

D121

TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION ALTERING RISK
PREFERENCES Ikuya Nomura1, Haruaki Fukuda1, Kazuhiro Ueda1; 1The
University of Tokyo — We human are frequently urged to make decision
which goes with risk assessment. Some always takes the risky choices
while others always or at least sometimes avert them. This occurs just
because our utility functions which determine our attitude against risks
differs between each other. Previous studies have shown that concurrent
anodal transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) over the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex(DLPFC) with the cathodal tDCS over the left
DLPFC reduces the choice of high risk prospects at some risk tasks.
Here, our study’s aim is to indicate that tDCS does not only influence a
ratio of risky choices at a specific risk task, but it affects one’s utility
function itself. To elicit one's utility function, we used Abdellaoui’s
method which asks a subject repeatedly to choose a lottery between two
thar differ in risk. Subjects received right anodal/ left cathodal tDCS, left
anodal/ right cathodal tDCS, sham stimulation and we elicited their utility functions at each stimulation. As predicted, subject’s utility function
during receiving right anodal/ left cathodal tDCS was more risk aversive than that during receiving left anodal/ right cathodal tDCS.

D122

A NOVEL OUTCOME-OVEREXPECTATION TASK IN HUMANS AS A
COGNITIVE ANALOG OF PAVLOVIAN US-OVEREXPECTATION Dale

Swanton1, Geoffrey Schoenbaum2, Mark Gluck1; 1Center for Molecular and
Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Newark, 2University of Maryland
School of Medicine — We present a novel outcome-overexpectation task
and discuss data from healthy controls. Our task is based on the Pavlovian paradigm of US-Overexpectation in which a CS loses some of its
associative strength due to repeated pairings with another CS in compound, following prior training to both CSs independently. This phenomenon has been explained in animal learning by the error-correcting
principle of the Rescorla-Wagner model (Rescorla & Wagner, 1972),
which argues that the negative prediction error caused by a violation of
overexpectation will reduce the associative strength of the individual
stimuli. Overexpectation has been observed frequently in the animal literature (Kehoe & White, 2004; Takahashi et al., 2009), but to a lesser

144

Thinking: Decision Making
extent in humans (Collins & Shanks, 2006). Here, participants were
trained that various energy drinks (CSs) predicted how far a fictional
soccer player kicked a ball. A one-way analysis of variance revealed a
significant weakening of response to the critical test cue relative to control cues (F [2, 26] = 6.965, p = .004), indicating that overexpectation had
occurred. The orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) has been strongly implicated in
animal studies of US-overexpectation (Schoenbaum et al., 2003; Takahashi et al., 2009), leading to the possible use of such a task in humans as
a tool for studying neurological and psychiatric disorders that involve
the OFC.

D123

TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION (TDCS) FACILITATES
DECISION MAKING IN A PROBABILITY GUESSING TASK David Hecht1,2,

Vincent Walsh2, Michal Lavidor1; 1University of Hull, UK, 2University College
London, UK — In a random sequence of binary events where one alternative occurs more often that the other, humans tend to guess which of the
two alternatives will occur next by trying to match the frequencies of
previous occurrences. Based on split-brain and unilateral damaged
patients it has been proposed that the left hemisphere (LH) tends to
match the frequencies, while the right hemisphere (RH) tends towards
maximizing and always choosing the most frequent alternative. The current study used transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to test this
hemispheric asymmetry hypothesis by stimulating the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of each hemisphere and simultaneously inhibiting the corresponding region in the other hemisphere, while participants were
engaged in a probability guessing task. Results showed no difference in
strategy between the three groups (RH anodal/LH cathodal, LH
anodal/RH cathodal, no stimulation) as participants always tended to
match the frequencies of the two alternatives. However, when anodal
tDCS was applied to the LH and cathodal tDCS applied to the RH, we
observed a clear and steady reduction, over the blocks of trials, in
response times for selecting the most-frequent option. This finding is in
line with previous evidence on the involvement of the LH in probabilistic learning and reasoning. In addition, it may also reflect the LH relative
disinhibitory inclination and its greater role in decision processes, as
well as its propensity for overinterpretation and premature conclusions
based on insufficient evidence.

D124

THE SCARCITY HEURISTIC IMPACTS ERROR EVALUATION WITHIN
MEDIAL-FRONTAL CORTEX Boaz Y. Saffer1, Olav E. Krigolson1, Todd C.

Handy; 1The University of British Columbia (UBC) — Humans utilize heuristics – rules of thumb – to simplify the decision making process. For
instance, the scarcity heuristic is an assumption that scarce resources are
more inherently valuable than frequent resources, even in the absence of
information affirming the validity of this assumption. Here, we predicted that error evaluation within medial-frontal cortex would be
impacted by the scarcity heuristic. Specifically, we predicted that the
amplitude of the error-related negativity (ERN), a component of the
event-related brain potential (ERP) thought to reflect a reinforcement
learning prediction error, would be impacted by stimulus probability.
Participants played a game in which they were presented with twentyfive gambles on each trial. The twenty-five gambles were colour coded
into an infrequent and a frequent subset of gambles. On each trial participants picked six of the twenty-five available gambles and were provided with feedback about the results of each gamble. Participants were
given no information about the relationship between the colour, frequency, and results of the gambles. Unbeknownst to participants, feedback for each gamble was random. An analysis of the feedback averaged
ERP waveforms revealed an ERN for both frequent and infrequent gambles. Further, the amplitude of the ERN for infrequent gambles was
greater than that for frequent gambles – even though the actual number
of gambles in each category (frequent, infrequent) was the same. In sum,
our results suggest that error evaluation within medial-frontal cortex
does not rely solely on reinforcement learning principles, but instead
also takes into account heuristics.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Thinking: Decision Making
D125

DECISION-MAKING GUIDED BY THE INFERRED VALUE OF UNSAMPLED
STIMULI Karin Cox1,2, Julie Fiez1,2; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2Center for the
Neural Basis of Cognition — Lockhart et al. (1963) asked whether monkeys
who had developed a discrimination learning set (i.e., achieved ceiling
accuracy on all but the initial trial of novel discriminations) could learn a
second task that required inferences regarding the value of initiallyunsampled objects. In the new task, each sampled Trial 1 object was
replaced with a novel object (with the same reward value) on Trial 2. The
monkeys did not exceed chance performance on this task. We asked
whether humans, provided with no verbal clues, would fare better. Ten
undergraduates (18-20 y, 5 males) completed a modified version of the
Lockhart et al. (1963) experiment, consisting of training on deterministic
pattern discrimination followed by the introduction of the replacement
manipulation. Both the training and replacement phases were terminated following attainment of 90% Trial 2 accuracy within a 20-problem
block or completion of 25 total blocks. Criterion performance was
achieved by 9/10 subjects, although the number of blocks required to
reach criterion was surprisingly variable for the replacement phase
(range = 1 - 20, mean = 8.33). Subjects’ difficulty with this task may have
been largely driven by problems in which a Trial 1 rewarded stimulus
was replaced; these problems yielded less accurate performance relative
to those in which a nonrewarded stimulus was replaced (p = 0.04). Our
findings confirm that humans can take advantage of the inferred value
of an unsampled stimulus, but their tendency to do so may be subject to
attentional biases and individual differences in strategy use.

D126

PREFERENCE FOR POSITIVE VERSUS NEGATIVE-FEEDBACK LEARNING
IN PARKINSON’S PATIENTS AT RISK FOR IMPULSE CONTROL
DISORDERS Szabolcs Keri1, Rachel Jonas2, Mark A. Gluck2; 1Semmelweis
University, Hungary, 2Rutgers University, Newark — Parkinson's patients who

subsequently developed impulse control disorders (ICDs) such as compulsive gambling or hypersexuality showed a higher than normal preference for learning from positive feedback in a probabilistic
categorization task when first put on dopamine agonist treatment, as
compared to other Parkinson's patients who did not develop ICDs or to
matched healthy controls. These patients were a subset of the patients
originally tested in the study reported last year as Bodi et al. (2009, Brain)
in which young medication-naive patients showed an impairment in
learning from positive-feedback while those just recently placed on
dopamine agonists showed an impairment in learning from negativefeedback. The new longitudinal follow-up data suggests that susceptibility to ICDs may result from a dopamine-agonist induced hypersensitivity in processing positive feedback and other rewards.

D127

THE INFLUENCE OF ACUTE STRESS ON REWARD PROCESSING AND
DECISION MAKING Anthony J. Porcelli1, Mauricio R. Delgado1; 1Rutgers
University — Research suggests stress exposure modulates cognition
behaviorally (e.g., Patil et al., 1995) and neurally (e.g., Arnsten & Goldman-Rakic, 1998). Less is known about stress-related modulation of the
neural substrates of human decision making, however, a critical link to
learning to cope with maladaptive behaviors (e.g., drug addiction). The
goal of this study was to probe the influence of acute stress on financial
decision-making in humans. In this experiment participants engaged in
a gambling task during fMRI scanning under conditions of acute stress
(i.e., exposure to extreme cold) or no stress (i.e., a room temperature control). They made binary choices between gambles at varying levels of
perceived risk, presented separately in either the gain (e.g., a 20% chance
of winning $3.00 vs. an 80% chance of winning $0.75) or loss (e.g., a 20%
chance of losing $3.00 vs. an 80% chance of losing $0.75) domains. Participants’ choices were deemed “risky” or “conservative” based on probability of success. Salivary cortisol data were acquired; after acute stress
exposure cortisol levels were elevated. Behaviorally, participants’ risktaking increased under acute stress, particularly in the loss domain. At

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session D
decision, acute stress modulated BOLD responses with respect to decision domain and decision strategy in brain regions such as the anterior
cingulate, orbitofrontal cortex, striatum, and amygdala. In addition,
reward-related processing at the level of feedback in the striatum was
diminished under acute stress, suggesting that stress exposure influences reward processing at the neural level both while making decisions
and receiving feedback on past decisions.

D128

FINANCIAL EDUCATION REDUCES DELAY DISCOUNTING

Nicole
Senecal1, Joseph W. Kable1; 1University of Pennsylvania — When
making
decisions that involve tradeoffs between the quality and timing of desirable outcomes, people consistently discount the value of future outcomes. This discounting process is often measured in the laboratory by
asking subjects to choose between a smaller amount of money available
immediately and a larger amount available after a delay. Subjects who
discount highly on this task are more likely to exhibit problem behaviors
such as drug abuse and pathological gambling, and this task has been
widely used in neuroscience studies of decision-making. However, the
degree of discounting observed on this task is extremely puzzling from
an economic viewpoint. Since subjects are making decisions about
money, the normative economic strategy is to only turn down rates of
return from the experimenter that are lower than rates available on the
market. However, all studies of temporal discounting cite discount rates
that are significantly higher. Here we ask whether subjects discount to
such a degree because they are simply unaware of the normative economic argument. Subjects read a “financial education guide,” which
explicitly described the optimal decision strategy. Immediately after
reading the guide, discount rates decreased by 80%. After one month,
subjects’ discount rates had increased, but were still significantly lower
than before subjects had read the guide. This demonstrates that a simple
educational intervention can have a long-lasting effect on decision-making. Given this strong effect, this paradigm should prove useful for
studying neural mechanisms by which education can change behavior.

D129

DIFFERENTIAL NEURAL RESPONSES TO EXPECTED VALUE AND
UNCERTAINTY IN A MIXED-GAMBLE TASK AS REVEALED BY FUNCTIONAL
MRI Catherine L. Jones1,2, Ludovico Minati1, Neil A. Harrison1, Jamie Ward2,

Hugo D. Critchley1; 1Clinical Imaging Sciences Centre, Brighton and Sussex
Medical School, Brighton UK, 2University of Sussex, Brighton UK — In mixedgamble tasks, decisions are driven by integration of available information into abstract representations such as expected value, risk and uncertainty. Previous work has demonstrated that this process involves an
extended network of cortical and subcortical regions. Here, we explored
the regional specificity of neural responses to varying levels of expected
value and uncertainty, computed from proposed gambles characterised
by winning probability, potential loss and potential gain. Subjects were
not given any feedback. Region-of-interest analyses were performed for
cortical and subcortical regions using expected value and uncertainty as
factors. Percentage of bets increased with expected value and was not
influenced by uncertainty. A hierarchical ANOVA demonstrated differential regional responses to expected value and uncertainty. While no
activation effects were observed for the posterior insula, there were leftlateralised responses to expected value and uncertainty in the anterior
insula. No significant responses were observed for the amygdala and
pallidus-putamen complex. Conversely, the caudate and anterior cingulate cortex responded to both expected value and uncertainty, while the
dorsal and ventral prefrontal cortices differentially responded to uncertainty only. While activation in the anterior insula and cingulate followed a non-linear pattern, engagement of the caudate nucleus
increased monotonically with expected value. All uncertainty-sensitive
regions displayed greater activation for low uncertainty. No interactions
between the two factors were observed for any region. This study
extends previous neuroimaging and lesion literature in demonstrating

145

Poster Session D

Language: Development & Aging

that the distributed representations of expected value and uncertainty
supporting decision-making are differentially expressed in activation of
the insula, basal ganglia and prefrontal circuits.

Language: Development & Aging
D130

BRAIN STRUCTURAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN AUTISM SPECTRUM
YOUNG ADULTS WITH AND WITHOUT DELAYED SPEECH ACQUISITION

Krista Hyde1, Fabienne Samson2, Alan Evans1, Laurent Mottron2; 1McConnell
Brain Imaging Centre, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University,
2
Centre d'Excellence en Troubles Envahissants du Développement de
l'Université de Montréal (CETEDUM) — Autism exists across a wide spectrum and there is debate as to whether autism spectrum individuals with
average IQ and typical speech onset (‘’Asperger’s syndrome’’) should be
considered a distinct subgroup from those with delayed speech onset
(“Autism”). Here, we investigated whether cortical thickness (CT) in
young adults with autism can be distinguished based on whether they
have typical or delayed speech onset. Autism spectrum adults with
delayed speech onset had increased CT relative to the autism group with
typical speech onset in several cortical areas (bilateral cingulate and tranverse temporal gyri, left insula, superior marginal, occipital and frontal
gyri), but decreased CT in only the left postcentral and fusiform gyri.
One possibility is that these CT differences are related to differences in
the age of speech onset (and less likely due to differences in core symptoms of autism, since diagnostic measures were matched between
autism spectrum groups). Indeed, age of first phrase was correlated with
CT in several of these above brain areas. Consistent with previous findings (Hyde et al., 2009), CT differences were also found between the
autism speech delay group and typically developing controls (matched
in age, gender, IQ) in distributed cortical areas, however no CT differences were found between the autism group with typical speech onset
and controls. The novel CT differences found here between autism spectrum adults with typical versus delayed speech onset suggest that history of language acquisition may be a marker that distinguishes
heterogeneous brain phenotypes within the autism spectrum.

146

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Other
E2

EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL RESPONSES TO GRAMMATICALITY
VIOLATIONS INVOLVING VERBS: A POSSIBLE INDEX OF INCREASING
SECOND-LANGUAGE PROFICIENCY J. D. Purdy1, Karen Froud1; 1Teachers
College, Columbia University — Increased second-language (L2) proficiency
is associated with a shift from explicit to implicit processing; however,
the neural underpinnings are little understood. Furthermore, it is known
that unaccusative verbs cause persistent difficulties in L2 learning. We
examined event-related potential (ERP) responses to grammatical and
ungrammatical sentences involving passive, unergative and unaccusative verbs, in native and L2 English speakers, to investigate whether neural responses changed with increasing proficiency. Native English
speakers and three groups of Chinese learners of English at different
proficiency levels (low, mid, high) were shown grammatical sentences
containing passive, unergative, or unaccusative verbs, and ungrammatical sentences containing incorrectly passivized unaccusative and unergative verbs. Concurrently obtained high-density electroencephalogram
(EEG) recordings were segmented at verb onset, and averaged for each
condition. No systematic difference between the verb types was
observed for the native speakers; however, the three learner groups all
showed different responses to the verb manipulation. Native speakers
revealed a left anterior negativity (LAN/N280) to ungrammatical conditions, followed by a ramplike negativity (the N400/700, previously identified as an index of expectancy with respect to phrasal heads). However,
the three learner groups showed an N180 peak over parietal sensors
bilaterally, greatest in amplitude and duration for low-proficiency learners and attenuated for middle and high proficiency learners. N180 is
associated with visual working memory, and our findings therefore
accord with suggestions that non-native speakers recruit non-linguistic
mechanisms for L2 processing. We hypothesize that N180 attenuation,
together with a shift towards anterior and left-lateralized processing,
may provide an index of increased L2 proficiency.
E3

ONLINE PROCESSING OF DISCOURSE-LEVEL CONGRUENCE AND
LEXICAL ASSOCIATIVE PRIMING IN SCHIZOPHRENIA: AN ERP STUDY

Megan A. Boudewyn1, Tamara Y. Swaab1,2, Ann Kring3, Steven Luck1,2, George
R. Mangun1, J. Daniel Ragland4, Charan Ranganath1,5, Cameron S. Carter1,5,6;
1
University of California, Davis, 2Center for Mind and Brain, UC Davis,
3
University of California, Berkeley, 4UC Davis Medical School, 5Center for
Neuroscience, UC Davis, 6Imaging Research Center, UC Davis — This study
used ERPs to test whether schizophrenia patients have difficulty in
exerting control over the process maintaining language context to constrain word meanings during spoken language comprehension. We
examined the interplay of lexical association and discourse-level congruence in schizophrenic patients and control participants. Participants listened to three-sentence passages containing associative word pairs
culled from existing norms. The terminal word in the third sentence varied in overall discourse congruence and lexical association with a pre-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

ceding prime word; e.g., “Luckily Ben had picked up some salt and
pepper/basil”, preceded either by a context in which Ben was preparing
marinara sauce (discourse congruent) or dealing with an icy walkway
(discourse incongruent). Previous studies of schizophrenia patients have
related language impairments to difficulties in processing linguistic context or to increased effects of lexical priming (“hyperpriming”). Our
study directly assessed effects of discourse congruity and lexical priming
in the same patients using the N400, an ERP component that is sensitive
to semantic aspects of the input. In contrast to controls, schizophrenia
patients only showed N400 effects of lexical association for words that
were also congruent with the overall context, but no effects of discourse
context or association in any of the other comparisons. These findings
show that 1) in contrast to controls, schizophrenics show no immediate
effects of discourse congruence on lexical-semantic processing of a critical word, suggesting difficulties with maintaining the overall discourse
representation, and 2) since priming was not found for incongruent discourses, hyperpriming alone cannot account for language problems in
schizophrenia.

E4

ERP EVIDENCE FOR ATTENUATED AUDITORY RECOVERY CYCLES IN
CHILDREN WITH SPECIFIC LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT (SLI) Courtney

Stevens1, David Paulsen2, Leila Mitsunaga1, Alia Yasen1, Helen Neville3;
Willamette University, 2Duke University, 3University of Oregon — Previous

1

research suggests that low-level auditory processing deficits may play a
role in the language difficulties experienced by at least some children
with specific language impairment (SLI). The goal of the present study
was to compare auditory recovery cycles, indexed by increases in the
neural response at slower rates of stimulus presentation, in 12 children
with SLI and 12 matched controls. Event-related brain potentials (ERPs)
were recorded to 100 msec linguistic and nonlinguistic probe stimuli
embedded in a complex acoustic environment. The stimuli were presented at interstimulus intervals of 200, 500, or 1000 msec. Results indicated that both groups of children showed a similar broad positivity
from ~100-250 msec in response to the probe stimuli. However, the two
groups of children showed different effects of variation in the interstimulus interval on the amplitude of the neural response, suggesting greater
neural recovery in typically developing children. These effects generalized to both linguistic and nonlinguistic probe stimuli. Taken together,
these data suggest that deficits in the neural systems mediating low-level
aspects of auditory processing, including auditory recovery cycles, may
be part of the profile of deficits among at least some children with specific language impairment.

E5

NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL INDICES OF CATEGORICAL PERCEPTION OF
CHINESE LEXICAL TONES: ACOUSTIC AND PHONOLOGICAL
INFORMATION IS PROCESSED IN PARALLEL Linjun Zhang3,1, Jie Xi1,2,

Hua Shu1, Yang Zhang4, Ping Li5; 1State Key Laboratory of Cognitive
Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China, 2State
Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Science, Institute of Psychology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 3College of Chinese Studies, Beijing
147

Poster Session E
Language and Culture University, Beijing, China, 4Center for Neurobehavioral
Development, University of Minnesota, 5Center for Language Science,
Pennsylvania State University — The present study investigated the neurophysiological correlates of categorical perception of Chinese lexical tones
in sixteen adult native speakers of Mandarin Chinese. Two sets of stimuli were constructed for this experiment: speech and nonspeech. The
speech stimuli were Chinese monosyllables /pa/ that differed in their
lexical tones (the high rising tone, Tone 2 and the falling tone, Tone 4).
Based on the behavioral test results, the standard stimulus, a cross-category deviant and a within-category deviant were chosen for the ERP
oddball paradigm experiment. The nonspeech stimuli were harmonic
tones with the same pitch, amplitude, and duration parameters as the
speech stimuli. The results showed that the Mismatch Negativity
(MMN) response was enhanced by a change across the category boundary relative to equivalent physical change within the category boundary.
The MMN enhancement was dominant in the left frontal-central recording sites, suggesting linguistic processing of phonological representations of the tonal categories. Furthermore, MMN enhancement was
observed for an acoustic control condition using non-speech stimuli,
which indicated transfer of lexical tone knowledge to the perception of
non-speech signals. These data collectively demonstrate that acoustic
and phonological information is processed in parallel at the MMN time
window for the perception of lexical tones.

E6

IS THE VOLUME OF FRONTAL GYRI A PREDICTOR OF VERBAL FLUENCY,
OR IS FLUENCY A PREDICTOR OF FUTURE FRONTAL ATROPHY? Olof

Lindberg1, Sari Karlsson3, Carl-Henrik Ehrenkrona1, Leif A. Svensson2, Eva
Örndahl2, Linnea Engström1, Qiu Chengxuan3, Yi Zhang1, Laura Fratiglioni3,
Lars-Olof Wahlund1, Lars Bäckman3; 1Health Care Science and Society,
Karolinska Institut, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Karolinska university hospital,
Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Aging Research Centre (ARC), Karolinska
institute. — Verbal fluency is traditionally used to investigate frontal lobe

language functions. We investigated the relationship between verbal fluency and total volume of the superior and middle frontal gyrus in 318
healthy elderly subjects between 60-93 years of age. Frontal volumes
were measured manually at two time points. Scan intervals were
approximately 6 years for younger participants (60-72 years) and 3 years
for older participants (+ 72 years). Verbal fluency was measured at the
time of the baseline scan. We found no relationship between verbal fluency and total volume of the frontal gyri at baseline. Interestingly, however, verbal fluency at baseline was linked to frontal volumes at follow
up. Furthermore, fluency performance was related to annual volumetric
change between baseline and follow-up, such that higher performance
was related to less volumetric decline. These findings suggest that low
verbal fluency may be a predictor of atrophic cortical processes in
healthy elderly subjects.

E7

CORTICAL MAPPING OF AREAS SENSITIVE TO SPEECH AND
ACOUSTICALLY MATCHED NON-SPEECH SOUNDS: AN INTRACRANIAL
RECORDING STUDY Pierfilippo De Sanctis1,2, Manuel Mercier1,2, Theodore

Schwartz3, Einat Liebenthal4, John J. Foxe1,2, Sophie Molholm1,2; 1City College
of the City University of New York, 2Albert Einstein College of Medicine of
Yeshiva University, 3Weill Cornell Medical College, New York Presbyterian
Hospital, 4Medical College of Wisconsin — Despite intensive work on the
neural underpinning of speech, there is no consensus about the specific
cortical regions involved in computing the sensory code of speech. We
used sub-dural intracranial recordings in humans (subjects undergoing
intracranial mapping of sources of seizure activity) to distinguish cortical areas sensitive to speech, acoustically matched non-speech, and simple tones. Local field potentials were recorded over temporal, parietal
and frontal cortical regions with strips and grids of electrodes (resolution
3x3 mm). The Mismatch Negativity (MMN), which occurs in response to
deviation from acoustical regularity in a standard oddball paradigm,
served as our probe. Because the generators of the MMN are thought to

148

Language: Other
reflect where the deviating feature is represented, we hypothesized that
this would reveal distinct regions of cortex that were differentially sensitive to these three classes of acoustic stimuli: speech, non-speech stimuli
matched for complexity, and simple tones. In all five subjects, we found
regions sensitive only to complex stimuli (speech and non-speech). In
three of five subjects, we also found regions sensitive only to speech
stimuli. Analysis of the precise cortical locations and trends across the
subjects will be reported.

E8

ASYMMETRIES IN THE MMN RESPONSE TO VOWELS BY FRENCH AND
ENGLISH ADULTS: EVIDENCE FOR LANGUAGE-UNIVERSAL AND
LANGUAGE-SPECIFIC BIAS Monika Molnar1, Linda Polka1, Shari Baum1,

Lucie Menard2, Karsten Steinhauer1; 1McGill University, 2Université du Québec
à Montréal — According to the Natural Referent Vowel (NRV) hypothesis
proposed by Polka & Bohn (2003), vowels in the periphery of the acoustic/articulatory vowel space have a special perceptual status independent from native language background. This became evident in infant
behavioral studies showing directional asymmetries; discriminating a
change from a less peripheral vowel to a more peripheral vowel is easier
compared to the same change presented in the reverse direction. Directional asymmetries have also been shown in adults when discriminating
non-native vowel pairs but not when both vowels are native to the adult
listener. To investigate the neural underpinnings of this perceptual bias,
we recorded mismatch negativity (MMN) responses from monolingual
(English, French) adults using an auditory discrimination oddball paradigm using four vowels: English [u], French [u], French [y], and an
acoustically-distinct (control) [y]. Across the language groups, two patterns were observed: (1) In response to across-category vowel pairs, [u]
vs [y], discrimination responses were larger and earlier when the deviant
vowel was the more peripheral one, supporting the predictions of NRV,
and (2) in response to within-category vowel pairs, (English [u] vs
French [u]), a larger discrimination response was elicited when the deviant was a native language prototype. These findings reveal that in adulthood, a language-general perceptual bias favoring peripheral vowels is
retained in the neural perceptual processing of vowels at a global level;
however perception of subtle within-category acoustic differences
appears to favor language-specific prototypes.

E9

READING ABNORMALITIES IN SCHIZOPHRENIA: EVIDENCE FROM THE
MOVING WINDOW PARADIGM Veronica Whitford1, Gillian O'Driscoll2, Jan

Churan3, Ashok Malla4, Christopher Pack3, Debra Titone1; 1Center for Research
on Language, Mind, and Brain, Psychology, McGill University, 2Psychology,
McGill University, 3Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, 4Douglas
Hospital, McGill University — Language disturbances are a defining feature

of schizophrenia, with the majority of work emphasizing semantics.
Fewer studies examine the perceptual channels through which language
is encountered, such as reading. People with schizophrenia show
impairments on standardized reading tests (Revheim et al., 2006), however, it is unclear how this impairment manifests in moment-by-moment
reading processes. We use eye movement measures (number and duration of forward fixations, number and length of forward saccades) and
perceptual span, using the classic moving window paradigm (McConkie
& Rayner, 1975), to investigate this issue. People with schizophrenia and
controls read 90 sentences while their eye movements were recorded. In
a gaze-contingent moving window display, five conditions varied the
amount of parafoveal information available at each fixation: one no-window condition, and four conditions consisting of progressively narrower
windows to the right of fixation. For both groups, average first fixation
duration was longer for the narrowest window relative to no window.
Compared to controls, patients made more forward fixations, had
shorter forward saccades, and read fewer words per minute across all
windows. They also had reduced perceptual spans. These effects appear
to co-vary with standardized reading tests and non-linguistic oculomotor and visual processing. Although preliminary, the results suggest that

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Other
people with schizophrenia engage in a different moment-by-moment
reading strategy than controls. This reading strategy may optimally
compensate for a reduced perceptual span, whereby less information is
extracted at each fixation. Whether such reading impairments subsequently affect higher-level language functions typically investigated in
schizophrenia (semantics) is an open question.

E10

COMPARISON OF FMRI AND MEG LOCALIZATIONS DURING EXPRESSIVE
LANGUAGE TASKS IN A GROUP OF ADOLESCENTS Elizabeth W. Pang1,2,

Frank Wang1, Marion Malone1, Elizabeth J. Donner1,2; 1Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, 2University of Toronto — MEG tasks to localize receptive

language are well established although there are no standardized tasks
to localize expressive language areas. We developed two tasks for MEG
and validated their localizations against fMRI data. Ten right-handed
adolescents (mean=17.5yrs) were tested with fMRI and MEG on: picture
verb generation (PVG) and word verb generation (WVG). MEG and
fMRI results were normalized and overlaid. The number of overlapping
voxels activated in fMRI and MEG were counted for each subject, for
each task, at significance levels of p=0.005, p=0.001, and p=0.0005. All
subjects demonstrated fMRI activations of the left inferior and middle
frontal gyri at a threshold of p=0.005. With PVG, the mean number of
voxels activated in this region was 266±8 on fMRI and 94±15 on MEG.
The number of overlapping voxels identified by both modalities was
80±15 (79.6% overlap). With WVG, the mean numbers of voxels activated in the region of interest on fMRI and MEG were 274±11 and
113±16, respectively, with 61±13 voxels (50.2%) overlapping. With
increasing significance levels, the percent overlap decreased to 46±7.3%
and 26±8.0% for PVG, and 28±6.4% and 8±3.5% for WVG, at p=0.001 and
p=0.0005, respectively. Our novel MEG expressive language tasks identified left frontal regions involved in language production. Percent overlap of activated voxels is high when validated against fMRI. In this
cohort, PVG produced higher overlap with fMRI than WVG. The degree
of overlap decreased with increasing thresholds suggesting that the neurophysiological response underlying MEG and the hemodynamic
response underlying fMRI manifest differently.

E11

EYE MOVEMENT, AND ERPS AND PROSODY Shani H. Abada1, John E.
Drury1, Karsten Steinhauer1, Shari R. Baum1; 1McGill University — The

present study examined the neural correlates of semantic and prosodic
processing in simple aurally presented phrases of conjoined nouns with
one of two prosodic groupings (e.g., "bike # and dog and cup" versus
"bike and dog # and cup). Phrases were presented concurrently with
horizontal triples of pictures grouped in one of two ways (e.g., BIKE |
DOG CUP vs. BIKE DOG | CUP). The visual and auditory stimuli were
arranged in four conditions where the pictures either: (i) corresponded
to phrases (match), (ii) differed in the phrase grouping depicted (prosodic mismatch), (iii) contained a word/picture mismatch on the second/middle noun (semantic mismatch), or (iv) differed in both phrase
grouping and word/picture mismatch (double mismatch). We
attempted to minimize contamination of the ERPs by horizontal eyemovements by instructing participants (N=20) to fixate in the center of
the screen. Examination of HEOG signals demonstrated while some participants were able to perform the task in this way (the "non-movers",
N=7), more than half (the "movers", N=13) were unable to inhibit horizontal eye-movements (first leftward, to the initial object, then steadily
rightward as the auditory signal unfolded in time). In general, ERP data
revealed that participants were sensitive to both prosody and semantics,
as evidenced by N400 and P600 responses to both types of mismatches.
However, only the ERP responses associated with prosodic mismatches,
and not those driven by semantics, differed between the groups, suggesting that eye-movement behavior in this task systematically influences prosodic processing.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E
E12

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THE ANATOMY OF BROCA'S AREA

Christiana M. Leonard1, Stephen D. Towler1, Suzanne E. Welcome2, Christine
Chiarello3; 1University of Florida, 2University of Western Ontario, 3University of
California, Riverside — How language functions are divided among anatomical compartments in Broca’s Area is a subject of enduring controversy. Oddly, there appear to have been few attempts to determine how
much of the variability in experimental results is due to individual variation in sulcal anatomy. In the human inferior frontal gyrus, the v-shaped
pars triangularis is bordered by the anterior horizontal ramus (AHR)
and the anterior ascending ramus (AAR). Pars opercularis (containing
the inconstant sulcus, diagonalis (D)) is found more posteriorly. Pars triangularis is roughly associated with Brodmann’s Area 45, while pars
opercularis is roughly associated with BA 44. In this study we identified
the locations for the consensus Talairach coordinates for phonological
and semantic fluency (taken from 17 studies by Costafreda et al. 2006) in
left hemisphere MRI images of 200 healthy college students. The correlates for phonological fluency were found most frequently in pars opercularis (26% in D, 54% outside of D) and AAR (24%). The correlates for
semantic fluency were found most frequently in AAR (54%), other pars
triangularis locations (19%), and D (16%). Only 50% of the students had a
pars triangularis with the classic v-shaped formation. Individual differences in sulcal volume and location could be associated with different
patterns of regional connectivity and linguistic function. It is interesting
to speculate on how theoretical and computational models of language
might incorporate information on individual differences in sulcal anatomy. Supported by the UF McKnight Brain Institute & NIH
R01DC006957.

E13

THE SEMANTIC PRIMING EFFECT IN CONCURRENT EEG-FMRI

Sebastian Geukes1, René J. Huster2, Andreas Wollbrink2, Pienie Zwitserlood1,
Christian Dobel2; 1University of Muenster, Germany, 2Institute for
Biomagnetism and Biosignalanalysis, Muenster, Germany — The N400 component of the electroencephalogram (EEG) is a well established indicator
for the ease of retrieval of semantic information associated with a concept. Numerous studies have been conducted to reveal the neural generators of the N400 component using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI). Recently, concurrent EEG-fMRI has been introduced as
a means to benefit from the high temporal and spatial resolution of the
respective methods while recording responses to identical stimulation.
We present a semantic priming experiment using concurrent EEG-fMRI.
Subjects judged whether pictured objects are manmade or naturemade.
The pictures were preceded by either the object’s written name, a related
word, an unrelated word or a pseudoword. We hypothesized the N400
response to increase with the above mentioned order of priming conditions. After application of independent component analysis to the EEG
data in order to extract fMRI-related artifacts, event related patterns of
brain activity were analyzed in source space using L2 Minimum Norm
Estimates. A significant N400 priming effect was found, with neural generators situated in the left temporal lobe. In fMRI data, increased hemodynamic activity was observed in the left inferior frontal gyrus and left
superior temporal gyrus. The results are discussed in relation to the
existing literature on the generators of the N400.

E14

NEURAL CORRELATES OF ORTHOGRAPHIC, PHONOLOGICAL AND
SEMANTIC PROCESSING IN NORMAL ADULT READERS Suzanne

Welcome1, Ashlyn Swift-Gallant1, Marc Joanisse1; 1University of Western
Ontario — Previous functional imaging studies in normal readers have

identified a large network of brain regions that participate in the reading
process. These regions may be differentially active during tasks that
emphasize orthographic (word form), phonological (word sound), and
semantic (word meaning) processing. We compared patterns of activation in adults during case decisions, rhyme decisions, and meaning decisions to examine brain networks engaged by each type of processing. In

149

Poster Session E
addition, each participant’s reading ability was assessed by standardized
measures before the fMRI session. Case, rhyme and meaning decisions
resulted in partially overlapping regions of activation, including left
temporal and inferior frontal cortex. We found that rhyme decisions
resulted in greater activation of left inferior frontal cortex than case decisions, consistent with a role for this region in phonological processing.
Meaning judgments, relative to rhyme decisions, resulted in greater activation in the bilateral superior frontal cortex. These findings suggest that
as task demands change, broader cortical regions are recruited, with
frontal regions only becoming engaged with phonological and semantic
tasks. We will discuss relationships between reading skill and activity in
frontal and temporal regions. Such relationships between individual differences in brain activation and individual differences in reading skill
may shed additional light on the neural substrates of reading.

E15

THE LOCATIONS AND EFFECTS OF VISUAL HEMISPHERE-SPECIFIC
STIMULATION ON FLUENCY IN CHILDREN WITH THE CHARACTERISTICS
OF DYSLEXIA Bobbie Jean Koen1; 1University of Houston — Numerous
neuroimaging studies of reading processing have shown that decoding
written language reliably engages three core subsystems: the temporoparietal system associated with semantic encoding; the anterior system
associated with phonological encoding; and the ventral system associated with orthographic encoding. Further, neuroimaging and intervention studies have found evidence of functionally distinct regions of
interest (ROI) within each subsystem: the left hemisphere (LH) supramarginal gyrus (SMG) in the inferior parietal lobule; the posterior aspect of
the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG); and the LH inferior occipito-temporal/
fusiform area (OT skill zone). Identifying the manner by which these
brain regions are engaged in phonological processing and developing
automaticity offers valuable insight into how a distributed brain network mediates fluent reading. In this study, functional magnetic resonance imaging will be used to identify the neural organization of
developing phonological analysis in students with the characteristics of
dyslexia, pre- and post-intervention, as they decide if target letters
within words could have the same sound, alternating with a fixation
baseline and a perceptual control task requiring judgment of visual similarity of letter strings. Participants displaying activation in core reading
subsystems (ROIs), namely LH SMG, bilateral IFG, and LH middle to
inferior temporal gyri in the OT skill zone (MTG and ITG, respectively)
will be included in functional connectivity analysis. The results are
expected to show strong bi-directional, intrinsic connections between the
three ROIs, with the strongest connections between the IFG and MTG/
ITG. This will form a basis for establishing the neural networks that contribute to automaticity of processing.

E16

FMRI EVIDENCE FOR AUTOMATIC SPEECH CATEGORIZATION IN EARLY
AND LATE BILINGUALS Pilar Archila1, Elizabeth Owens1, Jazon Zevin2,
Arturo Hernandez1; 1University of Houston, 2Weill Medical College of Cornell
University — How accurately novel sounds are assigned to L2 categories

depends on the age at which the second language was acquired and the
level of L2 proficiency. With the use of clustered acquisition in fMRI, the
current study investigated the preattentive categorization of nonnative
speech syllables (i.e., saf, sof, and suf) in a population of early and late
Spanish-English bilinguals with varying degrees of proficiency. In the
scanner and using a passive listening paradigm, participants were asked
to watch a video while syllables played through the headphones. The
blocks of nonnative syllables were presented during silence intervals
between scans. Each block consisted of 5 trials and each trial consisted of
a pair of stimuli. Each trial was one of the 6 combinations generated –
classified as “same”(saf-saf, sof-sof, suf-suf) or, “different” (saf-sof, safsuf, sof-suf). Preliminary results showed that for the contrast of ‘same vs.
different’ trials, early bilinguals activated areas in the right middle and
left inferior frontal gyrus -par opercularis, whereas late bilinguals activated areas in the left inferior frontal gyrus-par triangularis and the left
supplementary motor area. Previous studies investigating other types of

150

Language: Other
categorization have also reported activity in frontal regions. Activity in
the SMA, however, suggests that late bilinguals persistently attempt to
decode nonnative syllables by covertly saying them to themselves,
despite the automatic nature of the task. This, in turn, suggests that
activity in the SMA in late bilinguals corresponds to the, perhaps effortful, categorization of novel L2 speech sounds.

E17

AUDITORY SCENE PERCEPTION IN CHILDREN WITH DEVELOPMENTAL
LANGUAGE DISORDERS Elyse Sussman1; 1Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY — Phonological processing impairments are often
observed in individuals with developmental language disorders but
there is considerable debate about what causes these impairments. A
main disagreement is centered on whether they can be attributed to specific linguistic deficits or to more general acoustic processing deficits,
such as difficulty in processing rapidly changing acoustic information.
The auditory environment is a dynamically changing and noisy place
with overlapping acoustic information originating from simultaneously
active sources. A key function of the auditory system is the ability to
integrate sensory inputs that belong together and segregate those that
come from different sources. We hypothesized that this complex acoustic
processing skill may be impaired in children with language difficulties.
To test this, we assessed the ability of school-aged children to parse auditory input and perceive sound streams, and determined whether the
presence of phonological processing impairments was predictive of
stream segregation performance. We found that children with language
disorders did not segregate streams as well as their age-matched peers,
requiring larger frequency separations to hear distinct streams. Moreover, phonological processing ability was a strong predictor of whether
or not children reported hearing discrete sound streams. These data are
consistent with the hypothesis that certain general auditory processing
strategies are impaired in children with language difficulties. The results
suggest that children with developmental language disorders may have
difficulty parsing speech streams, or identifying individual sound
events, when there are multiple competing sound sources.
E18

THE ROLE OF AREA PE IN WRITING Emily Ferreira1, Michael Petrides1;

1Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University — The present imaging
study aimed to elucidate the brain areas centrally involved in writing.
The experimental and control tasks were well-matched for variables not
directly related to writing, such as visual stimulus characteristics, generating and retrieving the object’s name, and basic hand movement. Comparison of the BOLD signal in the writing conditions with that in the
control conditions revealed increased activity in the premotor cortex, the
primary motor and sensory hand region and, further caudally, in the rostral part of the superior parietal lobule (area PE) in the left hemisphere.
In addition, there was increased activity in the cingulate motor areas, the
secondary somatosensory cortex (SII) in the upper bank of the Sylvian
fissure and the insula, again in the left hemisphere. Area PE, which is
directly linked with posterior cortical areas and premotor/motor cortex,
can be a critical interface between posterior cortical regions in the left
hemisphere involved in language processing with the central motor and
sensory region that is directly involved in the control of movement. An
interaction analysis of functional connectivity demonstrated that area PE
functions more closely with the left angular gyrus when the writing is in
response to words that are read. In sharp contrast, when the writing is in
response to pictured objects, then the interaction is with the supramarginal gyrus, an area that is involved in the articulatory and phonological
loop, as well as with prefrontal regions that are involved in the retrieval
and selection of semantic information.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Other
E19

CLOSURE POSITIVE SHIFTS (CPS) : EVOKED BY PROSODIC RHYTHMGROUPS IN MEANINGFUL AND MEANINGLESS SPEECH Annie
C.

Gilbert1, Boutheina Jemel1, Victor J. Boucher1; 1Université de Montréal — The

speech stream can bear two types of prosodic marks: language specific
and structural. The latter marks, which are associated with rhythm and
intonation groups (RGs and IGs), are universal and occur spontaneously
during oral recall. Using Event Related Potentials (ERPs), IGs have been
found to evoke a “closure positive shift” (CPS) (Steinhauer et al. 1999,
Pannekamp et al. 2005). The present study adopts the view that CPS
reflects instead the effects of RGs and captures the online segmentation
of speech. We conducted two experiments using 100 meaningful utterances (Experiment 1) and 100 meaningless series of syllables (Experiment 2) where 2 RGs of varying length (3-4 syllables) were inserted
within an IG. ERPs were averaged with respect to RGs. The averaged
potentials show that the CPS is specifically evoked by RGs in both experiments, confirming that these potentials link to prosody and not to
semantic or syntactic units. The results also bear implications with
regard to an on-line segmentation of speech based on RGs, a principle
that conforms to grouping effects on the recall of verbal series (Boucher
2006) and the hypothesis of a limited focus of attention (Cowan 2000).

E20

AN ERP EXAMINATION OF PRONOUN RESOLUTION IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA Tali Ditman1,2, Kana Okano2, Gena Gorlin2, Donald Goff1,
Gina Kuperberg1,2; 1Massachusetts General Hospital, 2Tufts University — An

impaired use of cohesion markers, such as pronouns, in patients with
schizophrenia is well documented during production and has been postulated to be a trait-marker of the disorder. However, no study has
examined the underlying neurocognitive mechanisms mediating this
impairment. The present study employed event-related potentials
(ERPs) to examine pronoun resolution during reading comprehension in
schizophrenia. Patients and healthy matched controls read sentences
that contained an ambiguous pronoun (“he” in “Mark and John went to
the store because he needed milk”), a failing pronoun (“she” in “Mark
and John went to the store because she needed milk”; “she” in “Mark
went to the store because she needed milk”), or an unambiguous pronoun (“he” in “Mark went to the store because he needed milk”). Examination of neural activity evoked to ambiguous pronouns relative to
unambiguous pronouns in healthy controls showed a larger Nref component, suggesting increased working memory demands associated
with keeping two potential antecedents online in order to resolve the
ambiguity. In patients, however, an Nref was not evoked, implicating a
working memory deficit in pronoun comprehension. Moreover, whereas
controls exhibited a larger amplitude P600 to failing relative to unambiguous pronouns, patients with schizophrenia exhibited both a larger
amplitude N400 and P600 effect to these failing pronouns, suggesting
that they may engage different cognitive processes in attempting to
resolve these pronouns. These findings are the first to demonstrate a
neurocognitive impairment in establishing referential coherence across
clauses in schizophrenia.

E21

DO LANGUAGE AND ACTION PRODUCTION SHARE A COMMON NEURAL
SUBSTRATE? And Turken1, Nina Dronkers1,2; 1Research Service, Veterans

Affairs Northern California Health Care System, 2University of California,
Davis — We investigated the relation between language impairments in

aphasic patients and deficits in producing purposeful movements
(praxis). Using neuropsychological (Western Aphasia Battery, WAB) and
brain imaging (MRI and CT) data from 136 chronic left hemisphere
stroke patients with aphasia, the behavioral and neural correlates of
motor planning and action production (praxis) and language impairments were compared. Praxis deficits were correlated with comprehension impairments (r = 0.74), aphasia severity (r = 0.69), repetition
problems (r = 0.67) and less strongly with impaired fluency (0.53). Analysis of WAB praxis subtest performance (maximum score = 60) by apha-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E
sia type showed that the patients with global or Wernicke’s aphasia had
the lowest performance (mean = 21.2 and 33.4, respectively). Broca’s and
conduction aphasics were in the middle range (43.1 and 50), whereas
anomic aphasics and the patients within normal limits on the WAB had
spared praxis performance (57.4 and 58.8). Voxel-based lesion-symptom
mapping (VLSM) analysis revealed that the lesions associated with
impaired motor planning, comprehension and repetition show strong
overlap in the left parietal lobe (supramarginal and angular gyri), the left
temporal lobe (posterior superior temporal and posterior middle temporal gyri), as well as the left superior and inferior longitudinal fasciculi
(SLF, ILF) and the arcuate fasciculus (AF). Praxis and fluency VLSM
maps overlapped mainly in the superior temporal lobe and the superior
longitudinal fasciculus. These findings are consistent with the notion
that motor planning and language share common neural mechanisms.

E22

NEURAL CORRELATES OF THE PERCEPTION OF PROSODIC FOCUS IN
FRENCH: AN FMRI STUDY Marcela Perrone1, Marion Dohen2, Hélène

Loevenbruck2, Marc Sato2, Cédric Pichat1, Gaëtan Yvert1, Monica Baciu1;
1
Laboratoire de Psychologie et NeuroCognition, 2GIPSA-lab — The studies of
the neural correlates of the perception of prosody have led to different
conclusions (for a review: Baum & Pell, 1999). The present functional
magnetic brain imaging (fMRI) study deals with the perception of prosodic contrastive focus in French (example: Mary ate the apple? No,
JOHN ate the apple; see Wildgruber et al., 2004; Tong et al., 2005 for
related studies). Twenty-two right-handed French speakers participated
in the experiment. The two conditions consisted in the auditory judgement of two kinds of utterances: with contrastive prosodic focus (Focus
condition, Task) and without (Neutral condition, Control). The stimuli
were delivered via headphones. The task was to judge whether the utterances contained focus or not. The subjects answered using two response
keys. An event-related paradigm was designed (48 events per condition;
30 null-events). The behavioural responses were correct in more than
90% of the trials. The Focus vs. Neutral contrast revealed bilateral frontal
activation (left BA 6 and BA 47 and right BA 44 and BA47), temporal activation (left BA 22 and right BA 21) and parietal activation (bilateral BA
40 and left BA 7). The Neutral vs. Focus contrast showed activation in the
post-central gyrus (BA 1, 43) and left insula. A ROI analysis showed significant left hemisphere predominance for left inferior frontal (BA 47)
and supramarginal (BA 40) gyri, as well as for left anterior insula (BA 13)
during the Focus condition. Overall, these results suggest that the auditory perception of contrastive prosodic focus involves a left-dominant
temporo-parieto-frontal network.

E23

AN FMRI STUDY OF CUED SPEECH IN DEAF NATIVE USERS

Mario
Aparicio1, Philippe Peigneux1, Brigitte Charlier1, Jacqueline Leybaert1;
1Universté Libre de Bruxelles (Belgium) — Functional
neuroanatomy of
speech perception in oral languages has been described taking account
data from audio-visual speech. However, Cued Speech (CS), a system of
manual aids developed to help deaf children to understand speech by
eliminating lipreading ambiguity, has shown that we can perceive complete linguistic information of the oral language without need of auditory input. Therefore, accurate speech perception of oral language may
be perceived through different modalities (audio-visual vs. visual only).
But, will they be differently processed? In other words, to what extent
are functional brain systems shaped by different linguistic input modality? In the first neuroimaging study of the perception of French CS (FCS),
we explored this question by measuring brain activation using fMRI in a
group of deaf native users of FCS while they performed a FCS word-perception task. A group of hearing performed an analogous task that
involved audio-visual French words. Results show an important common activation generated by both audio visual French in hearing users
and FCS in deaf users in the temporal lobe and inferior prefrontal
regions. This data support the argument that much of the linguistic treatment is modality independent. However, they were also some differences: audio visual speech had a greater activation in primary and

151

Poster Session E

Language: Other

secondary auditory cortices while FCS generated enhanced a strong activation in MT/V5 occipito-temporal region suggesting they were also
some modality-dependent language localization patterns in both groups.

E26

E24

Wozniak1, Ellina Kostopoulos1, Yannick Marchand2, Ryan D'Arcy2, Aaron J.
Newman1; 1Dalhousie University, 2National Research Council of Canada —

SWITCHING LANGUAGES MAKES L1 SUFFER: AN ERP STUDY ON
LANGUAGE MIXING USING OVERT SPEECH Ingrid K. Christoffels1,2,
Caljouw2,

Colzato1,2,

Waldorp3; 1Leiden

Lorenza
Lourens J.
Institute for
Carien
Brain and Cognition (LIBC), 2Leiden University, 3University of Amsterdam — In
research on bilingual speech production it is hotly debated how? control
of language comes about. Recent studies showed that especially? the first
language (L1) suffers when switching between languages. This? might
be explained by sustained inhibition of the L1 to equate ?accessibility
with the second language in mixed language contexts ?(e.g., Christoffels
et al, 2007). Presently, we try to assess? the extent of the L1 adaptation to
language mixing. We administered a? switching task with only 10%
switches were the same language was repeated language for? at least 7
trials while obtaining behavioral and ?electrophysiological measures.
This allowed for a detailed analysis of? how local language requirements
influence naming in L1 and L2. As predicted, we found slower L1 than
L2 reaction times on the first same language? repeat, replicating previous results. Against expectations, even after 7 repeats, reaction times did
not? become any faster for either L1 or L2. However, ?analysis of variances showed decreased variability in response time with? increasing
repeats for L1. ERP analysis? indicated modulation of the waveform in
the N400 time window, for the L1 only. Finally, the extent of L1 adaptation across tasks was clearly ?shown when comparing blocked naming
in L1 and L2 only before and after switching, naming in L1 was faster
than L2 before switching but this was reversed after switching, where
ERP amplitudes were more negative. Within and across tasks effects ?of
language mixing indicate strong global and subtle local? changes in L1
processing due to mixed language circumstances.

E25

ERP EVIDENCE FOR PHONOLOGICAL AND LEXICAL PROCESSING OF
NON-NATIVE PHONEMIC CONTRASTS IN LATE SECOND LANGUAGE
LEARNERS Erin White1, Masha Westerlund1, Fred Genesee1, Debra Titone1,

Karsten Steinhauer1; 1McGill University — The present study addressed two
questions: How do late second language learners process speech sounds,
and words containing those sounds, that are part of their second language (L2) but not their first (L1)? How does L2 proficiency modulate
processing? Native English speakers and late French-English bilinguals
participated in two experiments that investigated a speech contrast that
is phonemic in English but not in French, and is notoriously difficult for
Francophones to produce: /h-Ø/. Experiment 1 measured MMN and
P300 responses to the contrast in an attended odd-ball paradigm. Experiment 2 measured N400 responses to word and to pseudo-word primes
created by adding or deleting an /h/ (i.e. “appy”) and semantically
associated targets (“sad”). Native English speakers were sensitive to the
/h-Ø/ contrast at both phonological and lexical levels; they displayed
MMN/P300 responses in the odd-ball paradigm, a larger N400 to
pseudo-words than words (i.e. “appy” vs “happy”) and an N400 priming effect only to word-word pairs (“sad” when it followed “happy” but
not “appy”). Francophones, as a group, displayed smaller MMN/P300
responses and did not appear to differentiate between word and pseudoword primes (i.e. both “appy” and “happy” primed “sad” to the same
extent). However, the amplitude and presence of these components varied as a function of L2 proficiency. Taken together, these results suggest
that late Francophone learners of English have persistent difficulties perceiving this non-native phonemic contrast, although some can learn to
process it with increased proficiency.

152

THE CLINICAL AND NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL IMPACT OF INTENSIVE
APHASIA TREATMENT K. Ryan Wilson1, Heather O'Rourke1, Linda

Evidence suggests that intensive speech-language therapy for aphasia
can lead to significant improvements in language ability, even in chronic
aphasia. One such program is the Intensive Residential Aphasia Communication Therapy program (InteRACT), an intensive 4-week long program with over 100 hours of speech-language language therapy. Our
goal was to characterize the effects of intensive therapy on the N400, an
ERP effect associated with lexical processing. We hypothesized that in
aphasics who benefitted from treatment, the N400 would become larger
and have shorter latencies more closely resembling the N400 of control
subjects. Eight aphasic patients and 8 matched controls performed a task
in which they had to determine whether a spoken word was a ‘match’ or
a ‘mismatch’ for a presented image. Each aphasic completed the task
immediately before and and after the InteRACT program; controls performed the task twice with a 4 week interval between sessions. Seven of
the eight aphasics showed clinically significant gains on standardized
language testing from the beginning to the end of InteRACT. Post-therapy, the aphasic group showed a significantly earlier onset latency of the
N400, as well as a more left-lateralized scalp distribution. These results
suggest that the N400 can be a sensitive measure of neural reorganization associated with treatment for aphasia.

E27

INTER-CODE CONNECTIONS BETWEEN ARITHMETIC REPRESENTATIONS
IN THE BILINGUAL BRAIN Elena Salillas1, Nicole Y. Y. Wicha1,2; 1University

of Texas at San Antonio, 2University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio — Salillas and Wicha (2009 JOCN, suppl. 1) showed that the language of learning arithmetic (LolA) and Digit formats have stronger and
better arithmetic representations compared to a bilingual’s other language (Ll2). Here we use ERPs to explore the connections between these
formats with two goals: 1) determine if either of the preferred codes is
accessed to facilitate processing in Ll2 and 2) determine the degree of
automaticity in the connections between each format. Participants made
correctness judgments to simple multiplication problems (2x3) with correct (6), incorrect table-related (9) or unrelated (7) solutions, which were
always presented in a different code than the operands (e.g., LolA-Ll2,
two three seis). ERPs measured from solution onset showed an N400 correctness effect, an index of automaticity in the spread of activation
between concepts, for all code switched solutions, with a significantly
smaller effect for the Digit to Ll2 switches compared to the others. The
N400 relatedness effect, which reflects finer-grained connections
between arithmetic concepts in a network, was observed only between
the stronger codes (Digit-LolA and LolA-Digit), and when going from
the stronger LolA to the weaker Ll2. In contrast, only a later positive
component, thought to index more controlled processing, was modulated by relatedness in switches from Ll2, and when going from Digits to
Ll2. In sum, connections from Ll2 to the other codes are less refined and
less automatic, while the bidirectional connection between LolA and
Digit codes is strong. Modifications to the existing bilingual arithmetic
model are suggested.

E28

PROSODIC PHRASING IN SPOKEN KOREAN GARDEN PATH SENTENCES:
AN ERP STUDY Hyekyung Hwang1, Karsten Steinhauer1; 1Centre for
Research on Language, Mind, and Brain, McGill University — It is well-known
that prosodic structure plays an important role in the recovery of syntactic structure (e.g., Clifton et al., 2002, Kjelgaard & Speer, 1999). Prosodic
boundaries at potential syntactic boundaries facilitate (dispreferred) processing, whereas prosodic boundaries that mismatch syntactic boundaries lead to initial misunderstandings (‘garden-path’ effect). The
immediate use of prosodic information in the comprehension of temporarily ambiguous sentences has been demonstrated by ERP investiga-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Other
tions (e.g., Steinhauer et al., 1999), but cross-linguistic evidence is still
limited. We present data from our first ERP study investigating spoken
Korean garden path sentences to test the same paradigm used in the previous Korean ERP study in reading (Hwang & Steinhauer, 2009) and
thereby to further specify the cognitive mechanisms of prosodic online
processing as well as respective ERP correlates. An early ambiguous
dative noun-phrase (NP) following a matrix subject phrase can locally
associate with the matrix or the relative clause. By changing the position
of a second dative NP (either in the matrix or the relative clause), two
different unambiguous interpretations were construed. Prosodic patterns were defined by comparing the boundary sizes surrounding the
ambiguous NP: prosodic structures cooperated or conflicted with syntactic structures to different extent. Prosodic patterns were crossed with
matrix subject length. Filler sentences included various types of ungrammatical sentences. As predicted and similar to the previous reading
study, ERP data of 36 Korean speakers showed the Closure Positive Shift
at prosodic boundaries. Also, different patterns of prosodic phrasing
caused or prevented garden-path effects at the end of sentences.

E29

BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SPEECH RATE: THETA BAND RESPONSE TO
COMPRESSED SPEECH Veronica Figueroa1,2, Greg Cogan1,3, Oded

Ghitza4, David Poeppel3; 1University of Maryland, 2Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile, 3New York University, 4Boston University — The objective of

this study was to explore the brain response to rate variations in speech.
The experiments used compressed speech as a way to understand how
representations of brain rhythm might underlie speech perception. We
tested the hypothesis that a brain parameter responsive to rate is phase
coherence in the theta band. This particular response of the theta band
has been proposed by Luo and Poeppel (2007) as a brain ‘metric’ that is
relevant for speech processing, specifically allowing the discrete sampling of speech, at a pace that coincides with the timing of relevant linguistic events such as syllables. Predictions were that the frequency of
the phase coherence response would be modulated according to stimulus rate variation. Specifically the peak of phase coherence response
would shift to higher frequencies as stimulus rate gets faster. The predicted shift in frequency was not observed. Nevertheless, results show
that the magnitude of phase coherence response is modulated with rate.
Phase coherence response increased with compression to reach a maximum for 33% compressed speech (3 times faster than normal speech).
Results suggest that there is an endogenous rhythm with stable intrinsic
properties specially tuned for the processing of normal speech. The
inherent properties of the system modulate and constraint brain
response to changing speech stimuli. The results of this study do not yet
have a straightforward interpretation, but open several interesting questions about the role of brain rhythms underlying speech processing.

E30

LONGITUDINAL CHANGE IN MMN RESPONSES TO ENGLISH VOWELS BY
A SPANISH-SPEAKING LEARNER OF ENGLISH Paula Garcia1, Karen

Froud1; 1Teachers College, Columbia University — Mismatch
Negativity
responses (MMN) are known to reflect phonological memory traces specific to native language contrasts (Peltola et al., 2003). Second language
learners are able to acquire native-like representations of non-native
speech sound contrasts; however it is not known when in L2 acquisition
this change in representational capability occurs. We examined MMN
responses to a non-native vowel contrast (/i/ vs. /I/) in an adult male
native Spanish speaker from his first English lesson (time 1), and twice
more at monthly intervals (time 2 and time 3). This vowel contrast is of
particular interest in Spanish-speaking learners because it is often
reported that the English /I/ gets perceptually assimilated to Spanish /
i/.(Escudero & Boersma, 2004). In an auditory oddball paradigm, the
participant was asked to ignore binaurally presented English vowel
sounds /i/ and /I/, presented in a CVC context by two female speakers,
and watch a silent movie while EEG was recorded. It was observed that
MMN responses to the vowel contrast changed with English exposure
over the 3 testing sessions: there was no discernible MMN at time 1 or

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E
time 2, but a clear MMN by time 3. The pattern of responses observed
suggests a re-organizational process affecting phonological memory
traces associated with the novel English vowel /I/. Results are consistent with previous research showing that adults can learn to perceive
phonemes that do not exist in their native language, even though some
phonemes would be more difficult than others (Best & Strange, 1992).

E31

EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS REVEAL THAT L1 PHONOLOGY AFFECTS L2
RHYTHM PERCEPTION Maren Schmidt-Kassow1,2, Paula Roncaglia2,

Kathrin Rothermich2, Sonja A. Kotz2; 1Institute of Medical Psychology,
University of Frankfurt, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — Event-related potential (ERP) data
from German natives have shown that metric foot violations in a sentence elicit a biphasic ERP pattern consisting of an anterior negativity
and a posterior positivity (P600; Schmidt-Kassow & Kotz, 2009a). However, proficient French late learners of German are not capable to identify these metric incongruencies in German sentences and fail to show a
comparable ERP response (Schmidt-Kassow & Kotz, 2009b). We argued
that this result is due to the lack of lexical and contrastive stress in the
French in contrast to the German stress system. Thus, French speakers
are ‘stress deaf’ given the fact that they are not able to discriminate two
stimuli that vary in their stress position (Dupoux et al., 2008). This in
turn seems to result in ‘metric deafness’, i.e. the insensitivity for the concept of a metric foot. Here, we conduct the same experiment with Spanish late learners of German. Contrary to French, lexical and contrastive
stress is implemented in Spanish. Thus, if the metric deafness observed
in French late learners is due to differences in the native stress system we
expect Spanish late learners of German to show a similar biphasic ERP
pattern in response to metric incongruencies as reported for German
natives. In contrast to French natives Spanish natives accurately judge
the metric homogeneity of the presented sentences and show a biphasic
ERP in response to metric incongruencies. We thus argue that the sensitivity for metric feet is highly dependent on phonological representations of stress during first language acquisition.

E32

ACTIVATION CHANGES AFTER BEHAVIORAL INTERVENTIONS FOR
APHASIA: DOES TREATMENT TYPE MATTER? Elizabeth H. Lacey1,2, Susan

N. Lott1, Rhonda B. Friedman1; 1Georgetown University Medical Center,
2Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience — We used fMRI to examine

shifts in activation in persons with aphasia (PWA) associated with continued practice of treated items after they have reached a pre-set performance criterion. We have shown previously that items learned to
criterion (LTC) are associated with activation in right hemisphere (RH)
perisylvian areas, whereas items learned beyond criterion (LBC) are
associated with activation in left hemisphere (LH) areas surrounding the
patient’s lesion. This pattern mimics the shifts in activation that have
been shown to occur during spontaneous recovery of language. Our previous study focused on a treatment that used a mediating strategy to circumvent a damaged system. The current study examines LBC in a
treatment that does not employ a mediating strategy in order to determine if the same shifts in activation occur. We used a non-mediating
treatment for picture naming with patient JMC, who suffered an arteriovenous malformation rupture 2 years prior to the study. Similar to our
findings for a mediating treatment, post-treatment naming was associated with recruitment of RH homologs in areas known to be active during naming in controls. Moreover, trained words were associated with
greater bilateral frontal activation than words JMC could name pre-treatment, possibly reflecting increased effort. Data collection for LBC items
is ongoing with JMC and others to determine if it will be associated with
a LH shift. In conclusion, activations associated with successfully treated
items may reflect the level of automaticity with which words are produced, rather than the type of treatment used to retrain them.

153

Poster Session E

Language: Other

E33

E35

STATEMENT: QUESTION CATEGORIZATION IN CONGENITAL AMUSIA

ATTENDING TO EVENTS: WHAT, HOW, AND WHERE? Alexander Kranjec1,
Eileen Cardillo1, Anjan Chatterjee1; 1Center for Cognitive Neuroscience,
University of Pennsylvania — Dynamic spatial events can be described not

tone deafness, as it is commonly called) involves problems in pitch discrimination. Although this is most salient in music-related tasks, pitch
also plays a central role in linguistic prosody. In particular, the distinction between sentences spoken as a question or as a statement relies
heavily on the pitch contour of its final syllables. Prior studies have differed on whether amusia can cause difficulties in discriminating
between statements and questions (Ayotte, Peretz, & Hyde; 2002; Patel et
al., 2008). In this experiment, we examine how amusics categorize small
differences along the statement / question continuum. The stimuli were
sentences which had different prosodic interpretations created by
manipulating the pitch height of the final syllables. Eleven different final
syllable pitch heights were used, creating a prosodic continuum with
equal steps varying between clear statement and clear question. Amusic
and control participants were asked to listen to each and judge whether
it was an example of a statement or a question. Logistic regression analyses were used to compare amusic and control groups. Results showed
that, while amusics and controls divided between statements and questions at the same boundary point, amusics showed less consistency in
their judgments, with more errors overall. These results help to clarify
earlier studies, and suggest that amusics and controls categorize statements and questions according to the same rules, but amusics do so less
accurately in general.

just in terms of agents and goals, but also with regard to the path and
manner of motion involved. Path refers to the trajectory of an object relative to some external reference, or where it moves; manner refers to the
intrinsic motion of an object, or how it moves. Across languages, distinct
linguistic elements are typically used to express these different motion
properties (e.g. prepositions vs. verbs in English). To consider the
hypothesis that this linguistic parsing of events mirrors a neural segregation in the processing of these motion components, we tested 20 righthemisphere injured patients on a blocked event perception task. Patients
attended either to the Creature, the Manner, or the Path of 3-second animations and indicated whether the attended dimension changed relative
to the previous trial. Performance on Creature trials exceeded 90% accuracy, but a motion processing deficit was evidenced by significantly
lower accuracy in both Manner and Path conditions (73% and 67%,
respectively). Despite comparable behavioral impairment in the recognition of these two event attributes, voxel-based lesion symptom mapping
(VLSM; Bates et al, 2003) indicated a relative dorsal/ventral distinction
in the neural substrates for path and manner perception. Consistent with
previous neuroimaging research (Wu et al, 2003), these results support a
further partitioning of the “where” motion-processing stream into dorsal
and ventral segments attuned to different types of motion. These findings also accord with a variety of research demonstrating close parallels
between the functional organization of perception and language.

Nathalie Gosselin1,2, Sean Hutchins1, Isabelle Peretz1; 1BRAMS, University of
Montreal, 2Faculty of Music, University of Montreal — Congenital amusia (or

E34

SHARED AND DISTINCT NEURAL CORRELATES OF VOWEL PERCEPTION
AND PRODUCTION Marc Sato1, Krystyna Grabski1, Laurent Lamalle2,3,

Jean-Luc Schwartz1, Coriandre Vilain1, Nathalie Vallée1, Irène Troprès2,4,
Monica Baciu5, Jean-François Le Bas2,6; 1GIPSA-Lab, CNRS, Grenoble
Universités, France, 2Institut Fédératif de Recherche n°1 “RMN Biomédicale et
Neurosciences”, CHU de Grenoble, France, 3INSERM, France, 4Université
Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France, 5Laboratoire de Psychologie et
NeuroCognition, CNRS & Université Pierre Mendès France, Grenoble, France,
6
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Grenoble, France — Although a functional distinction between frontal motor sites for speech production and
temporal auditory sites for speech perception has long been postulated,
some recent neurobiological studies rather argue for a tight connection
between speech perception and production systems. In the present functional magnetic resonance imaging study, we investigated whether common brain areas might participate in both vowel perception and
production. In order to minimize scanner noise and movement-related
imaging artifacts, a sparse sampling acquisition technique was used
where participants produced or passively listened to a vowel (previously recorded from their own voices) during a silent interval between
successive image acquisitions. Direct comparisons between speaking
and listening conditions revealed specific activations for speaking in the
sensorimotor cortex, the supplementary motor area, the basal ganglia
and the posterior cingulate gyrus. In addition, specific reduced
responses were also observed in the supramarginal gyrus, which are
likely to reflect motor-to-sensory feedback control mechanisms. Finally,
a conjunction analysis showed a shared neural network for vowel perception and production, with common activations in the left inferior
frontal gyrus and in the superior temporal gyrus/sulcus bilaterally.
Interestingly, although previous studies have demonstrated activation of
the ventral premotor cortex in passive speech perception, the overlapping frontal activations were here largely confined to the inferior frontal
gyrus. The absence of response in the ventral premotor cortex during
vowel perception might be due to the perception of participant’s own
voice that does not explicitly require a mapping of perceived vowel onto
internal motor representations of articulatory gestures.

154

E36

ERP EVIDENCE ON JAPANESE INTERJECTIONS: PITCH DRIVES THE
VALENCE EFFECT Masako Hirotani1,2, Sonja Kotz3; 1Carleton University,

Ottawa, Canada, 2Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 3Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and
Brain Sciences, Neurocognition of Rhythm in Communication Group, Leipzig,
Germany — The present study investigated ERP correlates for emotional
prosody, using Japanese interjections. Japanese is unique in that (i) a
wide variety of interjections such as ‘ah’ and ‘oh’ appears in daily conversation and that (ii) their pitch modulation (e.g., high to low, low to
high) systematically shifts emotional valence (positive, negative). The
experiment tested six different kinds of monosyllabic interjections in
three emotion conditions, positive, negative, and neutral, each corresponding to high to low, low to high, and flat in pitch. The stimuli were
played to 24 Japanese listeners and their ERP responses were collected.
The results are summarized as follows: (i) In the N1 time window (50150 ms) both neutral (flat in pitch) and negative (low to high) conditions
elicited an anterior-central negativity, compared with the positive condition (high to low); (ii) in the P2 window (150-300 ms) the negative interjections showed an anterior-central negativity, compared with the
positive and neutral conditions; and (iii) in the N400 window, the neutral condition was more negative than the positive and negative conditions. Based on the distribution of obtained ERP patterns and acoustic
properties of stimuli, these results likely suggest three distinct processing stages for Japanese interjections: the first stage (N1) attributed to processing acoustic properties of interjections, deviant (low to high and flat)
vs. non-deviant (high to low), the second stage (P2) involving salient
(negative) vs. non-salient emotional processing (positive and neutral),
and the third stage (N400) for integrating processed emotions into meaningful (fall and rise) vs. meaningless (neutral) context.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Emotional Responding

Emotion & Social: Emotional Responding
E37

CEREBRAL ACTIVATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH PROCESSING OF AVERSIVE
STIMULI IN WOMEN WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA AT TWO DIFFERENT PHASES
OF THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE Annie Dubé3, Nadia Lakis1,2, José Jiménez1,2,

Adham Mancini-Marië1,2, Marc Lavoie1,2, Emmanuel Stip1,2, Adrianna
Mendrek1,2; 1Centre de Recherche Fernand Seguin, Louis-H Lafontaine
Hospital, Canada, 2University of Montreal, 3Concordia University, Montreal,
Canada — A relationship between emotion processing and different
phases of the menstrual cycle has been documented in healthy women
(HW). Also, impaired emotion processing is a fundamental component
of schizophrenia. Thus, the aim of the present study was to investigate
the link between emotion processing and distinct phases of the menstrual cycle in schizophrenia women (SZ-W). Thirty-five women (17HW, 18-SZ-W) underwent functional MRI while viewing negative
images selected from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS).
The task was performed twice at two different phases of the menstrual
cycle. There were no differences between the groups in subjective rating
of emotional images. HW had significantly stronger and more widespread activations during the luteal relative to the follicular phase in the
right(R)-postcentral, bilateral(B)-temporal inferior and left-supramarginal gyrus. SZ-W also demonstrated increased activations, but only in
the circumscribed region of the R-superior occipital cortex. While no significant differences were found between patients and controls in the follicular phase, SZ-W showed less cerebral activations compared to HC
during the luteal phase in the B-postcentral, R-cerebellum, R-superior
frontal, B-superior temporal, R-superior parietal, B-putamen and B-middle frontal regions. To summarize, the pattern of cerebral activations
induced by viewing negatively valenced images was stable over time in
SZ-W but fluctuated significantly in HW leading to conclusion that the
relative impairment in emotion processing in SZ-W is menstrual cycle
phase-dependent. Further investigations will examine the potential
implications of estrogen in emotion processing across the two phases.

E38

ACCENTUATE THE POSITIVE: LONGITUDINAL EFFECTS OF INTENSIVE
MEDITATION TRAINING ON MODULATION OF THE EMOTION
POTENTIATED STARTLE REFLEX Brandon G. King1, Anthony P. Zanesco1,
David A. Bridwell2, Tonya L. Jacobs1, Stephen R. Aichele1, Katherine A.
MacLean3, Phillip R. Shaver1, Erika L. Rosenberg1, Baljinder K. Sahdra1, Emilio
Ferrer1, B. Alan Wallace4, Clifford D. Saron1; 1University of California, Davis,
2University of California, Irvine, 3Johns Hopkins University, 4Santa Barbara
Institute for Consciousness Studies — We investigated modulation of the

emotion-potentiated eyeblink startle in a longitudinal, wait-list controlled study of intensive meditation training. Participants were
assigned to matched training (N=17) or control (N=18) groups. The
training group completed three months of instruction and practice in
meditation techniques aimed at promoting focused attention and emotional balance. Both groups were tested onsite at a remote meditation
center using counterbalanced stimuli sets at pre- and post-training. Participants viewed positive and negative pictures (6000ms duration, 15-18s
ISI) from the International Affective Picture System accompanied by
acoustic startle probes. Bursts of white noise (50ms, 100dB peak SPL)
occurred at 1500ms, 4500ms, or 7000ms following picture onset. Analyses indicated that startle magnitude (50ms baseline to 20-120ms postprobe peak rectified EMG amplitude) was dependent on picture valence
and probe timing, with maximum magnitudes occurring at 4500ms.
Negative picture stimuli elicited greater overall magnitudes than positive stimuli. We quantified emotion potentiation (EP) as the magnitude
difference between the startle responses that were most influenced by
emotional arousal (4500ms) and a baseline response (1500ms). A
repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant interaction of group,
testing, and valence. Follow-up comparisons showed a significantly
greater EP for positive pictures in the training group at post-test, indicat-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E
ing greater arousal to positive stimuli. No group differences in EP for
negative pictures were found. Meditation practice promoted continued
engagement with familiar positive stimuli at post-test, leading to
increased positive arousal despite the presence of highly arousing negative stimuli. In contrast, controls appeared to habituate to the positive
stimuli.

E39

TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX INVOLVEMENT
IN PROCESSING OF INFANT STIMULI Birgit Wieckhorst1,2, Isabella

Mutschler1,2, Markus Klarhöfer3, Frank H. Wilhelm4, Franz Müller-Spahn2,
Erich Seifritz5, Tonio Ball6,7; 1Psychology, University Basel, Switzerland,
2
Psychiatry, University of Basel, Switzerland, 3MR-Physics, University Hospital
Basel, Switzerland, 4Faculty for Psychology, Clinical Psychology and
Psychotherapy, University of Basel, Switzerland, 5Clinic for Affective Disorders
and General Psychiatry, Psychiatric Hospital Zurich, Switzerland, 6Bernstein
Center for Computational Neuroscience, University of Freiburg, Germany,
7Epilepsy-Center, University Hospital Freiburg, Germany — Neuroimaging
studies indicate that the rostral anterior cingulate cortex (rACC) is
involved in affective and anxiety processing [1,2]. However, the dynamics of the rACC involvement in emotional processing and its relation to
personality traits are poorly understood. To this end, the present study
investigated rACC responses during the processing of repeatedly presented natural emotional stimuli in 103 healthy females and the impact
of neuroticism on rACC response dynamics. Neuroticism is a personality
trait that has strong association with negative emotional experience as
individuals with high neuroticism scores tend to be anxious [3,4]. For
stimulation during fMRI data acquisition, 30 repetitions of a movie
showing crying children and 10 repetitions of a movie showing laughing
children were presented. We found positive correlations with participants’ neuroticism scores (Neo-FFI; [5]) and the contrast ‘movie perception of crying children > baseline’ for the first block in the rACC
extending to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (p < 0.05, FDR-corrected). Furthermore, to explore the temporal patterns in the rACC over
the whole experiment a median split was conducted to divide participants into a low- and a high-anxious group. Individuals who scored
high on neuroticism activated whereas low scorer deactivated the rACC
at the beginning. However, this difference diminished and tended
towards zero within the investigated period of time. Thus, our results
indicate that future studies investigating the role of the rACC in emotional processing and anxiety disorders should take into account the possibility of differential response dynamics as a function of personality
traits.

E40

CORTICO-AMYGDALAR HYPERACTIVATION IN OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE
DISORDER
DURING
INDIVIDUALLY
TAILORED
SYMPTOM
PROVOCATION Daniela Simon1, Nele Adler1, Christian Kaufmann1, Norbert
Kathmann1; 1Humboldt-Universitaet zu Berlin, Germany — Anxiety disorders

have been linked to a hyperactivated cortico-amygdalar circuitry (e.g.
Cannistraro & Rauch, 2003), but the amygdala’s role in the pathophysiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) remains to be elucidated
(Rauch et al., 2003). This fMRI study investigates fronto-striatal and limbic activity of 17 unmedicated OCD patients and matched healthy controls during symptom provocation with individually selected pictorial
OCD triggers. Hemodynamic responses were acquired (1.5T, EPI,
TR=2120ms, 38 slices, 3x3x3mm voxel) while participants performed two
tasks, one self-referential, the other not, in response to OCD-relevant,
aversive and neutral control stimuli presented in an event related
design. During the self-referential task participants indicated how the
pictures made them feel (pleasant vs. unpleasant), whereas during a
demanding central distraction task processing of OCD triggers occurred
outside the focus of attention. Patients showed increased fronto-striatal
activation to OCD-relevant stimuli contrasted with both control categories in the self-referential task only. Symptom-related triggers elicited
amygdala engagement in patients during self-referential mental activity.

155

Poster Session E
We hereby confirm findings of amygdala activation previously reported
during provocation in unmedicated patients with contamination fear
(van den Heuvel, et al., 2004) and in a multisymptomatic sample (Simon
et al., 2010). The involvement of the amygdala in the perception of disorder-relevant stimuli is consistent with its pivotal role in the detection of
salient stimuli (Sergerie et al., 2008). However, attention-demanding
tasks seem to attenuate emotional processing in OCD patients. We
present evidence for a putative link between pathological anxiety in
OCD and fronto-limbic activation, which provides a link to other anxiety
disorders.

E41

ANXIETY-RELATED AMYGDALO-INSULAR ANTICIPATORY RESPONSE TO
AN AVERSIVE SOUND Joshua Carlson1, Tsafrir Greenberg1, Denis Rubin1,
Lilianne Mujica-Parodi1; 1State University of New York at Stony Brook — Antic-

ipation is a central component of anxiety and the anterior insula appears
to be an important neural substrate in which anxious anticipation is
mediated. However, the extent to which individual differences in trait
anxiety are associated with anticipation-related reactivity to aversive
sounds is unknown. Based on previous findings in other sensory modalities, we hypothesized that the anterior insula, amygdala, and anterior
cingulate would be activated during the anxious anticipation of an aversive sound and this activity would be positively associated with an individual’s level of trait anxiety. Thirty-five participants completed the
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory and an fMRI cue (X or O; 1sec) plus countdown (16 sec) paradigm to signal a future aversive (X = 100 dB burst of
white noise) or neutral (O = soft presentation of white noise) auditory
event (1000 ms). Analyses revealed anxious anticipation-related activity
in the right amygdala, bilateral insula, and additional structures (p’s <
0.001). Aversive anticipation-related activity in the left amygdala and
bilateral insula were found to covary with trait anxiety (p’s < 0.005).
Additionally, a subset of participants (N = 23) rated their anxiety levels
during the period of aversive anticipation. Variability in these ratings
positively covaried with activation in the visual cortex (p < 0.005). These
findings provide evidence for an amygdalo-insular system involved in
aversive auditory anticipation and that variability in amygdala and
insula reactivity were associated with trait anxiety. Facilitation of visual
cortex (possibly indicative of increased fear-elicited attention) was associated with participants’ self-reported level of anxious anticipation.

E42

THE AFFECTIVE IMPACT OF FINANCIAL SKEWNESS ON NEURAL ACTIVITY
AND PREFERENCE Charlene C. Wu1, Peter Bossaerts2, Brian Knutson1;
1Stanford University, 2California Institute of Technology — Traditional

economic and finance theories consider the anticipation of expected value
and variance, but few have targeted the influence of improbable but significant outcomes (i.e., “skewness”). Employing a gambling task with
event-related fMRI, this study investigated whether anticipatory neural
activation and reported affect in response to financial skewness can
account for subsequently observed gamble preferences. Participants
(n=18) played 4 different gambles that were constructed with equivalent
expected value but varied systematically by variance (high versus low)
and skewness (positive versus negative). Following scanning, participants reported their valence and arousal as well as ranked their preferences for each gamble. Despite equivalent financial returns across
gambles, participants displayed distinct preferences, preferring high
variance and positively skewed gambles while avoiding the negatively
skewed gamble. Consistent with previous studies of monetary anticipation, expected value elicited activation in nucleus accumbens (NAcc) and
medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), whereas variance elicited activation in
the anterior insula (Kuhnen & Knutson, 2005; Preuschoff, Bossaerts &
Quartz, 2006). Relative to a gamble with equal variance, both positively
and negatively skewed gambles elicited heightened anterior insula activation. Finally, reported affective positivity correlated with NAcc and
MPFC activation. Collectively, these findings support an anticipatory
affect account (Knutson & Greer, 2008) in which statistical properties of
gambles - including skewness - influence preferences by their affective

156

Emotion & Social: Emotional Responding
impact. Neither traditional expected value nor mean-variance models
can account for the observed neural or behavioral results. Neuroeconomic studies can inform existing economic models by disentangling
and reconstructing the psychological and neural components that promote choice.

E43

NEURAL MECHANISM MEDIATING THE STATUS QUO BIAS Rongjun Yu1,

Dean Mobbs1, Ben Seymour2, Andrew Calder1; 1MRC-Cognition and Brain
Science Unit, Cambridge, UK, 2Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging,
University College London, UK — The reason why human have a prevailing
tendency to stick with the default alterative even though it is not optimal
(e.g. preferring for an incumbent candidate) has long been a puzzle to
social scientists. The prevalence of such bias challenges the axiom of
decision theorists which posit that only the expected utility associated
with each choice matters. Using fMRI, we found that status quo modulates decisions and psycho-physiological response to outcomes. Participants played a non-social realistic gambling task in which they were first
assigned to one gambling card and then asked to choose either to stay
with the status quo card or switch to the other card. Although the default
cards were assigned randomly, participants were more likely to stay
than to switch, and the probability of stay significantly correlated with
activity in insula. Subjective emotion ratings showed that participants
felt stronger frustration for losses after switch than after stay. The
enhanced frustration significantly correlated with elevated activity in
right anterior insula and rostal anterior cingulate cortex, regions consistently been identified as responding to both physical and psychological
pain. Taken together, our results illustrated that simply putting one
alternative in the status quo position can dramatically bias the decisions
and modulates subsequent outcome evaluation. The anticipatory
somatic response to potential negative consequence after switching
might underlie the defaults preference in decision making. Our study
highlights the importance of considering status quo framing in public
policy making and incorporating default preference within models of
human decision making.

E44

FUNCTIONAL INVESTIGATION OF DYNAMIC FACIAL EXPRESSIONS

Marie Arsalidou1,2, Margot Taylor1,2; 1Hospital for Sick Children, 2University of
Toronto — Humans are very effective in discerning emotions from facial
expressions. Numerous studies have examined the neural correlates of
facial expressions, but only few have utilized dynamic presentations,
which would have intuitively much greater ecological validity. In three
fMRI experiments we investigated activity elicited by (1) dynamic and
static happy faces, (2) dynamic and static happy and angry faces, and (3)
dynamic faces and dynamic objects. Using activation likelihood estimate
(ALE) meta-analysis we also demonstrated a network of areas across
studies that used dynamic facial expressions. In agreement with previous research, we showed that a set of areas underlies processing of
dynamic facial expressions; these include the fusiform gyrus, middle
temporal gyrus (V5/MT), superior temporal sulcus (STS) and
amygdalae. We found V5/MT, STS and the amygdalae were more active
for dynamic than static facial expressions. Evidence from the meta-analysis revealed concordant activity in the same regions, as well as areas
associated with cognitive manipulations (inferior and middle frontal
gyri) and eye movements (precentral gyrus). Thus, these findings demonstrate that dynamic facial expressions draw on a distributed set of
structures that include those elicited by static facial expressions, and also
show increased activity in a wider network of areas involving the
amygdalae and STS, likely related to their increased salience.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Emotional Responding
E45

SEX STEROID INFLUENCES ON SOCIAL REWARD PROCESSING

Lena
Rademacher1,2, Sören Krach3, Frieder Paulus3, Gerhard Gründer1,2, Katja N.
Spreckelmeyer1,2; 1RWTH Aachen University, 2JARA-Translational Brain
Medicine, 3Philipps-University Marburg — Gonadal steroid hormones have
been shown to modulate reward-related neural activity (Dreher et al.,
2007). The aim of the present study was to examine specifically, if
gonadal steroid levels have an influence on the neural mechanisms
underlying processing of social reward in the form of friendly faces. Seventeen male and 15 female participants (all heterosexual, single, nulliparous, and not taking hormonal medication) performed the “social
incentive delay” paradigm (Spreckelmeyer et al., 2009) during functional
magnet resonance imaging (fMRI) on a 3 Tesla scanner. In every trial a
cue indicated either potential reward (three types of happy face expressions with increasing intensity level) or no reward (control trial). To test
for opposite-gender effects, the colour of the cue was varied indicating
either a male or female face as potential reward. In order to receive
reward, a target button had to be pushed within a certain time window.
Estradiol, progesterone and testosterone plasma levels were measured in
all participants. Influences of hormone levels were predominantly found
in male participants: amygdala activation during the anticipation of
opposite-gender faces correlated with estradiol levels in men but not
women. Also, we found a positive correlation between male testosterone
levels and insula activity during the presentation of same-gender (i.e.
male) faces in the reward consumption phase. The data suggest that hormonal levels influence the processing of social reward in a gender-specific manner. The results allow inferences on hormonal regulation of
socio-sexual approach behavior.

E46

THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS ON NEURAL ACTIVITY DURING
A COOPERATIVE GAMBLING GAME Michael A. Niznikiewicz1, Dominic S.

Fareri1, Victoria K. Lee1, Mauricio R. Delgado1; 1Rutgers University — Research
has demonstrated involvement of the striatum in processing positive
and negative outcomes in both non-social and social domains (Elliott et
al., 1998; Delgado et al., 2000; Seger et al., 2005; Izuma et al., 2008). An
outstanding question is how the quality of our social relationships may
modulate this processing. This study seeks to explore the effects that
social relationships may exert on neural activity during a cooperative
gambling game, where participants’ role (i.e., playing or observing a
partner play) and partner (computer, stranger and a close friend) varied.
The goal of the game was to win money by correctly guessing whether a
cue card had a high or low value. Participants played with three partners: a computer, a stranger, and a close friend, each represented by a
picture shown above the cue card. Their role switched across runs from
the person making the guesses (actor), to observing their partners’
guesses (observer). At the end of the game, the participant split his or her
winnings from all blocks evenly with each partner. As in previous iterations of this gambling task (e.g., Delgado et al., 2000), preliminary analysis revealed a main effect of feedback in the ventral striatum, showing
increased BOLD activity to positive outcomes. Interestingly, this
response was modulated by an interaction of role and partner, specifically in the observer role. Future analysis will explore the involvement of
other regions implicated in reward and social processing, such as the
amygdala.
E47

A DISPOSITION TO REAPPRAISE DECREASES INSULA REACTIVITY
DURING AVERSIVE ANTICIPATION Nazli Dikecligil1, Josh Carlson1,
Lilianne Mujica-Parodi1; 1State University of New York at Stony Brook — The

anticipation of aversive events or outcomes is a central component of
anxiety-related behaviors and disorders. Research indicates that the
anterior insula is involved in anticipatory threat processing and representing emotional states. The reappraisal of negative emotional stimuli
generally decreases amygdala and insula activation and may therefore
decrease negative/anxious emotional processing. However, the extent to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E
which individual differences in dispositional reappraisal are associated
with anticipation-related insula reactivity is unknown. Based on previous findings, we hypothesized that the anterior insula, amygdala, and
prefrontal cortex would be activated during the anxious anticipation of
an aversive image and that activity in these structures would be negatively associated with the extent to which an individual reappraises
emotional stimuli in daily life. Twenty participants completed the Emotion Regulation Questionnaire (Gross & John, 2003) and an fMRI cue (X
or O; 1sec) plus countdown (16 sec) paradigm to signal a future aversive
(X) or neutral (O) image (IAPS; 3000 ms). Analyses revealed anxious
anticipation-related activity in the left anterior insula, left dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex, and bilateral areas of visual cortex (p’s < 0.001). Aversive anticipation-related activity in the right anterior insula was found to
negatively covary with reappraisal (p’s < 0.001). These findings provide
further evidence that the anterior insula is involved in aversive anticipation and that variability in anticipatory insula reactivity is negatively
associated with reappraisal. Thus, a disposition to reappraise may
decrease negative emotional states of anticipation.

E48

BOTH PAIN AND NEGATIVE EMOTION ACTIVATE PERIAQUEDUCTAL
GRAY Jason Buhle1, Hedy Kober2, Kevin Ochsner1, Peter Mende-Siedlecki3,

Brent Hughes4, Tor Wager1; 1Columbia University, 2Yale University, 3Princeton
University, 4University of Texas - Austin — An extensive animal and human
literature has characterized the descending inhibition periaqueductal
gray (PAG) exerts on ascending nociceptive input. This inhibition has
been shown to mediate diverse anti-nociceptive mechanisms, including
opioid drugs, placebo expectancy, and distraction. Additionally, PAG
receives direct projections from ascending nociceptive pathways in the
spinal cord, and human neuroimaging studies reliably report painrelated increases in PAG activity. Yet the function of PAG appears to
extend well beyond pain processing. Animal studies indicate PAG participates in the coordination of behavioral and physiological responses to
threat, including aggression, fear, and learned helplessness, and recent
neuroimaging meta-analyses have found consistent activation of the
PAG during negative emotional processing unrelated to nociception. In
the present study, we interleaved phasic heat stimulation and presentation of emotional photographs during a single fMRI session to directly
compare neural activity associated with and pain and negative affect.
PAG activity was greater during high compared to low pain and negative compared to neutral image viewing. Follow-up connectivity analyses examined relationships between PAG and other pain- and affectprocessing regions as a function of stimulus type. To our knowledge, this
study provides the first within-subject confirmation of a shared role for
PAG in pain and negative emotion. These findings suggest that cognitive
neuroscience models of emotion should incorporate PAG as a core
region in the generation of negative emotion.

E49

SEX HORMONES AND THE PERCEPTION OF INFANT FACES Janek
Lobmaier1, Reiner Sprengelmeyer2, David Perrett2; 1University of Berne,
Switzerland, 2University of St. Andrews, UK — Interactions between a mother
or father and a newborn are probably the most elementary of all human
interactions. Given this high biological and psychological relevance, the
scarcity of work on perception of infant faces is surprising. In a series of
studies we investigated emotive responses to infant faces. We compared
the sensitivity of young males and females to computer-manipulated
baby faces varying in cuteness. In a two alternative forced choice experiment participants had to choose the baby which they thought was cuter.
In general, females were more sensitive to variations in cuteness.
Women taking oral contraception outperformed women not taking contraception. These results suggest an existence of a hormone-modulated
visual system for perceiving cuteness, which works highly efficiently in
women of childbearing age. In a second experiment with the same stimulus material participants were asked to choose the younger infant. Here
we found no group differences between males and females regarding
accuracy. Different accuracy in cuteness ratings but not in the age judge-

157

Poster Session E
ments indicates that males might use different cues when processing
cuteness of infant faces. While females pick up on more “holistic” neotenous cues to judge cuteness, males seem to base their judgements on
other cues, such as for example emotional expression. Given that cuteness is considered an indicator of being helpless and in need of care, we
hypothesise that the ability to detect small variations in the degree of
cuteness may have evolved to guide the allocation of necessary maternal
care to the infant.

E50

DISSOCIABLE FMRI ACTIVATION PATTERNS ASSOCIATED WITH BASIC
EMOTION STATES Katherine Vytal1, Stephan Hamann1; 1Emory
University — Ekman (1999) proposed that basic emotion states (i.e., happiness, sadness, anger, fear, and disgust) elicit characteristic and distinctive patterns of physiological and CNS activity. A recent quantitative
meta-analytic review (Vytal & Hamann, in press) examined multiple
neuroimaging studies and found that basic emotion states are associated
with characteristic and dissociable activation patterns. However, the
question of whether such dissociable activation patterns exist has not
been investigated previously by directly contrasting each basic emotion
within a single FMRI study. We used functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) to scan participants while they experienced basic emotion states elicited during alternating runs of films and autobiographical
memories. Eleven subjects (5 female) were scanned while they viewed
20-second film clips and recalled 30-second autobiographical memories
(from each basic emotion category, alternating with neutral emotion).
During each trial, subjects made a button press when they first began to
feel an emotional response. Following each trial, subjects rated their elicited emotional state on valence, arousal, and emotion category. Ratings
confirmed that the emotional stimuli were effective in eliciting the
intended emotional responses. Results demonstrated that each basic
emotion state elicited a distinctive and characteristic pattern of activation
(e.g., happiness: anterior cingulate, sadness: subgenual cingulate, disgust: insula) regardless of the elicitation method used. Additional
regional activations were also associated with elicitation method (film
vs. memory). These findings converge with previous evidence from neuropsychology and other domains and provide further support the proposal that basic emotions are associated with characteristic patterns of
neural activation.

E51

PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL STATES DISCRIMINATE BASIC EMOTIONS

Jennifer Wilson1, Stephan Hamann1; 1Emory University — The existence of
emotion-specific physiological activity is a central element of theories of
discrete or basic emotion. Patterns of physiological activity that can consistently differentiate between emotions across multiple contexts have
not yet been identified. This study investigated whether anger, fear, disgust, happiness, and sadness could be discriminated on the basis of cardiorespiratory activity, and whether this generalized across two
different methods of emotion elicitation. Electrocardiogram, impedance
cardiogram, and respiratory activity were recorded while participants
either recalled autobiographical memories or watched film clips
designed to elicit the target emotions and a neutral state. Heart rate,
heart rate variability, respiratory sinus arrythmia, and respiration rate,
amplitude, and variability were assessed. Participants’ subjective ratings
of their emotional responses confirmed that both recollection and film
clips elicited strong emotional responses consistent with the targeted
emotion. Univariate analyses indicated strong effects of emotion on respiration frequency, and smaller effects on heart rate and heart rate variability. Principal components analysis reduced overlap in variance
among cardiorespiratory variables, and MANOVA revealed significant
increases along the respiration component in Happiness and Fear relative to Disgust in the emotional recall condition. Discriminant analyses
tested the ability to discriminate among emotions in the emotional recall
condition, based on the pattern of cardiorespiratory components
observed for each emotion type. Resulting discriminant functions

158

Emotion & Social: Emotional Responding
allowed emotion classification at a rate significantly above chance. These
findings suggest that characteristic physiological responses for each
basic emotion remain constant across methods of elicitation.

E52

THE ROLE OF ATTENTION IN EMOTION REGULATION SUCCESS Genna
Bebko1, Steven Franconeri1, Kevin Ochsner2, Joan Chiao1; 1Northwestern
University, 2Columbia University — Cognitive reappraisal successfully regulates emotions by decreasing negative emotional experience without
physiological or mental costs (Gross, 2007). According to appraisal theories of emotion, cognitive change processes underlying reappraisal play
an important role in reappraisal success because changing thoughts can
successfully change feelings (Lazarus, 1991). In opposition to this theory,
a neuroimaging study found that gaze accounted for significant variance
in neural activity associated with reappraisal success, suggesting that
attentional deployment processes may play a larger role in reappraisal
success than cognitive change processes (van Reekum, et al., 2007).
When gaze is controlled, however, reappraisal is still successful, suggesting that attentional deployment may not be a causal mechanism for reappraisal success (Urry, 2009). The purpose of this study was to further
examine the relationship between attentional deployment and emotion
regulation success. Participants were randomly assigned to either a reappraise (N=43; 22 females) or suppress (N=41; 19 females) group. We controlled the valence of attentional focus while participants viewed
negative IAPS images during emotion regulation. To measure emotional
experience after each trial, participants rated how negative they felt.
Consistent with findings from prior studies, reappraisers rated feeling
significantly less negative than suppressers (Gross, 2007). Furthermore,
participants rated feeling significantly less negative after emotion regulation relative to after baseline (attend). Novel to this study, we found
that varying the valence of attentional focus did not alter the success of
cognitive reappraisal or expressive suppression. These findings provide
further evidence against the role of attentional deployment as a causal
mechanism for emotion regulation success.

E53

THE PRIMACY OF NEGATIVE INTERPRETATIONS WHEN RESOLVING THE
VALENCE OF AMBIGUOUS FACIAL EXPRESSIONS Maital Neta1, Paul

Whalen1; 1Dartmouth College — Surprised facial expressions can be interpreted either positively or negatively. We have previously shown that a
region of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and the amygdala show
inverse activity in response to surprised faces that predicts whether the
face will be interpreted as negative or positive. Specifically, high prefrontal activity and low amygdala activity predicts a positive interpretation. We speculated that surprised expressions are initially processed in
terms of their potential negativity, and a positive interpretation requires
additional processing/regulation. As an initial behavioral test of this
idea, we examined the effect of spatial frequency information on valence
interpretations of surprised expressions. It is widely accepted that
coarse, low spatial frequency features are processed first and that this is
followed by a finer analysis of high frequencies. Further, recent data
show that the amygdala is particularly responsive to LSF information
contained within negative facial expressions. We reasoned that LSF presentations of surprised faces would be more likely to be interpreted negatively, given the bias of the amygdala in this direction. To this end, we
had subjects provide valence ratings of surprised expressions presented
as only LSF information, only HSF information, or intact images. Results
showed that surprised expressions were interpreted as more negative
and reaction times were faster to LSF information compared to HSF
information. These data are consistent with our proposal that the default
hypothesis for surprised expressions is to interpret them as negative at
first, and that positivity requires regulation based upon more detailed
features (i.e., HSF information).

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Emotional Responding
E54

STRESSED BY THE OPPOSITE SEX: IMPACT OF THE COMMITTEE’S SEX
ON STRESS REACTIVITY IN MEN AND WOMEN Annie
Duchesne1,

Eyerusalem Tessera1, Jens Pruessner1; 1Douglas Mental Health Institute,
McGill University — Stress response to a psychosocial challenge shows con-

sistent sex difference, where men are typically more reactive compared
to women. Gonadal hormones only partially contribute to the observed
discrepancy between men and women. Sex differences in processing
social information have also been reported. In fact, in stressful situations
women would try to bond with other women as opposed to men who
inversely represent a source of threat suggesting that social evaluation
provided by either men or women might differentially modulate the
stress response. This study investigates the impact of the panel’s sex on
the stress reactivity of men and women to a psychosocial challenging
task. Men and women between 18 and 25 years of age were exposed the
Trier Social Stress Task in front of a committee comprised of only men,
or only women. Women were equally tested during their cycle. Salivary
cortisol, blood pressure and perceived stress were measured throughout
the task. Cortisol levels measured by the area under the curve increase
(AUCi) were significantly increased when both men and women were
exposed to an opposite sex panel. However, while this effect seems to be
driven by menstrual cycle in women, variation in personality components seems to contribute to the effect in men. This study demonstrate
the effect of the committee’s sex during a social evaluative stress task
and both men and women were more reactive to an opposite sex panel.
Although the same results are observed in men and women the underlying factors seem to be different.

E55

THE P300 AS A MARKER OF COLLECTIVE GUILT IN A MOCK INTERGROUP
TRANSGRESSION Eric Vanman1, Martin Henrion1; 1School of Psychology,
University of Queensland, Australia — Collective guilt is a negative feeling
associated with wrongful actions perpetrated by one’s social group on
members of another group. It traditionally has been investigated in the
context of historical conflicts between real groups using questionnaires.
This study investigated whether an event-related potential (ERP) version
of the Guilty Knowledge Test, which was developed for lie detection,
could also be used to measure collective guilt in a laboratory paradigm.
University students participated in a two-part experiment. In the first
session, they were assigned arbitrarily to one of two teams and then
engaged in team-building exercises, which included creating a team flag.
Collective guilt was manipulated by having a confederate, who was randomly assigned to one of the teams, destroy the other team’s flag “by
accident.” Thus, some participants were now associated with the perpetrator’s group and the others were associated with the victim group. In
the second session, participants completed a picture-viewing task while
ERPs were recorded. Analyses revealed that participants in the victim
group elicited larger P300s when viewing task-relevant stimuli (e.g., a
picture of the damaged flag) than did those in the perpetrator group.
Consistent with hypotheses, however, a strong positive correlation
between self-reports of collective guilt and P300 amplitude was observed
when participants in the perpetrator group viewed such stimuli. The
relationships between self-report measures of emotion and P300 amplitudes to transgression-related stimuli demonstrated validity for this new
measure of guilt. This study also provides a laboratory-based procedure
for investigating collective guilt in social situations.

E56

THE PROCESSING OF FACIAL EXPRESSIONS DURING PAIN Antje B. M.
Gerdes1, Matthias J. Wieser1, Rene Greiner1, Paul Pauli1; 1University of
Würzburg, Germany — It is well known that emotion modulates pain perception. In order to test whether pain can also influence emotion processing, happy, angry and neutral facial expressions were presented to
40 healthy volunteers during either painful or non-painful pressure stimulation. Subjective ratings of valence and arousal and event-related brain
potentials (ERPs) in response to facial expressions were measured. Over-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E
all, early visual components (P100, N170) were not modulated by the
facial expressions. However, during pain the amplitude of the P100 was
significantly reduced in response to all facial expressions. At later stages
of stimulus processing, angry and happy facial expressions elicited augmented late positive potentials (LPP) relative to neutral expressions, and
this index of a more elaborated perceptual analysis was also reduced
during pain independently of the facial expression. Explicit ratings of the
facial expressions were not affected by pain. Thus, pain generally
reduces early and late components of central nervous face processing,
but does not interfere with the processing of specific facial expressions.
In sum, the results indicate that pain captures and maintains attention
resulting in an overall reduced processing of facial expressions.

E57

ATTACHMENT ANXIETY, RESPONSIVENESS, AND REWARD SYSTEM
FUNCTIONING Joshua Poore1,2, Matthew Lieberman2, Jennifer Pfeifer3,

Elliot Berkman2, Tristen Inagaki2; 1National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke, 2University of California, Los Angeles, 3University of Oregon —
Neurobiological animal models of monogamous pair-bond formation
have been influential in the understanding of human romantic attachments. However, they have not yet accounted for the propensity of the
human attachment system to adopt cognitive/behavioral care-seeking
styles that are tailored to the patterns with which romantic partners are
responsive. Given 1) the importance of the mesocorticolimbic reward
system in the development of partner preferences in animal models, 2)
its functional similarities with the attachment system, and 3) its relation
to uncertainty-related phenomenology also associated with the anxious
attachment style, we examined whether the mesocorticolimbic reward
system might be involved in the adoption of the attachment styles in
relation to partner responsiveness. Participants were given 100 statements that either confirmed their expectations about their partners’
romantic sentiments or violated them, with roughly equal likelihood, at
near chance levels. Findings show that ventral tegmental activity systematically tracked the valence of the statements. Also, consistent with
prediction-error studies of economic losses relative to gains, the posterior ventral striatum showed activity when expectations were negatively
violated, rather than positively violated. Additionally, activity in the
anterior ventral striatum and medial orbitofrontal cortex was associated
with task-related attachment anxiety. Overall, findings suggest that the
human reward system tracks stimuli related to partner responsiveness
and monitors violations of expectations for responsiveness. Given that
the reward system is also an associative behavioral learning system, our
findings suggest that it may be involved in the attachment system’s ability adopt styles of care-seeking behavior based on partners’ patterns of
responsiveness.

E58

INFLUENCE OF GENDER AND INDIVIDUAL PREFERENCE ON NEURAL
ACTIVITY DURING SOCIAL REWARD PROCESSING Katja

Spreckelmeyer1, Lena Rademacher1, Soeren Krach2, Gregor Kohls3, Gerhard
Gruender1; 1RWTH Aachen University, Germany, 2Philipps-University Marburg,
Germany, 3Children's Hospital of Philadelphia — Social feedback is a strong
motivator for human behaviour. In a number of consecutive studies we
delineated the neural correlates of goal-directed behaviour towards
social incentives. Specifically, we examined the neural basis of reward
anticipation vs. consumption in an incentive delay task offering different
levels of social approval. In study 1 (performed on a 1.5T fMRI scanner
in N=28 participants) we also offered monetary reward for direct comparison of different incentive types. In study 2 (performed on a 3T scanner in N=30 participants), only social reward was offered but came either
from a male or a female person to test for opposite-gender effects. Both
studies revealed activation of the ventral striatum during anticipation of
reward, which increased with increasing level of reward, independent of
incentive type. However, neural activation during anticipation was
modulated by gender in a complex manner. Sensitivity to anticipated
social reward was stronger in women than men only if monetary reward

159

Poster Session E
was offered within the same experiment, the latter yielding much stronger activations in men than women. If only social reward was offered
(study 2) striatal activations were equally pronounced in men and
women. However, in the same study, the amygdala of male participants
was found sensitive to increasing levels of anticipated social feedback if
it came from a woman. In both studies, reward consumption led to pronounced amygdala activation in response to social feedback. Again,
amygdala activation was modulated by reward level. The findings imply
sensitivity to reward value in different structures of the reward system.

E59

ANXIETY MODULATES RESTING STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF
Justin
THE AMYGDALA AND THE MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX M.

Kim1, Dylan G. Gee2, Rebecca A. Loucks1, Paul J. Whalen1; 1Dartmouth
College, 2University of California, Los Angeles — Evidence from nonhuman
animal and human research suggests that anxiety is related to a number
of cortical and subcortical brain regions, particularly the amygdala and
the dorsal and ventral portions of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC).
Given that anxiety is an ongoing psychological state, we hypothesized
that anxiety levels would modulate the functional connectivity of these
brain regions during rest, even without the presence of anxiety-inducing
external stimuli. Resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging
scans and self-reported measures of anxiety were acquired from a total
of 29 healthy subjects. Using a seed-based approach, statistical maps of
the brain showing voxels that correlated with the intrinsic spontaneous
low-frequency signals within the amygdala were computed for each
individual subject. At the group level, anxiety measures were included
to generate maps of regions that covaried in connectivity with the
amygdala. We found a significant positive correlation between state anxiety and functional connectivity of the right amygdala with the dorsal
mPFC and a negative correlation with the ventral mPFC. Taken together,
our data show that anxious subjects, even during rest, recruit an
amygdala-mPFC circuitry that has been implicated in generating and
controlling anxiety. Interestingly, we demonstrated a dissociation
between dorsal mPFC versus ventral mPFC functional connectivity and
anxiety.

E60

MUSICAL CHILLS: LINKING EMOTION AND PLEASURE IN THE BRAIN

Valorie N. Salimpoor1,2,3, Mitchel Benovoy3,4, Alain Dagher1, Robert J.
Zatorre1,2,3; 1Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, 2BRAMS
Laboratory, 3Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Music Media and
Technology, 4Centre for Intelligent Machines, McGill University — Emotion
and reward have long been associated, but how emotions become pleasurable is not entirely clear. Music provides an excellent medium to
examine this relationship, since (1) music can be both pleasurable and
emotionally arousing; (2) the pleasurable aspects of music are thought to
result from emotional arousal; and (3) the temporal and dynamic nature
of musical stimuli allow for an examination of build-up in emotional
arousal and how this may contribute to pleasure. In contrast to previous
fMRI experiments that have used experimenter-selected music, we used
self-selected music, thereby allowing for a fuller range of emotional
experience. The “musical chills” response, a marker of peak autonomic
nervous system activity, was used to index intense emotional arousal.
Functional MRI scans were collected as individuals listened to music
while providing continuous subjective ratings of pleasure. A parametric
analysis confirmed that voxels showing a correlation with increases in
subjective pleasure were found in dorsal and ventral striatal regions
implicated in reward and motivation, consistent with previous studies.
However, this study offers the novel finding that peak periods of emotional arousal were also associated with activity in these regions, providing a direct link between emotional arousal and pleasure during music
listening. Moreover, time-series analysis revealed distinct patterns of
activity in different portions of striatal, limbic, and frontal regions dur-

160

Emotion & Social: Emotional Responding
ing periods leading up to the peak of emotional arousal as opposed to
during and after this moment, providing a glimpse of how a build-up in
emotional arousal can lead to pleasurable feelings.

E61

PERIPHERAL EMOTION PROCESSING: EFFECTS OF FACIAL
EXPRESSIONS IN A CLINICAL POPULATION Simon Rigoulot1, Fabien

D'Hondt1, Sabine Defoort-Dhellemmes1, Pascal Despretz1, Jacques Honore1,
Henrique Sequeira1,2; 1University of Lille, France, CNRS UMR8160, 2University
of Lille — The visual detection of natural emotional scenes constitutes an
essential adaptive ability. However, human visual capacities are not
homogeneous depending on which part of the visual field is stimulated.
Indeed, it is generally admitted that visual performance declines with
the visual field eccentricity, from central to peripheral vision (CV, PV).
When CV capacities are reduced or even abolished, as is the case in
patients with central scotomas, visual resources are limited to those of
PV. Then, it appears important to improve such resources. As suggested
by recent studies, one way could consist to displace attentional focus on
peripheral visual field. Considering the ability of emotional information
to capture attentional resources, even in degraded visual conditions similar to those in PV, we tested for the first time the performance of
patients’ PV to the presentation of neutral and emotional facial expressions. Happy, fear or neutral faces were presented to the PV of 7 patients
with impaired central vision. Patients had to discriminate faces according to their expression, emotional or not. The analyses of variance, conducted on the percentage of correct responses showed patients are more
efficient in VP for emotional faces than neutral, especially for happy
ones. This result suggests that happy faces might be used to increase the
attentional capture in PV and then contribute to optimize the performance of PV in patients with lesions or diseases of the CV. Consequently, these data open new perspectives on the behavioral
rehabilitation of CV disorders like Age-related Macular Disease or Stargardt’s Disease.

E62

EMPATHIC DYSFUNCTION AND ABNORMAL EMOTION PROCESSING IN
INCARCERATED PSYCHOPATHS Laurie R. Skelly1, Kent A. Kiehl2,3, Jean

Decety1; 1University of Chicago, IL, 2Mind Research Network, Albuquerque,
New Mexico, 3University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico — Psych-

opathy is a personality disorder believed to be a contributing factor to a
disproportionate amount of serious societal problems such as violent,
recidivistic crime and fraud. Though conventional wisdom predicts that
psychopathy is characterized by serious deficits in emotional functioning including empathy and sympathetic concern, studies to date have
had difficulty finding consistent differences between psychopaths and
controls in traditional probes of emotion functioning. The current study
aims to investigate emotion perception and empathy in criminal psychopaths with greater sensitivity by (1) using criminal psychopaths who
score very high on the Hare Psychopathy Checklist-Revised, (2) comparing them with an appropriate, well-matched criminal control group, and
(3) isolating neural differences associated with empathy and emotion
processing by using a passive viewing paradigm that limits the effects of
cognitive compensation strategies that may mask differences in emotionnaming, priming, and self-report. Twenty incarcerated, male psychopaths and twenty incarcerated controls, matched for age, IQ, and substance abuse, viewed depictions of social interactions and dynamic
expressions of emotion in the Mind Research Network’s Mobile 1.5 Tesla
MR scanner stationed at the maximum security prison. Results reveal
intriguing differences in cortical and subcortical regions during emotion
processing, including patterns of activation in the amygdala between
groups in the reverse pattern expected by contemporary theory.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Emotional Responding
E63

HEMISPHERIC DIFFERENCES IN PROCESSING FACIAL AFFECT: THE
PARANOIA EFFECT Yuan Hang Li1, Xin Ming An1, Eran Zaidel1,2;
1Psychology,

UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, 2Brain Research Institute, UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA — INTRODUCTION: Behavioural, as well as neurophysialogical data, show that 1) the Right Hemisphere (RH) is specialized for
processing facial affect and 2) the RH is specialized for processing negative affect (the valence hypothesis). However, the majority of studies
have only employed full emotional face stimuli as oppose to emotional
expressions with a range of intensities. METHODS: We used emotional
face stimuli of anger and happiness that were morphed with neutral
faces. Participants indicated with 2 alternative forced choice bimanual
button presses whether the stimulus was angry/happy or neutral. Stimuli were flashed centrally or to the left or right visual hemifield for
150ms. RESULTS: We conducted a 3 (VF: left, right, center) x 2 (emotion:
angry, happy) x 2 (intensity: low, high morph) repeated measures
ANOVA. There was a significant 3 way interaction showing a selective
LH advantage for identifying low intensity angry morphs. DISCUSSION: Our results do not conform to either the RH being specialized for
processing facial affect or to the valence hypothesis of hemispheric specialization for negative affect. When detecting angry stimuli, there is a
selective Left Hemisphere (LH) strategy that interprets neutral facial
affect as angry. We refer to this as "the Paranoia Effect." CONCLUSION:
The LH is more biased than the RH to see anger in faces of strangers
when they express little or no anger.

E64

THE WARM GLOW OF SELFISHNESS: SELF-INTEREST VALUE IS
ASSOCIATED WITH INCREASED STRIATAL ACTIVATION TO REWARD

Tobias Brosch1,2, Geraldine Coppin1, Klaus Scherer1, Sophie Schwartz1, David
every
Sander1; 1University of Geneva, 2New York University — Although

human being – and every organism – must to a certain degree prioritize
the pursuit of their own interests in order to survive, people differ in
how much importance they give to the pursuit of self-interests. We
investigated the neural mechanisms underlying decisions affected by an
individual's dominant values, comparing participants who reported
privileging either self-interest or altruistic motives. Using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we investigated the neural correlates of self-interest in a donation paradigm where 19 participants were
given an amount of investment money that they were to distribute
between themselves and a charitable organization of their choice. Selfish
individuals sacrificed less money for donations to charitable organizations, showed lower activity of the "mentalizing network" when deciding about donations and higher activation of the striate reward system
when receiving monetary rewards for themselves. These findings point
to neural mechanisms that might underlie the effect of dispositional factors, such as values, attitudes, or personality on important behavioral
decisions. Selfishness as a disposition might be caused by habitually
stronger activation of the reward circuits, due to genetic or epigenetic
factors, which would lead to a more positive evaluation of prospective
self-interest outcomes in behavioral decisions and consequently an
increased choice of selfish alternatives.

E65
Basia Radlinska1,4, Marc Pell1,3, G.
Bruce Pike3,4, Ekaterini Klepousniotou2,3,4; 1School of Communication
Sciences and Disorders, McGill University, Canada, 2Institute of Psychological
Sciences, University of Leeds, UK, 3Centre for Research on Language, Mind and
Brain, McGill University, Canada, 4McConnell Brain Imaging Centre, Montreal
Neurological Institute, McGill University, Canada — Recognising basic emo-

VOICES OF DISGUST IN THE BRAIN

tions such as ‘fear’ or ‘disgust’ is thought to engage distinct brain networks, based on mounting lesion and neuroimaging data. Specifically,
disgust may selectively engage the insula and basal ganglia structures
(putamen, caudate), among other regions involved in emotional processing. However, few studies have examined the processing of disgust conveyed in speech (emotional prosody). This study investigated the neural

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E
correlates of implicit attention to vocal expressions of disgust independent of semantic meaning, using a block fMRI design. Semanticallyanomalous pseudo-utterances (e.g., We revimerated the mesty yorns)
produced by male and female actors to convey disgust (experimental
condition) or neutrality (control condition) were presented in pairs. Sixteen young adults (8 female) were scanned while listening to each utterance pair and judging whether the speaker was the same or different
(implicit emotional processing). Analyses compared conditions in which
listeners processed sentences conveying disgust versus identical neutral
sentences. Our analysis revealed significant bilateral activations of the
middle frontal gyrus (BA 46) and the insula (BA 13), which were stronger in the right hemisphere. There was also a right-sided activation of
the inferior frontal gyrus (BA 45). Furthermore, vocal cues to disgust
elicited activity in the subcortical gray matter of the lentiform nucleus,
complementing patient and lesion studies which point to the importance
of the putamen for recognising this emotion. Our findings neatly build
upon previous data describing emotion-specific neural regions implicated in the recognition and experience of disgust, extending these findings to how disgust is understood from vocal attributes of speech.

E66

AN ERP STUDY ON THE EMOTIONAL PROCESSING OF HANDWRITTEN AND
PRINTED WORDS Reiko Sawada1,2, Nobuo Masataka1; 1Primate Research

Institute, Kyoto University, 2Japan Society for the Promotion of Science —
When we read the letters from our friends written by hand, we are able
to not only identify who wrote them but also feel a warmer impression
from them compared to computer-generated letters. Some recent studies
reported that handwritten words are processed differently from printed
words. Event-related potentials (ERP) were recorded under three conditions of writing styles (self-generated, other-generated, and printed) to
examine on emotionality on visual word processing. Fourteen volunteers (nine females and five males; average age = 30.5±7.4 yrs) were participated in this experiment. Emotional adjectives of negative and
positive valence were presented in a positive/negative judgment task.
We focused on early (P2) and late components (N400 and late positive
component/LPC). These ERP components are recorded at central and
parietal electrode sites, which are related to emotional effect on word
processing. By ERP analysis, we found that faster P2 was recorded while
printed words were presented compared to handwritten scripts, and
there was no difference between self-generated and other-generated
words. The handwritten words elicited larger N400 amplitude than the
printed words and the LPC amplitude was larger for printed words than
for handwritten words. These results suggested that printed words were
processed faster than handwritten word. Previous studies reported that
larger N400 represent greater semantic activation and LPC effect reflect
mental imagery. The handwritten words yield greater semantic activation than printed words and printed words may yield more concrete or
uniform imagery compared to handwritten words.

E67

EMOTION REGULATION BY COMPLEX VERBAL STIMULI: A CROSSMODAL
PRIMING TASK Beate Czerwon1, Annette Hohlfeld2, Heike Wiese2, Katja

Werheid1; 1Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 2University of Potsdam — We
investigated the effect of complex verbal stimuli including structural
parallelisms, on the processing of emotional information. Structural parallelisms are a main characteristic of texts like poems or prayers and typically involve repetitions of semantic, syntactic or phonological features.
Recent research in social sciences has shown that structurally parallel
non-verbal behaviour facilitates the synchronisation of emotion. However, experimental evidence on emotion effects of structural parallelisms
is scarce. In the present study we examined the impact of verbal structural parallelisms on subsequent processing of emotional facial expressions in a cross-modal priming task. Event-related brain potentials
(ERPs) were recorded while participants (n=25) classified positive, negative or neutral facial expressions as emotional or non-emotional. The
faces were preceded by verbal stimuli, extracted from prayers, which
were either parallel or non-parallel in structure. Analysis of ERP data
161

Poster Session E
revealed increased amplitudes of the early posterior negativity (EPN)
and a decreased late positive potential (LPP) on positive faces preceded
by structural parallel primes. Our findings suggest that structural parallelisms facilitate both early and late processing of positive emotional
information.

Emotion & Social: Emotional Responding
E70

NEUROMAGNETIC DYNAMICS OF EMOTIONAL PROCESSING: AROUSAL
AND VALENCE EFFECTS Fabien D'Hondt1, Maryse Lassonde2,3, Olivier

SUSTAINED PREFERENTIAL PROCESSING OF ANGRY FACIAL
EXPRESSIONS IN SOCIAL ANXIETY: EVIDENCE FROM STEADY-STATE
VISUAL EVOKED POTENTIALS Matthias J. Wieser1, Lisa M. McTeague1,

Collignon2, Simon Rigoulot1, Jacques Honoré1, Franco Lepore2, Henrique
Sequeira1; 1Laboratoire de Neurosciences Fonctionnelles & Pathologies,
CNRS UMR 8160, Université Lille Nord de France, Lille, France, 2Centre de
Recherche en Neuropsychologie et Cognition (CERNEC), Université de
Montréal, Montreal, Canada, 3Centre de recherche CHU Sainte-Justine,
Montreal, Canada — A growing number of studies in affective neuro-

dysfunctional patterns of attention allocation to social threat cues (e.g.,
angry facial expressions). In the present study, continuous fluctuations
of electrocortical facilitation were investigated during competition of
two simultaneously presented facial expressions (angry, happy, neutral)
in high and low socially anxious individuals, as determined by a prescreening procedure using the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. In each
trial, the two facial expressions were flickered at two different frequencies (14 Hz and 17.5 Hz, “frequency-tagging”), to separate the electrocortical signals evoked by the competing stimuli. It was found that angry
faces compared to happy and neutral expressions were associated with
greater electrocortical facilitation over visual areas only in the high
socially anxious individuals. This pattern of results was independent of
the respective competing stimulus. Heightened electrocortical engagement in the socially anxious participants was present in the first second
of stimulus array presentation, and was sustained for the entire viewing
period. No evidence of later avoidance of threatening faces or competition effects was found. These results, based on a continuous measure of
attentional resource allocation, support the view that social anxiety is
associated with early and sustained prioritized processing of social
threat cues. These cues, however, do not interfere with the electrocortical
processing of a concurrent face, suggesting that they are effective at capturing attention, but are weak competitors for resources.

science sought to identify the neural correlates of emotional processing
by exploring arousal and valence effects, considered as primary dimensions of human emotions. In particular, neuroimaging and electrophysiological experiments have suggested that these dimensions would
specifically impact brain activity during affective pictures perception.
However, spatio-temporal dynamics of brain implication in arousal and
valence processing remain unclear. Thus, the present study recorded
event-related magnetic fields (ERFs) during the presentation of emotional (unpleasant and pleasant) and neutral pictures in 18 healthy volunteers, which had to try to experience feelings induced by those
pictures. Neuromagnetic data were analyzed by means of spatio-temporal Principal Component Analysis (stPCA) and sources localization was
performed using a minimum-norm analysis. Main results revealed an
arousal effect, indicated by a greater activity for both unpleasant and
pleasant pictures compared to neutral ones, on an occipito-temporal
neuromagnetic component between 170 and 200 ms after pictures presentation. Valence effect, corresponding to a significant difference of
activity between pleasant and unpleasant pictures, was observed on a
fronto-temporal neuromagnetic component between 240 and 380 ms.
These results show that arousal impacts the early visual activity whereas
valence processing would take place later in frontal areas. In conclusion,
this study revealed new spatio-temporal dynamics subtending emotional processing.

E69

E71

HUMOUR APPRECIATION AND THE BRAIN’S REWARD SYSTEM: IS
FUNNINESS REWARDING? Mandana Modirrousta1, Darren W. Campbell1,

EMOTION, EMOTION REGULATION, AND CEREBELLAR VERMIS
VOLUME Nicole Giuliani1, Ellora Israni1, Emily Drabant1, James Gross1;

E68

Andreas Keil1; 1University of Florida — Social anxiety has been related to

Marc G. Wallace1, Jeffrey P. Reiss2, Joseph O. Polimeni1, Nancy A. McKeen1,3,
Jitender Sareen1; 1University of Manitoba, 2University of Western Ontario,
3Cancer Care Manitoba — Humour is a fundamental cognitive emotional
process. From the involvement of humour in social interactions to its
influence on mood and arousal, it is intrinsically linked to basic human
functioning. Despite the importance of humour, the neural correlates of
humour appreciation have received little systematic investigation. Previous research findings suggest a role for the brain reward centers in
humour appreciation. Using functional imaging methods, we investigated the set of brain structures associated with reward processing during a humour appreciation task. Our regions of interest consisted of subcortical reward nuclei including the substantia nigra (SN), the ventral
tegmental area (VTA), the nucleus accumbens (NAcc), and the
amygdala, as well as cortical regions including the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex. Healthy adult volunteers (N=22) were presented with 120 comics in a pseudorandom
order in the scanner. Participants were instructed to indicate whether the
comic was a funny joke, a joke but not funny, or not a joke through button pressing. We found that funny jokes as compared to non-funny jokes
were associated with higher mean bold signal in the left amygdala, left
and right SN and left and right NAcc. Furthermore, the activation in the
left amygdala was positively correlated with subjective rating of ‘social
humour productivity’ and ‘using humour as a coping strategy’. Humour
appreciation appears to modulate activity in the sub-cortical reward
structures, yet has negligible effects on higher order reward areas within
the prefrontal cortex.

162

1

Stanford University — The vermis of the cerebellum is known to play a
role in affective experience (Damasio, et al., 2000). Vermis volume is
reduced in individuals with major depression (Beyer, et al., 2002), and
damage to the vermis has been associated with altered affect (Dolan,
1998). However, it is not yet known how variation in the volume of the
vermis relates to emotion and emotion regulation among healthy individuals. In order to investigate this question, we recruited 52 healthy
women to undergo high-resolution MRI scanning and complete personality measures. Vermis volumes were calculated using manual Region of
Interest methods. Raw volumes were converted to the ratio of vermis
volume to total gray matter volume to control for brain size. Participants
completed questionnaires assessing their positive and negative affect
(Positive and Negative Affect Scale), depression (Beck Depression
Index), anxiety (Mood and Anxiety Symptom Questionnaire), and coping styles (COPE Questionnaire). We hypothesized that individuals with
smaller vermis volumes would experience more negative emotions and
show less emotion regulation as compared to individuals with larger
vermis volumes. Preliminary results show that vermis volume is positively correlated with self-reported negative affect (r = 0.29, p = 0.03) and
marginally associated with number of anxious symptoms (r = 0.27, p =
0.07). It is negatively correlated with coping via denial (r = -0.30, p = 0.03)
and positive reinterpretation (r = -0.30, p = 0.03). These findings indicate
that greater vermis volume is associated with greater negative emotion
and lesser emotion regulation.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Emotional Responding

Poster Session E

E72

E74

SUPPRESSING SENSORIMOTOR ACTIVITY MODULATES THE
DISCRIMINATION OF AUDITORY EMOTIONS BUT NOT SPEAKER
IDENTITY Michael Banissy1, Disa Sauter1,2, Jamie Ward3, Jane Warren4,

GRABBING FOR CASH! REINFORCEMENT VALUE MODULATES REACHTO-GRASP David Painter1, Ada Kritikos1, Jane Raymond2; 1University of

1

1

1

2

Vincent Walsh , Sophie Scott ; University College London, Max Planck
Institute for Psycholinguistics, 3University of Sussex, 4Imperial College
London — Our ability to recognise the emotions of others is a crucial feature of human social cognition. Functional neuroimaging studies indicate that activity in sensorimotor cortices is evoked during the
perception of emotion. In the visual domain, right sensorimotor cortex
activity has been shown to be critical for facial emotion recognition.
However, the importance of sensorimotor representations in modalities
outside of vision remains unknown. Here we used continuous thetaburst transcranial magnetic stimulation (cTBS) to investigate whether
neural activity in the right sensorimotor cortices is involved in non-verbal auditory emotion recognition. Two groups of participants completed
same-different tasks on auditory stimuli, discriminating between either
the emotion expressed or the speakers’ identities, prior to and following
cTBS targeted at the right premotor cortex or the vertex (control site). A
task-selective deficit in auditory emotion discrimination was observed.
Stimulation to the premotor cortex resulted in a disruption of participants’ abilities to discriminate emotion, but not identity, from vocal signals. These findings indicate that sensorimotor resources are not
specifically required for discriminating the identity of others and appear
to play a specific role in facilitating emotion discrimination across
modalities.

E73

THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF FELT MUSICAL EMOTIONS ACCORDING TO
THE GENEVA EMOTIONAL MUSIC SCALE (GEMS) Wiebke J. Trost1,2,3,
Zentner4,

Vuilleumier1,2,3; 1University

Marcel
Patrik
Medical School, University
of Geneva, Switzerland, 2Center for Neuroscience, University of Geneva, 3Swiss
Center for Affective Sciences, University of Geneva, 4University of York, United
Kingdom — Our study explored the neural coding of music-induced emotions with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), by investigating more refined categories than the simple pleasant/unpleasant or
happy/sad differentiations used in previous studies. We based our
study on a recent psychological model [1] that proposed nine distinct
emotion categories (joy, nostalgia, peacefulness, power, sadness, tenderness, tension, transcendence, wonder) specifically inducible by music. In
a blocked fMRI design, participants listened to excerpts of classical
music and evaluated their emotions according to the 9-emotion category
model immediately after each stimulus. Using statistical parametrical
mapping (SPM), we performed a parametric analysis to identify patterns
of brain activity that correlated with subjective evaluations for each category separately. Specificities and communalities between categories
were defined by a second-level ANOVA. A factor analysis of the ninedimensional evaluations suggested that two main factors were sufficient
to describe the data, which could be interpreted as ‘arousal’ and
‘valence’. Categories representing high arousal (tension, power, joy,
wonder) showed activations in superior temporal gyrus and striatum,
whereas categories with low arousal (tenderness, transcendence, peacefulness, nostalgia, sadness) were characterized by activations in ventromedial prefrontal cortex and hippocampal regions. For categories with
positive valence, we found activations in ventral striatum, ventral tegmentum area, and insula (wonder, joy), while categories with negative
valence induced activations in the precuneus. However, in addition to
the 2-dimensional arousal/valence differentiations, we could distinguish more specific areas of activation for some categories, including
activation in dorso-medial prefrontal cortex for sadness. [1] Zentner et
al., Emotion, 2008, Vol.8(4).

Queensland, 2University of Wales, Bangor — Humans

and animals use
reward value to maximise desired and minimise undesired outcomes.
Consequently, much research has sought to illuminate how rewards and
punishers direct behaviour. A key approach has been to assess the effects
of reward value on motor behaviour. Humans primarily interact with
rewarding objects by reaching and grasping them. The aim of the current
study was thus to investigate the effects of reward value on reach-tograsp. In two experiments, participants learned the monetary values
associated with reach-to-grasp targets. Using motion capture and
response times, in Experiment 1, we investigated the influence of reward
value in an ongoing reinforcement context. Participants reached and
grasped one of a pair of champagne flutes. LEDs were placed on the
glasses, and the pattern of illumination was informative as to the probability of reward associated with reaching for either flute. Participants
won or lost money depending on their selection. In Experiment 2, we
examined whether value representation is sufficient to influence motor
programming. Here, participants indirectly learned target object values
predicted by target colour. Again using motion capture and response
times, we measured subsequent reach-to-grasp reaches. We hypothesised that reach-to-grasp would be faster and less variable for more
rewarding compared with less rewarding targets. Results from both
experiments supported these predictions. Importantly, the results indicate that value representation is sufficient to influence motor programming and that reward value influences reach-to-grasp in a contextdependent manner.

E75

MODULATIONS OF HUMAN EXTRASTRIATE VISUAL NEURONAL ACTIVITY
BY EMOTIONAL VOICES: HUMAN INTRACRANIAL RECORDINGS Didier

Grandjean1,2, Julie Péron1,2,3, Valérie Milesi1,2, Lucas Tamarit2;
1Neuropsychology of Emotion and Affective Dynamics Laboratory, University of
Geneva, Switzerland, 2Swiss Center for Affective Sciences, University of
Geneva, Switzerland, 3URU 425 Behavior and Basal Ganglia, Movement
Disorders Unit, CHU de Rennes, France — The central nervous system has
developed specialized neural systems to process relevant information,
including emotional prosody in the auditory domain. Several behavioural and EEG studies have shown that visual processing is modulated
by emotional prosody processing (Brosch et al, 2008; Brosch et al., 2009).
However the neuronal mechanisms underlying these visual modulations
through emotional auditory information processing are still unclear.
Intracranial local field potentials (LFP) were recorded in the extrastriate
visual cortex in a patient prior to surgery for pharmaco-resistant epilepsy while he was instructed to listen to fearful, angry, sad or happy
tone of voice, and matched control auditory stimuli. These LFPs were
analyzed in the time-frequency domain using Continuous Wavelet
Transform. Our results demonstrate that the extrastriate visual cortical
activity in the alpha band is differentially modulated by different kinds
of emotional prosody. Fearful and anger prosody induced a decrease of
alpha activity within the extrastriate visual cortex while the activity
related to sad and happy prosody were not different from neutral or
matched control stimuli. These results are in line with the view of an
early modulation of different sensory human brain areas in response to
threatening emotional stimuli and an early influence of the auditory
modality on the neuronal activity within the occipital visual cortex.

E76

THREAT RESPONSE AND HYPERAROUSAL ASSESSED IN VETERANS WITH
GULF WAR SYNDROME: AN FMRI STUDY Virginia Isabel Buhl1, Clifford S.
Calley1, John Hart1, Gail Tillman1, Timothy Green1, Jack W. Grinnan1, Michael
A. Kraut2; 1University of Texas at Dallas, 2Johns Hopkins University —
Increased threat response and hyperarousal have been reported among
veterans suffering with Gulf War related Illness. We assessed threat
response and hyperarousal in the three GW Illness (GWI) subtypes, each

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

163

Poster Session E
shown to have varying degrees of emotional complaints, as well as a veteran control group using a real-not-real discrimination task during fMRI
acquisition. Stimuli from the IAPS were used and supplemented with
additional pictures of Gulf War combat scenes. Each picture was then
modified to create a corresponding meaningless visual stimulus by randomizing the phase information and recombining it with the original
picture's magnitude information. Results showed significant increases in
signal change for threatening vs. nonthreatening stimuli in GWI groups
complaining of heightened threat response compared to controls in areas
involved in threat processing, namely occipital and orbital frontal cortex.
We hypothesize the significant differences were the result of dysfunction
associated with threat processing and arousal.

E77

SHYNESS AND THE FIRST 100 MILLISECONDS OF EMOTIONAL FACE
PROCESSING Michelle Jetha1,2, Xin Zheng1, Louis A. Schmidt2, Sidney J.
Segalowitz1; 1Brock University, 2McMaster University — People high in shy-

ness show heightened fear and reduced face and eye contact during
social encounters, suggesting differences related to initial face processing. In the current study, we used event-related potentials (ERPs) to
examine how the temperament of shyness would affect the early visual
processing of emotional faces. Forty-one participants varying in shyness
passively viewed either neutral, happy, fearful, or angry faces that were
presented serially in a random order. After dividing participants into
three groups based on their shyness, the interacting effects between shyness and the type of emotional face stimuli were found in both P1
latency and P1 amplitude. Specifically, for the low-shy group, the P1
latency was shorter for happy faces than for non-happy faces (p<.001);
for the high-shy group, the P1 latency were shorter for fearful faces than
for non-fearful faces (p = .052). For the P1 amplitude, the low-shy group
showed greater P1 responses to happy than to neutral faces (p=.002); in
contrast, the high-shy group showed greater P1 responses to fearful than
to neutral faces (p<.001). The medium-shy group did not differ in either
P1 latency or amplitude across face stimuli. For the N170 component,
however, neither amplitude nor latency showed a shyness by emotion
interaction. Our findings are the first to show that social affiliation styles
are related to very early ERP visual processing of emotional faces, which
are likely influenced by the amygdala’s fast transmission of low-spatial
frequency information.

Executive Processes: Monitoring &
Inhibitory Control
E78

EFFECT
OF
DOPAMINE
TRANSPORTER
GENOTYPE
ON
METHYLPHENIDATE-INDUCED CHANGES IN FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
DURING RESPONSE INHIBITION IN CHILDHOOD ADHD Eric Murphy1,

Devon Shook1, William Parrott1, Jennifer Foss-Feig1, Laura Kenealy2, Edwin
Cook3, Mark Stein3, Chandan Vaidya1,2; 1Georgetown University, 2Children's
National Medical Center, 3University of Illinois at Chicago — Pharmacological studies have reported that there is considerable variability in the efficacy of methylphenidate in children with Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). This variability may relate to the polymorphism of the dopamine transporter genotype (DAT1) as methylphenidate (MPH) enhances synaptic dopamine by blocking reuptake
by the dopamine transporter. We used functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) to examine whether DAT1 modulates MPH-induced
changes in connectivity within the neural network underlying response
inhibition, a function that is impaired in ADHD. fMRI was performed
during a Go-NoGo task on ADHD children, once on and once off MPH,
who were heterozygous (9/10) or homozygous (10/10) for the 10-repeatallele. No significant behavioral differences (measured by NoGo errors)
were seen between genotypes. Psycho-physiological interaction analysis
was performed on fMRI contrast maps of NoGo > Go conditions to create functional connectivity maps of striatal connectivity. A DAT1 X MPH

164

Executive Processes: Monitoring & Inhibitory Control
interaction was observed such that in 9/10 children, striatal connectivity
with right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and left inferior parietal cortex
decreased with MPH, whereas in 10/10 children, striatal connectivity
these regions increased with MPH. Thus, MPH induced opposite
changes in functional striato-cortical connectivity depending upon
dopamine transporter genotype during response inhibition in children
with ADHD.

Executive Processes: Working Memory
E79

WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY AND NEURAL MECHANISMS OF
ATTENTIONAL CONTROL Kate Yurgil1, Edward Golob1; 1Tulane University —
Working memory capacity (WMC) estimates the ability to maintain and
manipulate information in working memory and is associated with individual differences in attentional control. Behavioral studies suggest that
high WMC conveys greater resistance to distraction. We used eventrelated potentials (ERP) to test whether high WMC is associated with
reduced distractibility, particularly under low perceptual load. Sensory
(N100, P200) and attention-related (P3a, P3b, slow wave) ERPs were
compared in high (n=13) and low (n=11) WMC groups. Subjects discriminated pure tone targets (1000 Hz) from nontargets at midline. Perceptual load was manipulated using nontarget frequency (low load=500 Hz,
high load=950 Hz). White noise distracters were presented at midline or
±90?. Reaction times were faster for low vs. high load (p<.001) across
WMC groups. The N100 was larger to targets vs. nontargets (p<.001),
particularly for high WMC (p<.02). N100 to distracters was larger for
low vs. high WMC (p<.001). Amplitude of a negative slow wave to nontargets (~200-400 ms) increased from low to high load (p<.001), with
larger increases for high WMC (p<.01). Overall load effects (low>high)
were evident for amplitudes of the N100 (p<.001), distracter P3a (p<.03),
and target P3b (p<.001). The P3b also had shorter latencies at low vs.
high load (p<.01). The ERP results suggest individual differences in
WMC are related to early automatic and controlled attentional processing (N100, slow wave) but not attentional orienting (P3a) or later stimulus classification (P3b).

E80

THE NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL TRACK OF ACOUSTIC SHORT-TERM
MEMORY Christine Lefebvre1, François Vachon2, Stephan Grimault1,

Synthia Guimond1, Robert J. Zatorre3,4, Isabelle Peretz1, Pierre Jolicoeur1;
1Université de Montréal, 2Université Laval, 3Montreal Neurological Institute,
4
McGill University — We sought to uncover neurophysiological activity
related specifically to the maintenance of acoustic stimuli in short-term
memory (STM) using the event-related potential (ERP) technique. The
electro-encephalogram (EEG) was recorded while participants performed a same /different task on two non-musical tone sequences separated by a 2-sec retention interval. Memory load was manipulated
parametrically by varying the number of tones in a sequence. The 2, 4, or
6 tones were preceded by white noise fillers to equal sequence length
across trials. The voltages measured during the retention interval of this
STM task were compared to those measured during completion of a control task. In this control task, participants ignored the first sequence and
completed a judgement task on the second sequence. We observed an
increase in negativity with memory load at frontal sites in the Memory
task, but not in the Control task. We also found a correlation between
memory capacity and voltage differences between the load conditions.
These findings suggest that not only can we isolate electrical brain activity specifically related to the retention of pitch information in acoustic
STM, but we can also link behavioural and electrophysiological data to
explain individual differences.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Working Memory

Poster Session E

E81

E83

TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION TO RIGHT INFERIOR
PARIETAL AFFECTS WORKING MEMORY RECOGNITION BUT NOT
RECALL Marian Berryhill1,2, Elaine Wencil2, H. Branch Coslett2, Ingrid

INDIVIDUALS WITH CHROMOSOME 22Q11.2 DELETION SYNDROME
(22Q11.2DS) EXHIBIT IMPAIRED SPATIOTEMPORAL PROCESSING
WHICH IMPACTS SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY PERFORMANCE Ling

Olson1,2; 1Temple University, 2University of Pennsylvania — Converging

evidence from neuroimaging and neuropsychology identify the functional
involvement of the parietal lobe in working memory (WM). However,
the mechanistic role of this region in WM is poorly understood. Recently
we have reported that patients with unilateral right parietal lesions were
generally impaired at WM across a wide range of stimuli when tested by
recognition. In contrast, patients performed normally when tested by
recall. We suggest that this dissociation reflects the fact that participants
adopt different strategies for storing information under recall and recognition retrieval demands. The recognition strategy is somewhat passive,
relying on parietal mediated attention system to store information for
short durations, whereas the recall strategy is more active, relying on a
subvocal rehearsal mechanism outside parietal cortex. Here, we sought
converging evidence for this recall/recognition dissociation using a neural stimulation technique: transcranial direct current stimulation. Participants performed a visual WM task in which 6 pictures of common
objects were presented sequentially and followed by a brief (1 s) delay.
In separate trial blocks, WM was tested using recognition or recall.
Cathodal stimulation (1.5 mA) was applied to the right inferior parietal
lobule for ten minutes prior to task performance. Baseline performance
was established prior to tDCS. The results replicated and extended our
lesion findings: tDCS did not affect performance on recall trials, but did
affect performance on recognition trials. These findings are consistent
with an attentional account of parietal involvement in WM.

E82

WORKING
MEMORY
AND
FEATURE-BASED
ATTENTION
SIMULTANEOUSLY MODULATE THE PERCEPTION OF COHERENT MOTION
IN HUMAN OBSERVERS Diego Mendoza1, Megan Schneiderman1, Julio

Martinez-Trujillo1; 1McGill University — Attending to a visual feature selec-

tively modulates the perception of this feature. We investigated whether
maintaining the representation of a visual feature in working memory
(WM) produces a similar effect, and whether the effects of WM and feature-based attention (FBA) can occur simultaneously. Seven subjects
identified the direction of a brief pulse of coherent motion occurring in
an otherwise incoherent random dot pattern (RDP). Simultaneously,
they performed another task that varied across three experiments: in
Experiment 1, subjects attended to four sequential test RDPs to detect
motion direction changes. The pulse co-occurred with one of the tests. In
Experiments 2 and 3, subjects stored the direction of a sample RDP in
WM and subsequently viewed four sequential tests and determined if
their directions matched the sample. In Experiment 2, the pulse occurred
during an inter-test interval, while subjects held the sample in WM. In
Experiment 3, the pulse co-occurred with one of the tests, while subjects
maintained the sample in WM and attended to the test. Pulse identification performance was higher when the pulse direction was the same as
the concurrently attended test (Experiment 1) or the remembered sample
(Experiment 2), than when it was opposite. In Experiment 3, performance was highest when both the remembered sample and the attended
test directions were the same as the pulse direction, intermediate when
one was the same and the other opposite, and lowest when both were
opposite. Our results suggest that WM and FBA can individually or
simultaneously modulate motion perception.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Wong1,2, Tracy Riggins3, Vy Nguyen2, Margarita Cabaral2, Leeza Kondos2, Tony
J. Simon1,2; 1University of California, Davis, Neuroscience Graduate Group,
2M.I.N.D. Institute, Sacramento, CA, 3University of Maryland — Chromosome
22q deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) is a mostly spontaneously arising
genetic disorder with a prevalence of around 1:400 births that adversely
affects cognitive functioning and physiology. Previous research indicates
that individuals with the syndrome have relatively intact verbal skills,
yet selective impairments in processing of spatial information. This
study tested the hypothesis that children with 22q11.2DS exhibit
impaired spatial and temporal processing which impact working memory performance, even when controlling for maintenance of attention.
METHOD: In a visuospatial working memory task, participants (n=52
22q11.2DS, n=49 typically-developing) aged 7 to 15 years were presented
images within a 3x3 grid, and after a delay, participants indicated the
positions of the presented images in the correct temporal order. Both the
memory load and delay interval were manipulated. ANALYSIS: Trials in
which the number of indicated items matched the number of presented
items were identified as trials in which attention was successfully maintained. The 22q11.2DS group was subdivided into high and low memory
based on a median split of overall performance scores. Analyses examined the effects of diagnosis, memory, and gender. RESULTS: Even
when controlling for attentiveness, participants with 22q11.2DS made
more spatial and temporal errors than control participants. They had
similar sustained attention performance and responses to increasing
load. Females made more errors than males, and these were predominantly temporal errors. Results extend the findings of impaired spatiotemporal processing into the memory domain in 22q11.2DS and
highlight gender as well as developmental differences in working memory processing.

E84

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY AND ATTENTION
DEFICITS IN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS Leon Gmeindl1, Susan M. Courtney1;
1Johns Hopkins University — Multiple

sclerosis (MS) is an immune-mediated demyelinating disease that results in widespread white-matter
lesions. It is not surprising, therefore, that impairment in working memory (WM), a neurocognitive system that relies on communication among
distant regions, is common in MS. While most research on WM abilities
in MS has focused on verbal information, recent work in our laboratory
revealed MS-related impairment on computerized variations of Spatial
Span, a task that requires encoding, maintenance, and reproduction of
sequences of locations. There was no differential MS-related effect on
performance of increased delay length, however, indicating that maintenance (rehearsal) of spatial information was not impaired. In the current
study, we targeted other component WM processes. In Experiment 1, in
addition to the serial recall (span) test, a serial recognition test was given
that eliminated the need for uncued retrieval and manual reproduction
of spatial sequences: subjects simply indicated whether sample and test
sequences matched by pressing one of two response keys. Patients were
impaired on both tests, indicating that poor performance on the serial
recall test was not necessarily due to a deficit in the uncued retrieval of
spatial information nor to degraded motor processing. In Experiment 2,
results from a version of the Posner cueing paradigm indicate inefficient
voluntary orienting of attention to relevant locations in MS, a deficit that
likely results in impoverished encoding of spatial information into WM.
Rapid, voluntary orienting of attention may be more vulnerable to the
effects of white-matter lesions than is spatial WM maintenance.

165

Poster Session E

Executive Processes: Working Memory

E85

E87

EVIDENCE OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN WORKING MEMORY
CAPACITY USING EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS: INFLUENCE OF
DISTRACTORS ON VISUAL WORKING MEMORY A. Becke1, H. Strumpf2, J-

THE SNAP25 GENE IS LINKED TO WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY AND
MATURATION OF THE POSTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX DURING
CHILDHOOD Stina Söderqvist1,2, Fiona McNab1,2, Myriam Peyrard-Janvid1,

M. Hopf1,2, N. Müller1; 1Otto-von-Guericke-University Magdeburg, Germany,
2Leibniz-Institute for Neurobiology Magdeburg, Germany — A study by Vogel

Hans Matsson1, Keith Humphreys1, Juha Kere1,3, Torkel Klingberg1,2;
1Karolinska Institutet, 2Stockholm Brain Institute, 3University of Helsinki —

and colleagues (2005) revealed a strong correlation between an individual´s Working Memory Capacity (WMC) and the ability to filter out
task-irrelevant information, indexed by EEG contralateral delay activity
(CDA). In this framework, we assessed the role of distractor information
for the processes of encoding and retrieval in visual WM as a function of
WMC. EEG data were recorded in 38 subjects, of whom 18 scored low in
an independent visual WMC assessment scale. In the S1-S2 changedetection task the orientation for only the target colored items, in the left
or right visual field (indicated by an arrow before each of the trials),
should be remembered. Distractors were induced in form of two different-colored items (S1) and due to changes in the orientation of an item in
the unattended side in the visual field (S2). Subjects with a low WMC
where much more affected while encoding information, as revealed by
the raised CDA. Furthermore low WMC subjects showed significantly
higher failure rates due to distractors in the retrieval phase (S2). Parietal
and occipital brain regions, show increased activity for periods of processing distractor information. The results elucidate the mechanisms of
distractor processing as a function of WMC and highlight two underlying effects of an early filter deficit and the inefficient suppression of distracters in the retrieval phase of visual WM.

Working memory is the ability to retain task relevant information. This
ability is closely related to attention and is important for a wide range of
cognitive tasks. Deficits in working memory are a central cognitive
impairment in neurodevelopmental disorders such as attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. Although working memory capacity is known to
be highly heritable, the majority of genes involved remain unidentified.
Here we show that working memory capacity is related to a common
polymorphism (rs363039) in the gene coding for synaptosomal-associated protein, 25kDa (SNAP25), in a normal population of children and
adolescents. We used magnetic resonance imaging techniques to demonstrate that this polymorphism affects the maturation of grey matter as
well as brain activation in the posterior cingulate cortex, regions previously implicated in regulation of attention. We thus identified a genebrain-behavior network which could be a key for understanding cognitive development as well as some of its disorders.

E86

PROBING THE FUNCTION OF DELAY-PERIOD ALPHA-BAND
OSCILLATIONS IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY David Sutterer1, Jeffrey

Johnson1, Daniel Acheson1, Bradley R. Postle1; 1University of WisconsinMadison — Sustained alpha-band power has been reliably observed during the delay period of working memory tests. Although alpha-band
oscillations in working memory have been variously attributed to processes such as, idling, active suppression, and coordination of cross-frequency phase dynamics, their role remains unclear. The present study
systematically investigated sustained alpha-band activity during spatial
delayed recognition through manipulations of stimulus identity and
behavioral context. Subjects completed five variants of visual delayed
recognition while 60-channel EEG was recorded. In the first condition,
to-be-remembered locations were cued with uniform circles. In the second condition, locations were cued with randomly selected difficult-toname Attneave shapes, although subjects were explicitly instructed to
ignore the variation in shape. The third and fourth conditions featured
the same stimulus presentation, but pre-trial instructions specified
whether subjects should remember locations or object identities. Finally,
the fifth condition required memory for objects in locations. Results
showed relative increases in alpha-band spectral power (8-14 Hz) as
object identity increased in salience. For location memory trials, delayperiod alpha-band power was greater in the second condition (when
stimuli were irrelevant Attneave shapes) than the first (no stimulus
shape variation), and greater still when location memory trials were randomly interleaved with object memory trials (i.e., in a behavioral context
when object identity was periodically relevant to behavior). These
results provide support for the idea that one function of sustained delayperiod alpha-band oscillations is the active suppression of trial-irrelevant information.

166

E88

INVESTIGATING PREFRONTAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO WORKING MEMORY
DEFICITS IN TURNER SYNDROME Signe Bray1, Bria Dunkin1, David

Hong1, Allan Reiss1; 1Stanford University — Turner syndrome (TS), a genetic

disorder characterized by complete or partial absence of an X chromosome in females, has been consistently linked with deficits in visuospatial skills and executive function, but relatively intact language skills. In
this study we investigated brain networks subserving working memory
(WM) in both visuospatial and phonological domains, hypothesizing
that visuospatial WM would be more impaired than phonological in TS,
and that this interaction would be reflected in brain activity. We used
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to scan both typically
developing (TD) and TS participants (all females, aged 7-14), while they
performed visuospatial and phonological 1-back and 2-back memory
tasks. Accuracy measures indicated that the phonological task was more
difficult, and TS participants were overall less accurate, but there was no
interaction between diagnosis and task or memory-load. We found that
across groups and modalities, a network of regions was increasingly
active for greater memory-load, including bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), anterior insula, and parietal regions. Among these
areas, only the left DLPFC was more engaged by memory-load in the TD
group relative to TS. We also found a significant modality by diagnosis
interaction in the right DLPFC, which was more active for phonological
relative to visuospatial in TD, but not TS. Taken together, these findings
complement prior work showing that DLPFC plays an important role in
WM performance in TS, and contribute novel findings by showing that
this effect is not specific to visuospatial tasks.

E89

ESTROGEN MODULATION OF FRONTAL LOBE CIRCUITRY DURING
VERBAL WORKING MEMORY IN OLDER WOMEN Julie Dumas1, Amanda
Kutz1, Christy Edgren1, Ashley Pfaff1, Paul Newhouse1; 1University of Vermont
College of Medicine — Prior research shows that hormonal changes after

menopause result in changes in cognition in some older women. However, little is known about how estrogen loss and subsequent estrogen
treatment affects cognition and the underlying brain processes responsible for any cognitive changes. We tested the ability of estrogen to modulate working memory performance and related brain activation in
postmenopausal women. Twenty healthy postmenopausal women were
assigned to three months of 1 mg oral 17-? estradiol or placebo. At baseline and three months later each woman completed a visual verbal Nback test of working memory during functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI). The fMRI data showed that women who were treated
with estradiol for three months had greater bilateral activation in the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Working Memory
middle frontal gyrus (Brodmann area 9) compared to women treated
with placebo. Performance on the verbal working memory task showed
no difference between estradiol and placebo treated subjects. These data
are consistent with prior work showing increases in frontal activation on
memory tasks after estrogen treatment. However, this is the first study to
show frontal increases during verbal working memory specifically.
These data suggest that estradiol treatment in postmenopausal women
may affect the manipulation component of working memory supported
by the frontal lobes necessary for good performance on the N-back task.

E90

DISTRIBUTING THE LOAD: AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN THE EXTENT
OF LOAD-DEPENDENT NEURAL ACTIVITY IN VISUAL SHORT-TERM
MEMORY Carson Pun1, Kristin Wilson1, Maha Adamo1, Peter J. Lenkic2,

Susanne Ferber1; 1University of Toronto, 2University of British Columbia — The
ability to hold visual information in mind after it is no longer physically
present seems to decline with age. The amount of information held in
visual short-term memory (VSTM) is reflected electrophysiologically in a
negative ERP waveform known as the contralateral delay activity
(CDA), which is computed as the difference between contralateral and
ipsilateral activity and whose amplitude correlates with VSTM capacity.
Using EEG, we employed a VSTM change-detection task where participants’ attention was directed to one side of a bilateral display and they
were asked to remember various numbers of colored squares presented
together for 100 ms. Following a brief delay, participants saw a single
probe square and were asked to indicate whether the color of the probe
was the same as the item appearing in that location during the memory
array. We observed a significant CDA across multiple posterior sites for
both young and older adults. In both groups, the amplitude of the CDA
was load-dependent; however, the extent of the load-dependent negativity was more widespread for young adults and restricted to only the
topographical peak of the CDA for older adults. That is, load-dependent
increases in CDA amplitude were more focal in older adults. This loaddependent difference between the two age groups did not only affect the
initial uploading of items into VSTM but also subsequently affected the
degree to which the CDA was sustained. Thus, changes in the efficacy of
the posterior VSTM system contribute to the observed decline in VSTM
capacity for older adults.
E91

UNDER ADDITIVITY OF INSTRUCTION AND REPORTED ITEMS IN
WORKING MEMORY Katia Gagnon1, André Achim1; 1Université du Québec
à Montéal — Working memory (WM) is a capacity-limited cognitive system that maintains task relevant information readily available in the
brain. The present experiment aimed at documenting the extent to which
instruction items compete with to-be-reported items in a WM span task.
Methods: Ten college students observed sequences of 4 individual symbols (either 4 different letters or 4 non letters: #$%&) constituting the
instruction items, followed by 3 to 8 triplets of symbols, after which they
had to report one item from each triplet, namely the left or right letter,
depending on whether the middle item belonged or not to the instruction set. The non letter instruction set served to control for the potential
cost of letter selection on WM span. There were two trials of each type, in
random order, for each number of triplets. The subjects proceeded to the
next level if they reported all correct items in correct order at least once.
The highest level reached with each type of instruction set constituted
the dependent variable. Result: The average span levels reached were 4.4
(experimental) and 6.2 (control). This difference of 1.8 differs significantly both from 0 (no experimental effect) and from 4 (expected if each
instruction letter occupied one WM capacity unit). Conclusion: The
observed under additive effect suggests that Items that must be recognized to perform the task occupy WM differently than items to be
reported. In this paradigm, recognition and report may respectively rely
on the visuospatial sketchpad and the phonological loop components of
the WM system.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E
E92

ALTERED PREFRONTAL CONNECTIVITY DURING SPATIAL AND OBJECT
WORKING MEMORY PERFORMANCE IN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS Yi-Shin

Sheu1, Caroline Montojo1, Megan Walsh1, Susan Courtney1,3; 1Johns Hopkins
University, 2F.M. Kirby Research Center for Functional Brain Imaging, Kennedy
Krieger Institute, Baltimore, Maryland — Background: Multiple Sclerosis
(MS) is an immune-mediated demyelinating disease. Working memory
(WM) deficits are common, presumably due to disruptions in communication among brain regions. Previous studies found recruitment of additional brain regions in individuals with MS during cognitive tasks. It is
thought this recruitment might limit expression of cognitive deficits, but
the mechanism is unknown. We hypothesized that anterior prefrontal
cortex (aPFC), a region involved in executive function, often activated in
both spatial and nonspatial WM, might contribute to this compensatory
plasticity through altered interactions with other brain areas. Methods:
FMRI data was collected while 15 subjects (24-55 year-old) with relapsing-remitting MS, and 11 age-matched controls performed delayed-recognition tasks involving either locations or identities of three faces.
Psychophysiological interaction analysis was used to identify group differences in whole-brain functional connectivity with aPFC specified as
the seed region, during each WM task relative to a sensorimotor control
task. Results: During spatial WM performance, MS-related reduction in
connectivity with aPFC was observed for insular, medial and superior
frontal, and lateral parietal regions, and enhancement was observed for
middle frontal, occipital and posterior parietal regions. During object
WM performance, individuals with MS showed decreased connectivity
with thalamus and parietal regions relative to healthy controls, while
increased connectivity with occipitotemporal and bilateral parahippocampal regions was observed. Conclusion: Decreases in functional connectivity with aPFC during spatial and object WM performance were
observed in MS, suggesting the normal WM pathways were disrupted.
In contrast, several other regions show enhanced connectivity with
aPFC, perhaps reflecting compensatory reorganization.

E93

FLUCTUATING INSTRUCTIONS DO NOT EASILY INCREASE WORKING
MEMORY LOAD André Achim1, Katia Gagnon1, Mélanie Demers1, Caroline
Picard1; 1Université du Québec à Montéal — Working memory (WM) is the

capacity to hold context relevant information and manipulate it. Maintaining task instructions could involve either WM or regular (long term)
episodic memory. But the latter is ill suited to distinguish very similar
episodes in close temporal and context proximity, like frequently changing instructions for equivalent stimuli. Thus, frequently changing
instructions might create an extra load on WM compared to homogeneous instructions within blocks of trials. This speculation was tested
with sequences of 6 alternating visual letters and numbers, to be
reported according to one of 6 possible instructions (e.g. "numbers in
descending order then letters in alphabetical order) by clicking on letters
or digits respectively across the top or bottom of the screen. Nine college
volunteers received 12 blocks of 12 trials. The trial sequence intermixed
six blocks of randomly mixed instructions (two of each type) and six of
uniform instructions, one block per instruction. Contrary to expectation,
the success rate in the mixed blocks (78.7% of sequences correctly
reported) was not lower than that in the uniform blocks (78.4%). Behavioural observations indicate that, in the mixed blocks, most participants
encoded the required report sequence using the screen layout (e.g. start
bottom right, end top right), possibly translating it into the visuospatial
sketchpad. If mixed blocks taxed a WM component (episodic buffer or
visuospatial sketchpad) other than the phonological loop, there was no
sign of interference between their respective loads. Instructions might
interfere only when they directly tax the involved WM stimulus holding
resource.

167

Poster Session E
E94

COGNITIVE CONTROL AND PROACTIVE INTERFERENCE IN WORKING
MEMORY IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Teal S. Eich1, Edward E. Smith1,2, Deniz
Cebenoyan1, Elena Derkits2, Chara Malapani2; 1Columbia University, 2New
York State Psychiatric Institute — Deficits of cognitive control (CC), includ-

ing inhibition in working memory (WM), have been reported in schizophrenia (SCZ). A single cause has been assumed to underlie these effects.
In contrast, we hypothesized that there are multiple CC processes, and
neural dysfunction in SCZ may result in impairment in only some of
these processes. We tested schizophrenics and controls on a task previously shown to dissociate brain mechanisms underlying the ability to
ignore distracting perceptual information (occipital cortex) and inhibit
information in WM (left lateral PFC). In the “Ignore” condition, subjects
saw a cue to remember either the red or blue words, followed by a wordset (2 red, 2 blue), and a memory probe. The “Suppress” condition was
identical, except the word-set came before the instruction-cue. Forty-percent of the memory probes were words subjects were supposed to maintain in WM (positives), 30% were words not to be maintained in WM
(dropped-negatives), and 30% were words that had not appeared in the
word-set (non-familiar negatives). Additionally, the word-pool number
(40 or 80 total) was manipulated between-subjects, to test the effects of
proactive interference (PI) in SCZ. We found that schizophrenics were
selectively impaired only on Suppress dropped-negative-trials in both
the 40 and 80-word task. Schizophrenics, but not controls, also showed a
PI effect, such that RT was greater in the 40-word task than the 80-word
task. These findings suggest that schizophrenics are impaired in suppressing information in WM, and information from previous trials, but
intact in inhibiting information prior to entry into WM.

E95

DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX ACTIVATION RELATED TO PAIN
AFTER MILD TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Nadia Gosselin1,2, Jen-Kai

Chen1,2, Carolina Bottari1,2, Michael Petrides1,2, Simon Tinawi3, Élaine de
Guise2,3, Alain Ptito1,2; 1Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital,
Montreal, Canada, 2McGill University, Montreal, Canada, 3Montreal General
Hospital, Montreal, Canada — Introduction: We recently showed a reduction in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) activity using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in subjects with mild
traumatic brain injury (MTBI) (Chen et al, 2004) during performance of
the visual externally ordered task, a working memory task devised by
Petrides (2000). To date, no studies have investigated the effects of pain
on cerebral functioning in MTBI subjects, although chronic pain associated to headaches are reported by more than 50% of this population. The
aim of the study was to measure the relationship between pain and activation in the DLPFC during the working memory task in MTBI subjects.
Methods: Nineteen subjects (11 women; age: 28.6±11.3 years; 8.5±8.5
months post-injury) were tested with fMRI and were compared to 26
controls (14 women; age: 28.5±9.3 years). They performed the visual
externally ordered task and a baseline control task. Pain attributed to
headaches at the moment of the testing was evaluated using a visual
analogue scale. Results: No group differences were found for either reaction time or accuracy. MTBI subject reported more pain than controls
(p<0.001). In fMRI, lower activations in the right (p<0.01) and left DLPFC
(p<0.05) were found in MTBI compared to control subjects. A significant
correlation was found between pain and activation in the right DLPFC
(r=-0.59, p<0.01) where MTBI subjects with higher pain had lower activation. Conclusion: Our results confirm that MTBI can produce functional
consequences that can be associated to the presence of pain.

E96

STRIATAL LEARNING FOLLOWING ACUTE SOCIAL STRESS IN A
CIGARETTE WITHDRAWN STATE Clio Pitula1, Tal Ben-Simhon1, Alain

Dagher1, Michael J. Frank2, Lesley K. Fellows1; 1McGill University, 2University of
Arizona — Changes in ventral striatum dopamine are believed to influence the gradual transition from casual to uncontrolled drug use. Stress
is a known trigger for relapse in addicted smokers and can stimulate

168

Executive Processes: Working Memory
dopamine release. Brain imaging studies have found a link between psychological vulnerability and increased striatal dopamine in response to
social stress. Reinforcement learning tasks can serve as an indirect probe
of striatal dopamine function. In an earlier study, we found differences
between smokers and tobacco ‘chippers’, long term casual smokers, during ad libitum smoking but not during withdrawal on one such task. The
present study investigates whether social stress, through its known
effects on dopamine, affects task performance in the same populations.
We used validated dependence questionnaires to classify participants as
addicted smokers (N=29) or chippers (N=23); groups were matched on
demographic variables. Following 18 hours of cigarette abstinence, participants performed two versions of the GoNogo learning task, separated
by either a social stress manipulation (TSST) or a non-stress control task.
Replicating our earlier results, there were no learning differences at baseline. The stress manipulation, despite leading to subjective reports of
increased stress in all participants, did not affect task performance, either
between or across groups. Moreover, while smokers differed from chippers in their subjective reactions to withdrawal, they reported similar
levels of stress in response to the manipulation. Thus, acute social stress
does not substantially affect dopamine-mediated learning in either
addicted or casual smokers in withdrawal, arguing against a role for
dopamine in stress-induced relapse.

E97

NEURAL CORRELATES OF SHORT VERSUS LONG DURATION TIMING: AN
FMRI STUDY IN ADOLESCENTS James Porter1, Paul Collins1, Ryan
Muetzel1, Monica Luciana1; 1University of Minnesota — We

investigated
brain regions involved in the perception and reproduction of discrete
time intervals. Prior studies indicate that interval timing involves a distributed cortical-subcortical circuit. Regions including the caudate, the
insula, the putamen, the supplementary motor area (SMA), the preSMA, ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC), and medial parietal cortex have been implicated in interval encoding. Interval reproduction has
been associated with dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC), fusiform cortex, the putamen, and parahippocampal cortex. Additionally, these regions may be differentially involved
for short (less than 3 seconds) versus long (3+ seconds) intervals, with
the shorter duration timings primarily recruiting SMA and pre-SMA.
However, the extent to which these dissociations apply to the four crosscombinations of short/long and encoding/reproduction parameters is
unclear. In order to investigate this, 30 healthy subjects were asked to
perform an interval timing task during fMRI scanning. The task included
short (1000-2500ms) and long (5000-6500ms) trials that required encoding and reproduction of the time intervals. Short trials recruited SMA
and motor cortex to a greater extent during the encoding phase than did
long trials. Longer trials required greater activation of pons, thalamus,
and ACC during encoding. Overall, reproduction engaged pre-SMA,
hippocampal/parahippocampal areas, thalamus, putamen, pallidum,
and caudate. Short reproductions additionally recruited bilateral DLPFC
and VLPFC, ACC, and insula. The results indicate that short-interval
encoding is carried out in pre-motor regions, while longer encoding
requires more extensive cortical-subcortical activations. In contrast,
reproducing shorter intervals requires greater prefrontal cognitive control areas than does long-interval reproduction.

E98

SHORT-TERM MEMORY: DISTINGUISHING THE REGION OF DIRECT
ACCESS FROM THE ACTIVATED PORTION OF LONG-TERM MEMORY

Derek Nee1, John Jonides2; 1Indiana University, 2University of Michigan — Several competing psychological models have been put forth hypothesizing
different architectures of short-term memory. Recent work has established that within short-term memory, a single item can be distinguished
within the focus of attention that demonstrates privileged access and a
unique neural signature. Whether memory outside of the focus of attention can be further sub-divided remains an open question. One account
posits that outside of the focus of attention, a limited set of items resides
in a region of direct access (RoDA) with other items in mind comprising
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Working Memory
the activated portion of long-term memory (LTM). A competing account
contests that all memory outside of the focus of attention is of one sort.
Here, we use a serial item-recognition task and fMRI to test these models. Behavioral performance demonstrated a sharp drop-off for items
putatively in LTM compared to the RoDA. Neurally, the left prefrontal
cortex (PFC) demonstrated heightened activation for items in LTM compared to the RoDA. Surprisingly, the hippocampus demonstrated the
opposite pattern: items in the RoDA were more active compared to items
in LTM. Activation in both regions correlated with behavioral data and
estimated working memory capacity. Finally, psycho-physiological
interaction (PPI) analysis revealed functional interactions between the
hippocampus and phonological loop for the RoDA, and between left
PFC and the ventral stream for LTM. These results suggest that distinct
memory codes form the basis of the RoDA and LTM, and support models that posit a tripartite memory architecture.

E99

CONTRIBUTION OF POSTERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX PERSISTENT ACTIVITY
Johnston1,
Emiliano
TO VISUOSPATIAL WORKING MEMORY Kevin

Brunamonti1, Neil Thomas1, Martin Pare1; 1Queen's University — Parietal cortical areas have been implicated as a critical link in the network of brain
areas underlying working memory. One line of evidence supporting this
has been provided by neural recordings in primates performing the
memory-guided saccade task. Neurons in parietal cortex, including the
lateral intraparietal area (LIP), have been shown to exhibit persistent
activity during the memory delay of this task. Such activity has been
considered a neural signature of working memory, but the contribution
of LIP persistent activity to mnemonic processes remains poorly understood. Specifically, it is unclear whether persistent activity represents a
retrospective visual or prospective saccade-related code. To investigate
this, we recorded the activity of single LIP neurons in three monkeys
while they performed memory and visually-guided saccade tasks, and
carried out two sets of analyses. We first compared the visual and motor
responses of each neuron with persistent delay activity during memoryguided saccades. LIP neurons exhibited a pattern of activity consistent
with retrospective coding: most neurons had greater visual than saccade-related activity, and persistent activity was most strongly linked
with the preferred direction of each neuron. To evaluate the fidelity of
this visual signal, we compared measures of discharge rates and variability between visual and memory delays. Activity of LIP neurons was
lower, and variability of responses higher, during memory delays. These
data show that LIP persistent activity is retrospectively biased, but of
low fidelity, and suggest a neural basis for the capacity limit of visual
working memory.
E100

ERP EXPLORATIONS OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FILTERING
IRRELEVANT INFORMATION AND WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY Maria
Kharitonova1, Tim Curran1, Yuko Munakata1; 1University of Colorado at
Boulder — A number of studies report that high working memory (WM)

capacity leads to better filtering of task-irrelevant information (e.g. Vogel
et al., 2005), suggesting that better WM enables more efficient allocation
of memory resources. However, in situations where filtering could be
disadvantageous to subsequent performance, high WM capacity is
sometimes associated with a broad attentional focus, resulting in low filtering (e.g. Just & Carpenter, 1992). Thus, high WM capacity might support a dynamic updating of filtering strategy, depending on task
demands. We test this possibility by manipulating filtering demands
within a single paradigm. In all conditions, participants needed to make
same/different judgments for visual arrays that contained either 2 taskrelevant objects, 4 task-relevant objects, or 2 task-relevant and 2 irrelevant objects (as in Vogel et al., 2005). In the high filtering demand condition, changes in the irrelevant objects were orthogonal to changes in the
relevant objects, thus increasing the need to filter irrelevant objects. In
contrast, in the low filtering demand condition, the relevant and irrelevant objects changed consistently, thus minimizing the need for filtering.
Behavioral measures of WM capacity and ERP measures of filtering were

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E
calculated as in Vogel et al. (2005). Results show more filtering in the
high filtering demand condition than in the low filtering demand condition. Moreover, as predicted, this effect was modulated by WM capacity,
such that a positive relationship between WM and filtering was only
observed in the high filtering demands condition, suggesting a dynamic
change of filtering strategy, based on task demands.

E101

BRAIN ACTIVITIES RELATED TO WORKING MEMORY UPDATING FOR
Abe1,
SPATIAL AND OBJECT INFORMATION: AN ERP STUDY Satoshi

Keiichi Onoda, Shuhei Yamaguchi; 1Shimane University — The

working
memory (WM) update is understood as a type of switching between the
activity for maintaining the current string of items and the activity for
changing this list. Converging evidence indicates that dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is involved in this executive process. In this study we
recorded ERPs during a WM task and compared brain activities related
to memory updating for spatial and object information. We also analyzed the effect of task load. Seventeen healthy participants performed
n-back tasks, where single alphabet was sequentially presented randomly one at a time in one of the nine squares arranged 3×3. The participants recalled the alphabet presented n trials previously for the object
WM task, the place of the alphabet presentation n trials previously was
recalled for the space WM task. In 3-back task (low load), we defined the
first three trials as control trials. After the forth (update trials), they need
to update of information to maintain recent three items. In 4-back task
(high load), the first four were the control, after the fifth were the update.
Correct response rates were 87.9% for the 3-back and 72.8% for the 4back object task, whereas 93.9% for the 3-back, 86.4% for the 4-back space
task. There was main effect of update at P3 component in frontal and
parietal region, but no main effect for task load and stimulus type. This
study suggests that WM update processing occurs at P3 component, and
the neural processing might not be modulated by task load and stimulus
type.

E102

PRE-FRONTAL CORTEX DYSFUNCTION IN GULF WAR ILLNESS G.

Andrew J. Hillis1, Traci I. Sandoval1, Michael A. Motes1,2, Ilana J. Bennett1,2,
Mary Jo Maciejewski1,2, Joanna Hutchison1,2, Bart Rypma1,2; 1Center for
BrainHealth & School of Behavioral & Brain Sciences University of Texas at
Dallas, 2University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center — Gulf War Illness
(GWI) is an amalgamation of symptoms that might result from neurotoxic exposure. One GWI syndrome group is primarily characterized by
cognitive deficits (Impaired Cognition) possibly resulting from neural
dysfunction. To test this hypothesis, we assessed neural activity during
working memory (WM) performance in this Impaired Cognition group
and an age-matched control group. Individuals performed a modified
Sternberg WM task in which they were instructed to encode a memory
set of 2, 4, or 6 letters, maintain this material over an unfilled delay
period, and then judge whether or not a single probe letter was present
in a retrieval period. Behavioral results revealed that both groups were
faster and more accurate for lower vs. higher set sizes, but there were no
significant group differences in these WM load-related effects. Imaging
results revealed load-related (set size 2 vs. 6) activity in pre-frontal (PFC)
and parietal cortex. The magnitude of these WM load effects differed
between patients and controls, with the direction of these effects varying
across task periods. Relative to controls the GWI patient group showed
decreased PFC and parietal activity at encoding, similar PFC activity but
increased parietal activity during maintenance, and increased PFC and
parietal activity during retrieval. In sum, this Impaired Cognition GWI
group had distinct patterns of WM-related neural changes compared to
controls, but these were not associated with significant WM deficits.
Such syndrome-specific neural effects may reflect strategy changes that
allow participants to optimize WM performance despite reduced brain
function from neurotoxic exposure.

169

Poster Session E

Executive Processes: Working Memory

E103

E105

TMS-EVOKED RESPONSE VARIES WITH INSTANTANEOUS PHASE IN THE
ALPHA BAND Bornali Kundu1, Daniel J. Acheson1, Jeffrey S. Johnson1,

IS DOPAMINE DIFFERENTIALLY ASSOCIATED WITH COGNITIVE
FUNCTIONING IN WOMEN AND MEN? Sari Karlsson1, Anna Rieckmann1,

Bradley R. Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin, Madison — Variation

in the
power and phase of oscillations in the alpha frequency band (8-14Hz)
predict trial-by-trial variation in a wide range of tasks, including visual
perception and visual working memory. The effect of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) on alpha-band power also predicts the effects of
TMS on working memory performance, although the precise mechanism
underlying these effects is unknown. To explore this, subjects performed
a spatial delayed-recognition task while we administered TMS during
the delay period. Data were binned according to phase of the alpha-band
oscillation at which TMS was delivered, and the relationship between
this pre-stimulus phase and power of the resulting evoked response in
the theta (4-8Hz), alpha (8-14 Hz), beta (15-25 Hz), and gamma (30-60
Hz) bands was explored. Immediately following the TMS pulse there is a
broadband decrease in power followed by a sharp increase at 50ms postTMS. The TMS-evoked response in the alpha and beta bands was greatest when TMS was delivered at between -90 and 90 degrees of the cycle
of the alpha-band oscillation, whereas there was a general decrease in
power across all frequency bands when TMS was delivered at between
90-180 degrees of the cycle of the alpha-band oscillation. These results
suggest that when TMS hits the brain near the trough of the alpha wave,
there is a general suppression of resulting frequencies, whereas when
delivered during the rising phase, near the crest of the alpha wave, there
is a resulting increase in the subsequent power of alpha and beta bands.

Yvonne Brehmer1, Per Karlsson1, Lars Farde1, Lars Nyberg2, Lars Bäckman1;
1
Karolinska Institutet, 2Umeå University — Several lines of research (animal,

E104

NEURAL AND BEHAVIORAL EVIDENCE OF WORKING MEMORY
DIFFERENCES IN MUSICIANS AND NON-MUSICIANS Elyse George1,2,

WORKING MEMORY MONITORING OF AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS
USING FUNCTIONAL NEAR INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY Hasan Ayaz1,

Scott Bunce2, Ben Willems3, Sehchang Hah3, Patricia Shewokis1,4, Kurtulus
Izzetoglu1; 1School of Biomedical Engineering, Science & Health Systems,
Drexel University, 2Penn State Hershey Neuroscience Institute, Penn State
University, 3Atlantic City International Airport: Federal Aviation Administration
William J. Hughes Technical Center, 4College of Nursing and Health
Professions, Drexel University — Significant progress has been made over
the last decade in understanding the physiological and neural bases of
cognitive processes and behavior. The advent of new and improved
brain imaging tools, that allow monitoring brain activity in ecologically
valid environments, is expected to allow better identification of neurophysiological markers of human performance. Further, deployment of
portable neuroimaging technologies to real time settings could help
assess cognitive and motivational states of personnel assigned to perform critical tasks. Functional Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIR) is an
emerging optical brain imaging technology that relies on optical techniques to detect changes of hemodynamic responses within the prefrontal cortex in response to sensory, motor, or cognitive activation. Teaming
with ongoing studies at the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) William J. Hughes Technical Center’s Research, Development, and Human
Factors Laboratory, fNIR has been used to monitor certified controllers
as they manage realistic scenarios under typical and emergent conditions. As part of the study, 24 participants performed a standardized nback task; which is a working memory assessment task with 4 conditions
of controlled difficulty level. Repeated measures analysis of variance
showed that average oxygenation changes at voxel that is close to AF7 in
International 10-20 System, located within left inferior frontal gyrus in
the dorsalateral prefrontal cortex, correlates with the task difficulty and
increases monotonically with increasing task difficulty (F= 8.17, p<0.01).
Post-hoc analysis showed a linear relationship with task difficulty and
oxygenation changes. These results are in agreement with recent metaanalysis of fMRI data of n-back studies.

170

molecular imaging, genetic, computational modelling) have demonstrated an association between dopamine (DA) function and cognitive
functioning. However, little is known about potential sex differences in
the DA-cognition relationship. In this study, we used Positron Emission
Tomography (PET) and SCH23390 to quantify D1 receptor binding in
healthy younger (10 male and 10 female) participants. A variety of cognitive tests were administered at a separate occasion, but in close proximity to the PET measurement. Results show no significant sex differences
in D1 receptor binding potential in striatal (associative, sensorimotor,
and limbic), medial temporal (hippocampus and amygdala), or frontal
(DLPFC and ACC) brain regions. However, in women D1 binding in
most brain regions correlated strongly with perceptual speed and general intelligence, and D1 binding in frontal and medial temporal regions
correlated strongly with working memory span, although there were no
associations between D1 binding and executive functioning. By contrast,
in men there were no correlations between D1 binding and perceptual
speed, general intelligence, or working memory span, but a significant
association between D1 binding in medial temporal lobe regions and
executive functioning. These findings suggest that DA function is differentially related to cognition in men and women.

E106
Donna Coch2,3; 1Neuroscience Program, Dartmouth College, 2Reading Brains
Lab, 3Dartmouth College — Previous research has suggested that music

training improves working memory. However, it is unclear which
domain(s) of working memory might be affected: executive control,
auditory working memory (phonological loop), or visual working memory (visuospatial sketchpad). Using event-related potentials (ERPs) and
a standardized test of working memory (Test of Memory and Learning,
TOMAL-2) with college undergraduates, we investigated both neural
and behavioral aspects of working memory in nonmusicians (n = 16) and
musicians, none of whom were professional musicians (n =16). Musicians had 9-16 years of musical training and currently played 3-15 hours
per week. Nonmusicians had fewer than 5 years of musical training,
prior to age 14. ERPs were recorded in standard auditory and visual
oddball paradigms. The latency of the typical P300 to deviants was earlier in musicians than nonmusicians in both the auditory (p = .01) and
visual (p = .004) paradigms. The amplitude of the P300 to deviants was
larger in the musicians only in the auditory paradigm (p = .036). Behaviorally, musicians outperformed nonmusicians on the TOMAL-2 subtests of visual, phonological, and executive memory. These results
suggest that music training is associated with improvements in various
aspects of working memory, as reflected by both behavioral and neural
measures.

E107

CONVERGING FMRI EVIDENCE FOR A ROLE OF THE LEFT INFERIOR
FRONTAL LOBE IN SEMANTIC RETENTION DURING LANGUAGE
COMPREHENSION A. Cris Hamilton1, Philip Burton2, Randi Martin1; 1Rice
University, 2University of Minnesota — An increasing amount of evidence

supports dissociable semantic and phonological short-term memory
(STM) capacities. Patient data suggest that the left inferior and middle
frontal gyri are associated with semantic STM deficits, while damage to
inferior parietal areas is associated with deficits of phonological STM. In
addition, semantic and phonological STM deficits have different consequences for language production and comprehension, with patients
identified as having semantic STM deficits being impaired on some language comprehension and production paradigms. In this experiment we
use fMRI with healthy subjects to test predictions motivated by previous

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Working Memory
patient studies. Subjects were required to detect semantic anomalies in
short phrases such as “green, bright, shining, sun”. Semantic anomalies
were manipulated such that they appeared either before (“green, bright,
shining, sun”) or after (“sun, shining, bright, green”) a head noun. We
found significantly greater activation in left inferior frontal and middle
frontal gyri for phrases that required maintenance of multiple words for
eventual integration with a subsequent noun (i.e., the “before” condition). These areas were similar to those reported in studies examining
semantic STM (Martin et al., 2003). Post-hoc analyses revealed no effects
between the two conditions in areas associated with phonological shortterm memory. These data are consistent with previous patient studies
(Martin & Romani, 1994; Martin & He, 2004) that associate semantic STM
with the left inferior and middle frontal gyri and suggest that deficits of
semantic STM have particular consequences for comprehension tasks
that require maintenance of several word meanings in unintegrated
form.

E108

THE ROLE OF MAINTENANCE MECHANISMS IN LEARNING TO ASSOCIATE
TEMPORALLY DISCONTINUOUS ITEMS: A DEVELOPMENTAL
INVESTIGATION Brian J. Kramer1, J. Y. Davidow2, Dima Amso1; 1Sackler
Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Cornell Medical College,

2Columbia University — A

variety of constraints act to enhance and/or
limit learning. We examined the role of the development of maintenance
capacities in pairing temporally discontinuous items during learning of
co-occurrences. We asked whether the ability to maintain the first item in
a pair over a delay would serve as a learning constraint. A total of 65
children, adolescents, and adults participated in this eye tracking experiment. Two centrally presented cues predicted the location of peripheral
targets with some probability (co-occurrences). Simultaneously, we varied the frequency with which each target is presented throughout the
task (item occurrence). This required no contingent pairings and should
be insensitive to the delay manipulation. In previous work, we found the
hippocampus in concert with the prefrontal cortex to be involved in
learning from environmental regularities. Subjects completed two identical learning blocks, one with a 250 millisecond delay and one with a 500
millisecond delay between cues and target locations. Subjects made an
eye movement to item locations, with changes in saccade latency serving
to index learning of the task structure. Data showed that the longer delay
interval disrupted learning of co-occurrences for children and adolescents, but not adults. As predicted, simple item occurrences were
learned equally well across age and delay interval, indicating specificity
in the mediation of learning by maintenance systems. We predict that
ongoing neuroimaging (fMRI) work will show this effect to be driven by
changes in frontohippocampal interactions over development.

E109

THE PURE EFFECT OF IMAGERY GENERATION ON THE EVENT-RELATED
BRAIN POTENTIAL Keiko Yamazaki1, Jun'ichi Katayama2; 1Hokkaido

University, 2Kwansei Gakuin University — Visual mental imagery generation

affected early event-related brain potentials evoked by imagery cue and
probe. In this study, we investigated whether this effect was observed
during imagery generation without inspection by the probe, or not. Furthermore, we established working memory condition for confirming the
effect is imagery specific. In the imagery condition (IMG), left or right
arrow was presented. After that, blank screen was followed by bilateral 5
x 5 grids and imagery cue, which was one of small letters (“l”, ”t” as
SIMPLE, and ”g”, “s” as COMPLEX trials) on the central cell of the grid.
Participants visualized the block letter corresponding to imagery cue on
the grid indicated by the arrow. 1500 ms after the cue offset, probe mark
appeared at one of the cell, and participants decided whether or not the
probe mark fell on the visualized shapes. In the working memory condition (WM), imagery cue was replaced by the block letter drawn on the
grid, and participants maintained it for later decision. Choice reaction
time confirmed that there was no difference in task difficulties between
conditions. ERPs elicited by the imagery cue (IMG condition) and the
block letter cue (WM condition) were estimated. While the side indicated

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E
by the arrow affected the early negative deflection in both conditions, the
complexity of imagery cue affected the early negative deflection and
later negative component only in the IMG condition. These results
showed that the early imagery effect on the ERP was due to generation
process specific to imagery.

E110

REMOVING IRRELEVANT INFORMATION FROM WORKING MEMORY:
DOMAIN-SPECIFIC PRIORITIZATION TAKES TIME Andrew T. Drysdale1,

Jarrod A. Lewis-Peacock1, Klaus Oberauer2, Bradley R. Postle1; 1University of
Wisconsin, Madison, 2University of Zurich — Working memory retention is

supported by functionally distinct states of representation (e.g., Cowan,
1995). These include an "active" state enabled by a capacity limited
direct-access region and a "passive" state consisting of re-activated portions of long-term memory. Transferring information into passive storage, so that its retention no longer affects processing latencies, can take
several seconds (Oberauer, 2001, 2002). We sought to replicate this finding for stimuli maintained in phonological, visual, and semantic codes.
Participants were presented briefly with two sets of visual stimuli for a
subsequent memory judgment task. Next, one set was cued as relevant
for subsequent memory judgment ("active set"), while the remaining set
had to be remembered but not used for the judgment task ("passive set").
Stimuli consisted of real words, single-syllable non-words, and line segments. Each required a domain-specific response: a synonym judgment,
a rhyme judgment, and an orientation judgment, respectively. Neuroimaging results (Lewis-Peacock et al., this meeting) suggest these stimuli
were maintained during the delay period in a domain-specific manner.
When stimulus sets were of the same type, response latencies were initially sensitive to size of both the active and passive sets, but became
insensitive to the size of the passive set after 4 s. This pattern of results
shows that uncued stimuli can be removed from the direct-access region
within a few seconds. We observed similar results when stimulus sets
were of different types (e.g., line segments and words), suggesting a
domain-general mechanism underlying the prioritization of information
in working memory.

E111

FUNCTIONALLY DISTINCT STATES OF WORKING MEMORY RETENTION
ARE REVEALED BY PATTERN CLASSIFICATION OF FMRI Jarrod A. LewisPeacock1, Andrew T. Drysdale1, Klaus Oberauer2, Bradley R. Postle1;

1University of Wisconsin, Madison, 2University of Zurich — One

theoretical
account of working memory suggests that the short-term retention of
information relies on re-activations of long-term memory (aLTM) (e.g.,
Anderson, 1983; Cowan, 1995). A subset of activated items can be held in
a capacity limited direct-access region or a single item held in the focus
of attention. Information no longer relevant for processing can be
removed from the direct-access region within several seconds, while still
retained in aLTM (Oberauer, 2001, 2002). We searched for neural correlates of these theorized states during a delayed-response task with fMRI.
First, we trained a pattern classifier to distinguish brain activity corresponding to the short-term retention of phonological, semantic, and
visual information. Then, this classifier was used to decode brain activity
from a subsequent task that required prioritization of the contents of
working memory. Participants were briefly presented two visual stimuli
drawn from two of three possible categories: non-words, real words, and
line segments. Following a brief delay, one stimulus was cued for a later
comparison task ("active” stimulus), while the other had to be remembered but not used for the comparison ("passive” stimulus). Results
showed high classifier estimates for the active stimulus following the
cue, while estimates for the passive stimulus fell to baseline. Critically,
activity corresponding to the passive stimulus re-emerged if that stimulus was cued later in the trial for a second comparison. This pattern of
results supports a key tenet of aLTM theories that information can be
temporarily removed from the direct-access region while being retained
in aLTM.

171

Poster Session E
E112

WILL COMPUTERIZED WORKING MEMORY TRAINING IMPROVE
OBSERVABLE ADHD BEHAVIOR? Chloe Green1, Debra Long1, David

Green, Meghan Miller2, Faye Dixon1, Catherine Fassbender1, Julie Schweitzer1;
University of California, Davis, MIND Institute, 2University of California,
Berkeley — Impaired working memory is a central deficit in ADHD. A
1

computerized training program, Cogmed, has been shown to increase
working memory capacity in children with ADHD. It is not known
whether the training improves behavior associated with classroom
learning, such as remaining on-task and inhibiting off- task behavior.
The aim of this study was to utilize ecologically valid measures to investigate training’s effect on observable ADHD behavior. Method: The current study took place at the UC Davis MIND Institute. The study was
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, and includes data from
twenty-six children (7-14 yrs old) diagnosed with ADHD. Off-task
behavior was measured using an observational assessment tool, the
Restricted Academic Setting Task (RAST), before and after training. This
dependent variable (the RAST) simulates the academic setting and is
often used to measure the efficacy of ADHD medications. Pre/Post
teacher and parent ADHD rating scales, standardized working memory
tests and achievement fluency tests were other outcome measures.
Results: Five weeks of working memory training led to significant
improvement on non-trained working-memory tests and on “off-task”
ADHD associated behavior on the RAST. There was no significant
improvement on achievement fluency tasks immediately following
training. Findings lend insight into the generalizability of working memory training’s effects and the relationship between deficits in working
memory and off- task behavioral components of ADHD.

E113

REPETITIVE TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION OF THE
POSTERIOR SUPERIOR TEMPORAL GYRUS MODULATES TASK-RELEVANT
THETA OSCILLATIONS IN VERBAL WORKING MEMORY Daniel Acheson1,
Bradley Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin, Madison — Repetitive transcranial

magnetic stimulation (rTMS) of language production-related brain
regions of the perisylvian cortex reliably disrupts verbal working memory (WM) performance. However, the neural bases of this effect remain
unknown. The goal of the present study was to combine online EEG
recording with functionally-guided rTMS to examine the effects of rTMS
on oscillatory brain activity associated with verbal WM performance.
First, fMRI was used to elicit activation in the posterior superior temporal gyrus (pSTG) as subjects performed overt picture naming. Second,
the pSTG and the leg area of somatosensory cortex (S1; a cortical control
area) were then targeted with rTMS as subjects performed delayed serial
recognition of pseudoword stimuli (e.g., rof, gup, etc). 10 Hz rTMS was
applied unpredictably on half of the trials during a 3 second delay
period, and EEG activity was recorded with a 60 channel, TMS compatible cap. Prior to data analysis, independent components analysis was
used to remove nonphysiological, rTMS-related artifact. Results showed
that rTMS of the pSTG led to a significant reduction in theta-band (4-8
Hz) spectral power, whereas rTMS of the control region (S1) had no such
effect. More importantly, at both frontal and parietal electrode cites, individual differences in the magnitude of the change in theta-band power
induced by rTMS of the pSTG predicted the magnitude of rTMS-related
changes in both accuracy and reaction time across subjects. These results
thus provide some of the first evidence of a causal role for theta oscillations in maintaining information in verbal WM.

E114

NEURAL CORRELATES OF N-BACK TRAINING – A PSEUDO-CONTINUOUS
ARTERIAL SPIN LABELING (PCASL) STUDY Susanne Jaeggi1, Martin

Buschkuehl1, Luis Hernandez1, Jessica Bernard1, John Jonides1; 1The
University of Michigan — We investigated the neural correlates of a working memory training by using a quantitative measure of cerebral blood
flow, i.e. pseudo-continuous arterial spin labeling (pCASL). Participants
trained for 7 sessions on a spatial version of an adaptive n-back para-

172

Executive Processes: Working Memory
digm. Before and after training, we scanned participants contrasting
their performance on an easy and on a hard version of the trained n-back
task (1-back vs. 4-back). We observed a large training effect which was
consistent with a significant performance increase in the pre- and posttest scanning sessions in the 4-back task: In the pre-test, participants
were performing close to floor-level, whereas their performance was >
80% correct at post-test. This performance increase was accompanied by
a decrease in activation in (right) dorsolateral prefrontal cortices, but
also, by an increase of bilateral activation in posterior parietal regions.
This shift from anterior to posterior networks suggests a reorganization
as a function of training gain reflecting neural plasticity.

E115

THE INFLUENCE OF DOPAMINE TRANSPORTER GENOTYPE ON WORKING
MEMORY PLASTICITY Helena Westerberg1, Yvonne Brehmer1, Martin

Bellander1, Daniel Fürth1, Sari Karlsson1, Lars Bäckman1; 1Karolinska
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden — Specific goals To investigate if an indirect
measure of striatal DA availability, the DAT1 polymorphism, affect
training induced plasticity of working memory (WM). Methods used A
group of 29 healthy adults (M 26.0, SD 2.8 years) performed cognitive
testing and received four weeks of adaptive training of WM implemented by a computerized program (CogmedQM). In addition to cognitive testing and training a blood sample were drawn from each
participant for analysis of functional polymorphisms related to WM.
Since Dopamine (DA) is implicated in (WM) functioning we were interested in variations in the DA transporter (DAT1) gene (SLC6A3), which
regulate DA availability in striatum. Compared to DAT1 9/10- repeat
carriers, homozygosity of the DAT1 10-repeat allele is related to less
availability of extra neuronal dopamine. We also controlled for individual variants of the COMT Val158Met polymorphism. Summary of the
results and conclusion At baseline the two groups were indistinguishable in WM performance as well as in tests assessing different cognitive
abilities. All participants improved their performance as a function of
training. However, DAT1 9/10-repeat carriers showed larger trainingrelated gains than DAT1 10-repeat carriers in visuospatial WM. This
result provides novel evidence that WM plasticity is a more sensitive
indicator of DAT1 gene-related cognitive differences than single-assessment performance scores. Investigating cognitive plasticity in relation to
imaging genomics is an unexplored approach in delineating the relationship among genes, brain, and behavior. To our knowledge, this is the
first study to demonstrate a modulating effect of a genetic polymorphism on cognitive plasticity.

E116

CONCURRENT TASK PERFORMANCE REDUCES THE MAGNITUDE BUT
NOT THE FREQUENCY OF TMS-EVOKED NATURAL FREQUENCY
ESTIMATES Jeffrey Johnson1, Mario Rosanova2, Marcello Massimini2,

Bradley Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2University of Milan — A
recent study using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to perturb
specific corticothalamic circuits (extrastriate cortex, superior parietal lobule (SPL), premotor cortex), and EEG to measure the resultant evoked
responses, demonstrated that each resonated at a distinct ‘natural frequency’ (8-12 Hz, 13-20 Hz, and 21-40 Hz, respectively) when participants were at rest (Rossanova et al., 2009). What remains unknown,
however, is whether a region’s natural frequency varies with behavioral
context. That is, do natural frequency estimates for a given brain area
change in systematic ways when that brain area is involved in the performance of a task? In the present study, we explored this possibility by
replicating the methods of Rossanova et al. (i.e., perturb with TMS and
measure while subjects are at rest) and adding a condition in which TMS
was delivered to the SPL during the delay period of a spatial delayedrecognition task. We focused on the SPL because of its known involvement in spatial memory tasks. Because previous studies have revealed
sustained increases in the power of posterior alpha-band oscillations
throughout the delay period of such tasks, we hypothesized that the
task-related natural frequency estimate would shift downwards towards
the alpha band. Contrary to this prediction, however, we found that natCognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Working Memory
ural frequency estimates were identical in frequency across rest and task
conditions, but were smaller in magnitude when TMS was applied during the delay. This finding suggests that a brain region’s natural frequency may be a stable property that does not vary with more transient,
task-specific network dynamics.

E117

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL DIFFERENCES IN THE FORMATION OF
AUDITORY IMAGES Ana Navarro Cebrian1, Petr Janata1; 1UC Davis, Center
for Mind and Brain — Deciding whether a note is in tune within a musical
context is an easy task for some people and very difficult for others. In
this experiment, participants judged the intonation of the last note of a
musical scale in both a top-down task in which the notes before the last
note had to be imagined and a task in which the image for the target was
driven bottom-up by the perception of the preceding notes in the scale.
First, good and bad performers in the tasks were compared using ERP
recordings. A stronger activity related to working memory (WM) was
found during the formation of images for good performers. Secondly,
differences in the activity for image formation modulated the cortical
potentials evoked by the deviated tone (N100). In addition, both tasks
were compared to demonstrate that the acuity of an auditory image is
comparable to that of a sensory memory trace to the point of evoking
similar neuronal responses. Finally, the influences of long-term memory
on WM and the consequent formation of accurate images was further
studied. It has been demonstrated that the tonal structure that governs
the relationships of individual notes to a primed key context is implicitly
learned by exposure to music. We found that images were more accurate
for those items more related to the tonal context.

Poster Session E
Pasternak, 2006) using a delayed-recognition task for motion direction
suggests such a cortical network, with low-level sensory information
represented in the middle temporal visual area (MT) and task-related
representations appearing in PFC during the memory delay. Here we
examined the short-term storage of motion information in human cortex
using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Subjects were
scanned while performing a delayed-recognition task for direction of
coherently moving random dot stimuli. These data were analyzed using
a whole-brain searchlight approach (Kriegeskorte et al. 2006), in which a
pattern classifier was repeatedly trained to discriminate motion directions using local patterns of activity centered on each voxel. The classifier was then used to guess the remembered direction during each time
point of the delay period during an independent run of the task. It also
discriminated categorical from sensory representations of direction. This
approach allowed us to assess within local areas of cortex how the representation of the stimuli evolved throughout the delay period, letting us
separate areas that represent low-level sensory features from those that
develop over time to represent task-relevant response-based representations.

E118

LEARNING CHUNKING HIERARCHIES IN NON-MOTOR (COGNITIVE)
SEQUENCES Anne B. Kühn1, D. Yves von Cramon1, Ricarda I. Schubotz1;
1

Max Planck Institute for Neurological Research — Memorizing sequences
requires structural analyses and optimization by chunking sequence elements. To study networks mediating the acquisition of sequential
chunks at different hierarchical levels, the present functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) study investigated learning of hierarchical 16digit-sequences by trial and error in a cognitive serial learning paradigm.
Sequences were learned and then scrambled to different extends (disruption of higher chunk levels (CL) while keeping lower CL intact). Learning of scrambled CL was hypothesized to isolate neural activity specific
to different CL. We expected activation of the frontal operculum (FOP)
for adjacent digits and of the supplementary motor area (SMA) for the
highest CL. Behaviorally, chunking was expressed by higher error rates
and longer reaction times for higher as compared to lower CL. Different
highpass filter cut-offs (1/125 Hz versus 1/620 Hz) were employed to
analyze learning of short (low CL) and large (high CL) subsequences.
This approach revealed a double dissociation: lowest CL were reflected
by fast changing activation of left FOP, whereas highest CL by slow
changing activation of SMA. Moreover, mesial Brodmann Area (BA) 9
was found for the highest CL. Findings point to a frequency- and leveldependent chunking network. In particular, data suggest the FOP to
contribute to the acquisition of local dependencies, BA 9 to integration of
already sub-chunked information and building up of coherences, and
SMA to store sequence knowledge.

E119

TRACKING THE EVOLUTION OF THE MEMORY TRACE FOR VISUAL
MOTION IN HUMAN CORTEX USING MULTIVOXEL PATTERN ANALYSES
Adam C. Riggall1, Bradley R. Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin, Madison —

Working memory, the ability to retain and manipulate information no
longer present in the environment, is a fundamental contributor to
higher-level cognition. While often thought to require specialized cortical systems, particularly those in prefrontal cortex (PFC), recent research
has shown working memory may arise through the coordinated recruitment of brain systems involved in sensory, representational, and actionrelated functions. Recent monkey electrophysiology work (Zaksas &

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

173

Long-Term Memory: Episodic
F1

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE THAT THE FINE-GRAINED
TEMPORAL STRUCTURE OF SUBJECTIVE EXPERIENCE IMPACTS THE
FORMATION AND RETRIEVAL OF EPISODIC MEMORIES Joanne L. Park1,

David I. Donaldson1, Kevin Allan2; 1University of Stirling, 2University of
Aberdeen — It is widely accepted that episodic memory is essentially
associative, producing memory traces from multiple elements of an
event that must be bound together in space and time, and that must be
extracted from the continuously changing stream of subjective experience. The key question addressed by this study is whether the finegrained temporal structure of subjective experience has an impact on the
formation and retrieval of episodic memories. Temporal structure was
manipulated by varying the time between words within a word-pair to
be encoded at study, and Event Related Potentials (ERPs) were
employed to measure the effect of this manipulation during retrieval in
an associative recognition task. The behavioural results revealed that
associative recognition was significantly enhanced when episodes comprised of a pair of words separated by a brief temporal gap, compared to
episodes comprising a simultaneously-presented pair of words. ERP
results revealed a corresponding relationship between the temporal
structure of the encoded information and the timing of retrieval processes, such that retrieval appeared to be delayed in onset for pairs studied with a brief temporal gap compared to simultaneous pairs. Taken
together, the findings suggest that the fine-grained temporal structure of
subjective experience is retained in an episodic representation, and does
impact the retrieval of episodic memories.

F2

FROM CONCEPTUAL RELATIONS TO ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY: AN EVENTRELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Olga Kukina1,4, Axel Mecklinger1,4, Xuchu

Weng2,4, Jiongjiong Yang3,4; 1Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany,
2
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 3Peking University, Beijing,
China, 4International Research Trainign Group "Adaptive Minds" — Cross-

cultural research on categorization showed that while Westerners prefer
taxonomic groupings (e.g., policeman-postman), East-Asians tend to
form thematic ones (e.g., policeman-uniform). These results imply differential weighting of the taxonomic/thematic relations in the conceptual
system of Westerners/Asians and if so, should be reflected in the differential modulation of the N400 component for the two relation types. We
assumed that these differences in the conceptual system also affect associative episodic memory. For Westerners (Germans), the retrieval of thematically-related associations should be quite demanding and therefore
mostly relying on a slow mnemonic process, i.e. recollection. In contrast,
the retrieval of taxonomic associates should benefit from the underlying
conceptual system and could be additionally supported by a fast automatic process, i.e. familiarity. In an ERP-experiment, German participants memorized lists of taxonomically/thematically-related and
unrelated word pairs. Subsequently associative memory was tested by
asking whether the presented word pair was old, rearranged or new.

174

ERPs recorded in the study phase show a gradient pattern for the N400.
It is attenuated for both relation types relative to unrelated pairs with the
largest modulation observed for taxonomic associates. This suggests that
the two relation types are dissociated in the conceptual system. Behavioral results on the memory task reveal higher recognition accuracy for
old taxonomic than thematic associates. The ERP-data also show differential involvement of familiarity and recollection for taxonomic and thematic pairings implicating that the conceptual system interacts with
associative memory. A subsequent experiment will be conducted with
Chinese participants to enable the cross-cultural comparison.

F3

MEMORY FOR OBJECTS RELEVANT FOR NAVIGATION IN ALZHEIMER
PATIENTS Roy Kessels1,2,3, Amy van Doormaal1,3, Gabriele Janzen1,3,4;
1Radboud University Nijmegen, 2Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
3Donders

Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, 4Behavioural Science
Institute — In spatial navigation, landmark recognition is crucial. Specifically, memory for objects placed at decision points on a route is relevant.
Previous fMRI research in healthy adults showed higher medial-temporal lobe (MTL) activation for objects placed at decision points compared
to non-decision points, even at an implicit level. Since there is evidence
that implicit learning is intact in amnesic patients, the current study
examined memory for objects relevant for navigation in patients with
Alzheimer dementia (AD). 21 AD patients participated with MTL atrophy assessed on MRI (mean MMSE=21.2, SD=4.0), as well as 20 age- and
education-matched non-demented controls. All participants watched a
4-min video showing a route through a virtual museum with 20 objects
placed at intersections (decision points) and 20 at simple turns (non-decision points). The instruction was to pay attention to the toys (half of the
objects) for which they were supposedly tested later. Subsequently, a
recognition test followed with the 40 previously presented objects
among 40 distracter items (both toys and non-toys). Results showed a
better performance for the non-toy objects placed at decision points than
non-decision points, both for AD patients (p<0.001) and controls (p<.05).
This indicates that AD patients with MTL damage have implicit memory
for object information relevant for navigation. No decision point effect
was found for the attended items. It may be that focusing attention on
the items occurred at the cost of the context information in AD, whereas
the controls performed at an optimal level due to intact memory function.

F4

ON BECOMING OLD BEFORE YOUR TIME: DISRUPTING ENCODING IN
YOUNG ADULTS PRODUCES AN EPISODIC MEMORY DEFICIT THAT
MIMICS THAT IN OLDER ADULTS David Friedman1, Doreen Nessler1, Ray

Johnson Jr.2; 1New York State Psychiatric Institute, 2Queens College of the City
University of New York — Older adults typically exhibit episodic-memory

deficits, but the extent to which this is due to encoding- or retrievalrelated deficiencies is unclear. Semantic elaboration during encoding is
critical to the formation of contextually-rich episodic memories because
it enables greater use of recollection- compared to familiarity-based
retrieval processes. Nessler et al. (2006) found that a left inferior prefron-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Episodic
tal cortex (LIPFC) ERP negativity (between 400 and 1400 ms), which
reflects semantic elaboration, was reduced in the elderly. This reduced
LIPFC activity was associated with reductions in both memory performance and the left-parietal episodic memory (EM) effect, a putative
index of recollection. The mid-frontal EM effect, presumed to measure
familiarity, was age invariant. These findings raise the possibility that
the elderly’s retrieval performance and altered brain activity is causally
related to their reduced LIPFC activity during encoding. We tested this
hypothesis by disrupting encoding-related processes in early (300-850
ms) and late (850-1400 ms) intervals when the LIPFC negativity is
present. Young adults made semantic decisions on to-be-remembered
nouns while simultaneously detecting infrequent auditory targets when
tones were present. ERPs were recorded during a subsequent Yes/No
recognition test. Compared to no-tone trials, distracting tones produced
an “age-related recognition deficit” in the young. This behavioral deficit
was accompanied by the same altered pattern of brain activity seen in
the elderly during retrieval: reduced left-parietal EM effect but no
change in mid-frontal EM effect. We conclude that at least part of the
episodic-memory deficit observed in older adults is attributable to
reduced LIPFC activity during encoding.

F5

ESTABLISHING THE BOUNDARIES: THE HIPPOCAMPAL CONTRIBUTION
TO IMAGINING SCENES Chris M. Bird1,2, Corinne Capponi1,3, John A.

King4, Christian F. Doeller1,2, Neil Burgess1,2; 1UCL Institute of Neurology,
London, UK, 2UCL Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, London, UK,
3Bioimaging Institute of Advanced Biomedical Technologies G. D'Annunzio
University, Chieti, Italy, 4UCL Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology,
London, UK — When we visualise scenes, either from our own past or
invented, we impose a viewpoint for our “mind’s eye” and we experience the resulting scene as spatially coherent. Recent research has implicated the hippocampus in imagining future and fictitious events as well
as retrieving past experience. We tested a specific hypothesis based on
the spatial firing properties of neurons in the hippocampal formation
that this region supports construction of spatially coherent mental
images by representing the surrounding environmental boundaries.
Using fMRI we show that hippocampal activation increases parametrically with the number of enclosing boundaries in the imagined scene.
This activity is unrelated to the spatial or non-spatial complexity of the
scenes or to task difficulty. Our findings support a specific computational role for the hippocampus in mental imagery and episodic recollection.

F6

CONTENT-SENSITIVE NOVELTY ENCODING IN THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL
LOBE: INSIGHTS FROM HIGH-RESOLUTION FMRI AND DISTRIBUTED
PATTERN ANALYSIS Jackson C. Liang1, Anthony D. Wagner2, Alison R.

Preston1; 1University of Texas at Austin, 2Stanford University — The ability to
distinguish between novel and familiar stimuli plays a critical role in orienting toward behaviorally salient and rewarding events. Current theories of medial temporal lobe (MTL) function propose that distinct MTL
regions may differ in their sensitivity to novelty based on information
content. For example, the anatomical projections between sensory processing regions and perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices suggest
that these regions are sensitive to visual object and visuospatial content
respectively. However, the representation of different stimulus content
need not be modular and may instead be distributed in a graded manner
both within and across subregions. To answer this question, we
employed high-resolution functional MRI and an incidental novelty
detection task using five stimulus classes (faces, scenes, visual words,
spoken words, sounds). Univariate statistics revealed a graded distribution of face and scene novelty responses along the anterior-posterior axis
of MTL cortex. Novelty responses in hippocampus were isolated to the
anterior subfields and were similar across content. Additional multivoxel pattern analyses revealed that despite overall sensitivity to specific
content, MTL cortical regions maintained an ability to classify informa-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session F
tion of non-preferred content. In contrast, hippocampal subfields DG/
CA3 and CA1 failed to accurately discriminate between different content
types, though subiculum demonstrated significant classification accuracy for faces and scenes. Together, these findings support a graded distribution of content-sensitive novelty responding along the anteriorposterior axis of MTL cortex and provide evidence for content-general
novelty encoding in the hippocampus.

F7

CONTENT-SPECIFIC REACTIVATIONS IN VISUAL CORTEX DURING
MEMORY RETRIEVAL Christoph Hofstetter1, Amal Achaibou1, Sebastian

Rieger1, Chiara Cristinzio1, Patrik Vuilleumier1,2; 1University Medical Center,
University of Geneva, Switzerland, 2Swiss Center for Affective Sciences,
University of Geneva, Switzerland — Studies on memory suggest that a subset of cortical regions implicated in stimulus encoding may be reactivated during subsequent retrieval, involving visual or auditory areas for
visual or auditory memories, respectively. However, the content specificity of such reactivations is still unclear. Some brain regions are specialized in processing distinct visual objects categories, such as faces, places,
and words. In our study we used functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) to test for face and word specific reactivations during a memory
task. The experiment consisted of a learning phase and a test phase in
which participants learned pairs of stimuli. A pair consisted of either a
scene and a face, or a scene and a word. The content of scenes was variable, containing objects, landscapes, and/or houses, but did not contain
faces or words. In the test phase we presented scenes only (one in turn),
and participants had to indicate whether this image was previously
paired with a face, a word, or was new. Preliminary fMRI results for the
test phase showed activations in a functionally defined face-responsive
region in the right fusiform gyrus, as well as in a region activated by
words in the left inferior temporal gyrus, for scenes previously paired
with faces and words, respectively. The results support the idea of cortical memory reactivations, even at a content-specific level, and are consistent with other results concerning mental imagery.

F8

REMEMBERING TO ATTEND: SEPARATING ATTENTION AND MEMORY
SIGNALS IN POSTERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX Melina Uncapher1, Sarah
DuBrow1, J Benjamin Hutchinson1, Anthony Wagner1; 1Stanford University —

While attention and declarative memory dynamically interact, the
nature of these interactions remains underspecified. Recent proposals
suggest that the consistent observation of functional activation in posterior parietal cortex (PPC) during episodic retrieval may reflect the
engagement of attention mechanisms. However, a central tenet of these
proposals is currently under debate; namely, whether separate attention
and memory mechanisms exist in PPC, or whether PPC attention mechanisms are engaged in service of retrieval (by setting the stage for and
then acting on the contents of memory during retrieval). To test these
competing hypotheses, the present fMRI study incorporated an attentional orienting manipulation into a memory retrieval paradigm. Volunteers were scanned while being cued to orient attention to locations
within trial-unique scenes in which trial-unique objects had been studied. To separate memory and attention effects in PPC, memory-based
expectations (about object-scene and/or object-location associations)
were either met or violated. We predicted functional heterogeneity in
PPC, such that (1) dorsal PPC would exhibit top-down attentional orienting effects (when cues to shift spatial attention appeared), (2) temporoparietal junction would exhibit reflexive attentional reorienting effects
(when expectations were violated), and (3) angular gyrus would exhibit
memory recollection effects (when associative information was successfully retrieved). BOLD data revealed all three patterns, indicating that
dorsal and ventral PPC attention mechanisms do not fully account for
parietal activation during episodic retrieval. Rather, additional PPC
mechanisms appear to be specifically engaged when retrieving associative information from memory. These findings add to an emerging literature indicating high functional heterogeneity within PPC.

175

Poster Session F

Long-Term Memory: Episodic

F9

F11

THE ROLE OF WORKING MEMORY IN THE ACTIVE INHIBITION OF
COMPETING REPRESENTATIONS IN LONG TERM MEMORY: NEURAL AND
BEHAVIOURAL EVIDENCE Rachael Elward1, Edward Wilding1; 1School of

TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP ATTENTION-TO-MEMORY: DELINEATION OF
TWO FUNCTIONAL NEURAL NETWORKS Hana
Burianova1,2,
Elisa

Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff — Cognitive control operations are
assumed to be engaged during memory retrieval. Working memory
capacity (WMC) is also assumed to be required for effective cognitive
control, and if this is correct then WMC should predict when cognitive
control over retrieval occurs. To test this, young adults (N=48) were
divided into high and low WMC groups on the basis of Operation Span
scores. In a retrieval task in which event-related potentials (ERPs) were
acquired, participants responded “old” to one class of studied items (targets) while rejecting another class (non-targets) along with unstudied
items. Larger left-parietal ERP old/new effects (an ERP index of recollection) for targets than for non-targets have been interpreted as evidence
for prioritisation of recollection of target information, and this pattern
was evident only for members of the high WMC group. Moreover, after
this task, participants recalled as many studied words as possible. Only
high WMC participants recalled reliably fewer non-targets than targets.
The ERP data ties the engagement of strategic retrieval operations to the
resources necessary to exert cognitive control, and the recall data suggests that strategic control is exerted by inhibiting information associated with non-targets. Finally, half of the high WMC participants
completed ‘resource depleting’ task (a Stroop task) before the retrieval
task. These participants showed no evidence of strategic recollection
neurally or behaviourally, suggesting that cognitive control is a normal
part of memory search in participants with sufficient WMC. Deficits in
recollection seen in older adults and some clinical populations may be
explained by WMC.

F10

INTERACTIONS OF THE HIPPOCAMPUS AND INFERIOR PARIETAL
CORTEX DIFFER BETWEEN ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL OF RELATIONAL
INFORMATION: ANATOMICAL AND FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
ANALYSES Cornelia McCormick1,2,3, Morris Moscovitch2,4, Andrea B.

Protzner1,2, Christian G. Huber3, Mary Pat McAndrews1,2; 1Krembil
Neuroscience Program, Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network,
2University of Toronto, ON, Canada, 3University Medical Center, HamburgEppendorf, Germany, 4Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre, Toronto,
Canada — Encoding and retrieval of relational information is thought to
require interaction between the hippocampus and various neocortical
regions, but it is unclear whether the connectivity of hippocampal-neocortical networks is different at input and output stages. To examine this,
we conducted a network analysis of event-related fMRI data collected
during a face recognition (remember/know) paradigm. Region-of-interest analyses identified a small region in the left hippocampus that
showed differential activation for both encoding and retrieval of recollected versus familiar items. Multivariate seed partial least squares (PLS)
analysis was used to identify brain regions that were functionally connected to this hippocampal region at encoding and at retrieval of
‘remembered’ items. Anatomically-based structural equation modeling
(SEM) was then used to test for differences in effective connectivity of
network nodes between these two memory stages. The SEM analysis
revealed very few differences except for a reversal of directionality
between the left hippocampus (LHC) and left inferior parietal cortex
(LIPC). During encoding, activation of the LHC had a positive influence
on the LIPC, whereas during retrieval the reverse pattern was found, i.e.,
the LIPC activation positively influenced the degree of LHC activation.
These findings emphasize the importance of the hippocampal-parietal
connections in initial binding and retrieval/reintegration of relational
memory, suggesting a complex dialogue between these regions that will
help to inform our understanding of parietal contributions to relational
memory.

176

Ciaramelli2, Cheryl L. Grady2, Morris Moscovitch2; 1Macquarie University,
Macquarie Centre for Cognitive Science, Sydney, Australia, 2University of
Toronto, Canada — The objective of this study was to provide further support for the Attention-to-Memory (AtoM) hypothesis, which purports a
distinction between the mnemonic roles of dorsal and ventral parietal
cortices. In a recent experiment, we examined whether dorsal parietal
cortex (DPC) allocates effortful top-down attention to memory retrieval,
and whether ventral parietal cortex (VPC) mediates spontaneous bottom-up capture of attention by memory. Participants studied word pairs
and responded to target (studied) words among new words. In some
conditions, recognition was facilitated by cueing of the target by a studied word of the same pair; in other conditions, no cue was provided. Left
DPC was activated upon presentation of a valid cue, whereas left VPC
was activated upon presentation of a non-cued target. Here, we aimed to
determine whole-brain functional connections with these two posterior
parietal regions. In response to a memory cue, the left DPC was functionally connected with a number of dorsal attention areas, including superior and inferior parietal areas, precentral gyrus, ventral and dorsolateral
prefrontal cortices, and with the left hippocampus. In response to a noncued target, the left VPC was functionally connected with ventral attention areas, including inferior and middle frontal gyri, superior temporal
gyrus, insula, and inferior parietal lobule, and the ventral visual pathway. These results are consistent with the hypothesis of two functional
networks subserving attention to memory, a top-down AtoM network
correlating with activity in the left DPC, and a bottom-up AtoM network
correlating with activity in the left VPC.

F12

AN ERP STUDY OF THE MODULATION OF ENCODING TASKS ON THE
MIRROR EFFECT INDUCED BY THE SEMANTIC TRANSPARENCY OF
CHINESE TWO-CHARACTER WORDS Yi-Jhong Han1, Shih-kuen Cheng1,

Ovid J-L. Tzeng1,2, Daisy L. Hung1; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
National Central University, Taiwan, 2Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica,
Taiwan — In a previous study that employed lexical decision as the encod-

ing task, a mirror effect was observed in the recognition of semantically
transparent and opaque Chinese two-character words. Opaque words
[e.g., “?(/yang/, sun)?(/chun/, spring)”, plain] elicited a higher hit rate
and a lower false alarm rate than transparent words [e.g., “?(/cha/,
tea)?(/bei/, cup)”, teacup]. Both behavioral and ERP data indicated that
the hit-rate part of the mirror effect results from the greater recollection
for opaque words. The current study examined whether the difference in
recollection for these two types of words was because opaque words
intrinsically elicit more elaborative processing than transparent ones. We
used encoding tasks that demands semantic processing to ensure that
both types of words were processed elaboratively. The greater recollection for opaque words remained when concreteness rating was used as
the encoding task, suggesting that elaborative processing was not the
only reason for the better recollection of opaque words. When transparency judgment was employed as the encoding task, both the hit rates
and the false alarm rates were statistically identical for transparent and
opaque words. ERPs data showed reliable mid-frontal and left-parietal
old/new effects, both of which were not modulated by the semantic
transparency of the test items. We argue that the transparency rating
task led participants to encode each constituent member of the Chinese
two-character words hence diminished the distinctiveness of the opaque
words resulted from their morphological structures.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Episodic

Poster Session F

F13

F15

EFFECTS OF UNILATERAL THALAMIC STROKES ON RECOGNITION
MEMORY Giulio Pergola1,3, Benno Koch2, Michael Schwarz2, Irene Daum1;

SLEEP LEADS TO QUALITATIVE CHANGES IN THE EMOTIONAL MEMORY
TRACE: EVIDENCE FROM FMRI Jessica Payne1,2, Elizabeth Kensinger3,4;

1Institute

of Cognitive Neuroscience, Bochum, 2Klinikum Dortmund,
International Graduate School of Neuroscience, Bochum — The thalamus is

3

known to be involved in declarative memory, but how exactly? Aggleton
and Brown (1999) proposed that the anterior thalamic nuclei (AN),
together with the hippocampus, support recollection, whereas the
mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus (MD) and the cortex of the parahippocampal gyrus participates in familiarity. Other dichotomies have
been proposed, e.g. encoding in the AN versus retrieval in the MD (Van
der Werf et al. 2003). The aim of this study was to test these hypotheses
through a behavioural experiment with patients having suffered focal
ischemic lesions, as assessed using high-resolution scanning facilities.
The subjects were shown pairs of pictures and they had to learn them by
association. Pictures belonged to one of the categories: animal, tool,
scene. In the test phase subjects were presented with mixed studied and
unstudied single pictures. The task was to make an old/new judgement
(tapping both familiarity and recollection), and in case the picture was
old, subjects named its counterpart using the first as cue (i.e., a recollection judgement occurred) and the category it belonged to. Eight patients
with MD and five with AN lesions were tested and compared with a
larger sample of healthy subjects. The data challenge Aggleton &
Brown's hypothesis: patients were not impaired at recognition. Impairments in cued retrieval were significant in both groups. The patients in
MD group were able to retrieve at least the category above guessing
threshold, while the AN group patients were not, supporting Van der
Werf’s hypothesis.

F14

REDUCED EFFICIENCY OF NEURAL NETWORKS INDEPENDENT OF
STRUCTURAL IMPAIRMENT: A SMALL-WORLD ANALYSIS OF
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY PATTERNS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Liang

Wang1,2, Paul Metzak1,2, Jennifer Whitman1,2, Todd Woodward1,2; 1University
of British Columbia, 2BC Mental Health and Addicitions Research Institute —
Brain networks are thought to be organized according to “small-world”
topologies, whereby an optimal balance between local and global connections is required. In schizophrenia, the small-world configurations
have been found to be sub-optimal. However, whether or not this
reduced optimization is secondary to structural impairment has not yet
been determined. To investigate this, 27 schizophrenia patients and 37
healthy controls were asked to indicate which of four operations they
previously performed in response to the presented words (read, heard,
semantically associated, or rearranged letters). Functional networks
underlying correct trials were constructed and analyzed using graph
theoretical approaches. We found that patient and control groups exhibited similar activations for the contextual memory task. However, functional networks revealed decreased local efficiency in the schizophrenia
group. Additionally, compared with healthy controls, decreased gray
matter volumes in schizophrenia patients were found in prefrontal cortex, insula and occipital cortex, which partially overlapped with the
functionally activated regions. Subsequently, the activated regions were
categorized into two sets on the basis of the presence or absence of gray
matter volume abnormalities. Then functional networks of each set were
separately analyzed using graph theory. Similar results (decreased local
efficiency in schizophrenia) were observed for regions that did not show
structural deficits, whereas slightly increased local efficiency in schizophrenia was seen for regions with structural deficits. This study suggests
that abnormal functional reorganization, independent of aberrant brain
structure, characterizes schizophrenia during contextual memory tasks.

1University

of Notre Dame, 2Harvard Medical School, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, 3Boston College, 4Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical
Imaging — After new information is encoded into memory, it continues to
be processed and transformed during an offline period of consolidation
that may occur optimally during sleep. The consolidation process solidifies memories, making them resistant to interference and decay, but
emerging behavioral evidence suggests that it can also change memories
in ways that make them more useful and adaptive. Here, we provide
neural evidence that qualitatively distinct systems modulate the retrieval
of emotional memories following delay intervals containing nocturnal
sleep and daytime wakefulness. Although two regions within the hippocampus were strongly activated during successful retrieval of negative objects regardless of delay interval, there were pronounced
differences in other regions following sleep vs. wake. A diffuse memory
network – including widespread activity in the lateral prefrontal and
parietal cortices as well as the medial temporal-lobe – corresponded
more strongly to successful retrieval of negative items following wakefulness relative to sleep. By contrast, a much more refined and restricted
network of limbic regions – including the amygdala, ventromedial prefrontal cortex, and cingulate gyrus – showed a stronger relation to successful retrieval of negative items after a period of sleep compared to a
period of wakefulness. In addition, effective connectivity analyses
revealed stronger connections in regions associated with emotional
memory retrieval following sleep vs. wake. These data provide strong
evidence that the qualitative behavioral changes in memory that are
observed following a single night of sleep are mirrored by corresponding changes in the brain.

F16

THE EFFECT OF VALENCE AND DELAY ON MEMORY: AN FMRI
ANALYSIS Katherine Schmidt1,2, Katherine R. Mickley Steinmetz1,2,

Elizabeth A. Kensinger1,2; 1Boston College, 2Athinoula A. Martinos Center for
Biomedial Imaging — People remember emotional stimuli with more subjective vividness than non emotional stimuli, but it is unclear how the
factors of valence and delay affect the neural processes that correspond
with this enhanced memory. In the present study, participants underwent an fMRI scan while they were shown high arousal pictures that
were either positive or negative in valence and neutral pictures that were
low in arousal. Immediately following the scan, and again approximately twenty-four hours later, participants were given a recognition
memory test and a modified version of the Memory Characteristics
Questionnaire. fMRI data was analyzed using an ANOVA, with the factors of memory accuracy (remembered, forgotten), valence (positive,
negative), and retention delay (short, long) as factors. As expected, a
main effect of memory accuracy was observed in key regions of the emotional memory network, including in the amygdala, hippocampus, and
orbitofrontal cortex, with greater activity corresponding with subsequent memory. Although activity in this “core” network did not interact
with valence, other regions did show an interaction between valence and
memory accuracy. In particular memory for positive arousing information was associated with left lateralized activity, primarily in the frontal
and parietal areas. On the other hand, memory for negative arousing
information was primarily associated with enhanced activity in the
extended amygdala. These findings suggest that valence can affect the
processes that yield both short-term and longer-term retention of emotional memories.

F17

THE IMPACT OF TRANSFER-APPROPRIATE PROCESSING ON NEURAL
CORRELATES OF ENCODING Eva M. Bauch1, Leun J. Otten1; 1Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience,University College London,UK — The

principle of
transfer-appropriate processing states that memory benefits from overlap between the processes engaged during encoding and retrieval. It is

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

177

Poster Session F
largely unknown how neural correlates of memory formation depend on
how memory for an event is later probed. Here, we investigate the influence of study-test overlap on event-related potential (ERP) correlates of
encoding by manipulating the congruency between the format of study
and test items. In an incidental learning paradigm, electrical brain activity was recorded from the scalps of healthy adult volunteers while they
made size judgments on intermixed series of pictures and words. After a
one-hour delay, memory for the items was tested with a remember/
know recognition test. Half of the studied items were cued in the alternative format (picture-word; word-picture) and half in the same format
(word-word; picture-picture). For both words and pictures, study-test
overlap affected ERP correlates of encoding. This was especially prevalent for studied pictures, which demonstrated a frontally-distributed
effect when later cued with pictures, but a posteriorly- distributed effect
when cued with words. These findings provide electrophysiological
support that the neural correlates of encoding depend on both the type
of stimulus material and the degree of overlap between study and test.

F18

TO INTENTIONALLY FORGET AN ITEM IS MORE EFFORTFUL THAN TO
REMEMBER IT: AN ERP STUDY OF ITEM-METHOD DIRECTED
FORGETTING Shih-kuen Cheng1, I-Chun Liu1, Daisy L. Hung1, Ovid J-L.
Tzeng1,2, Jun Ren Lee1,3; 1National Central University, Taiwan, 2Academia
Sinica, Taiwan, 3National Taiwan Normal University, Taiwan — In this study

we recorded ERPs while participants engaged in a procedure that combined semantic priming and item-method directed forgetting, aiming to
investigate (1) whether intentional forgetting is more effortful than
remembering, and (2) whether there are different kinds of semantic processing for to-be-remembered (TBR) and to-be-forgotten (TBF) items.
Participants made lexical decisions to target words that were each preceded by a semantically related or unrelated prime word. A Remember/
Forget cue, presented before the target, designated whether the preceding prime was TBR or TBF. Not surprisingly, a reliable directed forgetting effect for the primes was observed. More importantly, when the
Remember/Forget cues were shown for 500 ms, the N170 and P200
waves were larger for targets preceded by Remember cues than those
that were preceded by Forget cues. In addition, the topography of the
N400 effect was different for targets preceded by Remember cues and
those preceded by Forget cues. No reliable effects of Remember/Forget
cues on the ERP waves were found when the cues were shown for 1500
ms. On the bases that the N170/ P200 waves are sensitive to attentional
influence and the N400 effect reflects semantic processing, we conclude
that forgetting demands more attentional resource than remembering
and that the semantic processing was different for TBR and TBF items.
Nevertheless, there is a temporal limitation for the modulations of
Remember/ Forget cues on the semantic processing and attentional
resources in the item-method directed forgetting

F19

FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE (FMRI) CORRELATES OF
RECOGNITION WITHOUT CUED RECALL Anthony J. Ryals1, Felix M.
Pichardo2, Dan Lopez-Paniagua1, Anne M. Cleary1, Carol A. Seger1; 1Colorado
State University, Fort Collins, CO, 2Purchase College--SUNY, Purchase, NY —

Recollection-based recognition occurs when one recognizes something
by recalling the instance in which it was experienced before. Familiaritybased recognition occurs when one recognizes something based only on
a feeling or sense about the situation. Prior research has shown that damage to the hippocampus that spares perirhinal cortex results in impaired
recollection but intact familiarity (Aggleton et al., 2005). Damage to perirhinal cortices that spares the hippocampus has been shown to preserve
recollection but impair familiarity (Bowles et al., 2007). Our study examined the neural correlates of recollection and familiarity with a novel
task. The Recognition without Cued Recall (RWCR) paradigm uses test
cues that either do or do not resemble studied items, and separates recollection from familiarity based on whether cue recognition is accompanied by cued recall (Cleary, 2004). Cue recognition that is

178

Long-Term Memory: Episodic
unaccompanied by successful cued recall is presumed to be familiaritybased. Our four participants showed the behavioral RWCR effect: They
discriminated between test cues that resembled study items and test cues
that did not in the absence of cued recall. For overall recognition, fMRI
analyses revealed that cues resembling studied items elicited greater
right hemisphere hippocampal activity than cues not resembling studied
items, but no differences in parahippocampal activity. However, when
we examined only cues for which cued recall was absent, a different pattern emerged: Cues that resembled studied items elicited greater bilateral parahippocampal (perirhinal and entorhinal) activity than cues that
did not. Furthermore, hippocampal activity did not differentiate cues
resembling studied words from cues not resembling studied words.

F20

THETA OSCILLATIONS IN TOP-DOWN CONTROL OF SOURCE MEMORY
RETRIEVAL Erika Nyhus1, Tim Curran1; 1University of Colorado at Boulder —
One of the major questions currently faced by cognitive neuroscientists
is: How do the functionally specialized areas of the brain interact to perform rich cognitive abilities? Neural oscillations underlying the EEG signal can provide important information about local brain activity and the
interaction among brain structures for the retrieval of episodic memories. It has been proposed that theta (~4-8 Hz) oscillations provide a general mechanism of top-down control in episodic memory (Kahana,
Seelig, & Madsen, 2001; Klimesch, 1996, 1999; Klimesch, Freunberger,
Sauseng, & Gruber, 2008). The present study examined theta power and
long-range theta synchronization between frontal and posterior regions
during source retrieval. Subjects studied adjectives and either imagined
a scene (Place Task) or imagined what the word would sound like read
backwards (Read Task). During the recognition test subjects judged
which task the word was studied in ("Old Place Task" or "Old Read
Task") or "New". Subjects' discrimination of old and new words was
greater for the Place than the Read task and discrimination of source was
above chance. Theta effects were greatest from 500-800 ms over right
frontal and left parietal channels. From 500-800 ms, theta power over
right frontal and left parietal channels and frontal-parietal coherence
was greater for correct and incorrect source judgments than new judgments. These results indicate that right frontal theta is engaged for
source retrieval and that frontal-parietal theta synchronization could
represent top-down control from frontal to posterior regions to retrieve
source information.

F21

RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY AND TWO FORMS
OF RECALL IN HEALTHY AGING Kristin M. Thomas1, Ilana J. Bennett1,

David J. Madden2, Chandan J. Vaidya1,3, James H. Howard, Jr.1,4, Darlene V.
Howard1; 1Georgetown University, 2Duke University Medical Center, 3Children’s
National Medical Center, 4Catholic University of America — Some forms of
memory decline with healthy aging, possibly resulting from age-related
differences in white matter integrity. We used diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI) tractography to measure integrity of bilateral hippocampus-prefrontal tracts relevant to recall memory performance. We also assessed
two corpus callosum tracts (genu and splenium) that enable interhemispheric communication and likely influence more general cognitive
function, including processing speed. Tract integrity, measured as fractional anisotropy (FA), was compared in younger (n=14; 18.9 ± 0.7 years,
9 female) and healthy older (n=14; 67.6 ± 3.1 years, 10 female) adults. We
also examined relationships between FA and performance on two measures of recall memory: incidental recall (Digit-Symbol pairing) and
intentional recall (USC-REMT list recall). Results revealed that older
adults recalled less than younger adults on both tasks. Age-related differences in FA were largest in the genu, moderate in the splenium, and
non-significant in the hippocampus-prefrontal tracts. Independently of
age group, both incidental and intentional recall performance was
related to higher FA in genu and splenium tracts, with intentional recall
also relating to higher FA in the right hippocampus-prefrontal tract. In
addition, stepwise regression revealed that genu FA was a marginally
significant mediator of age-related differences in intentional recall. Thus,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Episodic
both intentional and incidental recall may depend on integrity of tracts
involved in more general processes (genu, splenium), whereas intentional, but not incidental, recall may also rely on integrity of more memory-specific hippocampal tracts. Furthermore, individual differences in
the integrity of the genu may contribute to age-related differences in
intentional recall.

F22

PREPARATORY NEURAL ACTIVITY PREDICTS PRIMACY: THE ROLE OF
SEMANTIC PREPARATION IN LIST LEARNING Giulia Galli1, Leun J. Otten;
1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London — Neural

activity immediately before an event can predict whether the event will
later be remembered or forgotten. This suggests that memory formation
is influenced by preparatory mechanisms engaged ahead of stimulus
presentation. Here, we asked whether preparatory activity affects the
learning of short word lists, and whether such activity varies as a function of serial position within the list. Healthy young adults studied lists
of randomly intermixed visual and auditory words. Each word was preceded by a cue, which indicated the modality of the upcoming word.
Lists were memorized with either an elaborative or rote rehearsal strategy. At the end of each list, volunteers performed a brief distraction task
before being probed for free recall. As expected, recall performance was
better for the first few words in a list and following elaborate rehearsal.
Crucially, electrical brain activity before a word predicted subsequent
recall of the word, but only for the first few items in a list. This effect was
most pronounced for auditory words and with elaborative rehearsal. In
contrast, word-elicited activity did not differ depending on serial position or rehearsal strategy. These findings demonstrate that preparatory
activity plays a role in list learning. The specificity of such activity to the
elaborative rehearsal condition suggests that semantic processes contribute to the effect. Importantly, preparatory activity only affected later
recall of items in the first list positions. This challenges the notion that
item-induced rehearsal is the main determinant of serial position effects.

F23

METAMEMORY JUDGMENTS OF EPISODIC AND SEMANTIC MEMORY: AN
FMRI STUDY Niv Reggev1, Maya Zuckerman1, Anat Maril1; 1The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem — Metamemory refers to monitoring and control of
one's memory performance. One measure of metamemory is the feeling
of knowing (FOK). Theoretical accounts of FOK postulate the cue-familiarity and the accessibility heuristics in generating FOKs. Interestingly,
no theoretical consideration of possible differences between the monitoring of episodic and of semantic knowledge has been put forward thus
far. At the same time, evidence from patients and drugs studies find
selective impairment in episodic FOKs but not in semantic ones, suggesting that metamemory monitoring might be different between these two
types of memory. Similarly, neuroimaging studies reveal different patterns of activation during episodic or semantic FOKs. However, as these
studies employed a variety of stimuli in a variety of experimental paradigms, the comparison between episodic and semantic monitoring is
impossible, as this factor cannot be isolated from other design elements.
In the current event-related fMRI study, we used a within-participant,
within-experiment comparison of both types of monitoring. Prior to
scanning, participants studied cue-target pairs. They later made FOK
judgments for the studied items and for general knowledge questions
while scanned. The to-be-retrieved items were used as targets in the episodic task for half of the participants, and as answers for the semantic
questions for the other half, counterbalanced between participants.
While the separate neural correlates of episodic and semantic FOKs
found in this study generally replicate previous neuroimaging findings
in medial and lateral frontal regions, the comparison between them
reveals significant differences, suggesting that distinct cognitive elements or computations operate in these tasks.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session F
F24

DOPAMINE AND EPISODIC MEMORY: WOMEN'S FACE RECOGNITION
PERFORMANCE IS RELATED TO D1 BINDING POTENTIAL IN FUSIFORM
GYRUS Johanna Lovén1, Sari Karlsson1, Yvonne Brehmer1, Anna

Rieckmann1, Per Karlsson1, Lars Farde1, Agneta Herlitz1, Lars Bäckman1;
1Karolinska Institutet — Human and animal data indicate that dopamine

(DA) is related to cognitive performance, although the extent to which
the DA-cognition link differs between men and women remains unclear.
In a pharmacological study, we assessed the relation between D1 binding potential (BP) and face recognition performance in 20 young adults
(10 women, 10 men). Participants studied faces in baseline and D1 antagonist conditions for later recognition. Before face encoding, they were
injected with a placebo drug or with 0.5 mg of the SCH23390 antagonist.
Memory for faces was generally lower in the antagonist compared to the
baseline condition. However, closer inspection of the data showed that
the D1 antagonist affected women's, but not men's performance. Critically, women's D1 BP in fusiform gyrus was related to baseline memory
performance, such that higher BP was associated with better face recognition. Further, women with higher BP were more affected by the antagonist than women with lower BP. This is the first evidence of a link
between D1 BP in a brain area selectively involved in face perception
and memory. In addition, the present results suggest that there are differences in how DA regulates cognitive functioning in women and men.

F25

TRUE AND FALSE RECOLLECTION ACTIVATES VENTRAL PARIETAL
CORTEX Pamela LaMontagne1, Jian Zhu1, Reza Habib1; 1Southern Illinois
University, Carbondale — Theories regarding the ventral parietal cortex
(VPC) during episodic memory retrieval include the attention to memory (AtoM) and the episodic buffer hypotheses. AtoM proposes that
salient (recollected) memories involve bottom-up attention and VPC
activity. The episodic buffer hypothesizes that VPC activity is related to
the amount of information retrieved from long-term storage into a temporary buffer for use with working memory. We examined the role of
the VPC by manipulating the veracity of items and amount of information encoded. On day one, subjects studied picture-word associations
one, three and seven times. For the final presentation on day two, half of
the repeated trials replaced the word associated with each picture with a
new word at the time of scanning, resulting in intact and recombined
pairs. At retrieval, subjects made Remember/Know/New recognition
decisions indicating whether they could recall details from items presented on day one, if they simply knew the pair was from day one, or
whether the item was newly presented on day 2. Left temporal-parietal
junction and bilateral hippocampus activity was greater for Remember
than Know responses for intact (true recollection), recombined (false recollection), and new picture-word pairs (false recollection). Greater activity for Know than Remember responses was observed in left
intraparietal sulcus for intact and recombined pairs. Consistent with
AtoM and lesion studies, subjective recollection of true and false memories involved activity in the VPC. VPC activity during false recollection is
incompatible with the episodic buffer hypothesis since no information is
actually retrieved from long-term storage.
F26

DOMAIN SPECIFICITY IN MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE CORTEX DURING
EPISODIC MEMORY FORMATION Bernhard
Staresina1,
Katherine

Duncan1, Lila Davachi1; 1New York University — Although the key role of the

medial temporal lobe (MTL) in memory formation is well established,
the division of labor among different MTL subregions remains poorly
understood. In this fMRI study, we assessed whether the contributions
of the perirhinal cortex (PrC) and parahippocampal cortex (PhC) are
domain-specific, differentially supporting successful encoding of objectvs. scene-related source information (Davachi, 2006). To this end, participants were presented with adjectives during encoding and instructed to
imagine either an object or a scene described by the adjective. Imagery
success was assessed via subjective ratings of the vividness/resolution

179

Poster Session F
of the resulting mental image. During the post-scan retrieval test, participants first indicated whether they recognized a given adjective and if
yes, whether they had imagined an object or a scene described by that
adjective. Results from 14 participants so far reveal that, behaviorally,
imagery ratings and source memory were equated across object and
scene trials. Critically, however, we found evidence for the differential
engagement of PrC and PhC during successful source encoding as a
function of the to-be-imagined stimulus domain. While successful source
encoding during object trials was accompanied by enhanced PrC activation, PhC showed enhanced activation during successful source encoding of scene trials. These data suggest that the functional involvement of
different MTL subregions is modulated by the domain of internally-activated representations during encoding.

F27

HIGH-RESOLUTION FMRI OF RELATIONAL PATTERN SEPARATION IN THE
HUMAN MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE Valerie A. Carr1, Serra E. Favila1,
Anthony D. Wagner1; 1Stanford University — In forming new memories, the

hippocampus is thought to separate related input patterns into distinct
representations, thereby minimizing interference between similar memory traces. Recent fMRI findings in humans suggest differing biases
among hippocampal subfields toward pattern separation in response to
manipulations of item similarity. Given the central role of the hippocampus in relational memory, the current study aimed to evaluate medial
temporal lobe (MTL) responses to manipulation of the spatial relationships among items. To this end, we scanned participants using high-resolution fMRI and a rapid adaptation paradigm in which trials began
with presentation of a unique scene, followed by a scene in which: all
items remained in the same location (identical), one pair of items
swapped location (one-swap), two pairs of items swapped locations
(two-swap), all items moved to novel locations (scramble), or new items
were placed in novel locations (new). We hypothesized that (a) the identical condition would lead to adaptation of BOLD signal across all MTL
subfields, and (b) critically, different levels of adaptation would appear
across subfields in response to changes in relational similarity, with
some subfields showing a linear release from adaptation and others
showing an exponential release. Examination of BOLD activity extracted
from anatomically defined regions of interest in both the hippocampus
(CA1, CA3/dentate, and subiculum) and surrounding MTL cortices
(parahippocampal, perirhinal, and entorhinal) revealed both response
patterns. These findings further advance mechanistic accounts of MTL
function, and help bridge human imaging findings with predictions
from neural-network models and observations in rodents. Funding:
NIMH(5RO1-MH076932), NARSAD

F28

SELF-REFERENCE AND RELIVING DURING AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL
MEMORY RETRIEVAL ARE LINKED TO DISSOCIABLE VENTRAL VS.
DORSAL MIDLINE REGIONS: AN FMRI STUDY USING A NOVEL CAMERA
TECHNOLOGY Peggy L. St. Jacques1, Martin A. Conway2, Matthew W.
Lowder1, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke University, Durham, NC, 2University of Leeds,
Leeds, UK — Self-reference and reliving are critical components of auto-

biographical memory (AM) which allow us to re-experience our personal past. We used a novel camera technology, which employs a sensor
and timer to automatically take hundreds of photographs when worn, in
order to elicit AMs using dynamic visuospatial images and to literally
ask participants to take a self vs. other perspective. Using functional MRI
(fMRI) we examined the neural correlates associated with: 1) Self-Reference, by comparing AMs elicited from a self-perspective vs. understanding of another person’s perspective, and 2) Reliving, by comparing AMs
elicited by visuospatial vs. verbal cues. Across both manipulations, we
found a dorsal vs. ventral distinction in cortical midline regions. First, in
the self-referential manipulation we found that AMs recruited greater
ventral medial PFC (mPFC), whereas understanding another perspective
recruited dorsal mPFC. Moreover, task-related functional connectivity
analysis revealed that ventral mPFC contributed to the medial temporal

180

Long-Term Memory: Episodic
lobe network linked to memory, whereas dorsal mPFC contributed to
the frontoparietal network linked to controlled processes. Second, in the
reliving manipulation, AMs retrieved via visuospatial cues recruited
greater retrosplenial cortex, whereas AMs retrieved via verbal cues
recruited greater posterior cingulate. Additionally, retrosplenial cortex
had greater functional connectivity to bilateral visual cortices and precuneus linked to visual imagery, whereas posterior cingulate had greater
functional connectivity to PFC and temporal regions associated with
controlled semantic processing. In sum, these results suggest that subregions of the posterior and anterior midline are functionally dissociable
and may differentially contribute to self-reference and reliving during
AM retrieval.

F29

NEURAL CORRELATES OF THE RETRIEVAL OF TEMPORAL
ASSOCIATIONS Maki Suzuki1, Michael D. Rugg1; 1University of California,
Irvine — It is well established that the hippocampus, along with adjacent
regions of the medial temporal lobe (MTL), supports memory for itemitem associations. It has been proposed that the hippocampus is also crucial for memory for temporal associations between items. Here, we used
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate whether
the same or different brain regions are activated during successful
retrieval of associative and temporal information. On each of a series of
study trials, subjects were presented with two words in succession (1500
ms presentation duration, 1000 ms inter-stimulus interval) with the
requirement to judge which item fit inside the other. Subjects were then
given a scanned surprise memory test. Test items comprised a mixture of
intact pairs (words in the same pairing as at study), rearranged pairs
(words drawn from different study pairs), and new pairs. The task was
to make one of four judgments to each test pair: intact/top (top word
was presented first at study), intact/bottom (bottom word was presented first at study), rearranged, or new. The only region to be activated
both by successful associative and successful temporal memory was the
precuneus. Retrieval effects unique to associative memory were evident
in numerous regions, including bilateral lateral parietal and left parahippocampal cortex. Successful retrieval of temporal information was associated with activation in the left anterior MTL on the border of the
amygdala and hippocampus. These findings suggest that the neural correlates of the retrieval of associative and temporal information are
largely independent.
F30

RELEVANCE MODULATES ACTIVATION OF PARIETAL CORTEX IN
RESPONSE TO MNEMONIC STATUS Jeremy A. Elman1, Arthur P.

Shimamura1; 1University of California Berkeley — The posterior parietal cortex (PPC) shows consistent activation during memory tasks; however, its
specific function is still unknown. Previous studies have found the PPC
to show greater activation for items recognized as old compared to new
items, termed the ‘parietal old/new effect.’ This is especially apparent in
the ventral PPC as strength of activation tends to increase with the
amount of information retrieved. It remains unclear to what extent this
activity is regulated by automatic bottom-up processing versus goalrelated top-down control. Here, we investigate whether activation in the
ventral PPC shows similar patterns of activation in response to new and
old items when they are encountered in both memory and non-memory
tasks. Subjects completed an explicit recognition task and a lexical decision task in which the mnemonic status of targets held different degrees
of relevance to the task goal. The parietal old/new effect was present in
each task, but the strength of activation in both parietal cortex and frontal areas was modulated by the relevance of recognizing old items to successful task completion. This suggests that memory related activity in
the ventral PPC is subject to top-down control.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Episodic

Poster Session F

F31

F33

CHANGE DETECTION IN VISUAL SEARCH REVEALS DECLARATIVE/
RELATIONAL MEMORY ACROSS SPECIES Vivian L. Chau1, Emily F.

THE IMPACT OF APPROACH AND AVOIDANCE MOTIVATION ON SPATIAL
LEARNING IN HUMANS Vishnu Murty1, Kevin LaBar1, Courtnea Rainey1,

Murphy1, R. Shayna Rosenbaum1,2, Jennifer D. Ryan2,3, Kari L. Hoffman1; 1York
University, 2Rotman Research Institute of Baycrest, 3University of Toronto —

Derek Hamilton2, R. Alison Adcock1; 1Duke University, 2The University of New
Mexico — Affective motivation has been demonstrated to modulate hip-

Search patterns when viewing repeated stimuli have been used to assay
memory, though the effects typically span delays of only seconds to
hours of the original stimulus presentation. Here, we used flicker change
detection in a repeated-trial design to address whether 1. change detection time could be used as a measure of declarative/relational recall of
long-term memories, 2. the detection time for an anterograde amnesic
would show repetition effects, and 3. monkeys show repetition effects
like those seen in humans. In Experiment 1, nine healthy adults searched
for the changing object embedded in a flickering natural scene as their
eye movements were recorded. Verbal reports of memory for the object
corresponded to faster change detection times (remembered < forgotten,
p<10^-12), regardless of delay interval (1 or 28 days). This led to an overall difference between detection times for novel and repeated images
(repeated < novel, p<10^-4). In Experiment 2, we tested a patient with
bilateral hippocampal damage (D.A.) using the same experimental
design. Unlike our age-matched controls, D.A. reported no memory for
the objects; moreover, his detection times overlapped those observed for
novel trials (repeated < novel: controls, p<10^-4; D.A., p=0.66), suggesting that rapid detection time indicates remembered objects. In Experiment 3, we tested a rhesus macaque and, parallel to healthy human
participants, a rapid ‘mode’ of detection times was seen for repeated
images compared to novel images (repeated < novel, p<10^-3). Taken
together, our results suggest that change detection time could be used as
a measure of declarative/relational memory.

pocampally-dependent spatial learning in rodents, but relatively little
research has investigated these processes in humans. The current study
investigates the impact of avoidance and approach motivation on spatial
learning in a modified Virtual Reality-version of the Morris water maze
task. Forty participants performed a spatial learning task in a VR water
maze with both correct and incorrect hidden platforms. During this task,
participants were instructed to navigate towards correct platforms while
avoiding incorrect platforms. Learning occurred over multiple trials in
unique environments. Half of the participants received shocks for navigating to incorrect platforms (or letting trial time expire) to elicit avoidance motivation, while the other half received monetary rewards for
navigating to correct platforms to elicit approach motivation. During
learning, avoidance motivation disrupted and approach motivation
enhanced spatial learning in multiple independent assays of spatial
memory. Participants found more correct platforms in the approach
compared to avoidance condition. On correct trials, participants had
shorter path lengths to correct platforms in the approach compared to
avoidance motivation conditions. On probe trials, participants in the
approach condition demonstrated better spatial localization of both platforms than participants in the avoidance condition. Finally acquisition of
learning across trials was faster under approach compared to avoidance
motivation. These findings not only demonstrate the utility of this novel
translational method for investigating spatial learning in humans, but
also the unique roles of approach and avoidance motivation on spatial
learning.

F32

LEARNING EXCEPTIONS TO THE RULE: HIGH-RESOLUTION FMRI OF
HIPPOCAMPAL SUBFIELD CONTRIBUTIONS TO CATEGORY LEARNING

Tyler Davis1, Bradley C. Love1, Alison R. Preston1,2; 1The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX, 2Center for Learning and Memory, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX — The medial temporal lobe (MTL) and its connections
with midbrain, prefrontal cortex (PFC), and striatum have been implicated in different forms of novelty processing. In the present study, we
examine a unique novelty detection task where subjects learn categories
containing items that violate a salient regularity. These “exceptions to
the rule” are novel in the context of their categories because they share
critical features with an opposing category, and must be learned and
stored separately to enable correct categorization. Previous theoretical
(Love & Gureckis, 2007) and whole-brain fMRI (Davis, Love, & Preston,
submitted) research suggests that the hippocampus is engaged during
exception learning and is modulated by midbrain, PFC, and striatum.
The current study employs high-resolution fMRI techniques to investigate the role of hippocampal subfields in exception learning. High-resolution methods extend our previous whole-brain results by allowing us
to dissociate the function of individual hippocampal subfields and MTL
cortical regions. Within the MTL, our results reveal that CA1 and a combined region of CA2,3 and dentate gyrus are recruited during categorization of exception items as well as in response to categorization errors.
Such findings are consistent with theories suggesting that the hippocampal circuit acts as a comparator to evaluate incoming information by
comparing it with previously stored representations and forming new
representations in response to prediction error. Specifically, we suggest
that the CA fields and dentate gyrus are recruited both to encode new
representations when exceptions are first encountered and to retrieve
these representations when needed for accurate exception performance.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

F34

POSTERIOR PARIETAL LESIONS IMPAIR MULTIMODAL BUT NOT
1The
UNIMODAL PAIR-ASSOCIATE LEARNING Daniel
A.
Levy1;
Interdisciplinary Center, Herzliya, Israel — The involvement of posterior
parietal cortex (PPC) in long-term declarative memory retrieval poses a
puzzle for cognitive neuroscience. On one hand, electrophysiological
and hemodynamic studies of memory have consistently noted robust
lateral PPC activation during memory retrieval, especially accompanying detailed recollection of studied materials and their contexts. On the
other hand, neuropsychological studies have revealed few substantive
deficits in long-term mnemonic abilities in the wake of lateral parietal
lesions, with recognition memory specifically found to be intact. We
hypothesized that parietal processes might be of greater importance for
certain more demanding forms of retrieval. Accordingly, we compared
pair-associate learning curves for cued recall of unimodal-verbal and
multimodal (picture-sound) learning in stroke patients whose unilateral
damage includes PPC. Several patients exhibited a notable dissociation
of preserved unimodal and very impaired multimodal cued recall. The
deficits were found despite intact initial processing of the multimodal
stimuli. It is hypothesized that parietal contributions to retrieval may
include multi-modal sensory integration that is attributed to PPC in its
role as a cortical association area.
F35

DISSOCIATING RECOLLECTION AND FAMILIARITY WITH RESPONSE
BIAS: EVIDENCE FROM YOUNG ADULTS, OLDER ADULTS, AND PATIENTS
WITH ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Rebecca G. Deason1,2, Erin P. Hussey1,2,

Brandon A. Ally1,2, Andrew E. Budson1,2; 1Center for Translational Cognitive
Neuroscience, Bedford VA Hospital, MA, 2Boston University — Do
recollection and familiarity rely upon different processes? As a result of their
impaired recollection, AD patients rely more on familiarity. This reliance
on familiarity may contribute to the abnormally liberal response bias
(greater tendency to respond “old”) also seen in AD patients. In this
experiment, we examined whether increasing reliance on familiarity
over recollection would also lead to a liberal response bias in younger

181

Poster Session F
and older adults, potentially indicating that familiarity and recollection
have different response biases. To increase reliance on familiarity, we
used differing delays between study and test phases, as longer delays
are thought to reduce the contribution of recollection more than familiarity. Younger adults, older adults, and AD patients were run in two
study-test sessions, with study and recognition test phases separated by
either a one-minute or one-day delay. With the one-minute delay, both
younger adults and healthy older adults showed a conservative
response bias, while AD patients showed a liberal response bias. But at
the one-day delay, the younger and older adults showed a liberal
response bias similar to the AD patients. The one-day delay reduces recollection and thus memorial judgments in this test phase are based primarily on familiarity leading younger and older adults to shift to a more
liberal response bias. AD patients rely mainly on familiarity, regardless
of the delay, due to their impaired recollection and they consistently
show a liberal response bias. A liberal response bias may reflect
increased reliance upon familiarity.

F36

PUTTING CONTEXT IN CONTEXT: THE MNEMONIC ROLE OF THE
PARAHIPPOCAMPAL CORTEX IN CONTEXTUAL PROCESSING Talya

Sadeh1, Anat Maril2, Yonatan Goshen-Gottstein1; 1Tel-Aviv University, 2The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem — A key feature of episodic memory is the
binding of an event to the context in which it occurred. Recent studies
implicate the parahippocampal cortex (PHc) in the processing of context.
These studies have typically used a definition of context which operationalizes it as a dichotomous, external entity. However, theoretical
models of episodic memory have demonstrated that context must be
viewed in a more expansive manner, with context being conceptualized
as a continuously fluctuating internal mental state. The goal of our
research was to examine whether the PHc represents context in this more
expansive interpretation. To this end, we used an approach informed by
cognitive models which establish that—as compared to recall—recognition relies more heavily on the processing of a continuously fluctuating
internal context at encoding. We therefore predicted that activity in the
PHc would be found when contrasting neural activity during encoding
of items subsequently remembered in a recognition test with encoding
activity of items subsequently remembered in a recall test. To test this
hypothesis, we used fMRI to measure participants’ neural activity while
they incidentally studied cue-target pairs. Each pair was subsequently
submitted to either a multiple choice recognition test or to a recall test.
As predicted, activity in the PHc was found when contrasting neural
activity during encoding of items subsequently remembered in the recognition test with encoding activity of items subsequently remembered
in the recall test. These results provide evidence for the role of the PHc in
episodic encoding of continuously fluctuating internal context.

F37

EFFECTS OF EARLY THYROID HORMONE DEFICIENCY ON CHILDREN’S
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY PERFORMANCE AND HIPPOCAMPAL
MORPHOMETRY Karen Willoughby1,2, Jovanka Skocic2, Joanne Rovet1,2;
1

University of Toronto, 2Hospital for Sick Children — Animal research has
shown that the hippocampus, a critical structure for autobiographical
memory (AM), is particularly vulnerable to thyroid hormone (TH) deficiency. Hippocampal abnormalities, as well as memory and learning and
visuospatial impairments have also been found in children who, due to
maternal hypothyroidism (HYPO) or congenital hypothyroidism (CH),
received insufficient levels of TH during gestation. However, no study to
date has investigated AM performance in these clinical populations.
Thus, the purpose of the present study was to examine whether TH-deficient children show deficits in AM recall relative to controls, and
whether their deficits are associated with abnormalities in hippocampal
structure. Participants were 60 children between 10-14 years of age
(M=10.66; 31 males), including 18 HYPO, 18 CH, and 24 controls. Using
the Children’s Autobiographical Interview, participants recalled two
autobiographical events and answered a series of structured questions to
elicit additional episodic details. Interviews were scored using a stan-

182

Long-Term Memory: Episodic
dardized system that provided total AM recall scores, as well as scores
for five subcategories of episodic details. After controlling for age and
gender using MANCOVA, significant group differences were found for
total AM details (p<.001), as well as event (p<.001), time (p<.05), and
perceptual (p<.001) details, with controls recalling more details than the
TH-deficient group. While groups did not differ significantly in hippocampal volume, AM recall was significantly correlated with hippocampal
volume in controls, but not in the TH-deficient group. Overall, the
results suggest that abnormal hippocampal development due to early
TH deficiency appears to have long-term effects on children’s AM.

F38

COMMON BRAIN REGIONS ASSOCIATED WITH RETRIEVAL OF SPATIAL
RELATIONS IN EPISODIC & SEMANTIC MEMORY Siobhan Hoscheidt1,

Lee Ryan1, Lynn Nadel1; 1University of Arizona — Traditionally,

episodic
memory and semantic knowledge have been viewed as very different
types of memory, dependent on different brain region. However, recent
research has argued that episodic memory and semantic knowledge may
elicit common regions of activation, depending on the type of information being retrieved (Ryan et al, 2009), specifically spatial information.
To test this hypothesis we experimentally varied spatial retrieval in an
episodic and semantic memory task, asking participants to retrieval spatial relations and spatial locations within each memory condition. We
then compared patterns of whole-brain activation across memory type.
Subjects (N=18), aged 20-30, recalled 30 autobiographical events during
an interview. A week later, during an fMRI scan, participants answered
“True/False” questions regarding spatial relations and spatial locations
within autobiographies and world knowledge. Images were collected on
a General Electric 3T. Data were analyzed using SPM-5. Results reveal
that retrieval of spatial relations within semantic memory elicits similar
brain regions as the retrieval of episodic memory, overall. By contrast,
retrieval of spatial locations in semantic knowledge elicited activation in
bilateral lingual gyrus, only. Regions of activation across episodic spatial
tasks showed significant overlap, with the exception of basal ganglia
regions that showed preferential activation for spatial location. Data provide evidence that episodic and semantic memory depend on similar
regions based on the type of information being retrieved. This is particularly true for the retrieval of spatial relations, which showed a distinct
pattern of whole-brain activation, regardless of whether recalling spatial
relations from past experienced events or world knowledge.

F39

EMG AND FMRI EVIDENCE FOR RESPONSE CONFLICT IN THE EXCLUDERECOGNITION TASK Hillary Schwarb1, Travis L. Seymour2, Eric H.

Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2University of California, Santa
Cruz — Although we may often recognize many stimuli in our environments, it is not always appropriate to acknowledge this recognition.
What happens then when we recognize information we do not wish to
acknowledge? How do memory retrieval processes (i.e., familiarity and
recollection) interact with motor and control processes to bring about an
appropriate response? How do we control the interaction between familiarity and recollective processes to produce recognition responses appropriate to our current task goals? The parallel task-set model (Seymour,
2001) predicts that under some circumstances familiarity and recollection processes activate competing responses. These predictions as well as
those of the conflict monitoring hypothesis (e.g., Botvinick et al. 2001)
suggest that competition should lead to response conflict. In two experiments, we investigated the influences of familiarity and recollection and
the role of response conflict in the exclude-recognition task using electromyographic (EMG) and functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI). In Experiment 1, participants performed the exclude-recognition
task (words) while surface EMG was measured on the triceps. On probe
trials (where participants were instructed to respond “new” to previously viewed stimuli), subthreshold EMG associated with the incorrect
“old” response reliably preceded superthreshold EMG associated with
task-appropriate “new” correct response. These partial-errors provide
strong evidence for response conflict in the exclude-recognition task. In

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Motor Control
experiment 2, participants performed the exclude-recognition task
(faces) while undergoing fMRI. They demonstrated anterior cingulate
cortex activity on probe trials again indicative of response conflict.
Together these data provide substantial support for the hypothesis that
the exclude-recognition task involves response conflict.

F40

THE HIPPOCAMPUS IS COUPLED WITH THE DEFAULT NETWORK DURING
MEMORY RETRIEVAL BUT NOT DURING MEMORY ENCODING Willem
Huijbers1, Cyriel Pennartz1, Roberto Cabeza2, Sander Daselaar1; 1University of
Amsterdam, 2Duke University — The brain’s default mode network (DMN)

is activated during internally-oriented tasks and shows strong coherence
in spontaneous rest activity. Despite a surge of recent interest, the functional role of the DMN remains poorly understood. Interestingly, the
DMN activates during retrieval of past events but deactivates during
encoding of novel events into memory. One hypothesis is that these
opposing effects reflect a difference between attentional orienting
towards internal events, such as retrieved memories, vs. external events,
such as to-be-encoded stimuli. Another hypothesis is that hippocampal
regions are coupled with the DMN during retrieval, but decoupled from
the DMN during encoding. The present fMRI study investigated these
hypotheses by combining a resting-state coherence analysis with a task
that measured encoding and retrieval of both externally-presented
events and internal events that were generated through mental imagery.
Increased hippocampal activity was associated with successful encoding
of both internal and external events as well as with successful retrieval of
internal and external events. Moreover, a task-based coherence analysis
indicated that hippocampus was decoupled from the DMN during
encoding but not during retrieval. These results support the hippocampal-coupling hypothesis rather the internal orienting account. They also
indicate that the hippocampus is not one of the “core” DMN regions.
Taken together, our findings clarify the relationship between the DMN
and the neural correlates of memory retrieval and encoding.

F41

MEMORY FOR NON-MONITORED BACKGROUND: AN FMRI STUDY
Yaakov Hoffman1, Anat Maril1; 1The Hebrew University of Jerusalem — When

monitored stimuli appear in context, the question arises as to whether a
non-monitored study context is represented in a retrievable memory
trace. In Experiment 1, stimuli consisted of a smaller black word printed
on a larger grey word. Participants made a vowel judgment on the black
monitored word. Memory for the non-monitored grey word was
assessed by a typical context paradigm recognition test which included
four types of stimuli; Target-old-Background-old (ToBo), Target- oldBackground-new (ToBn), Target-new-Background-old (TnBo) and Target-new–Background-new (TnBn). Memory for the background was
found under both Target conditions, old (ToBo-ToBn) and new (TnBoTnBn).The small but reliable effect indicating that non-monitored elements are encoded and remembered, contrasts with earlier theories concerning memory of non-monitored study material. Behavioral results
may underestimate this effect, as background may be suppressed by the
target. To address this issue we ran an event-related fMRI experiment
(current N=7), where subjects were scanned at the recognition test stage.
Results revealed activation in anterior cingulate- and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex for TnBo>TnBn, indicating a conflict, which in turn indicates robust memory for background: had the background not been
remembered there would be no conflict. These regions were not
observed for ToBn>ToBo - while it is likely that the background was
remembered to the same extent in the target old condition, manifestation
of conflict may only be possible in the absence of an old target, which,
when present, dominates the recognition decision process. Results suggest that in different target conditions, recognition of background is
based on different processes.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session F

Perception & Action: Motor Control
F42

ALTERED RESTING-STATE EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY OF THE FRONTOPARIETAL CIRCUIT ON THE PRIMARY MOTOR NETWORK FOLLOWING
STROKE Cory S. Inman1, G. Andrew James1,2, Justin Rajendra1, Stephan
Hamann1, Giuseppe Pagnoni1,3, Andrew J. Butler1; 1Emory University,
2
University of Arkansas, 3University of Modena and Reggio Emilia — Previous

studies have found that stroke alters the effective connectivity of motor
execution networks. Here we examined the intrinsic effective connectivity of top-down motor control in stroke survivors relative to healthy participants. Stroke survivors demonstrated significant deficits in motor
function, as measured by a standard evaluative instrument for measuring sensorimotor stroke recovery (Fugl-Meyer). The relationship
between these observed deficits in motor function and intrinsic effective
connectivity between brain regions involved in motor control and motor
execution were investigated with structural equation modeling (SEM) of
resting-state fMRI data (rs-fMRI). After generating a model that fit
healthy controls well, we applied the control model to the stroke survivors data. We observed alterations in spontaneous effective connectivity
from the fronto-parietal circuit to the resting-state motor network in
stroke survivors, particularly in connections from the superior parietal
cortex (PAR) to primary motor cortex (M1) and supplementary motor
cortex (SMA). Furthermore, in stroke survivors, but not in healthy participants, these particular paths were characterized by large individual
variance in their strength of influence upon each other. Importantly, previous studies have suggested that the fronto-parietal network exerts control over primary motor systems to guide upper-limb reaching
behaviors. The present study is the first to highlight the importance of
the PAR to M1 and PAR to SMA paths in healthy motor function using
rs-fMRI. These findings suggest that illustrating the resting-state connectivity deficits in top-down control of motor performance, will help therapist target neural networks that should be reestablished by cognitive and
physical stroke rehabilitation treatments.

F43

MUSICIAN SEE, MUSICIAN DO: MUSICAL EXPERIENCE INFLUENCES
GESTURE IMITATION Michael Spilka1,2, Christopher J. Steele1, Virginia B.

Penhune1,2; 1Concordia University, 2International Laboratory for Brain, Music,
and Sound Research (BRAMS) — Imitation plays a crucial role in the learning of many complex motor skills. Recent behavioural and neurophysiological evidence suggests that the ability to imitate is influenced by past
experience, such as musical training. To investigate the impact of musical training on motor imitation, musicians and non-musicians were
tested on their ability to imitate videoclips of simple and complex twohanded gestures taken from American Sign Language. Participants
viewed a set of 30 gestures, one at a time, and imitated them immediately after presentation. Participants’ imitations were videotaped and
scored off-line by raters blind to participant group. Imitation performance was assessed by a rating of performance accuracy, where the arm,
hand, and finger components of the gestures were rated separately on a
5-point scale (1=unrecognizable; 5=exact imitation). A global accuracy
score (PAglobal) was calculated by summing the three scales. Response
duration compared to the model (%MTdiff), and reaction time (RT) were
also assessed. Results indicated that musicians were able to imitate more
accurately than non-musicians, reflected by significantly higher PAglobal and %MTdiff scores. Furthermore, the greatest difference in performance was for the fine-motor gesture component (finger). These
findings support the view that the ability to imitate is influenced by
experience. This is consistent with generalist theories of motor imitation,
which explain imitation in terms of links between perceptual and motor
action-representations that become strengthened through experience. It
is also likely that musical training contributed to the ability to imitate
manual gestures by influencing the personal action repertoire of musicians.

183

Poster Session F
F44

FROM ACTION EXPERTISE TO SHARED ACTION PLANS: INCLUSION OF
NON-CONTROLLED ACTIONS AT THE INTRA- AND INTER-PERSONAL
LEVEL Jessica Chia-Chin Tsai1,2, Günther Knoblich1,2, Natalie Sebanz1,2;
1

Donders Centre for Cognition, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands,

2The Social Mind and Body Group (SOMBY), Radboud University Nijmegen, The

Netherlands — The aim of the present electrophysiological study was to
determine whether incoporating an observed action into one’s action
plan depends on how well the observed action matches one’s motor
expertise, and whether it depends on the observed action being performed by an intentional agent. Participants responded to one of two
color targets appearing at ipisilateral (compatible) and contralateral
(incompatible) sites. Below the stimuli, pictures of chopsticks and a
spoon were arranged in a congruent (spoon left) or incongruent (spoon
right) way with Asian participants’ dining habits. Participants experienced control over the cutlery on the right side –it moved whenever they
responded to targets. When alternative color targets appeared, participants saw the other piece of cutlery move, either by itself (solo condition) or as a consequence of a confederate’s key press (joint condition).
When acting alone, a larger compatibility effect was found when the cutlery was arranged congruently with participants’ dining habits. This can
be explained by the match of the observed actions with one’s motor
expertise. This compatibility effect was correlated with the ERP-N2
amplitude that reflects response selection conflict. The effect of motor
expertise was eliminated in the joint condition, where the compatibility
effects in RTs and ERP-N2 amplitudes were identical regardless of congruency of the cutlery arrangement. In addition, larger P3 amplitudes in
the joint context suggested that additional action control was recruited
when sharing a task with another. Taken together, the findings demonstrate that effects of action expertise and effects of co-action can be dissociated.

F45

IMPULSIVITY EFFECTS ON VOLUNTARY MOTOR PREPARATION Guido

Band1,3, Marlies van Bochove2,3; 1Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition,
2
Ghent University, 3Leiden Institute of Psychology — Trait impulsivity may
be associated with rapid motor activation or with low motor execution
thresholds (jumping the gun). What does this mean for the timing of the
awareness of the intention to act, as a function of impulsivity? If striatal
dopamine levels determine the speed of both access to working memory
and activation of responses, impulsivity would be hypothesized to be
correlated to the onset of intention awareness. The Libet et al. (1983)
experiment was replicated with students with variable degrees of impulsivity: Participants were instructed to voluntarily press a button and
remember the exact moment of intention awareness with the help of
rotating clock hand that they monitored. Readiness potentials (RP) and
lateralized readiness potentials were compared between groups of high
and low impulsive participants. Spontaneous eye blink rate was
recorded as a proxy for individual dopamine levels. High relative to low
impulsive participants showed a strikingly smaller RP amplitude and
shorter onset latency before the action. No group difference was found in
the relative speed of awareness. Interestingly, for both groups the
reported time of awareness almost overlapped with the actual voluntary
action, which is even longer after motor activation onset than in Libet’s
study. As in the Libet et al. study, the data show a temporal gap between
the first signs of intentions and awareness thereof.

F47

BENDING BODIES AND ROBOTS ON THE MOVE: THE INFLUENCE OF
PERCEPTUAL TRAINING ON ACTION PREDICTION Emily S. Cross1,
Waltraud Stadler1, Jim Parkinson1, Simone Schütz-Bosbach1, Wolfgang Prinz1;
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences — It has been

1

proposed that the mirror neuron system (MNS) is involved in negotiating the interaction between action perception and production. Here we
address the theory that the MNS subserves action prediction using a task
where participants observe and predict occluded actions. We probe the

184

Perception & Action: Motor Control
flexibility of this system by using sequences that are beyond participants'
motor repertoires (wind-up toy and gymnastic sequences). In between
pre- and post-training neuroimaging sessions, participants were trained
on a prediction task for a subset of toy and gymnastic videos. Behavioral
findings indicate equivalent performance for trained gymnast and toy
sequences. However, distinct neural systems were engaged by the different agents. These differences were most pronounced for the untrained
compared to trained sequences. Predicting untrained compared to
trained gymnastic sequences recruited inferior parietal lobule and premotor cortex, two core regions of the MNS. In contrast, predicting
trained toy sequences recruited a large cluster in the occipital gyrus. For
trained compared to untrained gymnastic sequences, greater activity
was observed within midline cerebellum. No brain regions emerged
from the comparable contrast for toy sequences. These results suggest
that after perceptual training, less MNS activation is needed despite better task performance. In contrast, unfamiliar human stimuli activated the
MNS and unfamiliar non-human stimuli activated visual cortices.
Together, the findings provide evidence that the motor system is
recruited for predicting complex human actions that one's own body
cannot perform, but not for non-biological, mechanical actions.

F48

NEURAL PROCESSES AND ATTENTION CHARACTERISTICS OF ELITE AND
ADVANCED FENCERS Jin Yan1; 1The Chinese University of Hong Kong —
The purpose of this study is to examine the characteristics of visual
attention and the neural mechanisms underlying the decision-making
processes and response speed and accuracy in professional fencers. In a
visual-motor discrimination task wherein three levels of fencers (experts,
advanced, and regular) determined the attacking and defending skills,
eye movements and event related potentials (ERPs) were simultaneously
recorded. Analyses indicate that the differences between fencer groups
in reaction time (RT) and accuracy were not significant. However, to
identify opponent’s attacking and defending attempts, expert fencers
were faster than lower-level fencers in controlling the visual fixation and
saccade movements (the 1st fixation time, the 2nd fixation time, the 1st
saccade time, mean saccade time, total fixation time, and mean fixation
time). In several selected brain regions, elite fencers showed lower
amplitudes in P1 and N2 and had shorter latencies in N2 and P3. A
lower activation level in P1, N1, N2 and an earlier activation in N2 and
P3 exhibited in the relevant brain regions among experts are interpreted
in the border context the superior fencing performance. In fencing
matches where it is critical to distinguish the skills used by the opponent,
elite fencers directed their visual attention to key body parts more
quickly and accurately. They required fewer cognitive resources for
mental operation than their lower-level peers. Expert fencers have developed adoptive and efficient visual search strategies in gaining critical
information for successful performance.

F49

CAN EYE HELP YOU? AN FMRI STUDY INTO THE EFFECTS OF ‘SOCIAL
GAZE’ ON THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF ACTION CONTROL AS
MEASURED BY A MANUAL STIMULUS-RESPONSE COMPATIBILITY
TASK Leonhard Schilbach1, Simon B. Eickhoff2,3, Edna Cieslik2,3, N. Jon

Shah2, Kai Vogeley1; 1University of Cologne, 2Institute of Neuroscience and
Medicine, Research Centre Juelich, Germany, 3University of Aachen,
Germany — Previous evidence suggests that ‘social gaze’ can cause shifts
in attention, but can also change the perception as well as the manipulation of objects located in the direction of gaze. Consistent with studies
demonstrating that attentional orienting driven by social cues involves a
different neural network than orienting driven by non-social cues, the
latter may, therefore, imply differences in the networks subserving
action control depending upon the stimulus type (social vs non-social).
Here, we sought to explore this hypothesis by using a stimulus-response
compatibility paradigm in which participants are asked to generate spatially congruent or incongruent motor responses to social and non-social
stimuli while undergoing fMRI. Results of this 2x2 factorial design dem-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Motor Control
onstrate that the perception of non-social stimuli – regardless of
response type – leads to activation of extrastriate visual and posterior
parietal cortex, while the perception of social stimuli results in activation
of inferotemporal cortex, the amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex.
Results further demonstrate recruitment of a fronto-parietal network for
the generation of incongruent motor responses regardless of stimulus
type, while congruent responses lead to recruitment of orbitofrontal cortex. Notably, a statistical interaction between the main effects was
observed for incongruent responses to social stimuli in subcortical structures (dorsal striatum, cerebellum, mediodorsal thalamus) and left inferior frontal gyrus. Taken together these results, therefore, highlight
differences in the recruitment of brain areas subserving action control
depending upon the stimulus type with social stimuli resulting in a differential recruitment of subcortical structures previously implicated in
implicit learning and reward-related processing.

F50

A VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENT-BASED PARADIGM FOR IMPROVING
ATTENTION IN SEVERE TBI Assaf Y. Dvorkin1,2, Milan Ramaiya3, Felise

Zollman1,2, Eric Larson1,2, Sonia Pacini1, Nancy Hsu1, James L. Patton1,2,3;
1Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, 2Northwestern University, 3University of
Illinois at Chicago — Attention deficits are frequently observed after trau-

matic brain injury (TBI). Attention has been the target of various types of
treatment and rehabilitation programs for TBI survivors. These methods
have been shown to influence attention in the more chronic and higher
functioning patients. However, studies that test the inpatient population
are scarce. We have developed and performed a preliminary test of a
haptic/graphic paradigm for improving attention and concentration in
early stages of recovery in 15 severe TBI inpatients (Rancho Los Amigos
Scale Levels of IV and V). Patients were tested on two successive days,
where they held the handle of a robot and reached for visual targets that
appeared one at a time in different locations within a three-dimensional
virtual environment. During a reaching movement patients experienced
(1) no haptic feedback, (2) a “break-through” force (similar to popping a
balloon), or (3) a gentle pulse of force - a haptic nudge (if one second
periods of near-zero speed were detected). Results showed that all
patients were able to tolerate the experience, and chose to return for a
second day. Furthermore, results showed improvement in target acquisition rates and average movement time during and across visits in nearly
all patients. Our findings indicate benefits in some patients from the gentle nudge both before and during a movement. These patients regained
concentration and were able to complete the reaching movement. These
findings demonstrate preliminary feasibility and provide the foundation
for a larger, intensive, protracted study with repeated treatment and
clinical outcome evaluations.

F51

HOW UNCONSCIOUS EFFECT INFORMATION AND MOTOR PREDICTION
CONTRIBUTE TO THE SENSE OF AGENCY: EVIDENCE FROM EVENTRELATED BRAIN POTENTIALS Antje Gentsch1,2, Simone Schütz-Bosbach1;
1

Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig,
Germany, 2Berlin School of Mind and Brain, Germany — The sense of agency

refers to the experience of causing one's actions and their sensory effects
and is assumed to be generated by a comparison between predicted and
actual action effects. It has been suggested that an internal forward
model computes these predictions on the basis of efferent information
which can be used to attenuate sensory effects of self-produced movements and in this way distinguish them from externally generated
effects. According to another view we infer agency independent of efferent information from observing covariances between prior thoughts and
sensory events. Even though there is evidence for both accounts, their
interrelation is so far poorly understood. The present study investigated
whether suppression of the neurophysiological response to self- compared to externally generated action effects is influenced not only by
internal efferent information but also by external preview information
about the action effect. We measured event-related potentials (ERP) to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session F
visual effect stimuli in a forced-choice response task and an observation
task, under different conditions of unconscious effect-priming and
motor prediction. As expected, the N1 amplitude of the visual ERP was
selectively reduced when action effects were self-generated. This N1
attenuation effect, as well as the explicit agency judgment, was furthermore modulated by predictability and priming of the action effect. These
findings suggest that both efferent information and action effect anticipation provide important cues for the conscious experience of agency.

F52

GENOMIC IMPRINTING EFFECT ON CORTICOSPINAL EXCITABILITY IN
TURNER SYNDROME Sara Tremblay1,2, Jean-François Lepage1,2, Maryse

Lassonde1,2, Cheri L. Deal2, Hugo Théoret1,2; 1Universite de Montreal, Québec,
Canada, 2Centre de recherche du CHU Ste-Justine, Québec, Canada — Turner

Syndrome (TS) is a genetic disorder associated with partial or complete
absence of one X chromosome in phenotypic females. Despite an IQ in
the normal range, TS individuals typically show cognitive, physical as
well as motor abnormalities. Interestingly, a genomic imprinting effect, a
process by which genes are expressed in a parent-of-origin specific manner, is thought to influence cognitive and physiological traits in this population. The present study sought to investigate the motor
neurophysiology of TS individuals with regards to genomic imprinting
effects. Sixteen TS individuals (6Xpat, 10Xmat) and 12 matched controls
underwent a TMS assessment of corticospinal excitability including
short-interval intracortical inhibition (SICI), intracortical facilitation
(ICF), long-interval cortical inhibition (LICI), motor threshold (MT) and
motor cortex excitability during action observation. Imprinting trends
were found on TMS measures of long-interval intracortical inhibition
(LICI) where 45,Xmat individuals showed less GABAB-mediated motor
cortex inhibition than 45,Xpat participants. MT, SICI and ICF showed no
imprinting trends and values were similar to those observed in healthy
controls. No impriting trends or differences with the control group were
found for action observation. These data suggest an effect of parent-oforigin X chromosome on corticospinal excitability in Turner Syndrome.

F53

EFFECTS OF UTTERANCE RHYTHM ON SPEECH PLANNING: AN MEG
STUDY Sam Tilsen1, John Houde2, Emily Moeng1, Kevin Sitek1, Srikantan

Nagarajan2; 1University of California, Berkeley, 2University of California, San
Francisco — Speech rhythmic processing has previously been associated
with activation in the right-hemisphere superior temporal gyrus, but it is
unclear whether low-frequency theta (4-8 Hz) and alpha (8-12 Hz) band
oscillations are related to the behavioral rhythms of a planned utterance.
The rhythmic patterns of target utterances in a prepared speech/working memory task were controlled in order to contrast metrically regular
utterances (four trisyllabic nonsense words, each with a stressedunstressed-unstressed metrical pattern) with phonologically-matched
metrically irregular utterances. Data were acquired from 8 participants
using a 275-channel whole-head biomagnetometer (CTF Systems, Vancouver BC) and analyzed in the time-frequency domain using Nutmeg
(bil.ucsf.edu/nutmeg). During the later part of the preparation phase,
the majority of subjects exhibited significantly more induced synchronization in theta (4-8 Hz) and alpha (8-12 Hz) bands in right-STG on the
rhythmically irregular trials compared to the regular ones. This difference is suspected to arise from greater effort required to maintain the
irregular pattern in working memory. In contrast, at the onset of and
prior to the preparation phase, subjects tended to exhibit in STG bilaterally a relatively greater alpha thru high-gamma band (8-135 Hz) synchronization on regular trials. This is suggested to reflect facilitation—
due to rhythmic regularity—of the initial encoding of the utterance in
working memory. Behavioral results reinforce these interpretations:
error rates were lower and rates of articulation were faster on the rhythmically regular trials. Further, the correlation between theta and alpha
activity in left and right STG was predictive of error rates in the task.

185

Poster Session F

Perception & Action: Motor Control

F54

F56

SOMATOTOPIC
REPRESENTATION
OF
LARYNGEAL
AND
SUPRALARYNGEAL
ARTICULATORY
MOVEMENTS
IN
THE
SENSORIMOTOR CORTEX Krystyna Grabski1, Laurent Lamalle2,3,

AUDITORY FEEDBACK DURING VOCAL PRODUCTION IS COMPARED TO
PREVIOUS Colin Hawco1,2, Jeffery A. Jones2; 1McGill University, 2Wilfrid

Coriandre Vilain1, Jean-Luc Schwartz1, Nathalie Vallée1, Irène Troprès2,4,
Monica Baciu5, Jean-François Le Bas6, Marc Sato1; 1Gipsa-Lab, CNRS &
Grenoble Universités, France, 2Institut Fédératif de Recherche n°1 “RMN
Biomédicale et Neurosciences”, CHU de Grenoble, France, 3INSERM, France,
4Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France, 5Laboratoire de Psychologie et
NeuroCognition, CNRS & Université Pierre Mendès France, Grenoble, France,
6
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Grenoble, France — Since Penfield’s seminal work on electrocortical stimulation, brain imaging studies have confirmed a general somatotopic functional organization related to parts of
the human body in the sensorimotor cortex. However, few studies have
investigated the possibility to discriminate distinct representation sites
of laryngeal and supralaryngeal articulations. In the present study, we
used functional magnetic resonance imaging to further test a possible
somatotopic organization of larynx, lip, jaw and tongue articulatory
movements. In order to minimize movement-related imaging artifacts, a
sparse sampling acquisition technique was used, where the motor task
occurred during a silent interval between successive image acquisitions.
To delimitate cerebral activations specific to supralaryngeal articulations, we had participants perform independently lip protrusion, jaw
lowering and tongue retroflex movements. Additionally, for laryngeal
activities, we looked for cerebral activation corresponding to the production of the /i/ vowel. For all movements, a group analysis revealed
strong bilateral activations within the sensorimotor cortex as well as
within the supplementary motor area and the anterior cingulate gyrus,
the inferior frontal gyrus, the insula, the inferior parietal lobule, the
putamen, the thalamus and the cerebellum. At the individual level, a
dorso-ventral bilateral somatotopic organization of lip, jaw, larynx and
tongue articulators, respectively, was detectable in the sensorimotor cortex and could be spatially discriminated for the great majority of the participants. The individually proven possibility to differentiate the
sensorimotor representation sites of lip, jaw, larynx and tongue movements is of particular interest for studies investigating speech motor control and disorders as well as cortical plasticity after neurosurgery.

F55

SEX DIFFERENCES IN MOVEMENT SEQUENCING AS RELATED TO
COMPLEXITY Gabriel Leonard1, Joelle Crane1, Alain Ptito1, Catherine

Evans2; 1Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, 2University College,
Oxford — Studies in human and nonhuman primates indicate that lesions
involving the frontal cortex impair the performance of complex motor
acts even when the precentral gyrus is spared. Of particular interest is
the fact that unilateral lesions of the supplementary motor cortex give
rise to deficits on bimanual co-ordination tasks in which the two hands
must perform different actions simultaneously (Brinkman 1981). Using
the Thurstone Tapping Task, we have demonstrated this type of discoordination in human subjects with frontal lobe lesions (Leonard, Milner, and Jones, 1988). We concluded that the deficits displayed by the
frontal lobe subjects were related to difficulty in switching from an external form of control (reliance on visual and kinesthetic feedback for the
guidance of each movement) to an internal form of control such that the
subjects’ internal representation of the complex movement sequence are
not efficiently encoded. In normal subjects, we showed that sex differences recorded in simple motor speed disappear as task demands
increase; men are faster for simple repetitive tapping, but no sex differences are evidenced for unimanual or bimanual sequential tapping. We
have now computerized this device and will present our most recent
findings on 300 normal subjects. The findings confirm robust sex effects
in rapid repetitive movements but when sequencing of movements is
required, both unimanual and bimanual, the male advantage disappears.

186

Laurier University — During speech and singing, auditory feedback is used
to ensure that motor output matches expectation, and to correct online
for errors. When speakers hear the fundamental frequency (F0) of their
voice altered, they shift their F0 in the direction opposite to the perturbation. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded while participants
vocalized an /ah/ sound for 3 seconds. Participants either matched a
target note or produced at a habitual pitch during separate experimental
sessions. Auditory feedback was shifted by 0 cents, 25 cents, 50 cents, 100
cents, or 200 cents for a 100 ms period in the middle of the utterance. A
mismatch negativity (MMN) was observed, with the amplitude positively related to the size of the perturbations. No differences were found
between sessions. These results suggest that auditory feedback is compared to the F0 prior to shift, rather than to a specific F0 target (such as
the target note). A second behavioural study confirmed this interpretation. Participants vocalized, matching a target note. In half of all trials, a
100 cent perturbation was introduced prior to vocalization. A mid-utterance perturbation could then be introduced by removing the existing
perturbation for 500 ms. In control trials, a mid-utterance perturbation
was introduced without an onset perturbation. F0 compensation to midutterance perturbations was identical to onset and control trials, and was
always smaller than the compensation to the onset shift. This confirms
that the baseline, preshift F0 is used as the comparator when detecting
errors in auditory feedback.
F57

DIFFERENTIAL ROLES OF THE FRONTAL AND PARIETAL CORTEX IN THE
PREPARATION OF EXOGENOUS AND ENDOGENOUS SACCADES Julia

Bender1, Kyeong-Jin Tark2, Norbert Kathmann1, Clayton E. Curtis2; 1Humboldt
Universitaet zu Berlin, Institut für Psychologie, Abteilung Klinische Psychologie,
Berlin, 2NYU, Center for Neural Science, New York University, NY — Although

externally as well as internally guided eye movements allow us to flexibly explore the visual environment, their differential neural mechanisms
remain elusive. A better understanding of these neural mechanisms will
help us understand the control of action and help us to elucidate the
nature of cognitive deficits in certain psychiatric populations (e.g.
schizophrenia) that show increased latencies in voluntary but not visually guided saccades. Both the frontal eye field (FEF) and the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) have been associated with control of eye movements.
However, it remains unknown what differential contributions the two
areas make to the programming of visually guided and voluntary saccades. In this study we tested the hypotheses that 1. IPS has a distinct
neural representation of visually guided saccades and 2. voluntary saccades need stronger FEF control by scanning thirteen healthy subjects
with fMRI while they generated exogenously and endogenously cued
delayed saccades. After a cue (exogenous = peripheral dot; endogenous
= arrow at central fixation), subjects prepared an eye movement that was
delayed until a go response was given. We used Multi-Voxel Pattern
Analysis to test whether patterns of preparatory activation could be used
to predict the direction of the planned eye movement and whether the
movement was exogenously or endogenously guided. Preliminary
results indicate that patterns in the IPS better predicted exogenously
cued saccades and patterns in the FEF better predicted endogenously
cued saccades. The results support the hypothesis that the FEF and IPS
make distinct contributions to the control of eye movements.

F58
Kent1,
Benjamin Pruce , D. Michael Bailey , Jennifer Vollmer , Sharlene Newman1,
William Hetrick1; 1Indiana University — Eyeblink conditioning (EBC) is a

NEURAL CORRELATES OF EYEBLINK CONDITIONING Jerillyn
1

1

1

widely used measure of associative learning in both animal and human
studies, with a well preserved response across species. The delay EBC
procedure consists of an unconditioned stimulus (airpuff) that elicits an
unconditioned response (eyeblink) being paired with a co-terminating

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Motor Control
conditioned stimulus, such as a tone. With repeated paring of the airpuff
and tone, a subject will display a conditioned response (eyeblink) to the
tone before delivery of the airpuff. Animal and human lesion studies
indicate a critical role of the cerebellum in delay EBC. However, the neural circuitry of EBC in healthy humans has yet to be fully elucidated. The
purpose of the current study was to identify the neural correlates of EBC
in healthy human participants using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI). Healthy young adults were scanned in a 3T Sieman’s
TRIO during a delay EBC procedure. The experiment consisted of 4, 11.5
minute runs. The first run was a pseudo-conditioning run in which 26
tones and 26 airpuffs were randomly presented. The remaining runs
were conditioning runs in which 52 tone/airpuff pairs were presented
with a 400 ms tone and a co-terminating 50 ms airpuff to the left eye.
Group maps comparing the last block of conditioning to the first showed
increased activation in the left (ipsilateral) cerebellum and the left temporal/occipital cortex. The results support the theory that the cerebellum
is crucial for EBC, and demonstrate the feasibility of measuring the neural activity associated with EBC using fMRI.

F59

CAN IPSILATERAL MOVEMENT REACTION TIME ADVANTAGES BE
EXPLAINED BY WITHIN VERSUS BETWEEN HEMISPHERE
PROCESSING? David Carey1; 1University of Aberdeen — Movement made
to targets on the same side of the body midline are faster and more accurate than movements made to targets on the opposite side of the body.
These “ipsilateral” advantages are typically interpreted as a result of
within-hemisphere control of the movement However, these effects may
follow biomechanical differences between ipsilateral and contralateral
movements (Carey & Otto-de Harrt, Neuropsychologia, 39, 885-861,
2001; Carey, Hargreaves and Goodale, Exp Brain Res, 112, 496-504, 1996).
Barthélémy and Boulinguez (Exp Brain Res, 147, 305-312, 2002) have
argued that reaction times may be an exception to a biomechanical
explanation, which is more sensibly applied to post movement onset
measures such as the peak velocity and duration. To evaluate their
claim, we used an antipointing-pointing paradigm. Twenty-six right
handed participants reached in separate antipointng and pointing blocks
to one of six randomly appearing targets and were recorded at 240 Hz. In
pointing, we found advantages for ipsilateral targets, which then
allowed for a test of the within versus between hemisphere model using
antipointing. In antipointing, this advantage reversed, providing strong
support for a more biomechanical explanation, such as the inertial
anisotropy account. In addition, the same effects were found for duration and peak velocity. Although within versus between effects are
found in some studies, when whole arm movements which vary substantially across the workspace are required, biomechanical effects dominate.

F60

RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN
COGNITIVE
ACTIVITY
AND
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAM IN HEALTHY ADULTS 60 YEARS AND
OLDER Milene Roca-Stappung1, Thalía Fernández, Thalía Harmony, Judith
Becerra, Marbella Espino; 1Instituto de Neurobiologia, UNAM, 2Universidad
Autónoma de Querétaro — There are few studies about healthy, elder indi-

viduals, and yet fewer advocating to the study of their EEG. This group
will soon be a wide part of the population, therefore, research is imperative in this field. This study had two goals: a) to describe the results of
the Wechsler Adult Inteligence Scale - Third Revision and of the values
obtained from quantitative analysis of the EEG in healthy adults 60 years
and older, and b) to explore the relationship between the WAIS-III scores
and EEG values in this group. Referential EEG was recorded in the 19
leads of the 10-20 System and WAIS-III was applied to healthy, active
adults (60-84 y.o.). A correlation analysis was made between the Z absolute power (AP) and relative power (RP) values of delta, theta, alpha,
and beta bands and WAIS-III scores. Lower values of delta AP, and delta
and theta RP, were significantly related to better scores in the WAIS-III
subtest scores, while an unexpected relationship was observed between
higher theta AP values and performance subtests. There were few signif-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session F
icant relationships accounting to alpha and beta activity, but generally,
better cognitive performance was associated with higher alpha and beta
AP and RP values. These results suggest that it would be important to
include the WAIS-III in neuropsychological evaluations done in this age
group, paying special attention to information, similarities, and letternumber sequencing verbal subtests, and picture completition, block
design, and symbol search performance subtests, which correlated most
significantly with EEG values. Supported by PAPIIT-ES216707.

F61

EYE CONTACT ENHANCES MIMICRY OF INTRANSITIVE HAND
MOVEMENTS Yin Wang1, Roger Newport1, Antonia Hamilton1; 1School of
Psychology, University of Nottingham, UK — Mimicry and eye contact both
play a pivotal role in social interaction. When two people meet in a bar, a
subtle interplay of social behaviours, such as eye contact and unconscious mimicry of actions plays an important role in how much the individuals like each other by the end of the evening. However, it is not
known how these different social signals interact. Here, we adopt a rapid
mimicry paradigm, to test if eye contact can modulate mimicry on a second by second timescale. We adopted a stimulus-response compatibility
paradigm used by Heyes and colleagues, in which participants respond
to a hand-opening or hand-closing stimulus by either opening or closing
their own hand in different blocks. Before each hand action trial, we presented a movie of a woman naturally performing a head movement
which resulted in direct gaze or averted gaze. Two experiments involving 43 participants consistently demonstrated that direct eye contact rapidly and specifically enhances mimicry of hand actions. In particular,
direct gaze facilitates the mimicry of hand action by 15 msec, compared
to averted gaze. Control conditions rule out an effect of spatial attention,
suggesting that eye contact is more than just an arousal and attentional
signal. Our findings have important implications for understanding the
role of eye contact as a controlling signal in human non verbal social
behaviour, as well as a facilitative signal in social learning.
F62

THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF FITTS’S LAW IN AN ACTION OBSERVATION
TASK: AN FMRI STUDY Terry Eskenazi1, Pia Rotshtein2, Marc Grosjean3,

Guenther Knoblich1; 1Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands,
2University of Birmingham, UK, 3Leibniz Research Centre for Working
neuroEnvironment and Human Factors, Dortmund, Germany — Previous
imaging studies support the assumption of a strong link between perception and action, demonstrating that the motor system is involved
when others’ actions are observed. One question that is still open to
debate is which aspect of observed actions engages the motor system.
Proposed alternatives include movement kinematics and the context of a
movement. The present fMRI study used Fitts’s law to disentangle different movement aspects. Fitts’s law postulates that the difficulty of any
biological movement (ID) is a function of the distance to the target (A)
and the target width (W). In an action observation task, ID of the
observed action was manipulated orthogonally to W (by using 5 different As). The results revealed increasing activation in primary motor cortex, supplementary motor area, and basal ganglia in response to
increasing ID levels. Thus activation of the motor system during action
observation is driven by how difficult it would be for the observer to perform the action.

F63

DISSOCIATING THE ROLES OF THE LATERAL AND MEDIAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX IN MEDIATING SPEED-ACCURACY TRADE-OFFS DURING
RESPONSE PREPARATION IN A GO/NO-GO TASK Ryan Blagdon1, Chris

Bowen2, Benjamin Rusak3, Jason Ivanoff1; 1Saint Mary's University, Halifax,
NS, 2National Research Council Institute for Biodiagnostics (Atlantic), Halifax,
NS, 3Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS — The speed-accuracy trade-off

(SAT) refers to the inverse relationship between the speed and accuracy
of decisions. We used slow event-related fMRI to isolate the effects of
SAT on neural activation associated with different stages of decision-

187

Poster Session F
making. Participants received a sequence of three different visual signals
which indicated i) whether to emphasize speed (‘SPD’) or accuracy
(‘ACC’) in responding; ii) the correct response (a left or right key-press,
indicated by the gender of a face image); and iii) whether the correct
response was to be executed or withheld ('Go' or ‘No-Go’, indicated by
an image of either a single- or two-storey house). Consistent with previous research, SAT instructions did not have a pronounced effect on activation in posterior sensory regions, while frontal regions were much
more sensitive to the SAT instructions. Activation in the medial frontal
cortex was greater after a SPD cue than an ACC cue, before presentation
of the response cue (i.e., face), also consistent with previous research. In
contrast, activation in lateral frontal regions increased more for ACC trials than SPD trials only after the response cue (i.e., the face image)
appeared. These results suggest that the medial and lateral frontal
regions are differentially engaged by instructions to emphasize the
speed versus accuracy of responding during different phases of perceptual decision-making.

F64

IDENTIFICATION OF THE AGENT MATTERS: N1 COMPONENT IS
MODULATED BY THE SELF-OTHER DIFFERENTIATION Pamela Baess1,

Antje Holländer1, Wolfgang Prinz1; 1Max-Planck-Institute of Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — Previous studies have shown that

perceiving another’s action activates to a certain degree the corresponding representations in the observer’s action system. With the means of
electroencephalography (EEG), these differences were reported in the
motor preparation potentials or following the action-associated stimuli.
However, less is known about when this co-representation of the other’s
action occurs. In the present EEG study, we have investigated how performing a task with another person affects the processes of the identification of the agent (“my turn”, “other’s turn”, “no-one’s turn”) and the
preparation for the appropriate response (left hand vs. right hand).
Therefore we used a paradigm where the processes of the identification
of the agent and the preparation of the response before the action-associated stimuli (Go-Signal) can be disentangled. Reaction times and eventrelated potentials were measured while participants performed a Go/
No-Go task alone (single condition) and with another person (joint condition). In both conditions, the N1 response was smallest for action-associated stimuli that referred to one’s own action. Further, the N1
component was differently modulated in the joint vs. the single condition. In the joint condition, the N1 response for the other’s action was
smaller compared to the one for no-one’s action. This pattern did not
occur in the single condition when the participants performed the task
alone. Thus, the N1 amplitude modulation might reflect the strength of
the action-associations. This gives evidence that the identification of
one’s own action vs. the other’s action already modulates early processing stages before the actual response.

F65

DEALING WITH ACTIONS OR DEALING WITH ACTORS? FROM MOTOR
SIMULATION TO THEORY OF MIND Moritz F. Wurm1, D. Yves von Cramon1,

Ricarda I. Schubotz1; 1Max Planck Institute for Neurological Research —

Action observation is usually associated with activity in the higher
motor system, while reflecting about other agent's mental states engages
the so-called theory of mind (ToM) network. Whereas recent studies on
action observation suggested that such reflections about mental states
are triggered only for implausible or new actions, the ToM network may
be also active during observation of normal actions, but may be obscured
by contrast building. In the present fMRI study we tested the hypothesis
that, first, an allocentric perspective on normal actions, and second, the
sight of the actor's face suffices to evoke ToM activity. Observing actions
from an egocentric perspective resulted in increased activity of the
higher motor system, whereas allocentrically perceived actions additionally enhanced activity in ToM areas, more precisely the temporo-parietal
junction (TPJ) bilaterally, the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC)
and the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC). Among these areas, the presence of a face further enhanced activity in vmPFC and PCC. Moreover,

188

Perception & Action: Motor Control
vmPFC and the precuneus were enhanced when the actor differed from
that in the preceding trial. These findings indicate that considerations
about other agent's mental states, as far as reflected by activation of the
ToM network, can arise during observation of normal everyday actions,
and that an allocentric perspective, the sight of the actor's face and the
presentation of a new actor function as potential triggers.

F66

NEURAL CHANGES FOR SPEECH MOTOR ADAPTATION Vincent
Gracco1,2,5, Douglas Shiller1,3, Marc Sato1,4, Shari Baum1,2; 1Centre for
Research on Language, Mind and Brain, 2McGill University, 3l'Université de
Montréal, 4Université Stendhal, 5Haskins Laboratories — Speech motor adaptation refers to changes in motor output in response to short but intensive periods of practice under feedback altering conditions. Speech
motor adaptation has been evaluated behaviorally in response to manipulations of auditory and orosensory feedback, yielding indirect evidence
of short term neural plasticity. In a recent behavioral study, we reported
compelling evidence for a strong sensorimotor coupling evidenced by
simultaneous changes in both speech motor output and speech perception. Here we focus on the neural changes associated with sensorimotor
adaptation. Functional MRI data were acquired while subjects produced
single words in the scanner. After acquiring baseline trials, auditory
feedback was gradually altered (3 semitone shift) over thirty trials and
then maintained for 120 trials. Changes in neural activation and acoustic
speech output were assessed following the initial feedback manipulation, and over the course of the practice period. Comparison of initial
and adapted periods revealed increased activations in the inferior frontal
gyrus extending to the ventral premotor and primary motor cortex, in
the anterior part of the insular cortex and in the superior and middle
temporal gyri bilaterally. These increases gradually subsided over the
course of the practice while the acoustic evidence suggested maintained
compensation for the altered feedback. These results reflect the interactive nature of speech production and speech perception and suggest that
speech motor adaptation results in a change in synaptic weights over the
course of a single experimental session. Sensorimotor adaptation provides a robust means to assess the dynamics of brain plasticity for
speech.

F67

NEUROANATOMICAL CORRELATES OF LONG-TERM VOCAL TRAINING

Boris Kleber1,2,3, Christina Moll1, Ralf Veit1, Christian Gaser4, Martin Lotze5,
Niels Birbaumer1,6; 1University of Tübingen, Germany, 2McGill University,
Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, Canada, 3International Laboratory
for Brain, Music, and Sound Research, Montreal, Canada, 4University of Jena,
Germany, 5University of Greifswald, Germany, 6Ospedale San Camillo, Venezia,
Italy — Playing an instrument or singing at a professional level requires
the perfect integration of cognitive processes with highly complex sensorimotor coordination. Studies have shown that playing an instrument
for many years results in task-specific gray matter changes (i.e. cortical
expansion) in areas related to sensorimotor control, right auditory cortex, as well as increased cerebellar volume and a larger anterior corpus
callosum. In contrast to instrumentalists, professionally trained singers
utilize a motor system that already operates at a comparably high level
of motor complexity during everyday activities, such as speaking. However, many years of training are still required to achieve superior levels
of voice control. To date, very little is known about the neuroanatomical
consequences of long-term vocal skill training. In a recent functional
MRI experiment, we demonstrated that expertise in classical singing correlated with increased blood oxygenation in bilateral somatosensory cortex, inferior parietal lobe and the cerebellum. This suggests that as they
gain experience, singers increasingly recruit proprioceptive information
from the laryngeal muscles for controlling their vocal output. Based on
these results, the present study used voxel-based morphometry (VBM)
to analyze gray matter differences in participants with and without vocal
training. We compared 27 professionally trained vocal students with 27
age and gender matched non-singers. We found that long-term vocal

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Motor Control

Poster Session F

training is reflected by cortical expansion in both the somatotopic larynx
area in the right primary somatosensory cortex, and in the right primary
auditory cortex. Results are discussed within concepts of music processing and cognitive control of vocal motor function.

F70

F68

Gallinat2, Norbert Kathmann1; 1Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 2Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin — Slowed reaction time has been documented

EFFECTS OF AEROBIC FITNESS ON AGING RELATED CHANGES IN
INTERHEMISPHERIC COMMUNICATION Keith McGregor1,2, Zvinka

Zlatar1,2, Kleim Erin1, Bauer Andrew2, Phan Stephanie1,2, Seeds Lauren1,
Kleim Jeffrey1,2, White Keith1,2, Crosson Bruce1,2; 1Malcom Randall VA Medical
Center, Gainesville, FL, 2University of Florida — Aerobic fitness has been

offered as a potential buffer against aging related changes in the human
neural system. In the human motor system, recent evidence from neuroimaging and neurophysiology has indicated that aging may be associated with a loss of interhemispheric inhibition during unimanual task
activity. We set out to test the effects of aerobic fitness on interhemispheric communication using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)
and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) on a cross-section of
15 highly fit and 15 sedentary elderly (>60 years) adults. Data from 15
younger adults (18-37 years) were also acquired for comparison. Participants engaged in unimanual fMRI (index finger to thumb opposition)
and TMS (ipsilateral silent period) tasks previously shown sensitive to
changes in interhemispheric communication. In fMRI, sedentary elderly
adults recruited motor hand areas in the primary motor cortex bilaterally, while younger and fit elderly adults showed negative BOLD activity in the ipsilateral motor hand bump indicating a potential inhibition of
this cortical area. During TMS, both younger adults and fit older adults
evidenced significantly longer ipsilateral silent periods than did the sedentary elderly group. These data indicate that aerobic fitness may serve
to mitigate a loss of interhemispheric inhibition in the motor system.

F69

SENSORIMOTOR ABILITIES AMONG EARLY AND LATE-TRAINED
MUSICIANS Jennifer A. Bailey1,2, Amanda Daly1,2, Virginia Penhune1,2;
1Concordia

University, 2International Laboratory of Brain, Music, and Sound
Research (BRAMS) — Previous work from our laboratory (Watanabe et al.,
2007) demonstrated that musicians who began training before age 7
(early-trained; ET) outperformed those who began after age 7 (latetrained; LT) on a visuomotor synchronization task, when controlling for
years of formal training and experience. Another study revealed that ET
musicians outperformed LT musicians on an auditory rhythm synchronization task as well (Bailey and Penhune, in press). Additionally,
despite no group differences on cognitive measures, performance on the
rhythm task correlated with individual working memory scores across
musicians. These results provide support to the idea of a “sensitive”
period for sensorimotor learning via musical training that cannot be
attributed to group differences in cognitive ability. An important question to be addressed is whether performance differences would be
observed on other musical tasks. The present study addresses this question by comparing ET and LT musicians on the auditory rhythm synchronization task (Chen et al., 2008; Bailey and Penhune, in press), a
melody discrimination task (Foster et al., 2009), and a pitch naming task
(Bermudez et al., 2008). In addition, cognitive measures were administered. While no group differences were observed on the cognitive measures, the ET group outperformed the LT group in terms of their rhythm
synchronization abilities and transposed melody discrimination abilities;
however, no group differences were observed on the pitch task. These
results will be discussed in terms of support for a “sensitive” period for
sensorimotor learning via musical training.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

RESPONSE SELECTION DEFICITS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA: EVIDENCE FROM
LATERALIZED MOVEMENT-RELATED AND ATTENTION-RELATED BRAIN
POTENTIALS Benedikt Reuter1, David Möllers1,2, Lisa Kloft1, Jürgen

consistently in research on schizophrenia. Here we follow the hypothesis
that the slowing reflects a generalized deficit in response selection,
including the activation of simple manual responses. Recent findings of
increased onset latencies of the lateralized readiness potential (LRP) in
schizophrenia patients might indicate a slowing of response selection
processes but could also be due to delayed allocation of attention to
imperative stimuli. In the present study with 20 schizophrenia patients
and 20 matched healthy control subjects, we use a Simon-type spatial
compatibility task for combined assessment of onset latencies of the LRP
and the N2pc of the event-related potential – an electrophysiological correlate of the focusing of attention. The data suggest that this methodology is suitable to dissociate impaired response selection from normal
attention allocation processes in schizophrenia.

F71

EFFECT ANTICIPATION AND SENSORY SUPPRESSION IN VOLUNTARY
ACTION Gethin Hughes1, Florian Waszak1; 1Université Paris Descartes — A
recent study (Bass et al. 2008) showed that the frontocentral auditory N1
event-related potential (ERP) component was suppressed for auditory
tones following a voluntary action, as compared to tones presented
alone. They concluded, in line with evidence from previous functional
imaging studies (Blakemore et al., 1998), that cortical responses to action
effects are suppressed. The aims of the current study were two-fold.
Firstly, we aimed to replicate these sensory suppression effects in the
visual domain. An advantage of using visual stimuli was to enable us to
disentangle frontocentral ERP activity associated with motor action from
posterior ERP components associated with the visual stimulus. Secondly, we included a new comparison to explore differences during
motor preparation between voluntary actions associated with an actioneffect and voluntary actions for which no effect was delivered. Our
results confirmed a significantly larger readiness potential for actions for
which a subsequent effect was expected. This difference may reflect the
ERP marker of an efference copy which codes for the consequences of an
action. In relation to sensory suppression, we observed no significant
differences between “action-to-effect” and “effect only” conditions in the
visual P1 component. However, we found significantly reduced frontocentral negativity from around 150ms after stimulus onset, as well as a
reduction in the parietal P300, for action-to-effect trials. These findings
suggest that although the initial sensory consequences of visual action
effects were not suppressed, later processing of the visual stimuli is
attenuated when it appears in response to a voluntary action.

F72

INTEGRATING BODY AND MIND: P3 MODULATION SUPPORTS AN
EMBODIED VIEW OF MENTAL ROTATION Jennifer Stevens1, Nathaniel

Lucena2, Whitney Cole3; 1College of William & Mary, 2Washington University,
3
New York University — Embodied cognition portrays cognitive processing

as an artifact of the state of the body. Specifically, mental performance
can be facilitated when the body is engaged in posture or action consistent with the cognitive task. Some studies demonstrate this facilitatory
effect in behavioral paradigms through increases in processing time
when there is incongruency between cognitive task and current body
position. The present study uses the event related potential (ERP) signal
to examine how this effect may be realized at the cortical level. Participants were asked to identify stimulus images presented at various
angles of rotation as either left or right hands. Compared to controls,
participants who completed the task with hands confined displayed two
specific waveform deviations: increased N1 amplitude overall and a
decreased P300 in the left hemisphere. The significant between-group
ERP differences occurred despite the two groups’ similarity in reaction

189

Poster Session F

Long-Term Memory: Skill Learning

time-angle of orientation functions. These results reveal a body-up modulation of the cortical signal mediating the cognitive task. Specifically,
when the observer’s stimulus-relevant hands were confined the P300,
identified as a marker for motor inhibition, was decreased even though
overall processing time was unaffected.

F75

F73

of auditory feedback during piano performance can be profoundly disruptive to performance. Furthermore, different alterations can yield different behavioral effects. Whereas alterations of feedback synchrony
disrupt performed timing, alterations of feedback pitch contents can disrupt accuracy. These effects suggest that sensorimotor associations are
stratified with respect to timing and sequencing (cf. Pfordresher, 2006).
The current research tested whether these behavioral dissociations correlate with differences in brain activity. Twenty pianists performed simple
melodies while being scanned in a 3-Tesla magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) scanner. In different conditions they experienced normal auditory
feedback, altered auditory feedback (asynchronous delays or altered
pitches), or control conditions that excluded movement or sound. Behavioral results replicated past findings, summarized above. With respect to
neuroimaging data, reliable effects emerged when contrasting conditions with auditory feedback (normal or altered) against control conditions that involved playing without feedback (which reveals auditory
activity). While playing with normal feedback, primary centers of activity were in the primary and secondary auditory cortices. Performances
with asynchronous delays led to increases in areas associated with working memory (e.g., BA 46), whereas performances with disruptive pitch
alterations simply led to increases within areas also active during normal
feedback. Disruptive effects may therefore follow from different neural
responses to altered feedback. For asynchronous data, disruption of timing may lead to compensatory activity in working memory. By contrast,
alterations of pitch may lead to subtler neural effects based on synchronization with actions; disruption may result because the brain does not
fully distinguish altered from normal feedback.

HIGH GAMMA BAND SYNCHRONY CONTRIBUTES TO ACTION-INDUCED
MODULATION OF AMBIGUOUS MOTION Kelly
Jantzen1,
Benjamin

Richardson1, Sarah North1, Mathew Seifert1, Charles Odell1, Aaron Tripp1,
Lawrence Symons1; 1Western Washington University — A growing body of

evidence reveals that parietal and prefrontal cortex moderate the direct
mapping between perception and action. Although focus has been on
how perception can influence action via motor resonance, common coding theories predict that action can also influence perception via perceptual resonance. Such hypotheses have been supported by behavioral
work demonstrating that the perceived direction of ambiguous apparent
motion is “captured” by the direction of an accompanying hand movement. The current study used EEG to investigate the neural basis of this
“perceptual capture” of apparent motion. Participants made circular joystick movements while viewing an array of dots arranged in a circular
pattern. The display was rotated such that the perceived direction of
motion could be either ambiguous (A) or forced (F) to occur in the same
direction as the movement. In A, movement captured the perception
such that rotation was perceived in the same direction as joystick rotation. Additional conditions in which participants moved (M) in the
absence of apparent motion and viewed ambiguous motion (AM) in the
absence of movement were also included. High gamma band (70-120
Hz) activity recorded over contralateral parietal-frontal sites was greatest for the F condition and lowest for the AM condition, with the A and
M condition falling somewhere between. Thus it appears that gamma
synchrony reflects directional specificity of the apparent motion. We
hypothesize that gamma band synchrony within parietal-premotor circuits underlies sensorimotor coupling and the ideomotor influences on
perceptually ambiguous stimuli.

F74

MOTOR AND VISUAL EXPERIENCE REDUCES IMPLICIT ANALYSIS
RELATED AREAS OF CORTEX Olave Krigolson1, Suzan Nouwens1, Todd

Handy1; 1University of British Columbia — Previous research has demonstrated that motor experience leads to reduced activation in visual and
motor regions of cortex during passive viewing of graspable objects.
Here, we sought to affirm whether this reduction in activation was actually due to motor experience or simply due to increased visual familiarity. Participants were either scanned with functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) or had event-related brain potentials (ERP) recorded
while passively viewing novel graspable objects (rock climbing holds) or
novel control objects (size and colour matched wooden blocks). Following the initial viewing session, participants completed a six week training program during which they gained motor experience with the
graspable objects and visual familiarity with the control objects. Subsequent to this, participants were scanned again with fMRI or had ERP
data recorded during passive viewing of the graspable and control
objects. Our fMRI results demonstrate that motor experience leads to
reduce activation in motor regions of cortex, whereas visual familiarity
leads to a reduction in activation in visual processing areas of the brain.
In a similar fashion, learning related changes were observed in the ERP
data with regard to components associated with visual processing of
objects. Specifically, we found a learning related reduction in visual ERP
component amplitude which we believe relates to increased object familiarity. In sum, these data imply that motor and/or visual experience
leads to reduced processing in the related areas of cortex during passive
viewing of graspable objects.

190

NEURAL STRATIFICATION OF SEQUENCING AND TIMING IN AUDITORY
FEEDBACK? AN FMRI STUDY Peter Pfordresher1, Jennifer Cox1, Michelle
Andrews1, James Mantell1, Steven Brown2, Robert Zivadinov1; 1University at
Buffalo, the State University of New York, 2McMaster University — Alterations

Long-Term Memory: Skill Learning
F76

DOPAMINE TRANSPORTER GENOTYPE PREDICTS IMPLICIT SEQUENCE
LEARNING BUT NOT IMPLICIT SPATIAL LEARNING Jessica
Simon1,

Melanie Stollstorff1, Lauren C. Westbay1, Chandan J. Vaidya1,2, James H.
Howard1,3, Darlene V. Howard1; 1Georgetown University, 2Children’s Research
Institute, Children’s National Medical Center, 3Catholic University — Implicit

learning (IL), the non-conscious acquisition of environmental regularities, underlies skills such as language acquisition and social judgments.
Research from patients, animal models and pharmacological interventions suggests that dopamine may be associated with IL. We examined
relationships between a polymorphism of the dopamine transporter
gene (DAT1), which influences DAT expression in the striatum, and two
forms of IL that differ in the regularity to be learned and in striatal
involvement. Participants, grouped as 9-repeat carriers or 10/10, completed the Triplets Learning Task (TLT) and the Spatial Contextual Cueing Task (SCCT). The TLT assesses sequence learning, recruiting the
dopamine-dependent frontal-striatal system, whereas the SCCT assesses
spatial context learning, recruiting medial temporal brain networks. For
the TLT, participants viewed open circles that first became red, then
green (target) in discrete, three-event trials or “triplets” and responded
to only the green target. Triplet frequencies were manipulated, with high
frequency triplets occurring nine times more often than low frequency
triplets. For the SCCT, participants viewed arrays of eleven distracters
and one target, and responded to the target’s orientation. Half the arrays
repeated and half were novel. For both tasks, participants demonstrated
learning in faster and/or more accurate responses to high frequency/
repeated versus low frequency/novel stimuli. When grouped by DAT1,
TLT learning was greater for the 9-repeat carriers than the 10/10 group,
despite equal overall accuracy. In contrast, there were no significant

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Skill Learning
group differences in SCCT. Thus, inheritance of the DAT1 9-repeat allele
was beneficial for implicit sequence learning, but not implicit spatial
contextual learning.

F77

AN ARITHMETICAL TRAINING REGIME MOTIVATED BY PRINCIPLES OF
BASAL GANGLIA FUNCTION Arava Y. Kallai1, Andrea Ponting1, Christian D.

Schunn1, Julie Fiez1,2; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2Center for the Neural Basis of
Cognition, Pittsburgh, PA — We developed an arithmetical training program with the aim of optimally engaging a basal ganglia learning system
in order to improve numerical cognition. Hypothesized key features of
the training regime were motivated by prior work (e.g., Tricomi et al.,
2006), and included the use of trial-specific contingent feedback, performance-based rewards, and uncertainty about trial outcomes. A secondary hypothesis was that engagement of the basal ganglia would induce
changes in the horizontal extension of the intraparietal sulcus (hIPS), an
area linked to non-symbolic number representation (e.g., Dehaene et al.,
2003). Training consisted of five one-hour sessions in which twenty subjects solved addition and subtraction problems. A control group of
twenty subjects was trained in numbers typing. All subjects were preand post-tested in a variety of tasks related to double-digit number representation. In a number comparison task, accuracy rates were improved
for Experimental subjects but not for Control subjects. A marginally significant Automatic Addition Effect (LeFevre et al., 1988) for double-digit
numbers was observed for the Experimental group but not for the Control group. In a Stroop-Like task, only Experimental subjects showed a
congruity effect (higher accuracy when larger sums were shown in
larger versus smaller boxes). We conclude that the training regime leads
to more robust and fine-tuned representations of large (double-digit)
numbers. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scans were
conducted pre- and post-training, and continuing work will explore
whether changes of activity in the hIPS region are correlated with behavioral measures of changing numerical representation.

F78
Chris
McNorgan1,
3
1
Lawrence W.
Ken
Marc F. Joanisse ; Northwestern
underUniversity, 2Emory University, 3University of Western Ontario — Our

MULTIMODAL PROFILES OF OBJECT CATEGORIES
Barsalou2,

McRae3,

standing of the neural organization of concept representations has been
informed by the category specific deficits patient literature, which has
often framed these deficits in terms of impaired knowledge of living versus nonliving things and explained them in terms of impairments to sensory versus functional knowledge or in terms of domain-specific
representational systems. Increasingly sophisticated experiments and
research tools have revealed unintuitive patterns of category specific
deficits at even finer-grained levels that we aimed to explain in terms of
the saliency of different sensorimotor knowledge types (Cree & McRae,
2002). Participants categorized color pictures of objects from two living
things (animals and fruits/vegetables) and two non-living things
(manipulable tools, musical instruments) categories in a fast eventrelated fMRI paradigm. Pictures appeared either once or three times
over the course of the experiment. The salience of each of several knowledge types for each category was predicted from a feature production
norms database in both conventional BOLD and fMRI adaptation analyses. The results are interpreted within the framework of a distributed
multimodal representational system and suggest that object concept categories can be described in terms of the profile of saliency of different
knowledge types.

F79

STRETCHING THE IMPLICIT MUSCLE: A PARAMETRIC STUDY OF
PERCEPTUAL-MOTOR SEQUENCE LEARNING USING EXTENDED
SEQUENCE LENGTHS Daniel J. Sanchez1, Paul J. Reber1; 1Northwestern
University — Perceptual-motor sequence learning has an extensive
research history, but most studies have relied on using short sequences
of five to twelve items. Utilizing a new Serial Interception Sequence
Learning (SISL) task, the implicit learning of longer motor sequences

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session F
was examined to explore the limit of information complexity that can be
learned in short training sessions. In the SISL task, circular cues scroll
vertically towards ring-shaped targets on a computer screen. Participants attempt to press the corresponding key when a cue reaches its target zone. Multiple cues may reach their targets simultaneously.
Participants were not told that the cues followed a repeating sequence.
To obscure the repetitions, twenty percent of the training trials were in a
random order. The velocity of the cues increased as task performance
improved to maintain task difficulty. After training, implicit knowledge
was assessed by comparing performance for the trained sequence
against novel sequences. Training began with 30-item sequences and
subsequent groups received successively longer sequence lengths. After
the implicit test, participants were informed about the repeating
sequence and performed recognition and verbal recall tests. For recognition, participants rated five sequences as to how likely it was that the
sequence had been repeated during training. Even with extended-length
sequences, participants exhibited sequence-specific learning within an
hour of training. A steep decline in recognition performance for
sequences exceeding 30 items suggests that implicit memory systems are
primarily driving the perceptual-motor sequence learning. These results
provide broader insight into the capabilities of the brain regions responsible for implicit learning.

F80

DECREASED BOLD RESPONSE IN A BILATERAL PREMOTOR-OCCIPITALPARIETAL NETWORK DURING PERFORMANCE OF A PRACTICED SERIAL
INTERCEPTION SEQUENCE Eric W. Gobel1, Paul J. Reber1; 1Northwestern
University — Most well practiced perceptual-motor skills are composed of
a learned sequence of movements that must be performed in a particular
order with specific, precise timing. Neuroimaging was used to identify
the sequence-specific changes in neural activity occurring as a result of
experience. Participants initially practiced the Serial Interception
Sequence Learning (SISL) task, which emphasizes precise timing of an
interception response to a moving visual cue and allows for manipulation of inter-stimulus timing information. After implicitly learning an
embedded 12-item repeating sequence, fMRI data were collected while
participants performed four transfer conditions, which maintained
either the ordinal sequence, the timing sequence, both sequences, or neither sequence. When either the order of actions or the timing intervals
between actions was changed, performance dropped to a level equivalent to that of a completely novel sequence. Performance of the practiced
sequence was correlated with decreased activity across a bilateral premotor-occipital-parietal network, reflecting sequence-specific facilitation
of motor planning, visual motion processing, and spatial relationship
analysis. These reductions were not associated with decreases in reaction
time since learning in the SISL task is reflected in increased accuracy of
interception responses. Maintaining only the timing sequence increased
activity in the same network, which may reflect interference of the random ordinal information during a practiced temporal pattern. These
results show tight integration of timing and order information in a
learned sequence, associated with decreased activity in a distributed cortical network of brain regions involved in the task.

F81

PROBABILISTIC CLASSIFICATION LEARNING WITH FEEDBACK IS
ASSOCIATED WITH DOPAMINE RELEASE IN THE VENTRAL STRIATUMEVIDENCE FROM A 11C-RACLOPRIDE PET STUDY Leonora Wilkinson1,

Yen Tai2, Paola Piccini2, Marjan Jahanshahi3; 1Brain Stimulation Unit, National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, MD, 2Division of
Neurosciences and Mental Health, MRC Cyclotron Building, Faculty of
Medicine, Imperial College, London, UK, 3Sobell Department of Motor
Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, Institute of Neurology, University
College London, London, UK — Functional neuroimaging has shown that
probabilistic classification learning during the weather prediction task
(WPT) recruits the cortico-striatal circuits. Patients with Parkinson’s disease have dopamine depletion in the striatum and are impaired on WPT

191

Poster Session F
learning. It has been proposed that the role of the striatum and dopaminergic projections is to process corrective feedback during WPT learning.
The present study used 11C- raclopride PET to measure striatal dopamine release in healthy participants during WPT learning with or without
corrective feedback. 15 participants were assigned to one of two groups
who completed 400 trials of the WPT either with (n = 7) or without (n =
8) corrective feedback, while having a 11C-raclopride PET scan. In addition, all participants completed a control task while having a 11C-raclopride scan. The order of WPT and control scans was counterbalanced.
Significantly more endogenous dopamine was released in the ventral
striatum during WPT learning with feedback compared to WPT learning
without feedback. Such task-dependent release of dopamine was not
observed for the dorsal striatum. The findings establish, for the first time,
ventral striatal dopaminergic contribution to probabilistic classification
learning with feedback on the WPT.

F82

SLEEP-DEPENDENT CONSOLIDATION OF STATISTICAL LEARNING

Simon Durrant1, Penny Lewis1,2; 1School of Psychological Sciences, University
of Manchester, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College
London — The consolidation of memory during sleep has been increasingly documented in the last decade. Perceptual learning, and in particular the important field of exposure learning, is currently underrepresented in this research. Here, we evaluate the contribution of sleep
to the offline consolidation of higher-order statistical patterns. Participants were exposed to a 7 minute stream of 5 pure tones generated stochastically from a transition matrix specifying a particular second-order
transition structure while eliminating significant first-order and zeroorder transition information. Following the exposure period, participants were presented with 84 two-alternative-forced-choice (2AFC) trials
in which each trial contained one sequence generated using the same
transition matrix as the exposure stream and one random sequence. Subjects indicated which sequence was familiar. 12hrs after the first session,
participants were retested with 84 more 2AFC stimuli. 24 participants
were divided equally between Wake and Sleep groups, with the Wake
group trained at 8am and retested at 8pm on the same day and the Sleep
group at trained at 8pm and retested at 8am the following morning.
Comparison of sessions 1 and 2 revealed that the Sleep group improved
by 7.5% between test sessions (t-test; p=0.0025), but showed no improvement for the Wake group (t-test; p=0.901). There were no between group
differences in performance on the first session (p=0.984), or in performance on evening sessions (p=0.985), ruling out circadian factors. This
result extends recent observations of enhanced abstraction and integration after overnight retention intervals by demonstrating that the representation of statistical patterns is also strengthened across sleep.

F83

STRUCTURAL CORRELATES OF SENSORIMOTOR SYNCHRONISATION ON
A SEQUENCE LEARNING TASK Christopher J. Steele1, Jan Scholz2, Heidi
Johansen-Berg2, Virginia B. Penhune1; 1Concordia University, Montreal, QC,
Canada, 2Oxford Centre for Functional MRI of the Brain, Oxford University,
UK — The precise synchronisation of actions to external events is a funda-

mental component of motor behaviour. This experiment utilised five
days of training on a visual synchronisation task to probe the structural
correlates of synchronisation. Subjects reproduced a sequence of precisely timed finger taps in synchrony with a visual stimulus; they
received explicit training at the beginning of the first day, then performed three runs (48 trials). Three runs were conducted on each consecutive day; DTI and T1-weighted structural scans were acquired at the
end of Day 5 and correlated with synchronisation performance. Synchronisation was negatively correlated with FA throughout a region of overlap between the corticospinal tract (CST) and superior longitudinal
fasciculus. Further analyses revealed that the effect was related to individual differences in perpendicular, rather than parallel, diffusivity.
Tractography confirmed that this fibre connected superiorly/posteriorly
to sensorimotor and superior parietal cortex, and to the putamen and

192

Long-Term Memory: Skill Learning
frontal lobe via the external capsule. This negative correlation may be
due to greater integrity in fibres crossing the CST in those who synchronise better; thus, synchronisation may involve more than just primary
motor regions. VBM analyses showed that the rate of improvement in
synchronisation over the experiment was positively correlated with two
regions of cerebellar cortex: ipsilateral VI and medial V. These regions
may reflect either an enhanced internal representation of the skill or
greater volume devoted to error-feedback. We successfully exploited
individual differences in brain structure to identify regions that contribute to skilled performance and learning on a sensorimotor synchronisation task.

F84

GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS IN MATHEMATICAL ABILITY VIA A BASAL
GANGLIA LEARNING MECHANISM Andrea Ponting1,2, Arava Y. Kallai1,

Christian D. Schunn1, Julie Fiez1,2; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2Center for the
Neural Basis of Cognition, Pittsburgh, PA — We developed an arithmetical

training program aimed at optimally engaging a basal ganglia learning
system and improving numerical cognition. Hypothesized key features
were motivated by previous work (e.g., Tricomi et al., 2006), and
included trial-specific contingent feedback, performance-based rewards,
and uncertainty about trial outcomes. Training consisted of five onehour meetings in which twenty subjects (experimental group) solved
addition and subtraction problems and twenty (control group) were
trained to type digits. All subjects were pre- and post-tested using
behavioral and imaging tasks aimed at measuring mathematical proficiency. Experimental subjects showed dramatic improvements in performance over the course of training, with 18 of 20 subjects learning to
accurately compute the sum or difference of double-digit/double-digit
problems within a 3.5 second response window. In a task involving double-digit addition and subtraction problems, larger pre-post gains were
seen for experimental subjects compared to control subjects, yet no differences were seen between new and old problems, showing that gains
were not based on retrieval. Also, a pre-post assessment of single-digit
math fact retrieval showed greater gains for addition problems in experimental than control subjects. In a math SAT-like test, experimental subjects showed greater pre-post gains over control subjects, providing
evidence of transfer benefits to complex mathematical cognition. We
conclude that training with contingent feedback, high incentive, and
uncertainty, leads to broad benefits beyond the exact training task,
including more basic fact retrieval and complex mathematical proficiency. Pilot neuroimaging results suggest that these changes are mediated by a basal ganglia learning system.

F85

WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY CORRELATES OF IMPLICIT SEQUENCE
LEARNING IN HEALTHY AGING Ilana J. Bennett1, David J. Madden2,

Chandan J. Vaidya1,3, James H. Howard Jr.1,4, Darlene V. Howard1;
1
Georgetown University, 2Duke University Medical Center, 3Children’s National
Medical Center, 4Catholic University of America — Implicit sequence learning refers to improved performance to predictable, frequently occurring
events within repeating sequence, without explicit awareness of the
sequential regularity. Previous research has identified subcortical (caudate, putamen, hippocampus) and cortical (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, DLPFC; supplementary motor area, SMA) regions involved in
implicit sequence learning. However, evidence is less clear regarding
whether these neural substrates differ with aging. The present study
used diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) tractography to reconstruct white
matter connections among the known gray matter substrates of implicit
sequence learning. Integrity of these tracts was then related to learning
in the alternating serial reaction time task (ASRT) in 14 younger (18.9 ±
0.7 years old, 9 female) and 14 healthy older adults (67.6 ± 3.1 years old,
63-72 years, 10 female). Both age groups showed significant sequence
learning (better performance to high versus low frequent events), with
an age-related difference in the late learning stage. Caudate-DLPFC and
hippocampus-DLPFC tract integrity were related to ASRT sequence

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Skill Learning
learning, which may reflect their role in forming sequence-specific associations, and these brain-behavior relationships did not differ significantly between age groups. In contrast, putamen-SMA tract integrity
was not significantly related to ASRT sequence learning, which may
reflect this network being involved in non-sequence-specific response
selection and execution. Additionally, individual differences in caudateDLPFC tract integrity mediated the age-related decline in late stage
sequence learning. Together, these findings complement studies of gray
matter substrates underlying implicit sequence learning, and provide
evidence for similar white matter integrity-sequence learning relationships in younger and healthy older adults.

F86

CONTEXTUAL INTERFERENCE BENEFITS IN MOTOR SEQUENCE
LEARNING ARE ACCOMPANIED BY INCREASED INTRACORTICAL
EXCITABILITY IN MOTOR CORTEX Chien-Ho Lin1, Barbara Knowlton1,
Allan Wu1; 1Neurology, UCLA — Generally, practice of different tasks in a

random order induces superior retention compared to practicing in a
blocked order, a phenomenon known as the contextual-interference (CI)
effect. We applied paired-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)
to investigate if the CI benefit in behavioral performance is associated
with changes in intracortical inhibition (SICI) and facilitation (ICF). 10
adults practiced serial reaction time tasks where a set of three 4-element
sequences were arranged in blocks or in a random order on 2 successive
days. On Day 5th, subjects were tested with practiced sequences to evaluate learning. Subjects practiced sequences in both blocked and random
conditions in separate sessions 2-4 weeks apart. TMS was applied over
primary motor cortex (M1) as paired subthreshold-suprathreshold TMS
pulses separated by interstimulus intervals of 2 (SICI) and 10 msec (ICF).
We identified a CI effect in that while reaction times (RT) in the random
condition were slower than the blocked condition during practice (effect
size (ES)= 0.8) the reverse was true during retention on Day 5, with faster
RT for sequences practiced under random conditions (ES= 0.9). Between
Day 1 and Day 5, SICI and ICF both showed increased excitability after
random practice, but not after blocked practice (ES of ICF: YR= 0.9, YB= 0.1; of SICI: YR= 0.7, YB= -0.6). These results suggest that the CI effect
can be demonstrated in a within-subject design. Results also suggest that
random practice is accompanied by increased intracortical excitability
within M1 which may support the superior retention of practiced
sequences.

F87

IMPAIRMENT OF HIGHER-ORDER BUT NOT SIMPLE SEQUENCE
LEARNING IN A CASE OF BILATERAL HIPPOCAMPAL ORGANIC
AMNESIA Clive R. Rosenthal1, Anne M. Aimola Davies1, Michael R.

Johnson2, Jerome J. Maller3, Claire Cochrane1, Christopher Kennard1;
1University of Oxford, 2Imperial College London, 3Monash University — An

important conceptual distinction within learning and memory is
between knowledge associated with and without complex relational
information. When assessed within a neurocognitive framework, a central issue is whether or not the hippocampus is sensitive to the presence
or absence of relational information or consciousness, per se. One view is
that the hippocampus mediates conscious learning and memory,
whereas an alternative position is that the hippocampus is sensitive to
the presence of relational information. We examined the ability of a
patient with bilateral hippocampal organic amnesia and control participants to learn simple (first-order) and complex (second- and third-order
conditional) sequence information on the serial reaction time task. A full
assessment using standardised neuropsychological tests indicated the
patient’s performance was average to high-average ability, even on
memory tests such as the WMS-III, Doors and People, and California
Verbal Learning. Results from manual volumetry and voxel-based morphometry revealed that the patient had normalised MTL sub-region volumes similar to age-matched controls, whereas T2 and T2-FLAIR
magnetic resonance imaging revealed bilateral hyperintense signal in the
hippocampi. Sequence knowledge and awareness were assessed on an

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session F
awareness questionnaire, cued-generation task, and recognition test.
Comparison between patient and controls revealed intact learning and
recognition of first-order sequences, whereas the patient was impaired
on learning second- and third-order sequences, independently of the
state of awareness associated with acquired knowledge. These data support the view that the hippocampus mediates relational, rather than conscious, learning per se.

F88

ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF AUTOMATICITY IN RULE-BASED
CATEGORIZATION: AN FMRI STUDY Sebastien Helie1, Jessica Roeder1,

Kyle Liban1, Sarah Kaufman1, Billy Bruno1, F. Gregory Ashby1; 1University of
California, Santa Barbara — Sixteen participants were each trained for 20
sessions (over 10,000 trials) in a rule-based categorization task with one
of two different underlying category structures. Stimuli were Gabor patterns that varied across trials in spatial frequency, which was the relevant dimension, and orientation, which was always irrelevant. On each
trial, participants assigned the single stimulus to one of two categories.
In one condition the category structure was simple (low spatial frequencies were in one category, high frequencies in the other). In the other condition, the category structure was more complex (low and high
frequencies were in one category, intermediate frequencies in the other).
Sessions 1, 4, 10, and 20 were performed in a 3T Siemens fMRI scanner.
Asymptotic accuracy (~95% correct) was reached in the first session for
the simple categories, and in the third session for the complex categories.
The behavioral data (accuracy and reaction times) of the two groups
were identical after the third session. Whole brain cluster analysis was
performed on Group Maps using FSL (2 Groups x 4 Sessions = 8 Group
Maps). The results show a general decrease in the number of clusters
with the development of automaticity, thus suggesting more focused
brain activation. More precisely, activation in the medial temporal lobes
and striatum decreased with practice in both groups. Conversely, activation in the parietal and premotor cortices increased with practice (also in
both groups). These changes are consistent with the recent proposal of a
computational model of automaticity in rule-guided behavior (Helie &
Ashby, 2009).

F89

MEMORY FOR TOOL ATTRIBUTES, MOTOR SKILLS, AND SKILLED TOOL
USE: THE ROLE OF DECLARATIVE AND PROCEDURAL MEMORY
SYSTEMS Shumita Roy1, Norman W. Park1,2; 1York University, 2KuninLunenfeld Applied Research Unit, Baycrest Centre for Geriatric Care — Objective: Previous research has shown that the ability to use tools requires
memory. It has also been proposed that different components of tool
knowledge rely on different memory systems. For instance, tool
attributes (e.g., tool function, colour) have been shown to be represented
within the declarative memory system. In contrast, motor skill learning
has been shown to be mediated by the procedural memory system.
However, the memory representation of skilled tool use (i.e., intentional
use of tools) is still unclear. While the importance of procedural memory
in skilled tool use is well-established, the necessity of declarative memory is under debate. In this study we propose that skilled tool use relies
on an integration of both declarative and procedural memory systems.
Method: D.A., an individual with hippocampal amnesia, was trained
and tested on various aspects of knowledge related to ten novel tools
that were created for this study. D.A.’s performance was compared to
that of six age-matched controls. Results: D.A. was unimpaired in motor
skill acquisition. Specifically, he became faster in using the tools across
training trials. In contrast, D.A. was impaired in recall of tool attributes.
Results also showed that D.A. was impaired in skilled tool use. Conclusion: Consistent with previous research, these findings suggest that
motor skills are acquired procedurally while tool attributes are represented declaratively. They also suggest that efficient skilled tool use
relies on both procedural and declarative memory systems where declarative memory may provide contextual information necessary for the
expression of appropriate motor skills.

193

Poster Session F

Executive Processes: Monitoring &
Inhibitory Control
F90

SEROTONIN TRANSPORTER POLYMORPHISMS INFLUENCE INHIBITORY
CONTROL IN HEALTHY SUBJECTS Nils Inge Landrø1, Martin Aker1, Anne

Marie Hoel1, Rune Jonassen1, Runa Marie Grimholt2, Kari Bente Foss Haug2,
Alexander Neumeister3, Tore Charles Stiles4, Pia Lyche1; 1Center for the Study
of Human Cognition, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 2Ullevål University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Yale University School of Medicine, West Haven,
Connecticut, 4Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway — The

serotonin transporter (5-HTTLPR) short allele has reduced transcriptional efficiency compared to the long allele, and individuals carrying
the short allele tend to have increased risk for depression. There are also
genotype-related alterations in an amygdala-cingulate feedback circuit
which is critical for emotion regulation. The cognitive mechanisms and
pathways underlying these associations are, however, incompletely
understood. Serotonin is also related to impulsivity/inhibitory control,
but studies relating 5-HTTLPR to laboratory measures of inhibitory control are lacking. The aim was to investigate possible links between serotonin transporter polymorphisms (5-HTTLPR) and inhibitory control.
Eighthy seven healthy adults, screened for psychopathology applying
SCID I and SCID II, were included. A triallelic classification was reclassified into a biallelic model based on the level of 5-HTT gene expression.
Inhibitory control was measured with the Stop Signal Task (SST) from
the CANTAB. Participants are programmed to a choice reaction to a
stimulus, and inhibitory control is defined as the subject's ability to
inhibit the prepotent motor response. Analyses of variance showed a statistically significant effect of genotype on inhibition. Subjects carrying
the low expressive alleles (S and Lg)were slower to complete the process
of inhibiting a preprogrammed response than subjects with two long (L)
alleles. These results suggest that S and Lg alleles constitute vulnerabilities for impaired inhibition, forming a possible cognitive endophenotype
in disorders like depression.

Executive Processes: Other
F91

POLYMORPHISM OF DOPAMINE TRANSPORTER PROTEIN GENE
INFLUENCES SUBSTANTIA NIGRA FRACTIONAL ANISOTROPY: A
DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING STUDY Arianne Johnson1, Angela Chen1,

Michael Miller1, Skirmantas Janusonis1, Scott Grafton1; 1University of
California, Santa Barbara — Previous studies have shown that there are
significant differences in fractional anisotropy (FA) values in the substantia nigra of clinical populations, such as de novo Parkinson’s
patients, relative to healthy controls. This likely represents changes of
cellular structure from neurodegeneration. In the present study, it was
hypothesized that variation in FA values might also occur in normal subjects, differentiated by genetic markers of neurotransmission. To test
this, differences of FA values in the substantia nigra (SN), a region
known to have a high density of dopaminergic cells, were compared as a
function of dopamine transporter (DAT) genotype in 81 subjects. FA values were generated from 30-directional diffusion tensor imaging on a 3T
Siemens scanner. Structural T1, FA and b0 scans were used to create
unbiased regions of interest for FA extraction, blinded to genetic status.
DAT allele had a significant effect on caudal SN FA (p = .044). Specifically, the 9/9 genotype group had a higher mean FA value than the 9/10
genotype group. Our in vivo results show that normal genetic variation
of brainstem dopamine influences brainstem FA values, which might
represent neurotransmitter site-specific changes in cell structure.
Dopamine status is associated with human cognitive performance and
psychiatric disease. The current results demonstrate that FA may be
used as a potential biomarker for this status.

194

Executive Processes: Monitoring & Inhibitory Control

Thinking: Other
F92

VAL ALLELE LOAD AT BDNF VAL66MET PREDICTS VERBAL
INTELLIGENCE Adam Green1, Colin DeYoung2, John Fossella3, Elena

Grigorenka1, Jeremy Gray1; 1Yale University, 2University of Minnesota, 3Mount
Sinai School of Medicine — Genetic factors contributing to verbal intelligence among healthy individuals have not been well characterized. The
gene encoding Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Growth Factor (BDNF) is a
likely candidate because BDNF contributes to strengthening white matter connections between brain regions thought to act cooperatively in
language and higher cognitive function. Here, we found that Valine
allele load at a functional polymorphism within the BDNF gene (BDNF
Val66Met) predicted verbal intelligence, assessed using a latent variable
derived from standard verbal measures, in a cohort of 410 healthy participants. 175 of the genotyped participants underwent structural and functional MRI. Neural endophenotypes likely to mediate the BDNF-verbal
intelligence relationship are indicated.

Thinking: Problem Solving
F93

OVARIAN CYCLE EFFECTS ON IMMEDIATE REWARD BIAS: A WINDOW ON
PFC DOPAMINE Christopher Smith1, Charlotte Boettiger1,2,3; 1Curriculum

in Neurobiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2Bowles Center for
Alcohol Studies, UNC-CH, 3Biomedical Imaging Research Center, UNC-CH —

Neuroimaging data from our lab indicate a role for the dorsal prefrontal
cortex (dPFC) in immediate reward bias. Specifically, when subjects
choose between hypothetical monetary rewards: one available “today”
(Now) and another, larger reward available at one of several delays
(Later), those showing hyperactivity in the dPFC more often choose
Now over Later, quantified as an impulsive choice ratio (ICR). Higher
ICRs and greater dPFC activity are also observed in individuals with the
Val/Val genotype at the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT)
Val158Met polymorphism, associated with reduced cortical DA. In the
present study, we investigated the role of dopamine in influencing ICR
by taking advantage of the fluctuation in estrogen levels across the menstrual cycle, as previous research indicates that estrogen increases
dopamine transmission. We tested adult females in a within subjects
design at peak (day 11-12) and trough (day 1-2) estrogen levels. A significant effect of cycle day (t(45)=2.52, p<0.05) was found in COMT 158Val
carriers, with ICR decreasing during elevated estrogen. These data suggest that ICR may not be a fixed trait, but one that can be manipulated by
transient changes in putative frontal dopamine. Moreover, results from a
concurrent study in our lab prompted testing for differences between
late adolescents (ages 18-21; n=26) and adults (ages 22-40; n=27), revealing that, among 158Val carriers, late adolescents demonstrate significantly higher ICRs than adults (F(1, 46)=4.79, p<0.05). These results
suggest that delayed maturation of frontal structures engaged by this
task may contribute to heightened IRB and that such effects may be
COMT genotype-dependent.

Executive Processes: Monitoring &
Inhibitory Control
F94
Clare Killikelly1, Denes
Szucs1; 1University of Cambridge — Previous research has identified that

THE DEVELOPMENT OF INTERFERENCE CONTROL

younger children are more susceptible to distracting stimuli than adults.
Interference control or the ability to resist interference from distracting
stimuli is a skill that develops throughout childhood. The cognitive and
motor components that underlie the development of interference control
have yet to be systematically documented. The current study attempts to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Monitoring & Inhibitory Control
separate the contributions of cognitive and motor response related processes involved in interference control in two ways. Firstly an amended
colour word Stroop paradigm was used to target cognitive and motor
related processes more precisely by using three different conditions that
engage cognitive and motor control to different degrees. Secondly this
research examined the underlying biomarkers of the cognitive and
motor processes. Electroencephalography (EEG) was used to examine
the cognitive level of processing whereas electromyography (EMG) was
used to examine the response level of processing. This study confirmed
that the cognitive and motor processes involved in interference control
can be dissociated in the manual colour word Stroop paradigm. Compared to trials requiring cognitive control participants were slowest on
the trials where the ability to engage motor control was required. This
indicates that motor interference control is perhaps a slower and more
difficult exercise. An underlying marker of cognitive control was also
determined. The ERP analysis revealed that at 400ms there is an amplitude decrease in the conditions with cognitive interference. This amplitude modulation is thought to be related to conflict detection and the
implementation of interference control at the cognitive level.

F95

THE EFFECTS OF STIMULUS AMBIGUITY ON CONFLICT MONITORING:
FRONTAL N2 MODULATION IN A VISUAL ODDBALL TASK John Fedota1,

Craig McDonald1, Raja Parasuraman1; 1George Mason University — Prior evidence suggests ERP components such as frontal N2 are illustrative of
conflict monitoring at the response stage of information processing.
However, recent evidence using go/nogo tasks has shown perceptual
similarity can elicit frontal N2 modulations as well. This suggests that
stimulus ambiguity may modulate ERP signs of response conflict. The
present study manipulated stimulus ambiguity and observed the subsequent modulations on frontal N2 in a visual oddball task. The use of an
oddball paradigm should reduce the influence of prepotent response
tendencies on conflict monitoring. The perceptual ambiguity of the nogo
stimuli was modulated in two conditions. In the hard condition, go and
nogo stimuli were perceptually similar, whereas in the easy condition,
go and nogo stimuli were perceptually different. The differences
between stimuli were determined using a JND protocol in an effort to
create maximum stimulus ambiguity. Behavioral results showed that
subjects were able to make a stimulus discrimination in the hard condition. Frontal N2 amplitude was unchanged for go stimuli in both conditions of the oddball tasks. However, in the hard task the perceptually
similar nogo stimuli elicited a larger frontal N2 than did nogo stimuli in
the easy task. These results show that high stimulus ambiguity can modulate frontal N2 in a visual oddball task. This suggests that conflict elicited early in the information processing cascade can, under optimal
conditions, modulate ERP components associated primarily with
response conflict monitoring. However, this conflict processing is most
prominent with frequent nogo stimulus presentation in difficult perceptual discriminations.
F96

WIDE AWAKE AND IN CONTROL: CAFFEINE AND THE EXECUTIVE
CONTROL OF ATTENTION Tad Brunye1,2, Caroline Mahoney1,2, Harris

Lieberman3, Holly Taylor2; 1US Army, Natick Research, Development and
Engineering Center, 2Tufts University, 3US Army, Research Institute of
Environmental Medicine — The present work investigated the effects of caffeine (0 mg, 100 mg, 200 mg, 400 mg) on the attention network test
(ANT), a modified flanker task designed to test three visual attention
network functions: alerting, orienting, and executive control. In a placebo-controlled, double-blind study using a repeated-measures design,
we found that the effects of caffeine on visual attention vary as a function
of dose and the attention network under examination. Caffeine
improved alerting and executive control function in a dose-response
manner, asymptoting at 200 mg. These results are congruent with caffeine's effects on adenosine-mediated dopaminergic activity in the thalamus, prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate, and the involvement of
these areas in maintaining vigilance and controlling attention. Higher

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session F
doses of caffeine also led to a marginally less efficient allocation of visual
attention towards cued regions during task performance (i.e., orienting).
Taken together, results of this study demonstrate that caffeine has differential effects on visual attention networks as a function of dose, and such
effects have implications for hypothesized interactions of caffeine, adenosine and dopamine in brain areas mediating visual attention.

F97

ACC ACTIVITY AND PUNISHMENT SENSITIVITY: COMPARING
ADOLESCENTS AND ADULTS DURING A MONETARY FEEDBACK TASK

Diane Santesso1, Angela Dzyundzyak1, Sidney Segalowitz1; 1Brock
University — The triadic model of motivated behavior proposes that ado-

lescents might be biased toward taking risks and disregarding negative
consequences of their actions due to immaturity of medial prefrontal cortex, including the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), in regulating striatal
reward-drives. According to this model, adolescents should be happier
when winning and less upset when losing money compared to adults.
The purpose of the present study was to examine such ACC-related
activity in adolescents and adults. Thirty adults and twenty adolescents
completed a self-report measure of sensitivity to punishment/reward
and performed an ERP monetary feedback task. The feedback-related
negativity (FRN) and LORETA current source density were used to
index ACC activity. Despite no developmental differences on the task,
LORETA source estimation revealed that losing was associated with
greater activity in the ACC compared to winning money. Higher sensitivity to punishment was related to greater activity in the ACC, but this
effect was driven by adults. No significant relations were found between
sensitivity to punishment or reward for winning for either age group.
Results are consistent with other studies underscoring the role of the
ACC in negative feedback processing and provide some support for the
triadic model. Importantly, higher sensitivity to losses in adults may
provide important clues to understanding adolescents' risky behaviors
and/or adults’ greater cautiousness.

F98

WHAT COGNITIVE PROCESSES CONTRIBUTE TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF
INHIBITORY
CONTROL
IN
CHILDHOOD?
AN
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY (EEG) STUDY IN YOUNG CHILDREN AND
ADULTS Donna Bryce1, Denes Szucs1, Fruzsina Soltesz1, David

Whitebread1; 1University of Cambridge — Inhibitory control, the ability to

suppress behaviour when it is inappropriate, is a crucial executive skill.
Variations of the classic Stroop task have established that the performance difference between congruent and incongruent conditions
decreases throughout childhood, demonstrating improved inhibitory
control. This study aims to more precisely establish what cognitive processes are reflected in this developmental improvement. That is, success
on incongruent trials in a Stroop task depends upon controlling both
‘early’ perceptual/cognitive conflict and ‘late’ motor conflict; behavioural studies only assess the amalgamation of these processes. Elaborating upon our previous study, we have EEG data from three groups of
participants aged approximately 5-years, 7-years, and 27-years. They
completed an Animal Stroop task, where two animals of different ‘real
life’ sizes are presented on-screen in images that are also physically different sizes. The participant must choose which animal is larger in real
life. Two factors are manipulated in this task: congruency and size difference (large, where small/big animal pairings are presented vs. small,
where small/medium and medium/big animal pairings are presented).
The lateralised readiness potential (LRP) reflects response preparation
before muscle contractions begin and in the absence of an overt
response. Examination of the LRP in different age-groups suggests that
younger children have a greater initial incorrect activation to overcome,
which could partly account for the difference in reaction time. A pointby-point repeated-measures ANOVA of ERP amplitude data indicates
that the LRP and RT age effects can be attributed to developing inhibitory control rather than speed of processing differences.

195

Poster Session F
F99

NEURAL CORRELATES OF INHIBITION OF PROACTIVE INTERFERENCE
FROM COGNITIVE SET Seiki Konishi1, Koji Jimura1, Junichi Chikazoe1,

Satoshi Hirose1, Takamitsu Watanabe1, Hiroko Kimura1, Yasushi Miyashita1;
The University of Tokyo School of Medicine — The prefrontal cortical mecha-

1

nisms for inhibition of proactive interference (PI) have been reported
that are recruited long after one behavior is updated to another. However, very little is known about the inhibitory mechanisms that are
recruited immediately after the update. The WCST was modified in the
present fMRI study such that inhibition of PI could be examined both
immediately after and long after update of behavior. Use of ‘dual-match’
stimuli allowed us to compare two types of trials where inhibition of PI
was and was not required (Control and Release trials, respectively).
Prominent activation was observed in the left presupplementary motor
area (pre-SMA) during Control vs. Release trials. The pre-SMA activation was selective to PI inhibition required immediate after update of
behavior, which exhibited marked contrast to the left anterior prefrontal
activation selective to PI inhibition required long after the update. These
results reveal dissociable inhibitory mechanisms in these two regions
that are recruited in the different temporal contexts of the inhibitory
demands imposed during performance of the task.

F100

AN FMRI STUDY ON THE ROLE OF UNCERTAINTY AND SPURIOUS
FEEDBACK IN CORRECTING SUBSEQUENT PERFORMANCE Sharon
Morein-Zamir1, Chris Dodds1, Barbara Sahakian1, Trevor Robbins1; 1University
of Cambridge — Abnormal monitoring is believed to play a key role in a

number of neuropsychiatric disorders such as depression, Obsessive
Compulsive Disorder and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. We
examined event-related fMRI activations in 18 healthy participants during an action monitoring task. Participants performed a simple visual
discrimination in pairs of trials, deciding whether a masked target was a
‘T’ or an ‘L’. High uncertainty was maintained by titrating the duration
of the target stimulus. Following the first response, participants received
spurious feedback independent of their performance, and then
responded again to the same stimulus presentation. While performance
during the first presentation did not differ from chance, slower
responses likely representing increased uncertainty, were associated
with increased activation in the medial prefrontal cortex as well as right
insula and inferior parietal lobe bilaterally. On the second presentation,
participants were more likely to switch following negative feedback and
following erroneous performance on the first presentation, with no interaction between the two factors on behaviour. Individual self-reported
levels of meta-cognitive self-consciousness and meta-cognitive negative
beliefs as well as trait anxiety correlated positively with the likelihood to
switch response despite being correct in the first presentation and receiving positive feedback. Response adjustment (i.e., switching response on
the second presentation) compared to maintaining the same response
was associated with extensive activity in the medial prefrontal cortex
and insula bilaterally. These data suggest that areas previously implicated in monitoring errors whilst and immediately after they occur, are
also involved in adjustment or perceived correction of subsequent
behaviour.

F101

ERROR AND CONFLICT RELATED BRAIN REGIONS AT TASK AND
RESPONSE LEVEL Charlotte Desmet1, Wim Fias1, Marcel Brass1; 1Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium — Most studies investigating adaptive behavior
have focused on errors and conflict at the response level. Under these situations the rostral cingulate zone seems to be activated. In this study we
investigated if task errors ( = performing the wrong task) and task conflict also activate these brain regions. Our results indicate that both task
and response errors activate medial prefrontal regions. Although there
seems to be an overlap between both error regions, response errors
extend more ventral to the rostral cingulate zone while the region associated with task errors extend more dorsal to the dorsal frontomedian cor-

196

Executive Processes: Monitoring & Inhibitory Control
tex. On the other hand, a clear dissociation was perceived between areas
associated with response conflict and with task conflict. While response
conflict was correlated with the rostral cingulate zone, the left inferior
frontal junction, the right middle frontal gyrus and the left frontomarginal sulcus, task conflict was correlated with the pre-sma, the premotor
cortex and the right middle frontal gyrus.

F102

IMPAIRED RESPONSE INHIBITION IN ILL GULF WAR VETERANS

Gail D.
Tillman1, Timothy A. Green1, Thomas C. Ferree2, Clifford S. Calley1, Mandy J.
Maguire1, John Hart Jr.1, Robert W. Haley2, Michael A. Kraut3; 1The University of
Texas at Dallas, 2The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 3The
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — Poor performance on tasks
implicating inhibitory dysfunction has been observed among chronically
ill veterans of the 1991 Persian Gulf War. Semantic difficulties such as
word-finding have also been frequently reported. We collected eventrelated potential (ERP) and behavioral data from 10 veterans who met
Haley criteria for Gulf War Syndrome 2 and from 11 matched Gulf War
veteran controls who were deployed but not symptomatic while they
performed a GO-NOGO task. This task required a button-push response
when the line drawing was of an object but a withheld response when
the drawing was of an animal. Thus, both semantic processing and
inhibitory processing were required. Behavioral data showed a significantly greater false-alarm rate among the ill veterans. This was accompanied in the ERP data by significantly reduced amplitude in the NOGO P3
of the ill group, which is consistent with previous studies of other patient
groups that have shown poor inhibitory response performance to be
marked by a blunted or absent NOGO P3. Analysis of the ERP showed
no differences in the N2 amplitudes. Given previous studies associating
the N2 with differentiation of stimuli at a semantic level, this supported
the contention that Syndrome 2 veterans’ deficit lies more in inhibition
ability than in detection of semantic differences in the stimuli.

F103

A HIERARCHICAL BAYESIAN MODEL OF THE STOP-SIGNAL TASK:
RELATION TO CORTICOSTRIATAL MODEL Thomas Wiecki1, Michael

Frank1; 1Brown University — The stop-signal task has been used extensively
by cognitive neuroscientists to research response inhibition. In this task,
subjects have to respond to a Go-signal as fast as possible. On a minority
of trials, however, a Stop-signal is presented after a variable delay following the Go-signal, instructing the subject to withhold their response.
The widely used "horse-race" model assumes a race between a Go and a
Stop-process. While the speed of the Go-process can be measured, the
speed of the Stop-process can only be estimated by analyzing inhibition
performance at various Stop-signal delays. The horse-race model
assumes the Stop process to have fixed speed. Recent data along with
computational simulations, however, challenge the assumption of a
fixed length process. Rather, the Stop-process appears to be dynamically
influenced by factors like motivation and saliency, which the horse-race
model cannot currently dissociate. We extended our model of the basal
ganglia to simulate the stop-signal task, and showed that it can account
for various lesion and pharmacological data. But while this model makes
contact with neural mechanisms underlying response inhibition, it is
complex and has too many parameters to quantitatively fit individual
human subject data. We thus applied Markov-Chain Monte-Carlo techniques to estimate the parameters of a hierarchical bayesian model governing subject choices. We estimate the speed of the Stop process,
motivational biases and salience detection rates by fitting them to
response time distributions and stopping patterns. We benchmark the
model by fitting it to data generated by our neural model of response
inhibition.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Monitoring & Inhibitory Control
F104

HE’S A CHIP OFF THE OLD BLOCK: PERFORMANCE MONITORING
ALTERATIONS IN PATIENTS WITH OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER
AND UNAFFECTED FIRST-DEGREE RELATIVES Anja
Riesel1,
Tanja

Endrass1, Christian Kaufmann1, Norbert Kathmann1; 1Humboldt University,
Berlin — Performance monitoring dysfunctions have been repeatedly
associated with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Event-related
brain potentials (ERP) and functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) studies consistently showed increased error-related brain activity
in patients with OCD. Enhanced electrophysiological correlates of performance monitoring (ERN, error-related negativity and CRN, correctrelated negativity) are associated with OCD and seem to be independent
from state-related changes in OCD symptoms. Therefore, they are considered as a potential endophenotype marker of OCD. Hence, the aim of
the present study was to examine whether unaffected first-degree relatives of OCD patients show larger ERN amplitudes and larger amplitudes of the CRN. ERPs were recorded from unaffected first-degree
relatives of OCD patients, OCD patients and healthy controls while performing a modified flanker task. Results indicate enhanced ERN and
CRN amplitudes in first-degree relatives and OCD patients compared to
healthy controls. These results indicate that performance monitoring
dysfunctions are not only observed in OCD patients but also in a group
of unaffected first-degree relatives. Thus, overactive performance monitoring could represent a potential neurocognitive endophenotype in
OCD mediating the familial or genetic vulnerability for OCD.

F105

EFFECTS OF SELF-RELEVANT FAILURE ON PERFORMANCE MONITORING:
AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION Kerstin Unger1,2, Jutta

Kray1,2, Axel Mecklinger1,2; 1Saarland University, Saarbruecken, Germany,

2International Research Training Group "Adaptive Minds" — A

growing body
of evidence indicates that motivational and affective variables modulate
the amplitude of the error-related negativity (ERN/Ne), suggesting that
this component does not only reflect cognitive facets of error processing.
This study examined the impact of self-relevant failure on earlier and
later stages of performance monitoring in a reinforcement learning task.
EEG was recorded while participants engaged in two consecutive phases
of a probabilistic learning task, in which we manipulated the validity of
feedback. After the first learning phase, participants performed a visual
search task. To induce self-relevance it was described as diagnostic of
intellectual abilities. Participants were assigned to one of two groups
receiving either no feedback or strong negative feedback during the
visual search task. Results indicated a clear dissociation between learning-related behavioural and electrophysiological effects for both groups
in the second learning phase. For the no-feedback group ERN/Ne amplitude decreased from first to second half of learning, while performance
remained stable across the two learning phases. In contrast, the failurefeedback group showed a smaller ERN/Ne magnitude than the no-feedback group during the first half of the second learning phase. However,
in this group error rate and ERN/Ne amplitude increased during the
second half of the learning phase following failure induction. This pattern of results suggests that failure experience has a strong impact on the
recruitment of cognitive control processes and affective responses to
errors during subsequent learning. They also confirm and extend prior
studies showing a positive relationship between negative affect and
ERN/Ne magnitude.

F106

MANIPULATION OF CONFLICT STRENGTH IN THE FLANKER TASK: DOES
STIMULUS CONTRAST MATTER? Jessica Strozyk1, Ines Jentzsch1;

1
University of St Andrews — According to one influential theory, people
monitor for the occurrence of conflicts in information processing in order
to evaluate the need for cognitive control. Conflict in this sense is
defined as the simultaneous activation of incompatible response tendencies. One task that has been widely used to investigate this kind of conflict is the Eriksen flanker task. The current study uses an adaptation of

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session F
this task, in which the contrast of target and flanker letters has been varied independently to enhance or decrease conflict, respectively. Effects of
this manipulation on both behavioural and electrophysiological data are
explored. A main effect of target contrast on reaction times confirms that
the manipulation was effective. Neither the contrast manipulation of the
target nor of the flankers had differential effects on the flanker effect,
which contradicts the predictions of the conflict-monitoring theory. The
anterior N2, a component of the event-related potential that has been
related to conflict processing on correct trials, showed an increase in
amplitude on incongruent trials as compared to congruent trials, thereby
confirming previous findings. Additionally, conflict-related and attentional effects related to flanker and target contrast can be observed in the
N2 component.

F107

PERFORMANCE MONITORING AND THE EVALUATION OF ERROR
SOURCE: ERROR-RELATED BRAIN ACTIVITY AND BEHAVIORAL
ADJUSTMENTS FOLLOWING DIFFERENT ERROR TYPES Marco

Steinhauser1, Martin E. Maier1, Andrea Kiesel2; 1University of Konstanz,
2University of Würzburg — The continuous monitoring of action outcomes
is crucial for the optimization of performance. This is achieved by a performance monitoring system, which detects errors and adjusts behavior
in order to reduce the probability of further errors. Evidence for such a
system has been provided by studies showing a relation between behavioral adjustments and the error-related negativity (Ne/ERN), a negative
deflection in the event-related potential following error responses, which
is assumed to reflect performance monitoring in the medial frontal cortex. The present study examined whether this system evaluates the
source of an error to adjust behavior appropriately. To this end, we compared behavioral adjustments following different error types in a flanker
paradigm and examined whether these adjustments are related to the
Ne/ERN. Experiment 1 showed that only errors resulting from a failure
of attention imply adjustments of attentional selectivity whereas other
errors imply only adjustments of response speed. Experiment 2 showed
that, in contrast to internally caused errors, externally caused errors are
followed by a transient reduction of effort. In both experiments, the
strength of behavioral adjustments was related to the amplitude of the
preceding Ne/ERN. This suggests that the performance monitoring system represented by the Ne/ERN initiates behavioral adjustments based
on the evaluation of error source.

F108

THE LEFT INFERIOR FRONTAL GYRUS, INTERFERENCE RESOLUTION, AND
SEMANTIC SHORT-TERM MEMORY Corinne Allen1, Loan Vuong1, Randi
Martin1; 1Rice University — Previous single case patient studies have

shown an association between left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) damage
and deficit in resolving interference in working memory. A single case
LIFG patient ML showed an additional association between interference
resolution deficit and semantic short-term memory (STM) deficit. This
study tested a new LIFG patient EV, a control non-LIFG patient MB, and
presented new data from LIFG patient ML to further elucidate the relationships. To examine interference resolution ability, the Stroop task, the
picture-word interference task, and a modified version of the recent-negatives task were tested on the patients and age-matched controls. To
examine STM abilities, several semantic and phonological STM tasks
were administered and composite phonological and semantic STM
scores were computed for each patient (in a group of 11 patients). EV
and ML consistently showed exaggerated interference effects, compared
to normal controls, across the three interference resolution tasks while
MB did not. All three patients showed reduced STM ability compared to
normals. Patient EV showed a pattern of semantic STM deficit, while
patient ML, who was previously classified as a semantic STM patient,
showed both phonological and semantic STM impairments. In contrast,
MB showed a larger impairment in phonological STM. These results provide further evidence for the critical role of the LIFG in interference resolution in working memory. Additionally, they provide additional

197

Poster Session F

Executive Processes: Monitoring & Inhibitory Control

evidence for a relationship between the ability to resolve interference
and ability to maintain semantic information in STM, as the two patients
with larger semantic STM deficits showed exaggerated interference.

F111

F109

Appelbaum1, Ruth Krebs1,3, Jens-Max Hopf2,3, Marty Woldorff1,4; 1Center for
Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC, 2Leibniz-Institute for
Neurobiology, Magdeburg, Germany, 3Otto-von-Guericke-University,
Magdeburg, Germany, 4Duke University, Durham, NC — Successful behavior

THE ROLE OF MEDIAL-FRONTAL CORTEX IN LANGUAGE ACQUISITION

Paul W. Gosset1, Olav E. Krigolson1, Todd C. Handy1; 1The University of British
Columbia — Recent experimental evidence suggests that a reinforcement
learning system within medial-frontal cortex plays a key role in several
types of learning. For instance, one recent study demonstrated that the
medial-frontal system plays a role in the acquisition of perceptual expertise (Krigolson, Pierce, Tanaka, & Holroyd, 2009). In the present study,
we sought to assess whether or not the medial-frontal system plays a
role in language acquisition. The error-related negativity (ERN) is a component of the event-related brain potential (ERP) thought to reflect error
evaluation by the medial-frontal system. To examine the role of medialfrontal cortex in language acquisition, we recorded ERP data while participants learned symbol word pairings for a novel language via a trial
and error shaping process. Our behavioural results demonstrated that
participants learned the correct meanings of the symbols, as indicated by
improvements in accuracy and decreases in response time. Further, the
number of symbols participants knew significantly increased over the
course of the experiment. Analysis of feedback averaged waveforms
showed differences between correct and error trials consistent with previous accounts of the ERN. Interestingly, analysis of the stimulus averaged waveforms revealed activations over posterior parietal and
temporal regions of cortex that increased with learning. In sum, our
results suggest that a reinforcement learning system in medial-frontal
cortex plays a role in language acquisition.

F110

WHY THE WHITE BEAR IS STILL THERE: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
EVIDENCE FOR IRONIC SEMANTIC ACTIVATION DURING THOUGHT
SUPPRESSION Ryan J. Giuliano1, Nicole Y. Y. Wicha1,2; 1University of Texas,

San Antonio, 2University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio —

Research on the paradoxical effects of thought suppression has lead to
the viewpoint that increased unwanted thoughts are due to an ironic
monitoring process, which increases activation of the very thoughts one
is trying to rid from consciousness. However, there is no direct evidence
that thoughts become more accessible during suppression. Event-related
potentials were recorded from word onset during a lexical decision task
that included a target, unrelated and non- words. Participants (N = 20)
suppressed then expressed, or vice versa, thoughts of each target word
across different blocks while pressing a button for non-words. Results
revealed larger N1 amplitude for expressed than suppressed targets,
suggesting that expression elicited greater perceptual processing than
suppression. In contrast, we observed smaller N400 amplitude for target
words when suppressed than expressed, suggesting that semantic activation was facilitated by thought suppression despite the decreased perceptual processing relative to expression. Only target word ERPs, and
not unrelated or non-words, were modulated by the mental control conditions. Replicating prior findings, self-reported occurrences of target
thoughts during a free association period prior to each lexical decision
block were more frequent during expression than suppression revealing
a dissociation between brain and behavioral responses. Overall, results
provide electrophysiological evidence for ironic semantic activation during thought suppression, and demonstrate one way to measure the elusive unconscious mind. These findings shed light on a cognitive
mechanism that may become dysfunctional in clinical populations suffering from recurring intrusive thoughts, such as OCD, PTSD, and
depression.

198

PINNING DOWN RESPONSE INHIBITION IN THE BRAIN – CONJUNCTION
ANALYSES OF THE STOP-SIGNAL TASK Carsten Boehler1,2, Lawrence

requires a finely-tuned coordination of initiating and inhibiting motor
programs to react effectively to constantly changing environmental
demands. A particularly useful paradigm for investigating inhibitory
motor control is the Stop-signal task, where already-initiated responses
to Go-stimuli are to be inhibited upon the rapid subsequent presentation
of a Stop-stimulus (yielding successful and unsuccessful Stop-trials).
Although this paradigm has been used extensively in functional neuroimaging, there is no consensus on which functional comparison is best
suited to characterize response-inhibition-related brain activity. Here,
we utilize conjunction analyses of successful and unsuccessful Stop-trials that were each contrasted against a reference condition. This conjunction approach identifies only processes shared by both Stop-trial types,
thereby capitalizing on the presence of response-inhibition-related activity in both conditions. Using this approach on fMRI data from human
subjects, we identify a network of brain structures common to both types
of Stop-trials, including lateral-inferior-frontal and medial-frontal cortical areas and the caudate nucleus. Moreover, comparisons with a reference condition matched for visual stimulation identified additional
activity in the right inferior parietal cortex that appeared to play an
important role in enhancing the processing of the Stop-stimuli. Finally,
differences in stopping efficacy (measured by the Stop-signal response
time, SSRT) across subjects were associated with activity variations in
the left anterior insula. Importantly, however, this region was also associated with general task accuracy (which furthermore correlated
inversely with the SSRT), suggesting that it might actually reflect a more
general mechanism of performance control that supports response inhibition in a relatively unspecific way.

F112

THE INFLUENCE OF MOTOR SYSTEM FAMILIARITY ON ERROR
EVALUATION IN MEDIAL-FRONTAL CORTEX Andrew J. Cornax1, Olav E.

Krigolson1, Todd C. Handy1; 1University of British Columbia — In general, people gain motor familiarity and dominance with the limb with which they
do most of their daily tasks and can experience difficulties when trying
to work with less practiced limbs. For example, this can easily be seen
when right-handed people attempt to write with their left hand. Here we
sought to assess whether or not motor system familiarity influenced
error evaluation within medial-frontal cortex. The error-related negativity (ERN) is a component of the event-related brain potential (ERP) associated with error evaluation within medial-frontal cortex. We
hypothesized that ERN amplitude would be influenced by motor system
familiarity, i.e., errors made by a less practiced movement effector would
elicit a larger ERN. On each experimental trial of our task, participants
heard an auditory tone and were asked to respond by pressing a mouse
button when they thought one second had elapsed. Response modality
changed several times during the task, with participants having to
respond to the auditory tone using their right hand, left hand, right foot,
and left foot in different experimental blocks. Analysis of the ERP waveforms elicited by the feedback stimuli revealed an ERN in all four experimental conditions. Additionally, we found that ERN amplitude was
modulated by response modality – the ERN elicited by errors made by
the right hand was smaller than the ERN elicited by errors made by the
left hand and either of the feet. Importantly, these data suggest that
motor system familiarity impacts error evaluation within medial frontal
cortex.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Methods: Neuroimaging
F113

TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION: A PARADIGM FOR THE STUDY
OF SELECTIVE RESPONSE INHIBITION. A. D. van Campen1, W. P. M. van

den Wildenberg1, K. R. Ridderinkhof1; 1University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands — Selective inhibitory control when selecting between two

actions is an important aspect of goal-directed behavior. In this study,
we applied transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) during action selection in a conflict situation. The goal of the experiment is to link behavioral indices of top-down suppression of involuntary response impulses
with physiological markers and to track its time course. In the Simon
task, participants respond to a relevant feature (circle color) while ignoring an irrelevant feature (circle location). This setup yields conflict trials
in which participants should respond with their left hand according to
the color of a circle, while the right stimulus position automatically activates a right-hand response. Single-pulse TMS is applied on the motor
cortex at five different time intervals after signal onset to track the excitation and suppression of cortico-spinal motor activity related to the right
hand. The timing of the TMS pulse is based on individual reaction time
distribution parameters. Motor evoked potentials (MEPs) and silent periods (SPs) are derived from the electromyogram recorded from the
thumb muscle. Results indicate a dynamic pattern of selective suppression of interfering response tendencies, resulting in smaller interference
effects for slower responses. This pattern is accompanied by changes in
duration of SP and differences in cortico-spinal excitability measured
with MEP. TMS seems to be an appropriate tool to measure cortical inhibition during goal-directed action selection in conflict situations.

F114

ERROR MONITORING AND FEEDBACK-BASED LEARNING IN OBSESSIVECOMPULSIVE DISORDER Tanja Endrass1, Christian Kaufmann1, Anja

Riesel1, Svenja Köhne1, Rosa Grützmann1, Norbert Kathmann1; 1HumboltUniversity Berlin, Germany — Event-related brain potential (ERP) and functional neuroimaging studies in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) revealed increased error-related negativity (ERN)
amplitudes and hyperactivity in fronto-medial brain regions following
incorrect responses. To date, inconsistent results exist with respect to
processing of performance feedback which is associated with similar
brain regions and comparable underlying processes. The ERN is
assumed to reflect the activity of a monitoring system that triggers subsequent adjustment of cognitive control to prevent future errors or to
learn from previous incorrect behavior. The aim of the current study was
to elucidate the relationship between performance monitoring in OCD
and behavioral alterations in terms of feedback-based learning. 14 OCD
patients and 14 healthy controls performed a probabilistic learning task
and a modified flanker task while ERPs were recorded. This enabled the
investigation of response- and feedback-related ERPs in the same group
of participants. Although both groups achieved comparable learning
performance, OCD patients showed superior avoidance learning in the
probabilistic learning task. Consistent with earlier findings, OCD
patients had enhanced error-related negativities compared to healthy
controls, but they had reduced feedback-related negativities in the learning task. These data indicate that OCD patients show altered error monitoring that is linked to their enhanced effort to avoid potential negative
consequences of their actions as reflected by better avoidance learning.

Methods: Neuroimaging
F115

A FMRI STUDY OF COGNITIVE SKILL RELATED NEURONAL PLASTICITY
Natasha Ludwig1, Stephen Romero1, Natalie Staples1, Earl Zimmerman2,
Jordan Grafman3; 1Union College, 2Albany Medical College, 3National Institute
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke — In the present study, Functional

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) was utilized to investigate neuronal plasticity associated with learning a cognitive skill. Twenty participants were scanned over three days of training with an alphabet

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session F
addition task (e.g., e+3=h True or False?). Behavioral results suggest that
participant’s performance became automated with practice due to a
switch in cognitive strategy from mentally counting-up in the alphabet
to retrieving the answer from memory. On the first day of training, participants’ mental counting performance was associated with activation in
the left inferior frontal gyrus, left cingulate gyrus and right parahippocampul gyrus. Left caudate nucleus activation can be associated with the
task general strategy choice process. The imaging results also support
the occurrence of dynamic activation changes across three days of practice. Linear increases in activation in the right insula, left medial frontal
gyrus and left transverse gyrus can be associated with the formation of
problem specific representations to support the switch to memory based
performance. A linear activation increase that was not task specific was
found in the superior frontal gyrus. One possible interpretation is in
terms of the development of an experiment specific representation of the
meta-knowledge associated with performance in this paradigm. A quadratic change in activation (increase and then decrease in activation) in
the left cingulate gyrus was probably due to attentional changes during
all 3 scanning sessions. These results suggest that neuroplastic based
activation changes can be tracked with fMRI and further suggests the
utility of using learning in fMRI studies.

F116

IN SEARCH OF A COMMON REPRESENTATIONAL SPACE FOR DECODING:
COMPARING ANATOMICAL ALIGNMENT, FUNCTIONAL VOXEL
MATCHING, AND HYPERALIGNMENT J. Swaroop Guntupalli1, James V.

Haxby1; 1Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH — Many recent studies have

shown that the information content of brain states can be decoded using
multivariate pattern analysis of functional MRI (fMRI) measures. Since
cross-subject registration of brain anatomy aligns only coarse structure,
most studies build subject-specific decoding models because of individual variability at fine-scale in both anatomical structure and functional
patterns. To address this issue, we have developed a new alignment
method, hyperalignment, that aligns each subject's multi-voxel representational space to a common space. We derived our alignment parameters
using fMRI data that we obtained from ventral temporal cortex while ten
subjects watched a full-length action movie. We then used these parameters to transform fMRI data from another experiment, in which the same
ten subjects were shown images of seven categories of objects and faces,
into the same common high-dimensional space. A classifier trained on
the hyperaligned data for nine subjects from the second experiment to
classify these seven categories was able to predict the categories of leftout subject’s hyperaligned data with a mean classification accuracy of
61.3%. This between-subject classification (BSC) performance was equivalent to mean within-subject classification (accuracy=60.3%) and was
significantly higher than BSC after anatomical alignment (mean accuracy=47.8%). We further constrained alignment to functional voxel
matching which derives an optimal one-to-one mapping of voxels
between subjects (a permutation) which gave a mean BSC accuracy of
57%. These results demonstrate that hyperalignment provides a better
functional alignment than does voxel matching and anatomical alignment, and efficiently captures between subject commonalities in
response patterns.

Methods: Other
F117

REDUCED
CORTICAL
THICKNESS
IN
LEFT
POSTERIOR
TEMPOROPARIETAL REGIONS IN HIGH FUNCTIONING AUTISM
SPECTRUM DISORDER Nathan Dankner1, Alex Martin1, Jay Giedd2,

Gregory Wallace1; 1Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, 2Child Psychiatry
Branch, NIMH — Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) share core social communication deficits that may be reflected in anatomical differences in
specific regions of the brain. Previous studies suggest that in ASD early
cortical overgrowth is followed by prematurely arrested growth. Only a
few studies have investigated cortical thickness (CT) in ASD, with incon-

199

Poster Session F
sistent results, likely due to variable ages and/or small sample sizes. In
one of the largest studies to date, we assessed differences in CT between
high functioning adolescent males with ASD and typically developing
(TD) males. T1-weighted MPRAGE 3T MRI scans were acquired from 40
high-functioning males with ASD and from 41 TD males matched
group-wise on age (range 12-24 years), IQ (?85), and handedness. Vertexbased analysis using the FreeSurfer image analysis suite revealed significantly thinner (cluster-corrected ps<.05) cortex in the ASD group limited
to posterior temporoparietal regions of the left hemisphere (i.e. postcentral/superior parietal gyri, supramarginal gyrus, superior temporal sulcus, inferior temporal gyrus, as well as a trending cluster in fusiform
gyrus (p=.084)). Consistent with notions of early arrested growth, group
differences were restricted to thinner cortex in ASD, which was regionally specific and may reflect social communication difficulties.

F118
Victoria
Leavitt1,
Glenn Wylie1, Bharat Biswal2, Helen Genova1, John DeLuca1, Nancy
Chiaravalloti1; 1Kessler Foundation Research Center, 2University of Medicine
and Dentistry of New Jersey — Functional neuroimaging research has

NEURAL CONNECTIVITY IN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS

sought to characterize unique patterns of activation in individuals with
multiple sclerosis (MS) during various cognitive tasks. However, few
investigations have explicitly endeavored to characterize functional and
effective connectivity in the context of a cognitive task for this population. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), 16 individuals with MS were compared to 17 healthy controls (HCs) during
performance of a processing speed task, a modified version of the Symbol Digit Modality Task. Functional connectivity analysis of the fMRI
data–pair-wise correlations between regions shown to be active during
task performance—showed decreased connectivity in left and right inferior frontal regions, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), and parietal
regions (P < 0.05, corrected) in the MS group relative to HCs. This
decreased connectivity was seen both within and across hemispheres.
Results using Granger causality analysis revealed strikingly different
patterns of effective connectivity in individuals with MS compared to
HCs. Notably, whereas HCs had cross-hemisphere connections in inferior frontal gyrus, DLPFC, and parietal regions, only one cross-hemisphere connection was observed in the MS group (left to right DLPFC).
The implications of dramatically decreased connectivity in individuals
with MS in the context of a cognitive task will be discussed.

F119

THE NEUROIMAGING INFORMATICS TOOLS AND RESOURCES
CLEARINGHOUSE (NITRC) David Kennedy1, Christian Haselgrove1,2, Jeff

Grethe3, Nina Preuss4, Robert Buccigrossi4, Keith Wagner4, Haig Evans1
University
of
Massachusetts
Medical
School,
Kavaldjian4;
2Neuromorphometrics, Inc., 3UCSD, 4TCG, Inc. — We report on the use of a
neuroimaging informatics knowledge environment for functional and
structural neuroimaging tools and resources entitled: Neuroimaging
Informatics Tools and Resources Clearinghouse (NITRC). Initiated in
October 2006 through the NIH Blueprint for Neuroscience Research,
NITRC’s mission is to foster a user-friendly knowledge environment for
the functional and structural neuroimaging community. By continuing
to identify existing software tools and resources valuable to this community, NITRC’s goal is to support its researchers dedicated to enhancing,
adopting, distributing, and contributing to the evolution of neuroimaging analysis tools and resources. Located on the web at www.nitrc.org,
this site promotes software tools and resources, vocabularies, test data,
and databases, thereby extending the impact of previously funded, neuroimaging informatics contributions to a broader community. NITRC
gives researchers greater and more efficient access to the tools and
resources they need, better categorizing and organizing existing tools
and resources, facilitating interactions between researchers and developers, and promoting better use through enhanced documentation and
tutorials—all while directing the most recent upgrades, forums, and
updates. In Summary, NITRC facilitates access to an ever growing num-

200

Methods: Other
ber of functional and structural neuroimaging tools and resources (220 to
date). We encourage the community to continue providing design and
content feedback. Averaging monthly 525,000 hits and 9,000 unique visitors, NITRC is now an established knowledge environment for the functional and structural neuroimaging community where tools and
resources are presented in a coherent and synergistic environment for
the advancement of functional and structural neuroimaging research.

F120

HOW RELIABLE ARE THE RESULTS FROM FMRI? Craig Bennett1, Scott

Guerin2, Christa-Lynn Donovan3, Elissa Aminoff1, Danielle King1, Amy
Frithsen1, Brian Lopez1, Michael Miller1; 1University of California, Santa
magnetic
Barbara, 2Harvard University, 3Stanford University — Functional
resonance imaging is one of the most important methods for in vivo
investigation of cognitive processes in the human brain. Within the last
two decades an explosion of research has emerged using fMRI, revealing
the underpinnings of everything from motor and sensory processes to
the foundations of social cognition. While these results have opened our
eyes to the potential of neuroimaging, important questions regarding the
reliability of these results remain unanswered. In this poster we report
on the test-retest reliability of fMRI data from three existing neuroimaging investigations. With this data we examine how the factors of task
type (episodic recognition, two-back working memory, perceptual discrimination), experimental design (block design, event-related design),
and test-retest interval (20 minutes, 24 hours, 6 months) influence reliability. We used intra-class correlation (ICC) to measure reliability across
these factors. There were several findings from this investigation. First,
reliability varies greatly depending on the task used. Perceptual discrimination had the highest reliability (mean ICC = 0.60), followed by working memory (mean ICC = 0.52), and then episodic recognition (mean ICC
= 0.48). Second, block designs generally had greater reliability relative to
event-related designs. Third, extended test-retest intervals reduced the
reliability of the results. It appears to be the case that numerous factors
influence the reliability of fMRI results. It also appears to be the case that
fMRI studies may be less reliable than many scientists assume. [Supported by the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies through grant
W911NF-09-D-0001 from the U.S. Army Research Office]

F121

EVIDENCE FOR NEURAL CONNECTIVITY ANOMALIES IN ADULT FEMALE
FMR1 PREMUTATION CARRIERS WITHOUT EVIDENT DEGENERATIVE
NEUROCOGNITIVE SYMPTOMS Siddharth
Srivastava1,4,
Heather

Shapiro1,4, Yingratana McLennan1,4, Lindsey Marcelino1,4, Christine
Godwin1,4, Flora Tassone2,4, Susan Rivera1,3,4, Tony J. Simon1,4; 1M.I.N.D
Institute, 2School of Medicine, 3Center for Mind and Brain, 4University of
California, Davis, CA — Fragile X premutation carriers (fXPCs) are defined
as having trinucleotide expansions between 55 - 200 CGG repeats in the
in the 5’ untranslated region of the fragile X mental retardation 1 gene
(FMR1). Typically female fXPCs below age 40 years old present with few
or mild cognitive and behavioral non-debilitating impairments and
increased frequency of autoimmune diseases including autoimmune
thyroid diseases, fibromyalgia and multiple sclerosis. Relative to males,
fewer females develop the degenerative tremor/ataxia disorder (FXTAS)
in later life, though the prevalence of these cases is currently unknown.
Using Diffusion Tensor Magnetic Resonance Imaging we derived anatomical connectivity metrics, sensitive to the tracto-linear water diffusion integrity in white matter, to explore regionally significant anomalies
in the brains of young female fXPCs with mild or no neurocognitive
symptoms. A group analysis comparing Fractional Anisotropy (FA) values in neurotypical participants and female fXPCs showed regionally
significant clusters at the level of medial cerebellar peduncle (MCP, bilateral) and in the white matter in close proximity to the fornix, where FA
values in the typicals were higher then the fXPC group. Correlation with
CGG repeat length within the fXPC group revealed that the FA values in
the left MCP cluster showed a significant negative linear correlation with
CGG repeat length. The FA anomalies correspond anatomically with T2

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Neuroanatomy

Poster Session F

hyperintensities in MCP of older patients with FXTAS, indicating that a
discriminative, and possibly predictive, imaging phenotype exists at the
mesoscopic level in the brains of young females fXPCs presenting without clear degenerative neurocognitive symptoms.

(amygdale/hippocampal head). Data suggest a specific neural dissociation of AD and the three FTLD subtypes. Results support the incorporation of standardized imaging inclusion criteria into future diagnostic
systems, which will be crucial for early diagnosis and treatment.

Neuroanatomy

Other

F122

F124

A NOVEL SETUP FOR INTEGRATIVE EEG AND FMRI IN BOTH HUMAN AND
NON-HUMAN PRIMATES Ricardo Gil-da-Costa1, Thomas Liu2, Jeng-Ren

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CORPUS CALLOSUM SIZE AND INTELLIGENCE
IN A LARGE HEALTHY REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE Hooman
Ganjavi1,

Duann2, Raynard Fung1, Thomas Albright1; 1Salk Institute for Biological
Studies, 2UCSD — A full understanding of the underlying neural sub-

strates of behavior requires multiple levels of analyses, from the single
neuron to brain areas and neuronal networks. A major gap in the linking
of human and non-human primate (NHP) research has been the lack of
adequate translation of findings resulting from different methods. In
humans, non-invasive methods provide insight into large-scale patterns
of neuronal activity but have limited temporal and/or spatial resolution.
Conversely, the invasive methods used in NHPs provide fine-grained
analysis of single neurons activity but little insight into the larger-scale
patterns. It is paramount to adequately integrate the vast knowledge
gained from animal electrophysiological studies on molecular and cellular mechanisms with current and future findings from human brain
imaging studies on large-scale neuronal networks. We will present the
development of a novel brain imaging setup for the simultaneous acquisition and integration of electroencephalography (EEG) and functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data in humans and non-human primates (NHPs), which we believe will contribute to bridge this gap by: i)
Developing an integrative approach for simultaneous acquisition, and
subsequent analysis of EEG recordings and fMRI scans in humans; ii)
Implementing a novel non-invasive whole-brain EEG system for awake
NHPs; and iii) Establishing a common platform for simultaneous EEG
and fMRI acquisition in both species. These developments allow for the
application of the same methods in humans and NHPs, thus allowing
these data sets to be directly compared, bridging not only species but
also “Systems” and “Cellular” neuroscience research.

F123

IMAGING MARKERS RELIABLY DETECT AND DISSOCIATE ALZHEIMER’S
DISEASE AND FRONTOTEMPORAL LOBAR DEGENERATION Matthias

Schroeter1,2, Jane Neumann1; 1Max-Planck-Institute for Human Cognitive and
Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2University of Leipzig, Day Clinic of Cognitive
Neurology, Leipzig, Germany — Recently, the incorporation of standardized imaging inclusion criteria into future diagnostic systems has been
suggested. Alzheimer's disease (AD) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) are the most common dementia syndromes. Comprehensive meta-analyses are the best choice to validate the impact of imaging
markers on diagnosis and differential diagnosis. Accordingly, we characterized the prototypical neural correlates of AD/FTLD in systematic
and quantitative meta-analyses involving 1618 patients and 1448 controls by calculating anatomical likelihood estimates. For AD and its prodromal stage (mild cognitive impairment, MCI) we revealed alterations
in a temporoparietal network related to episodic memory. AD additionally involved frontomedian-thalamic structures. Impairments in the
(trans-)entorhinal area/hippocampus and the inferior parietal lobules
predicted most reliably the progression from MCI to AD, whereas
changes in the posterior cingulate cortex and precuneus were unspecific.
For FTLD, we “triple dissociated” the prototypical neural substrates of
its three subtypes (frontotemporal and semantic dementia, progressive
non-fluent aphasia). Whereas the first subtype affected the frontomedian
network of social cognition, the second was related to the inferior temporal poles and amygdalae discussed in the context of conceptual knowledge, semantic information processing, and social cognition. The last
FTLD subtype involved the left frontotemporal network for phonological and syntactical processing. A conjunction analysis identified only one
brain area, where atrophy coincided in AD and semantic dementia

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Sherif Karama2, John Lewis2, Penny MacDonald1, Alan Evans2, Brain
Development Cooperative Group3; 1McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
2McConnell Brain Imaging Centre, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, 3National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland — The relationship between corpus callosum (CC) and cognitive ability in healthy individuals is unclear. Studies thus far have produced inconsistent results. We have attempted to address this issue by
examining this relationship in a large healthy representative sample. We
used structural MRI and IQ data collected in almost 500 children and
adolescents aged six to 18 as a part of the NIH MRI Study of Normal
Brain Development. Mid-sagittal CC area was calculated and subdivided using a semi-automated technique based on the Clarke technique.
Cognitive ability was measured using the full-scale WASI-IQ which consists of performance intelligence (PIQ) and verbal intelligence (VIQ) subscores. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 16.0. A significant
negative correlation was found between CC area and IQ after correcting
for brain volume. When subjects were divided into children (age < 12)
and adolescents (age ? 12), the relationship held for children, but not for
adolescents. Dividing the subjects by gender revealed that the negative
correlation was only found in males. The relationship was stronger in
PIQ than VIQ. Our data suggests that the relationship between CC area
and intelligence is a function of age and gender, and that CC area is more
related to PIQ rather than VIQ. Our study adds support to the notion
that there is a negative correlation between CC area and intelligence that
depends on age and gender.

F125

A NEW PARADIGM TO STUDY ACOUSTIC SHORT-TERM MEMORY

Synthia Guimond1, François Vachon2, Christine Lefebvre1, Stephan Grimault1,
studied
Pierre Jolicoeur1; 1Université de Montréal, 2Université Laval — We
acoustic short-term memory (ASTM) using the event-related potential
(ERP) technique. Other work in our lab has revealed an increased negativity at fronto-central electrodes during retention when we increased
the number of tones varying in pitch (i.e. the load) in a sequence to be
maintained in ASTM. In the present study, we created a new paradigm
to avoid sequential presentations in order to be sure that this activity
was caused by the retention of pitch and not by the retention of melodic
contour of the sequences. In the new paradigm, we presented the to-beremembered tones simultaneously, rather than sequentially. We found
the same increase in fronto-central negativity when we increased the
load that had been found in previous work with sequences of tones. This
effect was absent in a control task involving the same stimulation but no
requirement to remember the information. These results show that
fronto-central negativity corresponds to the active maintenance of acoustic objects in ASTM rather than to the complexity or length of melodic
contour, or the mere perception of multiple sound objects.

F126

NEURAL CORRELATES OF INTENSIVE MOBILITY TRAINING AND VIRTUAL
ENVIRONMENT REHABILITATION Alexandria Reynolds1, Julie Conder1,

David Blitzer1, Brennan Baylis1, Mackenzie Sunday1, Peter Lauten1, Debra
Krotish2, Stacy Fritz1; 1University of South Carolina, 2Palmetto Health Richland
Hospital — Stroke is a leading cause of disability, causing a large decrement on the person’s quality of life. Recent aggressive and intensive
therapeutic approaches show promise for great reduction of impairments caused by brain damage. The purpose of this study is to investi-

201

Poster Session F
gate the neural effects of two novel mobility therapies, Intensive
Mobility Training (IMT) and Virtual Environment Rehabilitation
(VEHAB), and their effects on motor function. Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) was used to detect therapy-induced neural
changes in patients with hemiparesis. Subjects performed three motor
tasks while undergoing fMRI scanning, and were scanned both prior to
and after the rehabilitation therapy. Responding to visual cues, subjects
were instructed to move their right or left limb and perform the following in succession: toe-point, flexion-extension, and hand-grip. The pretherapy fMRI data were analyzed using the FEAT method in FSL and
compared to the analyses of brain activity conducted after completing
the two-week intensive therapies. In some patients, therapy increased
the amount and extent of activation associated with the motor tasks
within the motor cortex; in other cases, therapy appears to have
recruited a large network outside of motor cortex as evidenced by
widely distributed increases in activation. In a second part of the study,
structural scans including T1, T2, and Diffusion-Weighted Images, were
collected prior to therapy to be used as a predictor of the degree of motor
improvement from therapy. Preliminary results suggest that both therapeutic approaches are most successful in patients where white matter is
relatively spared.

F127

WHITE MATTER CHANGES IN FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA AS
REVEALED BY DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING Kyle B. Womack1, Jeremy F.

Strain2, John Hart2, Ramon Diaz-Arrastia1; 1University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center at Dallas, 2University of Texas at Dallas — We
hypothesize

that differences in white matter integrity exist between subjects with
Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD) and normal controls. Diffusion Tensor
Imaging (DTI) is an MRI technique that is sensitive to changes in white
matter integrity. We used DTI to look at group differences in fractional
anisotropy (FA) between subjects with FTD and normal controls. DTI
scans were obtained in 32 subjects, 16 FTD and 16 controls. Images were
processed using the DTIfit and Tract Based Spatial Statistics (TBSS) tools
from the FSL software package. We performed a voxel-wise comparison
of the central core white matter skeleton using a threshold-free cluster
analysis with correction for multiple comparisons (?=0.05). Reductions
in FA were widespread. In the mid-saggital slice, the anterior half of the
corpus callosum, a small area at the isthmus of the corpus collosum and
the fornix showed reductions in FA. FA was reduced in the forceps
minor and in much of the inferior prefrontal white matter. FA was also
reduced in some parieto-occipital tracts, more notably on the right. To
assess the contribution of reduced FA to neuropsychological measures,
test scores for all subjects were correlated with the DTI measures. Moderate correlations between the mean FA of the anterior corpus callosum
and Mini Mental Status Exam (r=0.527), Digit Symbol (r=0.459), Controlled Oral Word Association Test (r=0.553), Trailmaking Tests A
(r=0.660) and B (r=0.566) (p<0.001 for all correlations). Conclusion: White
matter integrity is impaired in FTD subjects as compared to controls and
may contribute to impaired performance on neuropsychological tests.

Attention: Nonspatial
problem by offering a growing list of software tools for cognitive neuroscience research (e.g. AFNI, Caret, FSL, PsychoPy, PyEPL, PyMVPA,
Slicer) that are readily integrated into the Debian operating system with
its over 25000 other software packages. The well-known stability of
Debian provides a reliable foundation to carry out everyday research
routines, while NeuroDebian tracks the latest developments of relevant
software and makes them available in this stable and rich environment.
This poster demonstrates the simplicity of maintaining a NeuroDebianbased research system and shows how any researcher can easily set up
fairly complex computing environments and keep them up-to-date in
just a few minutes. Moreover it also shows how software developers of
neuroscience analysis tools benefit from the integration of their software
into the Debian system.

Attention: Nonspatial
F129

THE EFFECT OF BRIEF MINDFULNESS MEDITATION TRAINING ON
STROOP INTERFERENCE AND ADAPTATION EFFECTS: EVIDENCE FOR
INCREASED ATTENTIONAL FOCUS Mark Faust1, Fadel Zeidan2; 1University

of North Carolina at Charlotte, 2Wake Forest University — Long-term meditation practice is associated with changes in neural structure and function
and enhancement of cognitive functioning. There is increasing interest in
the effects of brief training. The present study examined the effect of
brief mindfulness meditation training on the ability to avoid interference
from distracting task-irrelevant information during performance of the
Stroop color naming task (i.e., interference). In Experiment1, we used
lists of congruent and incongruent stimuli. In Experiment 2, we used
manual responses and randomly mixed individual trials, and were interested in the extent to which participants exhibited cognitive control by
reducing the size of the Stroop interference effect on trials immediately
following an incongruent trial versus following a congruent trial (i.e.,
adaptation). In Experiment 1, the meditation group produced a smaller
Stroop interference effect, in comparison to non-meditators, in error
rates, but not naming times. In Experiment 2, we found that meditators
reduced the size of the Stroop effect following an incongruent trial
(adaptation), in error rates and not response latencies, at both short and
long delays, whereas non-meditators only did so at the short delay. The
results of Experiment 1 suggest that brief meditation training resulted in
a reduction in lapses of attention. The results of Experiment 2 suggest
that meditators were better able to employ cognitive control processes to
modulate attentional settings on a trial by trial basis to handle potential
lapses of attention on incongruent trials. Overall, the results are consistent with recent suggestions that brief meditation training can improve
attentional focus.

F128

IMPROVING EFFICIENCY IN COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
WITH NEURODEBIAN Michael Hanke1,2, Yaroslav Halchenko1; 1Dartmouth

College, 2University of Magdeburg — Improving efficiency in cognitive neuroscience research with NeuroDebian Cognitive neuroscience research
involves an increasingly complex set of software packages covering all
aspects from stimulus delivery, data collection and analysis to the visualization of results. Maintaining a functional research environment is a
tedious task that takes away resources from actual research. Individual
labs often try to limit this manpower drain by restricting the variety of
available tools and only reluctantly upgrading their main analysis tools
to new releases. This approach has a negative impact on the overall
research efficiency, since it forces scientists to use particular -- potentially
outdated -- tools regardless of their personal preferences and, moreover,
disconnects the lab from the latest methodological developments in the
field. The NeuroDebian project (http://neuro.debian.net) addresses this

202

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition
Interactions
G1

did not interact with evolutionary relevance. Both evolutionary relevant
and evolutionary irrelevant threats led to increased P1 amplitude,
although the effect was somewhat stronger for modern threats. We conclude that the threat superiority effect is robust and largely independent
of the type of threatening stimulus.

NEURAL BASIS OF EMOTIONAL MODULATION WHILE MULTITASKING:
ERP ANALYSIS Sean Seaman1, Li Hsieh1, Lina Wu1, Richard Young2;

G3

investigated the role of emotion in multitasking using a task designed to
assess the effects of speech on visual event detection during simulated
driving. EEG brain activations and behavioral responses to visual stimuli
in a go/no go task were collected while concurrently answering spoken
questions. Behavioral results confirmed that visual event detection reaction time (RT) is slightly slowed by concurrent speech compared to no
speech. However, this effect was moderated by presenting speech stimuli in an angry voice -- RTs were faster for angry than neutral speech.
ANOVAs on within-subject ERPs among 16 subjects indicated that P300
amplitudes from parietal electrodes to target visual stimuli were elevated when a concurrent speech task was added to driving; crucially,
though, this elevation was reduced for P300s observed during angry
compared to neutral speech. Conversely, angry speech elicited larger
P300 peak amplitudes than neutral speech from the right anterior frontal
electrodes. Behavioral RTs were inversely correlated with P300 amplitude in the right anterior frontal region, indicating that neural activity
here is associated with both angry speech stimuli and improved multitasking performance. These ERP results support our previous fMRI and
MEG findings that the distraction effects of a secondary speech task on a
primary visual task RT during simulated driving are correlated with
increased cognitive load and attentional distribution. The novel contribution of this ERP study is that adding an angry emotional valence to the
speech attenuates this distraction effect and improves multitasking performance, likely via increases in right anterior frontal activity.

Beeman1; 1Northwestern University — Recent research has suggested that
people in a positive mood show reduced attentional selectivity and
broadened attentional filters. When participants listened to happy or sad
mood-inducing music while performing a center-focus flanker task (i.e.
report the center letter and ignore flanking distractors), they showed
greater interference from incongruent flankers in a happy mood than in
a sad mood (Rowe, Hirsh, & Anderson, 2007). This mood effect occurred
even as flanker eccentricity increased, suggesting that the participants’
broadened attentional scope impaired selective attention to the target.
Experiment 1 of the current study extends these findings by manipulating mood with film clips played before (not during) the attention task,
and by inducing an anxious mood rather than a sad mood. Sixty-six
undergraduate participants completed a flanker task in positive and anxious moods (and participants’ mood ratings indicated that the induced
moods were sustained through the flanker task that followed the mood
clips). Participants showed a greater flanker interference effect in the
positive mood condition than in the anxious mood condition, but the
effect was only reliable when the flankers were near the target (i.e. one
letter width away, but not two letter widths away). Experiment 2, underway, investigates the role of positive and anxious moods on the spread
of attention in a visual search task. We predict that participants will be
better able to detect targets appearing farther from fixation when in a
positive mood and will be better able to detect targets nearer to fixation
when in an anxious mood.

1

Wayne State University, 2School of Medicine, Wayne State University — We

G2

AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF THE THREAT SUPERIORITY EFFECT FOR
EVOLUTIONARY RELEVANT AND IRRELEVANT STIMULI Isabelle

Blanchette1, Christopher Brown2, Wael El-Deredy2; 1Universite du Quebec a
Trois-Rivieres, 2University of Manchester — The threat superiority effect
describes the fact that threatening stimuli attract attention particularly
efficiently. In ERP studies, one type of evidence for this is a modulation
of the P1 peak of the visual-evoked potential by threatening items. While
theories have suggested that evolutionarily relevant threats should be
preferentially processes, differential neural processing of evolutionary
relevant and irrelevant threats has not yet been examined empirically. In
this study we examined the effects of evolutionarily relevant (e.g. spiders and snakes) and irrelevant (e.g. knifes and syringes) threatening
cues. We used a dot-probe task where non-predictive threatening and
neutral cues were presented side by side, followed by neutral targets in
one of the two locations. We recorded EEG from 61 scalp locations and
examined ERPs to the target. The amplitude of the target P1 was
increased in contralateral electrodes when it followed in the same location as a threatening cue, showing a threat superiority effect. This effect

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

THE INFLUENCE OF HAPPY AND ANXIOUS MOODS ON THE SCOPE OF
SELECTIVE VISUAL ATTENTION Ezra Wegbreit1, Steven Franconeri1, Mark

G4

NEURAL CORRELATES OF EMOTIONS REGULATION IN THE HUMAN
BRAIN Moran Cerf1,2, Ralph Adolphs1, Itzhak Fried2,3; 1Computation and

Neural Systems, California Institute of Technology, 2University of California,
Los Angeles, 3Functional Neurosurgery Unit, Tel-Aviv Medical Center and
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University — Studies in emotions regulation show that subjects are able to alter their perception of a scene
using cognitive strategies. Several studies with functional imaging suggest that areas such as the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex are
involved in the task of regulating emotions in humans. We tested the
ability of patients implanted with micro wires prior to resective surgery
to control their emotions while viewing images that carry emotions with
low and high valence and arousal. Subjects were viewing images in two
conditions – either when they were instructed to emphasize with theh
images, and when they were instructed to regulate their emotions and
remain neutral when viewing the images. We recorded single units
activity from the amygdala, hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, parahippocampal cortex and more. Neurons show responses from various types:

203

Poster Session G
subsets of the neurons correlate with the successful regulation of emotions, while others respond to objective emotions reflected in the images,
or to the subjective rating of those emotions by subjects. We categorize
neurons by their response types (inhibition, excitation), latencies, and
the duration of activity during the task. We identify neurons that show
early response that is invariant to the emotions regulation (i.e. the neuron fires for various emotions either when the subject is emphasizing or
passively viewing the image), and then show a later response only when
the subject is reporting strong feelings towards the images. These results
suggest a neural specificity in emotions regulation, and show evidence
for interaction across brain areas during emotions regulation.

G5

THE AKAP5 GENE ENCODES A GENETIC MODIFIER OF AGGRESSION AND
ANGER CONTROL Björn Schott1,2,3, Sylvia Richter1,2, Xenia Gorny1, Ulrike

Krämer2, Grazyna Debska-Vielhaber1,2, Antoni Rodríguez-Fornells4, Carsten
Reissner5, Hans-Gert Bernstein2, Hans-Jochen Heinze1,2, Thomas Münte2,
Eckart Gundelfinger1, Constanze Seidenbecher1; 1Leibniz Institute for
Neurobiology, Magdeburg, Germany, 2University of Magdeburg, Germany,
3
Charite University Hospital, Berlin, Germany, 4University of Barcelona, Spain,
5University of Münster, Germany — Human aggressive behavior is modulated by negative emotions, particularly anger. Interindividual variability of aggression and anger is high and results, to considerable extent,
from genetic contributions. The A-kinase-anchoring protein AKAP5 is
involved in intracellular signaling related to monoaminergic neurotransmission, which has previously been linked to anger and aggression.
Here we report an association of human aggression and anger with a
genetic polymorphism (Pro100Leu) in the gene encoding A-kinaseanchoring protein 5 (AKAP5). Among 527 young, healthy individuals,
carriers of the less common Leu allele (15.6% allele frequency) scored
significantly lower in the physical aggression domain of the Buss-Perry
Aggression Questionnaire (BPAQ) and higher in the anger control
dimension of the State-Trait Anger Expression Inventory (STAXI). Functional MRI revealed an influence of AKAP5 Pro100Leu on the control of
emotional interference. In a modified version of the Eriksen flanker task
with task-irrelevant angry faces in the background, Leu carriers showed
increased medial frontal cortex (mFC) activation during emotional interference, which in turn predicted shorter reaction times and might be
related to the neural mechanisms underlying anger control. Immunohistochemistry revealed AKAP5 expression in the human mFC. Taken
together, our results suggest that AKAP5 Pro100Leu contributes to
genetic variability of aggression and anger as well as their cognitive control.

G6

COGNITIVE BEHAVIORAL THERAPY IS EFFECTIVE FOR REGULATING
CONDITIONED FEAR Ashley A. Shurick1, Lasana T. Harris1, Claire J.

Hoogendoorn1, Amy K. Roy2,3, Elizabeth A. Phelps1; 1New York University, 2New
York University, Child Study Center, 3Phyllis Green and Randolph Co-wen
Institute for Pediatric Neuroscience — Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
has been shown to be an effective treatment of anxiety disorders, including social phobia (Juster & Heimberg, 1995) and generalized anxiety disorder (Gould et al., 2004). Previous work has demonstrated that
employing cognitive reappraisal can lead to successful regulation of
emotional responses (e.g., Ochsner et al., 2002). Although cognitive reappraisal is a component of CBT, these studies do not directly assess
whether cognitive restructuring techniques used in CBT can regulate
emotional responses in a laboratory paradigm. Our aim in this study is
to utilize such techniques to attenuate conditioned fear responses. Using
a Pavlovian conditioning paradigm, we paired images of either snakes
or spiders with a mild shock to the wrist while collecting Galvanic skin
response (GSR). After conditioning, the experimental group received
CBT intervention aimed at decreasing their emotional response to the
shock and the conditioned stimuli. The control group discussed their
thoughts and emotions about the experiment, but did not receive any
instruction about cognitive restructuring. All participants returned 24

204

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions
hours later for a subsequent conditioning session. Results demonstrate a
significant difference in GSR between the CBT and control group during
the second session. Within the CBT group, conditioned fear decreased on
day two relative to day one. These results provide physiological evidence for the effectiveness of CBT in diminishing fear. We also present
data examining the neural correlates of emotion regulation with CBT.

G7

SITUATING EMOTION EXPERIENCE Christine Wilson-Mendenhall1, Lisa

Feldman Barrett2,3, Lawrence W. Barsalou1; 1Emory University, 2Boston
College, 3Harvard Medical School — Much emotion research has focused on
identifying biological patterns in the brain and body that characterize
affective experiences classified as basic emotions (e.g., fear, anger). An
alternative approach is to examine elements of emotion experience, such
as situational context, that produce the dynamic realization of an emotional state. For example, fear may occur in situations varying from a
physical danger to one’s body to a social threat to one’s ego or reputation, both of which require distinct, situated responses. In this fMRI
study, participants imagined a variety of situations in which they were
either in physical danger or being socially evaluated. Greater activation
for physical danger situations was observed in a network of sensorymotor and affective regions, which included the insula, lateral orbitofrontal cortex, and middle cingulate. In contrast, social evaluation situations activated a network of mental state (many regions in the ‘default’
network) and distinct affective regions, which included ventral medial
prefrontal cortex, medial orbitofrontal cortex, and the insula. Furthermore, participants’ prior ratings of familiarity and their experience of
‘being there’ immersed in each imagined situation were correlated with
activity in these networks. Whereas regions associated with visuospatial
guidance of action showed increased activation with greater familiarity
and immersion ratings for physical danger experiences, midline areas
implicated in the default network showed a similar profile for social
evaluation experiences. Taken together, these results suggest that situational context is critical to understanding how emotion experience is
grounded in the brain.

G8

AGE-RELATED NEURAL DIFFERENCES IN EMOTION PROCESSING ARE
MODULATED BY ELABORATION Maureen Ritchey1, Brandy BessetteSymons1,2, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke University, 2Ithaca College — Emotion

processing is generally conserved in older adults (OAs), but may be
associated with age-related neural differences: OAs exhibit increased
frontal and decreased posterior activations relative to young adults
(YAs) during emotion processing. Differences also emerge with respect
to emotional valence: OAs experience increased positive and decreased
negative affect, and remember proportionately more positive stimuli
than YAs. This pattern has been interpreted in terms of positivity bias as
well as negativity reduction. Critically, age-related valence differences
are thought to depend on OAs’ capacity for controlled or elaborative
processing, mediated by the frontal lobes. In the present study, we
address the relationship between valence and elaborative processing by
scanning YAs and OAs while they viewed negative, neutral, and positive pictures during either a deep, elaborative task or a shallow, perceptual task. Subsequent memory was tested after 1-2 days. Behavioral
findings indicate that YAs and OAs had comparable arousal ratings and
hit rates, showing memory advantages for deeply-encoded and/or emotional stimuli. Functional MRI results replicate increased frontal and
decreased posterior activations during emotion processing in OAs. Furthermore, this study provides novel evidence for age differences in
valence processing as a function of task: relative to YAs, OAs show
enhanced activity in left inferior frontal gyrus, medial prefrontal cortex,
and amygdala in response to positive versus negative stimuli, but only
during deep processing. This finding suggests that frontal regions associated with elaborative processing are disproportionately engaged for
positive material in aging. The relationship between these findings and
subsequent memory will also be discussed.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions

Poster Session G

G9

G11

ACQUISITION OF SITUATED EMOTION CONCEPTS Lauren McDonough1,

IS PREDICTION ERROR SIGNAL EXPRESSED ON THE SCALP?

Christine Wilson-Mendenhall1, Lisa Feldman Barrett2, Jessica Lake3, W. K.
Simmons4, Lawrence Barsalou1; 1Emory University, 2Boston College, 3Duke
emotion
University, 4The Laureate Institute for Brain Research — Much

research focuses on how simple stimuli produce automatic, bottom-up
activation of simple response circuits, often believed to reflect discrete
basic emotions with evolutionary significance. Human affect, however,
is embedded in complex situations, characterized by dynamically constructed conceptualizations from which emotional experiences emerge.
Thus we hypothesized that when a specific type of emotional situation is
experienced repeatedly, an entrenched representation of the situation
develops in memory comprised of a situated conceptualization and core
affect. To test this hypothesis, two groups of participants repeatedly
experienced fear either in physical situations (e.g., about to be hit by a
car) or in social situations (e.g., about to be fired), but not both. The two
groups also repeatedly experienced three other concepts (anger, plan,
observe) either in physical or social situations. After extended training in
one type of situation across two days, participants were scanned using
fMRI while again processing the four concepts in the same type of situation (physical or social) experienced in training. On each trial, participants heard a concept word, listened to the description of a situation,
and then rated how typical it is to experience the concept in the situation.
Use of a catch trial methodology in a randomized event-related design
allowed deconvolving BOLD activations for the emotion words from the
subsequent situations. As predicted, the same emotion word activated
different neural circuits in physical vs. social situations (between
groups), consistent with the prediction that frequently experiencing a
type of emotional situation establishes a situated emotion representation
in memory.

G10

ANXIETY HIGHLIGHTS THE NEGATIVE: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
EVIDENCE THAT PERSONALITY MODULATES AFFECTIVE PROCESSING
Johanna Simpson1, Stephen M. Lawrie2, Jeremy Hall2, David I. Donaldson1;
1University of Stirling, 2University of Edinburgh — Affective
processing is

known to influence cognitive processes like memory and attention; here
we demonstrate that anxiety modulates this relationship. Electrophysiological research has shown that late-positive potentials (LPPs, centroparietal positivities onsetting 400ms post-stimulus, reflecting sustained
attention to stimuli) are increased in response to pictures of emotional
compared to neutral content. Negative stimuli are consistently found to
elicit larger LPPs than neutral stimuli; however evidence for a similar
effect of stimuli with positive stimuli is mixed. One possible explanation
for these variable findings is that they reflect different levels of anxiety
across samples. For example, studies using behavioral methods suggest
anxiety can modulate the allocation of attention to emotional stimuli.
Here we investigate this possibility using neuroimaging methods. While
EEG was recorded, 24 healthy participants viewed negative, neutral and
positive images from the International Affective Picture System. The
sample was split into non-anxious and mildly anxious participants,
according to Beck’s Anxiety Inventory scores. Both groups exhibited
larger LPPs to negative and positive stimuli than neutral ones. Additionally, however, mildly anxious participants showed significantly larger
LPPs in response to negative than to positive stimuli. These results suggest that previous evidence for significant affective processing effects for
negative but not positive stimuli reflect the influence of anxiety as a
modulator. We conclude that even small differences in trait anxiety, well
below the threshold for clinical diagnosis, will produce differences in the
neural correlates of affective processing. By implication, studies of emotional processing must always assess and report trait anxiety as a possible confound.

Deborah
Talmi12, Lluis Fuentemilla2, Emrah Duzel2, Ray Dolan2; 1University of
Manchester, 2UCL — Optimal decision-making must be guided by the
evaluation of how previous decisions panned out. Prediction errors
(PEs) are theoretical learning signals which integrate two features of the
response to an outcome: the probability of its occurrence and its value.
According to an axiomatic model (Caplin and Dean, 2008) neurobiological signals expressing PEs will always be stronger for positive than negative events, weaker for likely than unlikely events, and equivalent for
fully-anticipated events. We employed these axioms to determine
whether magnetoencephalography/ electroencephalography (M/EEG)
recorded scalp signals express PEs. We acquired simultaneous M/EEG
data while 17 adults performed a gambling task. Participants selected
one of two gambles where value (win/loss) and probability (0-.25-.50.75-1) were manipulated in each trial. Gamble outcomes were revealed
for each trial. Analysing MEG data with SPM8 demonstrated that wins
and losses were differentiated as early as 200ms after outcome revelation. The MEG signal that differentiated wins and losses was later modulated by loss but not win probability, resembling the feedback-related
negativity observed in the EEG data at the same time but counter to the
second axiom. MEG signal varied parametrically with probability in the
win and loss domains, but with the same sign in both domains, counter
to the pattern predicted by combination of the first two axioms. By using
the axiomatic approach we determine that no scalp-time signal fulfilled
all criteria for PE. We discuss the theoretical implications this finding has
for interpretation of scalp signals as teaching signals, secondary to a primary striatal PE signal.

G12

QUICK TO PLEASE: ACCUMBENS RESPONSE TO ULTRASHORT
PRESENTATIONS OF HAPPY FACES Bhismadev Chakrabarti1,2, Caroline

Robertson1,3, Edward Bullmore1, Simon Baron-Cohen1; 1University of
Cambridge, 2University of Reading, 3NIMH, National Institutes of Health —
Happy faces presented below the threshold of conscious awareness
causes valence-specific changes in choice behavior, a phenomenon
known as “unconscious liking” (Berridge et al., 2003). Although the neural underpinnings of this phenomenon remain unclear, animal models
implicate the nucleus accumbens (NAc). In a 3T fMRI experiment, we
sought to test this hypothesis by measuring NAc response to unconsciously presented happy faces. 25 participants (13 female) performed a
block-design gender-discrimination task on static photographs of neutral faces. Each face was preceded by either a conscious (13.3ms) or
unconscious (133.3ms) prime of one of five expressions (happy, sad,
angry, disgust, neutral). The data was preprocessed using SPM2, and the
statistical analysis done using SPM8 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/
spm). A 50% probability mask of the NAc was created to estimate
regional response to happy faces. This found significantly greater bilateral activity in the NAc for short compared to long prime durations
(p=<.03), not observed for other emotions. A main effect of emotion compared to neutral expressions was observed for both long and short
primes, suggesting emotion-specific activity at both levels of awareness.
Additionally, the findings of Phillips et al. (2004) were replicated, demonstrating differential brain activity for disgust in the long vs. short
prime condition. Our results support Berridge’s hypothesis that the NAc
plays a crucial role in the 'unconscious' perception of social rewards such
as happy faces. This initial NAc response is inhibited at longer prime
durations. This parallels earlier results in fear perception, where the
amygdala responds to unconscious presentation of fearful stimuli.

G13

NEURAL CORRELATES OF THE ILLUSION OF CONTROL Sarah
1

1,2

1

2

Getz1,
Princeton

Wouter Kool , Matthew Botvinick ; Princeton University,
Neuroscience Institute — When skill factors are introduced into chance situations, people often confuse luck for skill. This phenomenon is called
the illusion of control (IOC; Langer, 1975). In the present investigation,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

205

Poster Session G
we attempt to identify neural correlates of the illusion of control. We
have behaviorally replicated Ellen Langer’s IOC finding in an fMRI compatible paradigm in which participants showed greater self reported
confidence in their performance in chance “lotteries” in a choice condition than in forced a choice condition. Specifically, in the choice condition, participants have the opportunity to choose between three
“lotteries”, and in the no choice condition, participants choices are
vetoed by the computer. Currently, we are conducting an fMRI experiment in which we are comparing participants’ reward prediction errors
(RPEs) under the choice and no choice conditions. RPEs respond to the
unexpected delivery or omission of reward, and have BOLD correlates in
the ventral striatum. We are examining RPEs to wins versus losses, payoff probability, and critically choice versus forced choice trials. Specifically, we predict: 1) predict positive RPE to wins and negative to losses;
2) larger RPEs when payoff probabilities are smaller; and 3) larger RPEs
to wins on forced choice trials than on choice trials, because reward
expectancy is higher in choice trials.

G14

EMOTIONAL STIMULI INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE CENTER OF
ATTENTION Limor Lichtenstein-Vidne1, Avishai Henik1, Safadi Ziad2;
1Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel,
2

College of Medicine, Howard University, Washington, DC — Goal
directed
behavior requires selective attention, namely, the ability to focus on taskrelevant information and to ignore irrelevant data. This work examines
whether the processing of peripheral emotional stimuli is contingent
upon their relevance to the task at hand. All three experiments in the current study employed a Stroop-flanker task that combined a spatial factor
and an emotional one. In the first and second experiments, participants
were asked to determine whether a central target, either emotional or
neutral, was located above or below a fixation point. In the third experiment participants were asked to decide whether the emotional target
was either positive or negative. Across all experiments participants were
asked to ignore the simultaneous presentation of peripheral emotional
distracting stimuli. Results showed that task-relevance was a significant
factor in processing peripheral stimuli. However, other factors may be
involved while processing emotional stimuli, such as task difficulty and
available cognitive resources.

G15

DIFFERENT PATTERN OF CEREBRAL ACTIVATION BETWEEN MEN AND
WOMEN WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA DURING RECOGNITION OF POSITIVELY
VALENCED IMAGES Nadia Lakis1,2, José Jiménez1,2, Adham Mancini-

Marië1,2, Annie Dubé1,3, Marc Lavoie1,2, Lahcen Bentaleb1, Adrianna
Mendrek1,2; 1Centre de Recherche Fernand-Seguin, Louis-H Lafontaine
Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, 2University of Montreal, 3Concordia
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada — Studies have shown that women

outperform men and have different patterns of cerebral activation during emotional memory. It has also been demonstrated that patients with
schizophrenia have impairments in both emotional processing and episodic memory. The goal of the study was to investigate both performance and brain function in schizophrenia men and women during an
emotional memory task. Men (19-patient [SZ-M];19-controls [HM]) and
women (18-patients [SZ-M];18-controls[HW]) were scanned using fMRI.
Subjects viewed neutral and positively charged images selected from the
international affective picture system (RUN 1). After a 15-minute interval of an unrelated cognitive task, participants underwent the emotional
memory task (RUN 2) where 50% of the images were new and the other
50% were old images from RUN 1. The participants' task was to determine which of the stimuli were old and which were new. SZ-M performed worse (mean % correct=80.13, SD=12.86) than HM (mean=93.55,
SD=6.68; p<0.001) and SZ-W performed worse (mean=76.61, SD=14.56)
than HW (mean=92.8, SD=5.92; p<0.001). The fMRI results revealed
greater activations in HM than in SZ-M in the right(R)-middle frontal
and R-inferior frontal gyri, and greater activation in SZ-M than in HM in
the bilateral(B)-postcentral, B-parahippocampal and R-superior tempo-

206

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions
ral cortex. HW, on the other hand, activated the left(L)-calcarine and Rmiddle frontal cortex to a greater degree than SZ-W. Thus, differential
patterns emerged between men and women in both groups; SZ-M demonstrated increased activity relative to HM whereas the opposite pattern
was observed in women. These results are intriguing considering the
lack of sex differences in performance.

G16

UNCONSCIOUS GOAL PRIMING CAN ALTER THE EFFECT OF ATTENTION
AND EMOTION DURING FACE PROCESSING Swann Pichon1, Patrik

Vuilleumier1; 1University of Geneva — Previous neuroscience research on
unconscious processing has focused on how brain responses to emotional stimuli are modulated by top-down processes, such as voluntary
endogenous attention. These effects do not provide a full account for
understanding how internal states can influence unconscious processing
in real life conditions. Abundant work in social psychology has demonstrated that unconscious goals can be primed by contextual manipulations, without subjects being aware of it, and later produce strong biases
on information processing or behavior. Here we examined how current
context, manipulated by means of an emotionally-laden semantic task,
can subsequently alter brain responses during an unrelated visual task.
We used fMRI in 20 subjects to compare responses to attended/unattended and fearful/neutral facial expressions as a function of the valence
(negative or neutral) of semantic representations activated by a previous
word completion task. Subjects were not aware of the priming manipulation. Replicating previous findings, our preliminary results show that
fusiform responses to faces were modulated by attention, whereas
amygdala responses to fearful faces were generally independent of
attention. Most critically, we observed an interaction between context
and attention in the right fusiform gyrus. Whereas attended (vs. unattended) faces produced increased fusiform responses after exposure to a
neutral semantic context, this attentional modulation was strongly
reduced after priming by negative semantics. Amygdala responses to
neutral faces were also relatively enhanced after negative priming. These
results suggest that both emotional and attentional processes may be significantly impacted by covert contextual manipulations, presumably
reflecting unconscious changes in long-lasting affective states.

G17

INFLUENCE OF STRESS ON RECOGNITION MEMORY OF EMOTIONAL
FACES ACROSS TIME OF DAY Bhaktee Dongaonkar1, Lynn Nadel1;
1

University of Arizona, Tucson — A number of studies using emotional stimuli have shown that stress induced before encoding enhances memory
recall while stress induced before retrieval impairs memory recall. Most
of these stimuli were emotional pictures, slides, or videos. Such complex
stimuli have information integrated from scenes, stories or narrations. In
addition, studies that tested memory across different times of day have
shown variable effects of memory for emotional material. We report here
a study of how stress affects the recognition of the simplest form of emotional expression – facial expression. On the first visit, subjects were
instructed to observe 120 emotional (40 sad, 40 happy, and 40 neutral)
faces carefully. Half (60) of the faces from the first visit were replaced
with new faces on the second visit, consistent across gender and expression. Twenty four hours later subjects were instructed to recognize the
faces they had seen on their first visit as old or new. Subjects were
stressed using the Trier Social Stress Test either before the encoding of
emotional faces on their first visit or before recognition of emotional
faces on their second visit or not stressed during either visit (control).
The groups were split for testing in the morning vs. afternoon. While
there was no main effect of stress on memory for emotional faces, under
some conditions stress impaired recognition memory for neutral faces.
Our data suggest that acute stress may have differential effects on recognition memory for emotional and neutral face stimuli.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions

Poster Session G

G18

G20

DEFICITS IN THE DETECTION OF TRUSTWORTHINESS AND ABERRANT
SOCIAL INTERACTIVE DECISION-MAKING: EVIDENCE FROM PATIENTS
WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA Mascha van 't Wout1,2, Alan Sanfey2,3; 1Brown

VISUAL AND EXECUTIVE CORTEX POTENTIATION IN RESPONSE TO
EMOTIONAL IMAGE STIMULI IMPLICITLY PRESENTED WITHIN A
COGNITIVE-MOTOR CONTROL TASK Michael Silverman1, Ji-Yeoun Yoo1,

University, 2University of Arizona, 3Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, The Netherlands — Schizophrenia is well-known to be associ-

Xun Liu1, Thomas Naidich1, Martin Goldstein1; 1Mount Sinai School of
Medicine — Background: Several neurologic syndromes (e.g., ALS) are

ated with poor social functioning, and prior research has demonstrated
social-emotional deficits thought to be due to dysfunction in brain areas
supporting emotional processing. However direct evidence that difficulties in the processing of social-emotional information affects interpersonal functioning is lacking. One important social-emotional signal that
has been shown to greatly influence social interactive decision-making is
facial trustworthiness, a rapid, automatic, process which appears to rely
on normal amygdala functioning. In this study we examined the hypothesis that patients with schizophrenia do not incorporate facial trustworthiness signals of others when playing social interactive games. Eight
patients with schizophrenia and 19 control participants played a oneshot Trust Game with 16 partners previously (and independently) rated
as untrustworthy and also with 16 partners rated as trustworthy. Correlational analyses showed that patients rated the trustworthiness of faces
in a similar fashion to control participants (r=0.84, p<0.001), but deviate
drastically from controls when judging the untrustworthiness of faces
(r=0.001, p=0.99). Interestingly, both trustworthiness and untrustworthiness cues did not correlate with the decision on how much to trust
another person in the Trust Game (r=0.28, p=0.14), a behavioral pattern
that appears to be robust in non-schizophrenia participants (r=0.8,
p<0.001). We conclude that even though patients are able to detect some
aspects of trustworthiness, this social cue does not guide their decisions
in a social context, thereby resulting in patients acting in a more economically advantageous manner.

marked by aberration of cognitive-emotional integration required for
adaptive behavioral regulation. While extensive prior studies have demonstrated differential neural activation in response to emotional stimuli,
and the interaction of such stimuli with motor inhibition, implicit emotional activation concurrent with explicit cognitive control task demand
(a real world-relevant challenge for neurologic syndromes) have been
less well-investigated. Objective: To elucidate neural substrates of cognitive-emotional integrative failure across neurologic syndromes, we
designed a novel neuropsychological visual image Go/No-Go activation
paradigm, delivered within an fMRI protocol. Methods: 11 healthy righthanded subjects participated. Neuropsychological activation task
involved serial presentation of emotionally-valenced images (IAPS) in a
tilted or non-tilted manner. Discrimination of tilt/non-tilt attribute comprised basis of index finger Go/No-Go response selection. Task performance was concurrent with gradient EPI-BOLD fMRI. Image
presentations were counterbalanced for valence type, arousal level, and
presentation as Go/No-Go signal. SPM5 software was employed for
image analysis using initial threshold of p<.01. Present study focused on
differential neural responsivity to high- vs. low-arousal stimuli for purpose of validating this paradigm’s implicit induction of emotional processing. Results: fMRI contrast of High- vs. Low-arousal image
conditions revealed greater activation in bilateral prefrontal, bilateral
occipito-temporal, and bilateral occipito-parietal cortices. Conclusion:
Implicit emotional visual image processing concurrent to cognitivemotor control task performance recruited a distributed neural network
including executive and visual (primary and associational) brain
regions. These findings support validity of this paradigm for probing
emotional arousal-dependent differences in neural function relevant to
neurologic syndromes demonstrating cognitive-emotional integrative
dyscontrol.

G19

HOW DOES THE BRAIN PROCESS FEEDBACK ABOUT ITSELF?

Heather
Mann1, Graeme McCaig1, Adi Steif1, Kalina Christoff1; 1University of British
Columbia — Real-time fMRI is an emerging branch of neuroimaging,
which allows people to view moment-to-moment feedback displaying
fluctuating activations in their own brains. Real-time feedback can been
used to train people to modulate activation levels in particular brain
regions, a tool that bears promise for clinical interventions, for instance,
training chronic pain sufferers to mitigate the acuteness of their pain
experiences (deCharms et al., PNAS, 2005). However, real-time fMRI
feedback introduces a paradox: the experience of viewing information
about one’s own brain activations must itself activate particular brain
regions. If the target region for real-time training is sensitive to fluctuations in feedback valence, the effects of viewing positive or negative
feedback could interact with the desired modulation, potentially compromising training. The present study investigates how viewing positive
or negative real-time feedback influences whole brain activation patterns. Subjects viewed simulated real-time feedback on a fluctuating
thermometer bar, which they believed to represent activity in their parahippocampal place area (PPA). The simulated feedback alternated
between blocks of encouraging and discouraging feedback, which varied
independently of a PPA modulation task. We found that shifts from positive to negative feedback were accompanied by increased activation in
the anterior cinculate cortex (ACC). By contrast, shifts from negative to
positive feedback were associated with activation of default mode network (DMN) regions, including the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC)
and posterior cingulate cortex (PCC). We conclude that positive feedback is likely to counteract down-regulation of DMN regions, suggesting
that these regions are not amenable to real-time modulation training.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

G21

MEMORY IMMERSION PRODUCES REDUCTION IN PAIN PERCEPTION

Damon Abraham1, Jill Fischer1, Robert Bosnak1, Tor Wager1; 1Columbia
University — Pain is known to be influenced by many factors beyond the
immediate physical stimulus. For instance, expectancies of drug effectiveness (placebo), expectancies about pain and its circumstance, anticipated rewards, self-efficacy beliefs, regulatory strategies, and other
factors all may help shape the context in which pain is perceived. Supporting this assertion, previous research implicates several brain regions
not directly associated nociception such as value processing (putamen,
ventral striatum, caudate), cognitive control (DLPFC), and affective processing (DMPFC, pgACC) regions as mediators of these factors on pain
reports. One interesting therapeutic technique used to treat pain in
patients is a memory immersion paradigm, in which positive affect
induced through therapist-guided autobiographical memory retrieval is
believed to reduce painful sensation. It is unknown however, whether
this reduction in pain is driven by the immersion therapy itself, or
merely by factors of expectancy and relaxation. To test this hypothesis,
participants were randomly assigned to an immersion condition
described above or control. Control participants were provided with
non-specific relaxation instructions that produced similar expectancies
of analgesia as the immersion condition. Pain was administered by noxious thermal stimulation at low (pain sensation threshold), medium, and
high (pain tolerance threshold) levels. Self-report and physiological measurements (skin conductance and heart rate) were obtained in response
to thermal stimulation. As compared to the controls, memory immersion
subjects showed a significant decrease in reported pain across all pain

207

Poster Session G
levels. These findings demonstrate top-down regulation of pain processing facilitated by the induction of positive affect through memory
immersion.

G22

IMPAIRMENT IN WORKING MEMORY DUE TO SOCIAL EVALUATIVE
THREAT IS MEDIATED BY ACTIVITY IN THE INTRAPARIETAL SULCUS

Julie Spicer1, Vanessa van Ast2, Edward E. Smith1, Sonja Schmer-Galunder1,
Tor D. Wager1; 1Columbia University, 2University of Amsterdam — Social evaluative threat (SET) is a potent stressor that can impair working memory
(WM) and other cognitive processes, but the mechanisms by which it
does so are poorly understood. Here we examine whether SET fundamentally alters WM performance, and if so, whether these alterations
reflect changes in lateral prefrontal rehearsal and maintenance circuits,
posterior cortical circuits involved in directing attention, “default mode”
networks involved in task-irrelevant processes, or other areas. Twentyone participants performed either a SET-eliciting task (delivery of a
speech before a panel of evaluators) or a neutral control task (writing
about a friend). WM performance and neural activity were subsequently
assessed using an N-back task during fMRI scanning. Results indicate
that cortisol increased in the SET group and that WM performance, as
indexed by both accuracy and reaction time, was substantially impaired
in the SET group. We searched for brain mediators of this effect using
Mediation Effect Parametric Mapping. SET reduced N-back activity in
lateral frontal, anterior cingulate and pre-supplementary motor area, lateral parietal cortex, and intra-parietal sulcus (IPS). Greater activation
magnitude in many of these regions also predicted better WM performance across groups. However, only bilateral IPS mediated SET effects
on performance. These results suggest that a basic attentional component of WM, rather than rehearsal or other components, may be particularly vulnerable to SET conditions.

G23

POSITIVE AND ANXIOUS MOOD MODULATES INFERENCE PRIMING
DURING STORY COMPREHENSION Heather Mirous1, Mark Beeman1;
1

Northwestern University — When people comprehending stories hear a

premise state (John was wearing jeans) and later a changed state (John is
wearing a tuxedo), they bridge this gap by inferring a causal connection
(John changed). Drawing such causal inferences is often necessary to
maintain coherence during language comprehension. Mood, whether
assessed or induced, affects performance in a variety of cognitive tasks
that likely share some component cognitive processes with drawing
inferences. In the current set of behavioral studies, before participants
listened to stories, we induced mood via film clips to examine the influence of positive affect and anxiety on drawing causal inferences. We contrasted priming of inference-related target words presented at an early
time point (when the inference is predictive and optional) and a late time
point (when a bridging inference is necessary to maintain story coherence) after each mood induction. Participants showed greater inference
priming after positive mood induction than anxious or neutral mood
induction, especially at the later time point. These results provide evidence that mood modulates inference processing during natural story
comprehension, and suggests that mood may specifically influence the
controlled process of inference selection (bridging point) compared to
the automatic process of inference activation (predictive point). It is not
yet clear whether mood is directly influencing the process of drawing
inferences, or if the influence of mood is mediated through another cognitive mechanism, such as attention or working memory, which is under
investigation. Though preliminary, these results may have implications
for education as well as interpersonal communication.

208

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions
G24

THE CONSTRUCTION OF VALENCE: ERPS TO NEUTRAL WORDS IN
DISCOURSE MODULATED BY EMOTIONAL CONTENT OF PREVIOUS WORD
OR SENTENCE Liam Clegg1, Abigail Swain1, Eric C. Fields1, Nate DelaneyBusch1, Daphne Holt1,2,3, Gina Kuperberg1,2,3; 1Tufts University, 2MGH/MIT/
HMS Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, 3Massachusetts
General Hospital — We used event-related potentials (ERPs) to examine

the influence of emotionally-valent adjectives on processing subsequent
words in two-sentence scenarios (e.g. “The students gave the professor
enthusiastic/biting/periodic evaluations. Their feedback was read by
him.”). The first sentence included a positive (“enthusiastic”), negative
(“biting”) or neutral (“periodic”) adjective which modified a direct object
(“evaluations”) at the sentence-final position; the second sentence began
with a neutral noun-phrase anaphor referring back to the direct object
(“Their feedback”), and ended with a pronominal anaphor referring
back to one of the characters in the first sentence (“him”). To ensure deep
processing, participants produced a single sentence, extending the narrative they had just read. To determine the immediate effect of emotional
valence, ERPs were measured on the adjective in the first sentence. Both
negative and positive adjectives evoked a larger late positivity than neutral adjectives. Negative adjectives also evoked a larger centrally-distributed negativity between 350-450ms than neutral adjectives, while nouns
following positive adjectives evoked a widely-distributed N400 effect.
The influence of emotional valence persisted across clause boundaries:
(1) Anaphors referring back to emotionally-modified nouns evoked a
larger late positivity than those referring back to neutral nouns, and (2)
sentence-final pronouns that followed negatively valenced first sentences evoked a larger centrally-distributed positivity, beginning at
300ms, than those following neutral or positive first sentences. These
findings indicate that emotional valence has immediate impact on online
neural mechanisms of language processing, both within and across
clause boundaries.

G25

ESTRADIOL MODULATES EMOTIONAL MEMORY ENCODING IN YOUNG
WOMEN Amanda Kutz1, Christina Broadwell1, Heather Wilkins2, Ashley

Pfaff1, Paul Newhouse1, Julie Dumas1; 1University of Vermont, Burlington, VT,
2
Washington University, St. Louis, MO — Prior literature shows that endogenous variability in estradiol during the menstrual cycle is related to
changes in amygdala activation while viewing emotional pictures. Evidence also shows that amygdala activation correlates with improved
memory in an emotional memory task. The current study examined
emotional memory at different times during the menstrual cycle to
investigate the effects of estradiol variability on emotional memory and
related brain activation. Ten healthy young women completed the study
protocol once in the early follicular phase when estradiol levels were low
and once around ovulation when estradiol levels were high. Using
event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) women
viewed emotionally negative and neutral words from the ANEW database during an encoding task. Recognition memory was tested at the end
of the scanning session and measures of subsequent memory were used
to examine brain regions activated during encoding of emotional pictures. Results showed that while there were no significant differences in
recognition performance across the menstrual cycle, imaging data suggest differential patterns of activation at these two time points. Around
ovulation when estradiol levels were high, greater activation in frontal
regions during successful encoding emotional stimuli was noted. In the
early follicular phase when estradiol levels were low , greater activation
in the amygdala during successful encoding of emotional stimuli was
demonstrated. These data suggest that emotional encoding is modulated
by estradiol fluctuation during the menstrual cycle and may influence
how the brain responds to emotional information.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions
G26

NEURAL CONNECTIVITY AT ENCODING PREDICTS SELECTIVE MEMORY
FOR EMOTIONAL SCENES Jill Waring1, Elizabeth Kensinger1,2; 1Boston

Poster Session G
stored semantic knowledge is required. In sum, the results demonstrate
that visually opaque emotionally valent semantic knowledge is extracted
at high speed and facilitates sensory processing in the visual cortex.

College, 2Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging — Emotion-

G29

ally arousing visual scenes are remembered better than neutral scenes,
but not all portions of emotional scenes are remembered with the same
accuracy. Although memory for emotionally arousing items is enhanced
relative to neutral items within scenes, memory is often impaired for
peripheral background information contained within emotional scenes,
known as a trade-off effect. In this study, we examined the effective connectivity at encoding predicting a trade-off in memory for high arousal
emotional scenes. In an event-related fMRI study, young adults viewed
scenes containing high arousal positive and negative items, and neutral
items placed upon neutral backgrounds. Later, outside the scanner, participants completed a surprise recognition memory test, with the items
and backgrounds from the scenes presented independently. Subsequent
memory design allowed us to measure the neural activity predicting a
memory trade-off compared to later remembering both the emotional
item and background from the scene. To better understand the pattern of
neural activity associated with this effect, we modeled the effective connectivity between regions. Regions included in the anatomical model
were identified in whole-brain analysis comparing the neural response
to viewing all scene types versus a fixation cross, and selected for their
theoretical relevance to encoding of emotional information. Results
revealed that greater connectivity between the amygdala and limbic
regions and the inferior frontal gyrus predicted when participants would
later remember only the emotional item, compared to later remembering
both the emotional item and its background. These results demonstrate
stronger neural connectivity at the encoding stage predicts selective
emotional memory.

EMOTION PROCESSING DEFICITS IN PSYCHOMETRICALLY MEASURED
SCHIZOTYPY Nicole Karcher1, Jeri Kent1, Jennifer Stevens1, Glenn Shean1;

G27

DO APPRAISALS INFLUENCE THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN STRESS AND
MEMORY? Roxanna Salim1, Nicole Y. Weekes2; 1Claremont Graduate
University, 2Pomona College — Numerous studies have demonstrated

stress affects memory functioning. However, stress is not only determined by the circumstances of the external environment but also by how
the individual perceives the stressor and more specifically whether one
appraises the stressor as a threat or a challenge. While previous research
has investigated the relationship between stress and memory, the specific relationship between appraisals and memory has yet to be
observed. In the present study, 55 undergraduate participants were presented with the Trier Social Stress Test, a number of psychological and
physiological stress measures, and pre and post stress declarative memory tasks. Results indicate that participants showed a significant increase
in the face of the stressor, and threat appraisals negatively influence
memory performance.

G28

THE GOOD, THE BAD AND THE MEAN: BRAIN SIGNATURES OF
EMOTIONAL BIOGRAPHICAL KNOWLEDGE IN FACE RECOGNITION
Rasha Abdel Rahman1, Julia Junker1; 1Humboldt University, Berlin — Extract-

ing meaning from emotional facial expressions to understand other people’s mental states and feelings, and to quickly adjust our actions
accordingly, is a vital aspect of social interaction. However, not all emotionally relevant attributes of a person are directly observable. In this
study we used event-related brain potentials to investigate the effects of
emotionally significant stored information about a person’s biography
that cannot be derived from vision. Faces of familiar and initially unfamiliar persons with neutral expressions were associated with negative,
positive or emotionally neutral biographical information. The observed
ERP modulations associated with emotional knowledge, their scalp
topographies and time course strongly resemble the effects frequently
reported for emotional facial expressions even though here, access to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

1College of William and Mary — Schizotypy, or the personality characteristic of psychosis proneness, is associated with a broad range of emotional
deficits, including emotion processing. While previous research has
established the existence of these emotion processing deficits, few studies have delved into the basis of these deficits. The current study aims to
use event-related brain potentials (ERPs) in order to explore the neural
correlates of emotion processing deficits in schizotypal individuals.
Undergraduates were selected to participate based off of scores from the
Magical Ideation Scale. These scores revealed a group of participants
who indicated high levels of schizotypy (n=18), as well as a control
group with low levels of schizotypy (n=20). Participants viewed neutral,
positive, negative, and emotional valenced images while EEG was
recorded. The results indicate that differences between the two groups as
measured by additional schizotypy questionnaires were statistically significant. In addition, there were significant differences between the two
groups in the P300 amplitude response to emotional images. Specifically,
there was a striking trend of a decreased P300 amplitude in individuals
scoring high in measures of schizotypy. There also appears to be preferential emotional processing in the right parietal hemisphere in these
individuals. The results indicate that schizotypal individuals display
complicated combination of attenuated attentional allocation to emotional stimuli as well as an increased vigilance towards and in response
to threat. The P300 amplitude deficits also indicates the possibility that
these results may have been obtained due to a broader information processing deficit in individuals scoring high in measures of schizotypy.

G30

A BENEFIT FOR ATTENTION ALLOCATION TO ANGRY FACES FROM THE
DEPLETION OF CENTRAL RESOURCES? EVIDENCE FROM EVENTRELATED POTENTIALS Annekathrin Schacht1, Julian Rellecke1, Werner

Sommer1; 1Humboldt University, Berlin — Several studies have shown emo-

tional facial expressions to involuntarily draw attentional resources,
resulting in a preferential and sustained processing. However, as yet it
remains unclear, under which specific conditions emotional processing
depends on the availability of central attentional resources. In the
present study, we investigated whether processing of task-irrelevant
emotional facial expressions depends on the availability of central attention resources, using a dual-task paradigm. Twenty-four participants
performed a high-priority tone discrimination (T1) in combination with
a gender classification of faces (T2) with happy, angry, and neutral
expressions. Availability of central resources was manipulated by varying the stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) between tasks. Angry faces
elicited an enhanced early posterior negativity (EPN) in event-related
brain potentials. The EPN was largest at the shortest SOA. Therefore, fast
reflexive attention to angry emotional expressions, as indicated by the
EPN, appears to benefit from the withdrawal of central resources. This
finding is in line with a release from suppression of irrelevant emotional
information when central resources are allocated to other high-priority
processes.

G31

HUMANS SHOW CONTEXTUAL EFFECTS IN FOOD PREFERENCE
CONDITIONING Sarah Davies1, Isabelle Blanchette2, Liesbeth Zandstra3,

Wael El-Deredy1; 1The University of Manchester, UK, 2Université du Québec à
Trois-Rivières, Canada, 3Unilever Research and Development Vlaardingen, The
Netherlands — Animal and human studies show food preferences can be
learnt through a process of evaluative conditioning (EC). Studies have
shown that in rodents, food preference conditioning can be mediated by
contextual factors (e.g. location) such that a stimulus can be liked in one
context and disliked in another. Little research has, however, been car-

209

Poster Session G
ried out to investigate context effects in human food preference conditioning. This experiment aimed to investigate the effect of an internal
contextual factor, attitudes, on food preference conditioning in humans.
A differential flavour-flavour evaluative conditioning paradigm was
used in a balanced cross-over design. Participants (n=33) were exposed
to three novel CS flavoured drinks; one consumed in compound with a
pleasant US (CS+ sugar), one with an aversive US (CS+ saline) and a
third with plain water (CS-). Each CS+/- was sampled ten times. Attitudes were also manipulated by exposing participants to positive, neutral or negative information paired consistently with one of the CS+/-.
Results showed a significant increase in preference for CS flavours
paired with sugar and a decrease for CS flavours paired with saline. A
significant interaction between US type and attitude type showed conditioning effects were greater in the positive attitude condition than the
negative attitude condition. Results from this experiment suggest that
attitude can influence the extent to which food preference conditioning
occurs.

G32

UNCONSCIOUS AFFECTIVE PRIMING OF THERMAL PAIN: EFFECTS OF
SUBLIMINAL AFFECTIVE STIMULI DEPEND ON BOTH VALENCE AND
TEMPERATURE Joseph Wielgosz1, Lauren Atlas1, Damon Abraham1, Tor D.
Wager1; 1Columbia University — Subconscious priming is known to modu-

late semantic, perceptual, and affective processes. Meanwhile, overt presentations of emotional images have ben shown to modulate pain
reports and responses in relevant brain regions. We investigated
whether minimal affective stimulation, via subconscious perception of
masked emotional faces, influences pain. In study 1, we presented
masked fearful and happy faces at the start of an anticipation period,
and examined trial-by-trial pain reports for four levels of subsequent
noxious thermal stimulation. Pain reports were modulated by both
prime valence and stimulation temperature: at low temperatures, subjects reported less pain when primed with fearful faces relative to happy
faces. This effect was abolished under high pain stimulation. In study 2,
we added a neutral face prime, and a task measuring ability to discriminate between primes. Study 2 replicated the low-temperature priming
effect. Signal detection analyses revealed this effect to be independent of
subjects’ ability to consciously discriminate between primes. Accounting
for detection, we found that the effect was driven more by fearful faces:
subjects reported less pain after fearful than neutral faces, while no differences were found for neutral relative to happy faces. Pain experience
therefore appears sensitive to minimal affective cues in the environment,
via an automatic pathway. The observed pattern may implicate the
amygdala, where activity increases during perception of fearful faces,
while decreasing during pain. Functionally, such a process may serve in
preparing for anticipated pain, or in shifting attentional focus towards
potential threat in the external environment and away from the body.

G33

DISSOCIATIONS IN THE EXPERIENCE, RECALL, AND VALUATION OF
PAIN Jenna M. Reinen1, Tal Yarkoni1,2, Damon Abraham1, Tor Wager1;
1

Columbia University, 2Unversity of Colorado, Boulder — Decision
making
research has demonstrated that the most intense and final moments of a
painful experience contribute disproportionately to memories that influence related choice behavior (‘peak-end’ rule; Redelmeier & Kahneman,
1996). The present study sought to replicate and extend these findings at
both within-subject and between-subject levels of analysis in the domain
of thermal pain. Participants (N = 18) experienced a series of painful
stimulations that varied in intensity and shape while providing both
moment-by-moment and retrospective pain ratings. Subsequently, we
obtained willingness-to-pay (WTP) estimates of the monetary value participants assigned to each pain stimulus. An analysis of pain ratings and
valuation as a function of temperature (high/moderate), duration (long/
short) and number of peaks (one/two) revealed a complex pattern
whereby pain perception depended heavily on peak ratings and to a
lesser extent on duration. Moreover, the influence of duration on perceived pain was substantially attenuated during double-peaked stimula-

210

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions
tions relative to single-peaked stimulations. We interpret the latter
finding with reference to offset analgesia, a profound, active state of pain
relief associated with significant reduction in pain following small
decreases in intensity. Thus, these results suggest the “peak-end rule”
may reflect relatively low-level active relief processes rather than latestage memory distortions. Overall, our data supports the theory that the
peak level of reported thermal pain contributes disproportionately to
memory and valuation of pain. Future studies should further explore the
relative contributions of neural correlates of offset analgesia (e.g., periaqueductal gray and medulla) and event segmentation as possible mediators of the peak-end effect.

G34

EXPECTANCY-BASED ENHANCEMENT OF OPIOID ANALGESIA: AN FMRI
STUDY OF HIDDEN VS OPEN REMIFENTANIL ADMINISTRATION Lauren
Atlas1, Robert Whittington1, Nomita Sonty1, Tor Wager1,2; 1Columbia University,
2
University of Colorado, Boulder — It has long been believed that expectan-

cies enhance the effects of active pharmacological treatments. For example, open-label administration of analgesic drugs, which enhances
expectations of relief, can produce substantially greater pain relief than
administration without a patient’s knowledge. Though research suggests that common brain regions are influenced by both placebo and opioid treatments, it is unknown whether knowledge of drug delivery
specifically enhances drug effects on the brain. We used pharmacological
fMRI to compare the effects of overt versus covert administration of
remifentanil, a potent opiate analgesic, on brain responses to noxious
thermal stimulation. Two identical drug infusions were delivered to
each participant: In one condition, participants knew the infusion would
be delivered (“Open”), and in the other, they were led to believe that
they would be receiving saline (“Hidden”). Remifentanil reduced
reported pain during painful stimulation, and the reduction was greater
with Open than Hidden administration. Consistent with these effects,
remifentanil reduced pain-evoked responses in several key elements of
the PPN—dorsal anterior cingulate, anterior insula, and thalamus—and
these reductions were enhanced during Open administration. In addition, Open administration was accompanied by larger drug-induced
increases in regions involved in value and appraisal (medial orbitofrontal cortex, striatum, and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex). Together, these
results suggest that knowledge of drug delivery and the accompanying
expectations for relief enhance the analgesic effects of remifentanil. More
broadly, they point to the potential for placebo-drug synergies in other
drugs and domains as well, and suggest that expectancies should be considered in clinical pharmacological research.

G35

THE TIME COURSE OF AUTOMATIC PROCESSING FOR NEGATIVE
EMOTIONAL STIMULI WITH UNATTENDED CONDITION: EVIDENCE FROM
FUNCTIONAL DATA ANALYSIS AND ERPS Renlai Zhou1,2, Xiaonan Liu1,

Yansong Li1, Minqiang Zhang3, Can Jiao4, Minping Xiong3; 1State Key
Laboratory of Cognitive Neurosciences and Learning, Beijing Normal
University, China, 2Research Center for Learning Science, Southeast China
University, 3South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China, 4Shenzhen
University, China — The research aimed to examine if the processing of
unattended fearful faces was influenced by perceptual load of ongoing
tasks, and the interference effect of facial expression on ongoing task
would be decreased when presentation time was changed. The research
combined behavioral methods with ERP techniques. Participants were
asked to judge structures of Chinese character for low perceptual load
task and judge tunes for high load task. The presentation time in behavioral experiments was ranged from 90ms, 100ms, 130ms, 150ms, 200ms
to 220ms and from 100ms, 170ms to 200ms in ERP experiments. The
behavioral results showed that the interference effect of fear expression
was observed in low perceptual load when the presentation time was
ranged from 100ms to 200ms and in high load when the presentation
time was ranged from 150ms to 200ms. The interference effect of fearful
expression disappeared when the presentation time was 90 ms and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Emotion-Cognition Interactions
220ms in both tasks. The functional data analysis which assume the reaction time among different time points were acquired by the same group
showed that 170ms was the lowest point of interference effect. The ERP
results showed that the amplitude of P2 elicited by fear condition was
significantly larger in 100ms experiment. In 170ms and 200ms, there was
no significant difference of P2. The processing of negative stimuli under
inattention was modulated by the availability of attention resource, and
170ms was the lowest point of interference effect.

G36

FINDING THE FLASHBULB’S FLASH: EMOTIONAL AROUSAL ENHANCES
SUBJECTIVE AND NEURAL CORRELATES OF PERCEPTUAL VIVIDNESS

Rebecca M. Todd1,2, Adam K. Anderson1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman
Research Institute — The emotional spotlight cast on salient events — the
perceptual “flash” associated with “flashbulb” memory — may enhance
encoding of emotional events as well as subsequent memory. The goal of
the present study was to examine the psychophysical and electrophysiological bases of the perceptual vividness of emotionally arousing events.
To measure the phenomenological vividness of perceptual experience,
we employed a magnitude estimation procedure and manipulated the
amount of visual signal relative to noise in emotionally arousing and
neutral scenes by overlaying the scenes with randomly distributed pixels. In order to pinpoint the timing of cortical responses related to perceptual vividness, we collected ERP data while participants estimated
the relative degree of “noisiness” of each picture. Participants could
accurately distinguish objective levels of noise; however, at any given
level of objective noise, emotionally arousing images were perceived as
less noisy — or more perceptually vivid — than neutral images. Further
analyses revealed that emotional salience enhanced the experience of
perceptual vividness above and beyond vividness associated with objective physical differences between images. ERPs measured at occipitoparietal sites showed a positive peak at 200-250 ms after stimulus
presentation (P2) that was larger for more arousing images and smaller
for higher levels of objective physical noise, suggesting sensitivity to perceptual vividness between 200 and 300 ms. These results suggest that reentrant influences on posterior cortical activity related to enhanced vividness are observed as early as 200 ms, and may represent the cortical
“flash” supporting the perceptual enhancement of emotionally arousing
events.

G37

COGNITIVE MODULATION OF STIMULUS VALUES AT THE TIME OF
DECISION MAKING Cendri Hutcherson1, Hilke Plassmann2, James Gross3,

Antonio Rangel1; 1California Insitute of Technology, 2Insead, 3Stanford
University — Research on the neurobiology of emotional regulation has
illuminated how emotional responses to negative stimuli are regulated.
However, little is known about how people regulate reactions to appetitive stimuli to influence choice. We investigated this question using a
modified version of the food bidding task in Plassmann et al. 2007. Subjects were trained to use three types of regulatory strategies when placing bids in the scanner for the right to eat different foods at the end of the
experiment: (1) natural response (2) indulgence, and (3) distancing. We
examined the impact of regulatory strategy on activity in regions implicated in cognitive control and emotion regulation, such as the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC, Ochsner et al., 2005), as well as in regions
implicated in value computation, such as the medial orbitofrontal cortex
(mOFC) and amygdala. We found that both indulgence and distancing
increased activation of the vlPFC, but that this lead to different outcomes
in the two conditions. During distance trials the vlPFC exhibited negative functional connectivity with the mOFC, which in turn showed
reduced responsivity to the foods, as compared to natural and indulge
trials. In contrast, during indulgence trials, the vlPFC showed stronger
positive coupling with the amygdala, which in turn was more responsive to foods than during natural or distancing trials. These results suggest that participants can use cognitive strategies to modulate the value
signals that are assigned to stimuli at the time of choice, but that the networks involved might depend on the regulatory goals.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session G
G38

DISSOCIATION OF SOCIAL AND NON-SOCIAL REWARD PROCESSING IN
AUTISM Alice Lin1, Antonio Rangel1, Ralph Adolphs1; 1California Institute of
Technology — Impairments in social functioning are core features of
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Individuals with ASD do not show
the same early preference for faces and voices and often have difficulty
extracting the affect expressed through these cues. One theory, the social
motivation hypothesis, suggests that deficits in social cognition could
result from impairments in social reward processing. Decreased social
motivation would result in reduced attention to faces, voices, and hand
gestures, which in turn would lead to failure to develop efficient expertise ability to process social stimuli. High-functioning individuals with
ASD and neurotypical matched-control subjects chose between slot
machines characterized by different distributions of positive, neutral, or
negative outcomes; these outcomes were smiling, neutral, or angry faces
with matching sound effects in a social condition, and +$1, $0, or -$1 in a
monetary condition. Neurotypical subjects learned to differentiate
behaviorally between high and low rewarding slot cues in both conditions so as to maximize rewarding outcomes. By contrast, ASD subjects
performed similarly to neurotypicals only on the monetary condition but
exhibited a gross learning deficit in the social condition. This striking
behavioral dissociation allowed us to probe the underlying neural differences in social and non-social reward processing. In a separate fMRI
study, we found evidence for both shared and segregated neural substrates for processing social and nonsocial reward. Results not only lend
support for the social motivation hypothesis, but provide further insight
into social reward processing and have implications in the development
of therapeutic interventions for autism.
G39

REWARD PROCESSING IN SUBSYNDROMAL HYPOMANIA: ERP
DIFFERENCES IN A COMPUTERISED GAMBLING TASK Wael El-Deredy1,

Liam Mason1, Richard Bentall2, Isabelle Blanchett3; 1School of Psychological
Sciences, University of Manchester, England, 2School of Clinical Psychology,
Bangor University, Wales, 3University of Quebec, Canada — Reward processing is known to be altered in patients suffering from Bipolar Disorder
(BD). In particular, heightened reward responsiveness underlies
increased engagement in hedonic activities and risk-taking seen during
episodes of mania, whilst the converse is seen during episodes of depression. These two observations have given rise to reward dysregulation
accounts of BD. Both manic and depressive symptoms lie on a continuum, extending into the general population. Whilst much work tested
this account behaviourally, there is a paucity of research taking a neuroscientific approach. This study aimed therefore to characterise differences in the electrophysiological correlates of reward processing in a
sample exhibiting subsyndromal hypomania symptoms. We recorded
EEG during a computerised gambling task involving probabilistic learning. Participants learned reward contingencies of three cues with 20%,
50%, or 80% chance of rewarding outcome, and used this to guide their
bet sizes. Participants were divided into low, medium and high groups
based on scores on Hypomanic Personality Scale (HPS). We found significant differences in P300 magnitude between low and high hypomania groups for reward trials, with larger P300 in high scorers.
Furthermore P300 amplitude positively correlated with HPS score. The
P300 has been reliably shown to reflect reward processes, encoding
expectancy and both valence (gain/loss) and magnitude (small/large)
properties of reward-related stimuli. These findings from a clinical neuroscience approach support the hypothesis that a hypersensitive reward
system underpins the excessive engagement in pleasurable activities
typical during manic episodes. Future work will explore between-group
spatial differences in the neural generators of this waveform.

211

Poster Session G

Methods: Electrophysiology
G40

PARANOID FEELINGS OF HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS AND DELUSIONAL
BELIEFS OF SCHIZOPHRENIA PATIENTS: A COMMON NEUROCOGNITIVE
PROCESS? Lujaien Al-Rubaiey Kadhim1, Marie Prevost1, Sherisse

McLaughlin1, James Zhang1, J. Bruno Debruille1; 1Douglas Institute, McGill
University — Traditionally, paranoia is viewed as a pathological feature;
however, recent evidence suggests that paranoia may lie on a continuum
with normal behavior. The present study examined whether inducing
paranoid feelings in healthy individuals (HIs) would result in smaller
N400 amplitudes similar to those found when comparing More- to Lessdelusional schizophrenia (Sz) patients. Method: 52 HIs first completed
the Schizotypy Personality Questionnaire to measure their delusionallike ideation. Their ERPs were recorded during a semantic task and paranoid feelings were induced by telling participants that we may emit
small and harmless currents to temporarily modify their brain function.
Results: Paranoid levels were significantly increased by the induction (p
= .004). At lateral electrodes, More Delusional subjects had lower N400
amplitudes than Less Delusional subjects (F1,48 = 4.14, p = .047). Similar
trends were found for sagittal and parasagittal sites (F1,48 = 2.94, p =
.093 and F1,48 = 3.57, p = .065, respectively). Furthermore, higher levels
of delusion were associated with lower N400 amplitudes at Cz (p = .041),
O1 (p = .043), P3 (p = .022), T5 (p = .045) and T6 (p = .045) in the match
condition and O1 (p = .028) and T5 (p = .026) in the mismatch condition.
Conclusion: The results replicate those of a previous study in HIs and
confirm commonalities in the neurocognitive processes of HIs during an
active state of paranoia and those of Sz patients, also suggesting that
delusions and the cognitive abnormalities associated with them are
states rather than traits.

Language: Semantic
G41

HOW SPECIFIC ARE ACTION VERBS REPRESENTED WITHIN THE NEURAL
MOTOR SYSTEM? Shirley-Ann Rueschemeyer1, Wessel van Dam1, Harold
Bekkering1; 1Donders Centre for Cognition, Radboud University — Numerous

studies have demonstrated that understanding words activates neural
resources involved in the perception of a word's referent (i.e., embodied
cognition). For example, it has been shown that neural motor areas (i.e.,
areas involved in co-ordinating the execution of actions) are activated
when a participant listens to or reads words denoting motor acts (e.g.,
grasp, kick). It remains unclear how specific semantic features are represented within perceptual and motor systems. Previous research suggests
that within the visual modality, basic level category members (e.g., bird)
are less richly encoded within primary visual cortices than members of
the subordinate level (e.g., penguin). In the present study we were interested in whether we could extend these observations to the motor
domain. To this end, we measured BOLD-response to verbs that were
associated with a general motor program (e.g., to clean) or with a more
specific motor program (e.g., to wipe). We hypothesized greater activations for action verbs associated with a more specific motor program in
both the left ventral premotor cortex and the left inferior parietal cortex.
A preliminary regions of interest (ROIs) analysis revealed that fMRI activations in both ROIs were sensitive to the specificity of the motor programs associated with the action verbs. Action verbs that are associated
with a specific motor program showed greater activations in both the left
vPMC and the left IPL. Beyond previous research, these findings suggest
that the concreteness of an action semantic feature is reflected in the neural response to action verbs.

212

Methods: Electrophysiology
G42

COMPREHENDING FAMILIAR AND UNFAMILIAR METAPHORS

Els
Severens1, Sarah Bernolet1, Wouter Duyck1; 1Ghent University — The present

ERP-study investigated the comprehension of familiar and unfamiliar
metaphors within a sentence context. The focus of previous research
investigating metaphor comprehension was mainly on conventional
(familiar) metaphors. Recently, Arzouan, Goldstein and Foust (2007) carried out an ERP-study to investigate the comprehension of familiar and
unfamiliar metaphors. They found a modulation of the N400, with a
larger amplitude for unfamiliar metaphors. In their study metaphors
only consisted of two words, thus there was no context to comprehend
the metaphors. In daily life metaphors are mainly comprehended within
a specific context. Therefore, we added a context sentence to investigate
the comprehension of familiar and unfamiliar metaphors. The sentences
were first rated on familiarity, based on these ratings familiar and unfamiliar metaphors using the same word as metaphor were selected for the
experiment. During the ERP-study participants had to read both kinds of
metaphors and control sentences in which the critical words were used
in their literal meaning and as an anomalous word. The results showed a
modulation of the N400 amplitude, the smallest N400 was obtained in
the literal sentence, with increasing amplitudes for the familiar metaphors, unfamiliar metaphors and the anomalous sentences. These results
show that integration of the familiar metaphor is easier than integration
of the unfamiliar metaphor. Furthermore, it is easier to integrate the
unfamiliar metaphor than the anomalous word, which suggests that the
activation of the metaphorical meaning helps to integrate the critical
word in the unfamiliar metaphor.

G43

INVESTIGATING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SPEECH RHYTHM AND
SEMANTIC PROCESSING Kathrin Rothermich1, Sonja Kotz1; 1Max Planck
Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, IRG Neurocognition of
Rhythm in Communication — In trochaic languages such as German, the
alternation of stressed and unstressed syllables (termed ‘meter’) is very
prominent, and can function as a temporal and structural cue in sentence
processing. The current experiment investigated semantically, metrically, and doubly violated sentences to examine whether (1) the ‘metric’
negativity (i.e. Schmidt-Kassow and Kotz, 2009) interfaces with the N400
when manipulating semantic expectancy, (2) this potential interface is
influenced by task demands, and (3) the N400 (indexing lexical-semantic
integration) is affected by metric regularity. Our results show that
semantic expectancy violations elicit the expected N400, whereas metric
violations elicited a biphasic pattern consisting of the ‘metric’ negativity
and a P600. The ‘metric’ negativity differs from the classical N400 in
terms of its latency and distribution suggesting that the two components
reflect different processing mechanisms. Furthermore, the N400 and the
P600 are only evoked when attention is focused on semantics and meter,
respectively. However, lexical-semantic processing in metrically regular
compared to metrically variant sentence context is facilitated as evidenced by a reduced N400 response to semantic expectancy violations.
This finding suggests that the nature of metric sentence structure
impacts lexical-semantic integration.

G44

USING DICHOTIC AND CROSS-MODAL PRESENTATION TO STUDY
HEMISPHERIC DIFFERENCES IN MEANING ACCESS Ruth Ann Atchley1,

Jonathan Schuster1, Linzi Gibson1, Gina Grimshaw2; 1University of Kansas,
2
Victoria University, Wellington — The present studies investigated hemispheric differences in the processing of lexically ambiguous words presented dichotically and using a cross-modal presentation paradigm. We
predicted that words presented via the auditory modality would replicate earlier findings from the divided visual field language literature
showing a left hemisphere (LH) advantage for accessing the dominant
meanings of words and a right hemisphere (RH) advantage for accessing
more remotely associated word meanings. We tested eighty-six undergraduates across two studies (one study with a binaural prime and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Semantic
dichotically presented targets and one study with visually presented
primes and dichotically presented targets) using a modified lexical decision task. The results are generally comparable with previous visual
word presentation, laterality research. In both studies, the right ear/LH
data showed priming for the dominant meaning of the ambiguous
words, but no priming for subordinate word meanings. In contrast, the
left ear/RH trials showed evidence of equal access to the two meanings
of the ambiguous word in the purely auditory study and an advantage
(as reflected by significantly faster response times) for the more subordinate word meaning only in the cross-modal study. Our results provide
information about how dichotic methods might be effectively applied to
address laterality models of semantic processing.

G45

ABSTRACT AND CONCRETE NOUN PROCESSING IN HEALTHY OLDER
ADULTS USING FMRI Chaleece Sandberg1, Swathi Kiran1; 1Boston
University — Normal subjects and persons with aphasia exhibit a ‘concreteness effect’ during a variety of lexical tasks. Recent evidence from
neuroimaging studies suggests possible dissociable neural correlates for
processing abstract versus concrete words. Specifically, abstract words
are processed in a left-lateralized ‘verbal’ network and concrete words
are processed in a bilateral ‘perceptual’ network (Binder, Desai et al.
2009). However, the vast majority of these studies have been conducted
with healthy young adults. The current study examined the neural activation patterns of abstract and concrete word processing in healthy older
adults in order to help establish a baseline against which neural activation patterns of abstract and concrete word processing in persons with
aphasia could be compared. Ten (five male, five female) monolingual,
right-handed adults aged 50-63 with no history of neurological disease
each completed both a lexical decision task and a word judgment task in
an fMRI scanner. During the lexical decision task, both concrete and
abstract nouns produced bilateral activation, with greater overall activation for concrete nouns. During the word judgment task, abstract nouns
produced greater overall activation and more bilateral activation than
concrete nouns, which produced more left-hemispheric activation. These
tentative results indicate that a) neural activation patterns for concrete
versus abstract words may be task-specific, and b) healthy older adults
may process abstract and concrete words differently than healthy young
adults. These results may influence analyses of abstract and concrete
processing in persons with aphasia.

G46

ACTION VERBS DO NOT ALWAYS ELICIT EFFECTOR-SPECIFIC PREMOTOR
CORTEX ACTIVATION: IMPLICATIONS FOR EMBODIED LANGUAGE
UNDERSTANDING Roel Willems1,2, Martin Laverman2, Peter Hagoort2,3,

Daniel Casasanto3; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of
California, Berkeley, 2Donders Institute, Nijmegen, 3Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen — The cortical motor system has been implicated in understanding of action-related language such as action verbs
like 'kick' and 'throw'. Indeed previous research shows that reading such
action verbs leads to effector-specific activations in premotor cortex,
with cortical tissue which is involved in execution of for instance hand
movements also being sensitive to reading of verbs implicating hand
actions. On some proposals these premotor activations are regarded as a
crucial part of an action verb's representation, occurring invariantly and
independent from linguistic context or task. We directly tested if effector-specific premotor cortex activations always occur when reading
action verbs. Healthy participants read verbs expressing actions performed with the hand ('throw') or with the feet ('kick'), while they performed an abstract/concrete judgment task. Verbs were presented eight
times within an experimental session. Effector-specific regions were
determined by means of an action execution task in which participants
performed simple hand or foot movements. The results show that parts
of premotor cortex distinguishing hand from foot actions also distinguish hand from foot verbs, but only for the first presentation of a verb.
When a verb is read after its first presentation, these areas do not distin-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session G
guish hand from foot verbs anymore. This means that effector-specific
premotor cortex activation during language understanding is not an
invariant property of a verb's representation but that it is flexible, at least
depending upon the number of presentations during an experimental
session.

G47

DISSECTING EMBODIED COGNITION: SOMATOTOPIC-SEMANTIC
PROCESSING IN THE FRONTO-CENTRAL NETWORK Carrie Esopenko1,

Jacqueline Cummine2, Naila Kulhmann1, Gordon Sarty1, Ron Borowsky1;
1
University of Saskatchewan, 2University of Alberta — Embodied cognition

suggests that cognition is bodily based, and that the brain developed as a
function of interaction with the environment, thus evolving to facilitate
sensorimotor processing (e.g., Gibbs, 2006; Wilson, 2002). Recent neuroimaging research has shown a somatotopic-semantic organization in
the fronto-central regions during the processing of action-related language (e.g., Esopenko, et al., 2008; Hauk, et al., 2004). Our experiment
used functional magnetic resonance imaging to examine blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) characteristics (i.e., width, time to peak,
intensity and volume) as they relate to behavioural response time (“how
would you use the object the word refers to?”). By using stimuli that
involve either arm or leg interactions, we also explored the extent to
which the fronto-central regions are organized somatotopically. Our
results show semantic-somatotopy in the fronto-central network for arm
and leg stimuli. Regression of leg stimulus response time (RT) onto
BOLD characteristics revealed significant: (1) negative relationship
between RT and BOLD width in the middle temporal gyrus (MTG), premotor cortex (PMC) and supplementary motor area (SMA), (2) positive
relationship between RT and BOLD time to peak in the MTG, PMC, and
SMA, and, (3) positive relationship between RT and volume in the PMC
and SMA. Arm stimuli did not yield any significant relationships
between RT and BOLD characteristics. An analysis of the time to peak of
the BOLD signal shows that activation in MTG asymptotes sooner than
activation in PMC and SMA. These results will serve to advance models
of the relationship between semantic processing and neurophysiology.

G48

THE EFFECTS OF SEMANTIC AND PHONOLOGICAL AMBIGUITY ON
PROCESSING SPOKEN WORDS: BEHAVIOURAL AND NEURAL
EVIDENCE Jack Rogers1, William Marslen-Wilson1, Matthew Davis1; 1MRC
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge — Recent evidence suggests
that the anterior and posterior left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) may play
a role in semantic and phonological processing respectively (Poldrack et
al., 1999). However, it is unclear whether this specialisation reflects a
task-specific role within inferior frontal regions. Here we assess the effect
of semantic and phonemic ambiguity on lexical processing using single
spoken words. Lexical decisions to semantically ambiguous spoken
words (bark and knight/night) revealed significantly slower RTs compared to matched controls (bed). Lexical processing of phonemically
ambiguous syllables was assessed by creating natural sounding morphed speech continua using “Straight” software (Kawahara et al., 1999).
Participants heard either a single high-ambiguity (35% or 65% morph) or
low-ambiguity (5% or 95% morph) syllable created from mixing two
words (porch-torch), two non-words (pash-tash) or a word and a nonword (punt-tunt, poy-toy). Lexical decision responses showed an effect
of ambiguity for words but not for non-words. Using a sparse imaging
design and a simple semantic target detection task we assessed the neural correlates of the semantic and phonological ambiguity effects seen
behaviourally. Semantically ambiguous versus unambiguous single
words produced increased activation within regions of anterior LIFG
(triangularis), supporting previous findings (Rodd et al., 2005). The
effect of phonemic ambiguity specific for words produced increased activation in more posterior regions of LIFG (opercularis). These findings
support functional dissociations seen for comparisons of semantic and
phonological tasks in the absence of any task-specific neural effects.
Therefore, semantic and phonological ambiguity resolution may load
separately on anterior and posterior frontal systems.
213

Poster Session G
G49

DO YOU KNOW WHO THAT IS? REAL-WORLD REFERENCE AND
COREFERENTIAL PROCESSING Clinton L. Johns1,2,4, Debra L. Long1,2,3,

Tamara Y. Swaab1,2; 1University of California, Davis, 2Center for Mind and
Brain, 3University of Central Lancashire, Preston, England, 4Haskins
Laboratories — Establishing coreferential relations between anaphors and
their antecedents allows comprehenders to track "who did what to
whom" in a discourse. However, anaphors that are used in research
rarely refer to actual people, objects or events; characters in experimental
stimuli usually possess only minimal semantic detail. This poses a problem, because research has shown that processing difficulty can arise
when potential antecedents are semantically similar. For example, sentence comprehension was impaired when two characters were established with the same type of noun phrase, with the greatest difficulty
evident when two proper names were used (Gordon, Hendrick, &
Johnson, 2001). In order to investigate the influence of real-world information on coreferential processing we manipulated the semantic content
of antecedent representations. Event-related potentials were recorded as
participants read sentences that contained either a correct or an anomalous pronoun anaphor (e.g., "she" in reference to a male character). Antecedent entities were either fictional (e.g., Bill Jones) or real (e.g., Bill
Clinton). Anomalous anaphors elicited a P600 effect. The magnitude of
this effect was significantly greater when sentence characters were real.
In addition, in congruent conditions we observed a P600-like effect to
pronouns with fictional referents relative to pronouns with real referents. Our results suggest that the presence of semantically detailed, highquality representations in a discourse model facilitates the processing of
coherent coreference, and magnifies the processing penalty for referentially failing anaphors.

G50

WORD-FINDING DEFICITS ASSESSED IN VETERANS WITH GULF WAR
ILLNESS: AN FMRI STUDY Clifford S. Calley1, Michael A. Kraut2, Gail D.
Tillman1, Timothy A. Green1, Virginia I. Buhl1, Jack W. Grinnan1, John Hart1;
1University of Texas, Dallas, 2Johns Hopkins University — Word-finding prob-

lems have been reported among veterans suffering with Gulf War
related illnesses. We assessed word-finding in the three Gulf War Illness
(GWI) subtypes, each shown to have varying degrees of cognitive complaints, as well as a veteran control group using the Semantic Object
Recall Task (SORT) during fMRI acquisition. The SORT requires a subject to decide whether they recall a specific object when presented with
two words representing object features (i.e. desert + humps = camel).
Whole-brain analyses of individual groups using SPM5 showed more
significant signal change in areas involved in word-finding/language
processes, namely the pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA). A full
factorial ANOVA of all four groups also showed significant signal
change differences within thalamic and pre-SMA regions of interest. We
hypothesize these significant differences were the result of dysfunction
associated with this pre-SMA/thalamus circuit.

G51

USE OF N400 TO PARSE SEMANTIC FROM POST-SEMANTIC NAMING
FAILURES IN PRIMARY PROGRESSIVE APHASIA Robert
Hurley1,

Kenneth Paller1, Christina Wieneke1, Sandra Weintraub1, Cynthia Thompson1,
Kara Federmeier2, Marsel Mesulam1; 1Northwestern University, 2University of
Illinois — Primary progressive aphasia (PPA), a selective neurodegeneration of the language network, frequently causes object naming impairments. We examined the N400 event-related potential (ERP) to explore
interactions between object recognition and word processing in PPA
patients and controls. Participants viewed photographs of objects, each
followed by a word that was either a match to the object, a semantically
related mismatch, or an unrelated mismatch. Patients judged whether
word-object pairs matched with high accuracy, but they failed to exhibit
the normal N400 category effect (N400c), defined as a larger N400 to
unrelated versus related mismatch words. In contrast, the N400 mismatch effect (N400m), defined as a larger N400 to mismatch than match

214

Language: Semantic
words, was observed in both groups. N400m magnitude was positively
correlated with neuropsychological measures of word comprehension
but not fluency or grammatical competence, and therefore reflected the
semantic component of naming. After ERP testing, patients were asked
to name the same set of objects aloud. Trials with objects that could not
be named were found to lack an N400m, although the name had been
correctly recognized at the matching stage. Even accurate overt naming
did not necessarily imply normal semantic processing, as shown by the
absent N400c. The N400m was preserved in one patient with postsemantic anomia, who could write the names of objects she could not
verbalize. N400 analyses can thus help dissect the multiple cognitive
mechanisms that contribute to object naming failures in PPA.

G52

ERP INDICES OF THE CONCEPTUAL MODALITY SWITCH EFFECT: WHAT
HAPPENS WHEN LEAVES RUSTLE AFTER CANDLES FLICKER? Jennifer

Collins1, Diane Pecher2, René Zeelenberg2, Seana Coulson1; 1University of
California, San Diego, 2Erasmus University, Rotterdam — Responses to stim-

uli in one perceptual modality (e.g. vision) are slower when preceded by
a stimulus from a different modality (e.g. audition) than one from the
same modality -- a phenomenon known as the modality switch effect.
The conceptual modality switch effect is the finding that people take
longer to verify a visual property (e.g. deciding that candles can flicker)
after a trial from a different modality (e.g. deciding that leaves can rustle) than after a trial from the same modality. In the current study we
investigated the cognitive and neural substrate of the conceptual modality switch effect. We recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) as participants saw words in concept-property pairs and performed a property
verification task. We found ERP evidence for the conceptual modality
switch effect and observed that auditory and visual conditions elicited
different patterns of effects. The earliest differences were observed for
visual properties in the 300-500 ms window. We found a greater negativity for visual trials preceded by auditory trials (LEAVES-rustle ? CANDLES-flicker) than when two trials were both from the visual domain
(BANDAGES-tan ? CANDLES-flicker). The auditory difference occurred
later (550-700 ms) and showed a greater positivity for auditory trials preceded by visual trials (CANDLES-flicker ? LEAVES-rustle) than when
both trials were from the auditory domain (HIGH HEELS-click ?
LEAVES-rustle). Timing, scalp distribution, and polarity differences of
these ERP indices suggest that the processing of visual and auditory
properties may be recruiting different underlying perceptual substrates
in accordance with theories of embodied cognition.

G53

PARALLEL RECORDING OF EEG AND EYE MOVEMENTS: TESTING THE
TIMELINE OF WORD RECOGNITION IN NORMAL READING Olaf

Dimigen1,3, Michael Dambacher2,3, Alexander Mies1, Reinhold Kliegl3, Werner
Sommer1; 1Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, 2Freie Universität Berlin,
3Universität Potsdam — Brain-electric correlates of sentence reading have

mostly been studied in word-by-word presentation (RSVP) in the
absence of eye movements (EMs). This paradigm differs in many regards
from normal, saccadic reading and allows no direct comparisons
between oculomotor behavior and fixation-related brain potentials
(FRPs). We summarize results from three experiments (N=96), in which
EMs and FRPs were simultaneously recorded during normal, left-toright reading of 144 sentence pairs. To investigate the timing of word
recognition under this condition, predictability and frequency of a target
word were orthogonally manipulated. Additionally, in two of the experiments, a gaze-contingent masking of the target word was used to
manipulate the amount of parafoveal preview. Signal distortions due to
corneoretinal artifacts and differential component overlap were closely
controlled. Results are compared with those of three traditional RSVP
experiments (N=96) in which the same sentences were presented at slow
(SOA 700 ms), medium (490 ms), or reading-like (280 ms) presentation
rates. We replicate effects of word predictability and frequency on both
fixation durations and FRPs in normal reading. Amplitude and scalp dis-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Semantic
tributions of N400 predictability effects were remarkably similar
between saccadic reading and RSVP. However, compared to RSVP with
a reading-like speed, predictability effects began considerably earlier in
normal reading, indicating that word meaning is accessed within the
duration of the word-initial fixation. The two experiments with gazecontingent masking showed that this early onset was partly explained by
a robust parafoveal preview benefit, which was observed in EMs and at
the electrophysiological level.

G54

DECISION-MAKING MECHANISMS HELP RESOLVE AMBIGUOUS
PRONOUN REFERENCE: FMRI EVIDENCE Murray Grossman1, Corey

McMillan1, Delani Gunawadena1, Neville Ryant1, Robin Clark1; 1University of
Pennsylvania — Pronouns are common yet little is known about the neural
mechanisms supporting pronoun reference and the resolution of potentially ambiguous reference. We propose a two-component model for
resolving ambiguous pronoun reference (e.g., “The client chased the
king and he cried”). First, a core language network in perisylvian cortex
supports syntactic and semantic resources. Second, a strategic decisionmaking network supports probabilistic (e.g., Is “client” a male or female)
and risk-related (e.g., choosing “client” is risky because “king” must be
male) mechanisms. In an fMRI study we presented 16 young adults with
200 sentences pairs including two nouns and one pronoun, and participants identified the pronoun’s referent. Sentences included a Directly
Determined referent (“The king chased the queen. She cried”), an Indirectly Determined referent (“The king chased the client. She cried”) or
Underdetermined referents (“The client chased the visitor. She cried” or
“The princess chased the queen. She cried”). All conditions revealed left
inferior frontal and middle temporal cortex activation, consistent with a
core language network. In Underdetermined sentences, when the gender
of a gender-neutral noun (e.g., “client”) must be evaluated, we observed
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) activation. Previous research has
implicated dlPFC as a probabilistic mechanism. In Indirectly Determined
sentences, when a gender-neutral noun (e.g., “client”) must be selected
because the gender-biased noun (e.g. “king”) does not match the pronoun’s gender, we observed oribitofrontal (OFC) activation. OFC is often
implicated in risk-related behavior. These findings are consistent with a
two-component model of pronoun processing that incorporates core linguistic and decision-making mechanisms.

G55

CATEGORICAL AND RELATIONAL VERBAL ANALOGY PROCESSING
FOLLOWING BRAIN DAMAGE Gwenda L. Schmidt1,2, Eileen Cardillo1,
Alexander Kranjec1, Matthew Lehet1, Anjan Chatterjee1; 1Hope College,
Holland, 2University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia — The purpose of this

study was to explore the neural basis of analogy processing. We examined two broad classes of analogies. The first class were based on mapping category membership of either objects (liquid: water, dance: ballet)
or actions (drink: sip, exit: flee). The second class of analogies was based
on mapping relations, either thematic (bellhop: luggage, mover: boxes)
or locative (bird: cage, tongue: mouth). These analogy tests were given to
participants with left hemisphere (LHL, n=17) and right hemisphere
lesions (RHL, n=17). Both groups were similarly impaired on categorical
analogies (80% and 81% accuracy scores respectively). By contrast, only
the LHL participants were impaired on relational analogies (80%). Given
that RHL participants were not impaired on relational analogies (91%),
we suggest that an intact left hemisphere is needed to extract and map
relational structures. The left hemisphere may also be important in mapping functions in general since LHL produced deficits across both kinds
of analogy classes. Whole brain voxel-based lesion symptom mapping
(VLSM) revealed that impaired ability to make categorical analogies was
associated with damage to the right middle temporal and supramarginal
gyri. Impaired ability to make relational analogies was associated with
damage to the left middle temporal gyrus. Thus we suggest that the left
hemisphere is important for abstracting higher-order relations such as

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session G
those contained in our locative and thematic analogies. Categorical analogies rely on both hemispheres, but with clearer brain-behavior relationships in the right.

G56

DUAL STATUS OF THE ROLE REVERSAL P600: RESTRICTING NONSURFACE SEMANTIC COMPOSITION Wing Yee Chow1, Colin Phillips1;

1University of Maryand, College Park — Recent ERP studies (e.g., Kolk et al.,
2003; Kim & Osterhout, 2005) have observed a P600 in response to syntactically well-formed sentences in which the thematic roles of verb
arguments are “reversed” (e.g., The meal was devouring…), and have
taken such observations as evidence for an independent “semantic processing stream” that can compose interpretations that are incompatible
with the surface structure of the sentence. Here we highlight the distinction between the environments in which the “role reversal P600" is
observed. The current study (n=19) used the subject-object-verb order of
the syntactically unambiguous Chinese BA-construction to compare
within-subjects the effects of role reversal in the presence and absence of
surface animacy violations. Experiment 1 tested whether role reversal
affects processing beyond the effect of animacy violation by independently manipulating the presence of an animacy violation and the combinability of the verb-arguments triplets in a 2x2 design using sentences
such as: councilor[subj] - proposal[obj] - {(i)reject/ (ii)anger/ (iii)transport/ (iv)poison}. While the non-combinable conditions elicit the N400
response, both animacy-violated conditions (ii) and (iv) show identical
P600s, despite the fact that only condition (ii) allows a plausible reversal
interpretation. Experiment 2 examined the effect of role reversal in the
absence of animacy violation using sentences with animate arguments.
As in previous studies, the role-reversed sentences elicited a P600 relative to the non-reversed controls. Our results demonstrate that P600
responses observed in the two contexts are not equally attributable to
role reversal, and suggest that surface structures tightly limit comprehenders' access to surface-incompatible interpretations.

G57

FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF SEMANTIC REPRESENTATIONS OF
VISUAL AND HAPTIC WORDS Laura Baucom1, Jing Wang1, Svetlana

Shinkareva1; 1University of South Carolina — The sensorimotor theory of
conceptual and semantic processing suggests that sensory and motor
features become attached to a symbol by correlation (Warrington & Shallice, 1984; Humphreys & Forde, 2001). Based upon the sensorimotor theory, words eliciting visual imagery should activate networks containing
areas of the brain responsible for processing visual information, whereas
words eliciting haptic sensation should activate networks containing
areas responsible for processing somatosensory information. In the current study, we used event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and a similarity judgment task to identify functional
networks containing information regarding words whose meanings
were related to either visual or haptic perceptual features. While in the
scanner, six participants were presented with word triplets consisting of
three highly-related words and were prompted to make a judgment as to
which one of two words was most similar to the target word. Stimuli in
the visual condition contained words with visual features, such as color
and brightness. The haptic condition contained words with haptic features, such as moisture and temperature. Condition-specific functional
connectivity between brain areas was defined based on the Pearson correlation coefficient computed between the time-series weighted by the
condition-specific hemodynamic response function for each pair of
regions. Thresholded connectivity matrices were analyzed to identify
clusters of highly interconnected brain regions for the visual and haptic
conditions. The results showed differing condition-specific functional
connectivity patterns for visual and haptic words. Presumably, the differing functional connectivity patterns were due to differences in semantic representation of visual and haptic words.

215

Poster Session G
G58

FRONTAL THETA AND ALPHA POWER AND COHERENCE CHANGES ARE
MODULATED BY SEMANTIC COMPLEXITY IN GO/NOGO TASKS Michael

Kraut1, Matthew Brier2, Mandy Maguire2, Thomas Ferree3, John Hart2; 1Johns
Hopkins, 2University of Texas, Dallas, 3University of Texas, Southwestern
Medical Center — Oscillations as measured by scalp EEG are known to

reflect neural processes. Much effort has been put into describing the
spatial, temporal, and spectral properties of these oscillations. What is
unclear is how two processes that have overlapping distributions interact. We investigated three response inhibition tasks that differed in the
level of semantic processing required to perform the task. We designed
three tasks, the first requires the subject to make a Go/NoGo decision
based on pictures of one car and one dog, the second uses multiple cars
and multiple dogs, and the final task requires the higher category of
objects and animals. We found that the amplitude of the theta NoGo
response was attenuated as a function of complexity while the peak
latency was delayed only in the categorization task. Further, frontal
alpha desynchronization was strongest for the simplest task and
remained close to baseline for the other tasks. Finally, there was significant theta band coherence between the frontal pole and premotor areas
for the NoGo conditions across tasks. These data support a frontal
response inhibition circuit that is sensitive to changes in task demand
reflected by changes in the theta and alpha band.

G59

HOW VISION IS SHAPED BY LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION: TOP-DOWN
FEEDBACK BASED ON LOW-SPATIAL FREQUENCIES Gerrit Hirschfeld1,2,

Pienie Zwitserlood1,2; 1University of Münster, 2Otto Creutzfeldt Center for
Cognitive and Behavioral Neuroscience — Next to providing us with an

abstract representational system, language is also linked to perception
and action. While there is ample behavioral and neuroscientific evidence
for the activation of the motor system during comprehension (Pulvermüller, 2005; Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002; Casasanto, 2009), evidence for
an influence on visual perception is limited to behavioral studies. Behaviorally, sentential-semantic information speeds up reactions to perceptually-matching compared to mismatching visual objects (Zwaan &
Madden, 2005). In this reaction-time study, we spatially filtered the
object pictures, to test whether top-down feedback mechanisms based on
low spatial-frequency bring about these behavioral effects (Bar, 2004).
Frequency information contained in the visual targets was manipulated
between participants. We used unfiltered (9o × 9o visual angle in all conditions), high-pass filtered (Adobe PS high-pass filter set to a radius of
0.1 to 0.3 pixels), and low-pass (Adobe PS Gaussian blur filter set to a 6.1
pixel kernel) filtered pictures. Responses were faster to matching compared to mismatching pictures in the unfiltered and low-pass filtered
conditions. Critically, no such differences were observed in the highpass filtered condition. These results extend previous work on low-spatial frequencies in vision (Kveraga, Boshyan, Bar, 2007), supporting a
model in which higher cortical areas are important for the interplay
between language and vision.

G60

EFFECT OF PROPRANOLOL ON WORD FLUENCY IN AUTISM SPECTRUM
DISORDER David Beversdorf1, Sanjida Saklayen1,2, Ananth Narayanan1,2,

Katherine Higgins1, Shawn Christ1; 1University of Missouri, 2Ohio State
University — Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disorder commonly characterized by impairments in language and social
interaction, as well as stereotypical behavior. Studies have demonstrated
decreased flexibility of access to semantic networks in ASD. Improvement in such network access has been reported in ASD using beta-adrenergic antagonists, including propranolol. This is proposed to be due to
noradrenergic effects on the signal-to-noise ratio of cortical neurons. As
predicted by this, propranolol improved performance on simple anagrams in ASD patients. In order to determine whether these effects are
also observed on semantic network access tasks not involving problem
solving, we compared performance on category fluency and letter flu-

216

Language: Semantic
ency tasks in ASD and matched controls between propranolol and placebo, using a double-blind, crossover design. Individuals with ASD
performed significantly better on category fluency after administration
of 40mg propranolol, as compared to placebo. No effect was observed on
letter fluency. No difference between drug conditions was demonstrated
for either task in the control group. Further work will be needed to confirm this proposed mechanism of action, examine the range of tasks
affected, and determine the potential clinical benefit of propranolol in
ASD.

G61

IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT MECHANISMS OF WORD LEARNING IN A
NARRATIVE CONTEXT Laura Batterink1, Helen Neville1; 1University of
Oregon — The vast majority of word meanings are learned simply by
extracting them from context, rather than by rote memorization or
explicit instruction. Although this skill is remarkable, little is known
about the brain mechanisms involved. In the present study, ERPs were
recorded as participants read stories in which pseudowords were presented multiple times, embedded in consistent, meaningful contexts
(referred to as meaning condition, M+) or inconsistent, meaningless contexts (M-). Word learning was then assessed implicitly using a lexical
decision task and explicitly through recall and recognition tasks. Overall,
M- words elicited a larger N400 than M+ words, suggesting that participants were better able to semantically integrate M+ words than Mwords throughout the story. In the lexical decision task, no behavioral or
electrophysiological evidence for implicit priming was found for M+
words. This finding suggests that the M+ lexical representations are still
only weakly linked within the semantic network and thus cannot be
implicitly processed. In contrast, during the explicit recognition task, M+
words showed a robust N400 effect. The N400 effect was dependent
upon recognition performance, such that only correctly recognized M+
words elicited an N400. This pattern of results indicates that new words
can facilitate semantic integration even after relatively limited exposure,
but only if participants have explicitly acquired the meanings of these
words. Taken together, the results provide evidence that the explicit
semantic system is capable of rapid initial learning, while the implicit
semantic system takes time to gradually learn the same or analogous
knowledge (Ullman, 2005).

G62

THE EFFECTS OF TASK ON PROCESSING REAL-WORLD, ANIMACY AND
SYNTACTICALLY VIOLATED SENTENCES Suiping Wang1, Tali Ditman2,

Arim Choi2, Gina Kuperberg2,3; 1South China Normal University, Guangzhou,
China, 2Tufts University, 3Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
Massachusetts General Hospital — In three experiments, we examined the
effects of task on processing verbs and sentence-final nouns in non-violated sentences (.…the boys would eat toast and jam.), animacy violated
sentences (...the eggs would eat toast and jam.) and morphosyntactically
violated sentences (…the boys would eats toast and jam.). ERPs were
recorded as readers self-paced through each sentence word-by-word,
and then made acceptability judgments (Exp1), counted the number of
violations introduced (Exp2), or answered comprehension questions
(Exp3). The pattern of effects on verbs was qualitatively similar across
the three tasks: real-world violations evoked an N400 effect, animacy
violations evoked a small or no N400 effect but a P600 effect, and syntactic violations evoked no N400 effect and a larger P600 effect. Whereas
N400 modulation across conditions was not influenced by task, the magnitude of the P600 effect to the animacy and syntactic violations
decreased across the three tasks. Sentence-final nouns following all three
types of violations (vs. no violation) evoked an N400 effect between 300500ms using all three tasks. However, in a later 600-900ms time-window,
only sentence-final words following animacy and syntactic violations
evoked a sustained negativity effect, which again decreased across the
three tasks. These findings suggest that (a) P600 effects can be evoked by
both syntactic and animacy violations, regardless of task; (b) task nonetheless interacts with the additional processes reflected by the P600; (c)

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Semantic
sustained negativities on sentence-final words following mid-sentence
anomalies are likely to reflect an absence of processing rather than prolonged semantic processing.

G63

SUPPORT FOR ANTERIOR TEMPORAL INVOLVEMENT IN SEMANTIC
ERROR PRODUCTION IN APHASIA: NEW EVIDENCE FROM VLSM Grant

Walker1,2, Myrna Schwartz1, Daniel Kimberg2, Olufunsho Faseyitan2, Adelyn
Brecher1, H. Branch Coslett1,2; 1Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute,
2
University of Pennsylvania — [Goal] To replicate and extend a prior lesionsymptom mapping study that localized lexically-based semantic naming
errors to anterior temporal lobe (ATL); to rule out potential explanations
for failure to implicate Wernicke's area. [Methods] We performed a
voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping (VLSM) analysis involving 64
chronic aphasics with left hemisphere stroke. Lesions from recent MRI
(n=34) or CT (n=30) scans were segmented manually and registered to a
standard 1x1x1mm template. Subjects performed the 175-item Philadelphia Naming Test. In a modification of the published scoring criteria, we
expanded the definition of semantic errors to include any response
(noun, non-noun, or multi-word description) that was taxonomically or
associatively related to the target ("SemPlus"). Scores on non-verbal
semantic tests were used to estimate the contribution to SemPlus of prelexical, conceptual deficits; and these were factored out by regression
("Resid SemPlus"). In every voxel lesioned in at least 5 patients, a t-test
was computed comparing Resid SemPlus between patients with and
without lesions in the voxel. The resulting t-map was thresholded to control the False Discovery Rate at q=0.01. [Results] Voxels in mid- to anterior MTG showed an association between Resid SemPlus and lesion
status; no association was identified in posterior STG (Wernicke's area).
Further analyses ruled out confounding effects of lesion size and naming
errors that bear a phonologic rather than semantic relation to the target.
[Conclusion] The results replicate and extend our previous findings and
strengthen the evidence for a causal relationship between ATL damage
and lexically-based semantic errors in naming.

G64

LAGGED WORD PROCESSING IN READING: EVIDENCE FROM
SIMULTANEOUS RECORDING OF EEG AND EYE MOVEMENTS Michael

Dambacher1,2, Olaf Dimigen2,3, Werner Sommer3, Reinhold Kliegl2, Arthur
Jacobs1; 1Freie Universität Berlin, 2Universität Potsdam, 3Humboldt Universität
zu Berlin — Fixation durations during reading are not only determined by

characteristics of a currently fixated word n, but increase with the difficulty of a previous word n-1. One controversial explanation for this socalled lag-effect is the assumption that fixation durations are often too
short to grant full recognition of difficult words. Accordingly, incomplete word processing spills over to the next fixation and prolongs the
recognition of a subsequent stimulus. To delineate the time-course of
word processing across several stimuli, word frequency was manipulated on two subsequent targets (words n-1 and n) in an array of unrelated nouns. We co-registered fixation-related potentials and eye
movements during left-to-right reading. Additionally, event-related
potentials were recorded at a near-normal reading speed in an eye
movement-free control condition. Robust influences of past word frequency on inspection times and electrophysiological responses to currently fixated words provided evidence for ongoing processing beyond
the duration of fixations. Moreover, interactions of word frequency n-1
and n pointed to interferences between the processing of past and current words during left-to-right reading. The findings support the view of
lagged word processing in reading and indicate that mechanisms of oculomotor control and word recognition are partly independent; hence, the
data are in line with assumptions of parallel models of oculomotor control.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session G
G65

A FUNNY THING HAPPENED ON THE WAY TO ARTICULATION: N400
ATTENUATION DESPITE BEHAVIORAL INTERFERENCE IN PICTURE
NAMING Trevor Blackford1, Phillip Holcomb1, Jonathan Grainger4, Gina

Kuperberg1,2,3; 1Tufts University, 2MGH/MIT/HMS Athinoula A. Martinos
Center for Biomedical Imaging, 3Massachusetts General Hospital, 4LPC-CNRS,
Université de Provence — In a cross-representational masked priming paradigm we measured event-related potentials (ERPs) and naming times
to picture targets preceded by masked prime words (SOA: 80 ms) that
shared four different types of relationship with their target: (1) Identity
related in which the prime was the name of the picture (“cat”-), (2) Phonologically related in which the initial segment of the prime was the
same as the name of the picture (“comb”-), (3) Semantically related in
which the prime was a co-category exemplar and associated with the
name of the picture (“tiger”-), and (4) Unrelated (“book”-). Attenuation
of the N400 component to related (vs unrelated) words was taken to
reflect the ease of lexico-semantic access while differences in naming
times to related (vs unrelated) words reflected the end product of lexical
and post-lexical stages of processing. Attenuation of the N400 and
shorter naming times were both observed to pictures preceded by identity related (vs. unrelated) lexical primes. No ERP modulation but
shorter naming times were observed to pictures preceded by phonologically related (vs. unrelated) lexical primes. An attenuated N400 (electrophysiological priming) but longer naming times (behavioral semantic
interference) were observed to pictures preceded by semantically related
(vs. unrelated) primes. These dissociations between ERP modulation and
naming times suggest (a) that semantic behavioral interference occurs
post-lexically, at a later stage of processing than lexico-semantic activation, and (b) that phonological priming also occurs post-lexically, during
encoding of the speech response.

G66

SCHIZOTYPAL TRAITS OF HEALTHY PARTICIPANTS ARE RELATED TO
SPECIFIC INDEPENDENT COMPONENTS OF THE N400 POTENTIAL

Marie Prevost1, Vincent Calcagno1, Louis Renoult1, Audrey Christina
traits
Heppleston1, J. Bruno Debruille1; 1McGill University — Schizotypal

have been related to specific variations of the semantic processes
indexed by the N400 event-related potential (ERP). These relations seem
to depend on participant’s paranoid feelings, which can be manipulated
by stating that small and harmless currents may be emitted to temporarily change brain function. After this paranoid induction, delusionallike ideation was related to smaller raw N400 amplitudes and the interpersonal factor to reduced N400 effects. Meanwhile, the relation between
disorganization and more negative ERPs within the N400 time window
vanished. ERP data from two previous studies (with and without induction) using the same semantic categorization task were submitted to
independent component analyses (ICAs) separately to see whether or
not each schizotypal trait impacts the same IC in the N400 time window.
Six ICs in each study were chosen for their distribution, the percentage
of variance they accounted for and their overlapping activity in the N400
time window for category exemplars, non-exemplars and the non-exemplars minus exemplars differences. A general linear model tested the
relation between schizotypal traits and the activity of each component.
In both studies, delusional-like ideation was related to centro-parietal
components whereas disorganization and the interpersonal factor were
related to frontal components. Paranoid feelings were found to promote
the impact of delusional-like ideation on components that differentiated
semantic categories whereas it cancelled that of disorganization and the
interpersonal factor on such components.

217

Poster Session G

Language: Semantic

G67

INTERACTION BETWEEN LANGUAGE AND DECISION-MAKING
NETWORKS: DIFFUSION TENSOR AND BOLD FMRI EVIDENCE Corey

McMillan1, Jeffrey Duda1, Delani Gunawardena1, Robin Clark1, James Gee1,
Murray Grossman1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Few studies have investigated strategic decision-making in language. We hypothesize a twocomponent model for minimizing semantic ambiguity (e.g., saying “animal cage” instead of “pen”). A core semantic network in anterior temporal (aT) and superior temporal (STS) regions supports word meaning. A
decision-making network includes: a probability mechanism in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) to calculate a homophone’s likely meaning
(Does “pen” refer to a writing instrument or animal cage?); a value
mechanism in orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) to calculate risk associated with
an interpretation (Will “pen” be interpreted correctly?); and a mechanism in inferior parietal cortex (IPC) that integrates these components
(Expected Utility). In an fMRI study, 18 young adults performed a sentence-completion task by choosing a homophone (“pen”) or a related
alternative (“cage”). Each item included a sentence biasing the homophone meaning (dominant: “Tony has ink”; subordinate: “Tony has
pigs”; neutral: “Tony had a job”) followed by a completion sentence
(“He needed a __.”) and decision (pen or cage). OFC, dlPFC, and IPC
were activated in the subordinate context to support decision-making
when a homophone is likely to be misinterpreted; aT and STS were
recruited to support semantic resources required for word meaning. A
correlational network analysis revealed coactivation of all regions. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) from a subset of participants (n=10) related the
arcuate fasciculus to this BOLD activation, and related the rate of minimizing ambiguity to the inferior longitudinal fasciculus. These findings
provide functional and structural evidence for the interaction between
semantic and decision-making networks during language processing.

G68

HEMISPHERIC DIFFERENCES IN INTERPRETING CONCEPTUAL
MAPPINGS: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Tristan
S.
Davenport1, Seana Coulson1; 1University of California, San Diego — Two

experiments investigated the neural processes underlying the comprehension of literal language that differed in predictability and in semantic
complexity. EEG was recorded as healthy adults read three classes of linguistic stimuli: high-cloze literal (The last thing he did when leaving his
house was to lock the front door.), low-cloze literal (He tried to sneak
into the warehouse but couldn't find the door.), and low-cloze literal
mapping (LM)(For a good action hero, a window can easily be a door.).
Sentences were presented visually in the center of a computer monitor,
at a rate of one word every 500ms. ERPs were timelocked to the onset of
sentence-final words. Target words appeared centrally (Experiment 1)
and in either the right visual field (rvf) or the left (lvf) (Experiment 2), to
test for hemispheric asymmetries in complex semantic processing. Following central presentation, both low-cloze conditions elicited larger
N400 than did high-cloze literal. Low-cloze LM sentences also elicited
larger P600 than low-cloze literals, suggesting the demands of conceptual integration are evident 600-900ms post-onset. Following lvf presentation, low-cloze LM stimuli elicited larger N400 and P600 than lowcloze literals; both effects were more prominent over right hemisphere
electrodes. Following rvf presentation, low-cloze literal stimuli elicited
larger N400 than low-cloze LM stimuli over LH sites, with no difference
in the P600. These data suggest a left hemisphere advantage in processing literal mappings for the lexical integration processes indexed by the
N400 and an important right hemisphere contribution in the later stages
of processing indexed by the P600.

G69
Eileen Cardillo1,
Alex Kranjec , Gwenda Schmidt , Anjan Chatterjee ; 1University of
Pennsylvania, 2Hope College — Novel metaphors regularly infiltrate the

THE NEURAL CAREER OF METAPHOR: AN FMRI STUDY
1

2

1

collective vocabulary of a speaker group. Bowdle & Genter (2005) provide behavioral evidence that this shift from novel to conventional usage

218

is accompanied by a shift in how metaphors are understood, a process
they call the “career of metaphor.” One implication of such a change is
that it’s paralleled by a shift in neural recruitment. We tested this proposal in an fMRI study by parametrically varying participant familiarity
with an initially novel set of metaphors. Before scanning, subjects made
either two or five judgments about a subset of metaphors, thereby operationalizing their familiarity with them. During scanning, subjects simply
read metaphors and answered periodic comprehension questions. Items
were either those metaphors they had already judged, or ones they had
not previously encountered. Preliminary analyses with 13 subjects confirm neural sensitivity to familiarity: compared to items previously seen
five times, metaphors encountered for the first time activated left prefrontal cortex. In addition to addressing changes in metaphor processing
with experience, this study also considered potential differences in neural substrates for different types of metaphor. To do so, half of items
were noun-based, nominal metaphors (His smile was a charming dodge)
and half were verb-based, predicate metaphors (The pie murmured to
the dieter). Consistent with proposals that different metaphor types
entail different cognitive processes, lateralization differences emerged
when comparing nominal and predicate metaphors, collapsed across
levels of familiarization. Together, these results confirm the importance
of both metaphor type and familiarity in determining how it is processed.

G70

N400 COMPONENT IN LEARNING DISABLED CHILDREN Thalia
Fernandez1, Paula López-Alanís2, Gloria Avecilla1, Raquel Ocejo3, María del
Carmen Rodríguez4, Belén Prieto5, Melissa Calderón1; 1Instituto de
Neurobiología, UNAM, 2Universidad Latina de América, 3Facultad de
Psicología, UNAM, 4Universidad Autónoma de Queretaro, 5FES-Iztacala,
UNAM — Few investigations had explored N400 component of the
Evoked Related Potentials (ERPs) in Learning Disabled children, and
their results are not consistent. LD is diagnosed when the child has values substantially below that expected for his/her age, scholar grade, and
IQ in reading, writing, and arithmetic standardized tests. Two groups
were studied: 15 LD children (LDC), and 12 normal children (NC). Referential EEG recordings were obtained in the 19 leads performing a semantic task: two words were displayed in a monitor and he/she had to
answer if they were related (cat-dog) or not related (pen-salt) pressing
one of the two mouse buttons. Mean ERPs were calculated only from
correct answers. In individual visual analysis, almost all NC showed two
components related with no-related words; however, in few LDC was
possible to determine these waves. This was confirmed in the Grand
Average Potentials: NC exhibited a N400 component at 535-570 ms localized in left parietal and midline leads; it was preceded by an early right
frontal component at 315-390 ms. LDC children showed significant differences between conditions at 665-685 ms only in right frontotemporal
lead. These results suggest: a) the paradigm used is useful to evoke a
N400 component in normal children, and b) LD children do not evoke a
N400 component to unrelated pairs of words with the topography and
latency observed in NC, which suggests that LD children had a neurophysiological deficit that may explain their learning difficulties. * Supported by grants IN204103 from PAPIIT, and 69145 from CONACyT.

G71

NEW BUZZWORDS: EARLY CORTICAL RESPONSES TO PSEUDO WORDS
AFTER AFFECTIVE CONDITIONING Magdalene Ortmann1, Christian

Dobel1, Johanna Kissler2, Markus Junghöfer1; 1University of Münster, Germany,
University of Konstanz, Germany — Emotional compared to neutral words

2

receive preferential processing at visual sensory cortex regions starting
already at 200ms (Kissler et al., 2007). Convergent effects have been
shown for various kinds of emotional visual stimuli and are assumed to
reflect motivated attention leading to top-down re-entrant modulation of
sensory processing. Using associative learning with a multitude of different faces we have recently been able to show that aversively conditioned faces evoke motivated attention and convergent correlates of

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Semantic
amplified sensory processing beginning around 130ms and even in
absence of contingency awareness (Putsche et al., under rev.). Additionally we found preferential sensory CS+ processing already before 100ms
supporting two-pathway models as for instance suggested by LeDoux
(2000; “low road – high road”) or Bullier (2001, “fast brain”). Here we
aimed to investigate whether this rapid and implicit emotional learning
occurs also for words and whether magnetoencephalographic correlates
can support the idea that rapid “low road” or ‘fast brain” processing is a
general phenomenon and not limited to biological stimuli. 52 pseudo
words were paired three times each with one of 52 pictures depicting
aversive or neutral objects (shark, bottle, etc.). Comparison of event
related fields to pseudo word presentation before and after learning confirmed our hypotheses, showing enhanced sensory activity for aversively conditioned pseudo-words after learning at an early (“low road”)
and a mid-latency (“high road”) interval of information processing.
These results were supported by behavioral tests showing significant
effects of emotional content even in the absence of contingency awareness.

G72

FLEXIBLE IMPLEMENTATION OF HEMISPHERIC PROCESSING BIASES
DURING SENTENCE COMPREHENSION Edward W. Wlotko1, Kara D.

Federmeier1; 1University of Illinois — During sentence comprehension, the

left hemisphere (LH) engages in predictive processing whereas the right
hemisphere (RH) is driven by integrative comprehension strategies.
Event-related potential (ERP) studies investigated hemispheric contributions to comprehension by presenting words in the left or right half of
the visual field (LVF or RVF). RVF/LH N400s were facilitated more for
weakly expected sentence endings compared to the LVF/RH pattern,
consistent with the idea that the LH engages in predictive processing
even when context is only moderately predictive. The P2 was enhanced
for words presented to the RVF/LH when sentence context was strongly
predictive, whereas the LVF/RH P2 was not affected by sentential context, suggesting that LH predictive processing can extend to the perceptual level. We followed up on these results using strongly and weakly
constraining (predictive) contexts that were completed by plausible endings that could be expected, unexpected, or unexpected but related to the
most expected completion. Consistent with data from central presentation, predictive processing was less apparent when related endings were
included in the design. There were no asymmetric P2 effects, and the
N400 facilitation for weakly expected endings was diminished. Further,
while neither hemisphere showed much N400 differentiation between
the unexpected and related endings, later effects of relatedness were
exaggerated particularly for LVF/RH endings, consistent with the
claims that the two hemispheres may differ in controlled processing.
These results suggest that processing biases are flexible, as different
experimental contexts lead to recruitment of the hemispheric biases to
differing degrees.

G73

MODULATION OF EARLY ALPHA AND BETA EEG POWER REFLECTS CLASS
S.
AND CONTEXT DURING VISUAL WORD PROCESSING Monika
Mellem1,2, Marcel C. M. Bastiaansen3,4, Lea K. Pilgrim5, Andrei V. Medvedev2,
Rhonda B. Friedman2; 1Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience,
Georgetown University, 2Georgetown University, Neurology, 3Donders Institute
for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Center for Cognitive Neuroimaging,
Nijmengen, The Netherlands, 4Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics,
class
Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 5University of Stirling, Scotland — Word

and context have been shown to affect early lexical processing; however,
the neurophysiological mechanisms causing this effect are not well
understood. This study investigated how word class and context affect
local neuronal synchronization by studying event-related changes in
EEG power. We recorded 64-channel EEG (Neuroscan) while ten subjects silently read 840 words which appeared on a computer monitor for
400 msec (ISI = 800 msec) in either a sentence or list context. Artifact-free
EEG epochs sampled at 500 Hz were analyzed using the Fieldtrip soft-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session G
ware. Time-frequency representations of EEG power were calculated in
a wide range of frequencies (2-100 Hz) and analyzed for open class (contains semantic information, i.e., nouns, verbs, adjectives) and closed class
(contains minimal semantic information, i.e., pronouns, prepositions,
conjunctions) words in a sentence or in a list context. Nonparametric statistical analysis showed that relative to the sentence context, open class
words in the list context exhibited significantly greater power increases
(p<0.03) in the alpha (8-12 Hz) and lower beta (13-20 Hz) frequency
bands. These differences were observed at an early stage of lexical processing (50-250 msec) over bilateral occipito-temporal and frontal
regions. There was no significant difference for closed class words across
these contexts (p=0.16). These results suggest that early word context
effects are restricted to open class words. Increased neuronal synchronization in the alpha and beta frequency bands may reflect dynamic anterior-posterior network coupling needed when reading open class words
during less supportive contexts.

G74

THE EFFECTS OF SEMANTIC CONGRUITY FOUND FOR HIGHLY REPEATED
WORDS ARE PRESENT IN EXPLICIT BUT NOT IN IMPLICIT SEMANTIC
DESIGNS Louis Renoult1,2, Xiaoxiao Wang2, Jennifer Mortimer1, J. Bruno

Debruille1,2; 1Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Montréal, Québec,
Canada, 2McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada — A number of studies have shown that repetition can disrupt the processing of meaning,
resulting in a reduction or a suppression of semantic effects. However,
we have recently found preserved effects of semantic congruity on reaction times (RTs) and N400 event-related potentials (ERPs) in primed
semantic categorization tasks with highly repeated target words. The
preservation of semantic processing with repetition in these studies
could be due to the use of long SOAs (2000ms), of relatively high ratios
of related words (50%), or of explicit semantic instructions. The present
study investigated these possibilities. We contrasted a short (250ms) and
a long (1000ms) SOA in two different experiments using a lower proportion of related words (30%). One group of participants (N=22) performed
a lexical decision task (LDT) and a second group (N=19) performed an
explicit matching task with the same words (except for pseudowords)
and the same task parameters. In both tasks, word stimuli were only two
primes and two target words repeated throughout the experiment.
Results showed that the effect of semantic congruity on RTs and N400
was absent for both the short and the long SOA in the LDT but was
widely significant in the explicit task. The maintenance of the processing
of meaning with repetition thus does not seem to be directly related to
variations in SOA or in the proportion of related words. Task instruction
seems critical to preserve semantic processing with repeated presentations, which suggests that explicit attention to semantics prevents
semantic satiation.

G75

INDUCTION OF CATEGORY-SPECIFIC VS. GENERAL SEMANTIC
IMPAIRMENTS USING RTMS Gorana Pobric1, Elizabeth Jefferies2,

Matthew Lambon Ralph1; 1Neuroscience and Aphasia Research Unit, 2York
Neuroimaging Centre — How the brain encodes the meaning of words and
concepts has puzzled philosophers, cognitive scientists and neuroscientists alike. Some contemporary computational models suggest that concepts reflect a hub-and-spoke combination of information – modalityspecific association areas support sensory, verbal and motor sources (the
spokes) whilst anterior temporal lobes (ATL) act as an amodal hub. We
used off-line rTMS to delineate between three different hypotheses: (a)
distributed-only – concepts reflect the conjoint action of modality-specific areas alone; (b) hub-only – in which concepts are formed within
(ATL) and modality-specific regions only provide sensorimotor input/
output gateways rather than making a necessary contribution to conceptualisation; (c) hub-and-spoke – in which modality-specific regions provide the basic sensory, motor and verbal ingredients whilst the ATL hub
supports an additional amodal representation which codes the panmodal information. We delineated between these competing theories by

219

Poster Session G
investigating category-specific impairments. Specifically, we compared
the effect of stimulating the left ATL, inferior parietal lobule (IPL) and
occipital pole in normal participants prior to naming pictures and numbers. If the ATL is involved in semantic memory, as proposed, then
rTMS should generate a category-general effect. If the IPL spoke is implicated then stimulation should impact on semantic performance but only
for concepts that rely on praxis information – i.e., manipulable manmade
objects. We demonstrate novel and striking evidence in favour of huband-spoke hypothesis by applying rTMS to normal participants: ATL
stimulation generates a category-general impairment whilst IPL stimulation induces a category-specific deficit for manmade objects, reflecting
the coding of praxis in this neural region.

G76

TURNING DOWN THE VOLUME ON SEMANTICS: IMPAIRED KNOWLEDGE
OF SOUND-WORDS IN LOGOPENIC PROGRESSIVE APHASIA Michael F.
Bonner1, Murray Grossman1; 1University of Pennsylvania — OBJECTIVE:

fMRI studies of semantic memory have indicated that word meanings
for concrete objects rely on feature representations in perceptual-motor
association cortices. We tested this theory in logopenic progressive aphasia (LPA), a disorder linked to superior temporal cortical atrophy affecting auditory association cortex. We hypothesized an impairment in LPA
for words with strongly associated auditory features. METHODS: An
auditory lexical decision task was employed using words with strongly
associated features (determined in a norming study) in three modalities:
Auditory, Motor and Visual. LPA (n=6) were compared with healthy,
age-matched controls (HC; n=22) and a dementia-control group (DC;
n=9) comprising patients with semantic dementia and corticobasal syndrome. RESULTS: LPA had significantly lower accuracy than HC for
Auditory words (LPA: M=88.8%, SD=10.7; HC: M=99.1%, SD=1.6;
p<.05), while these groups did not differ for Motor (LPA: M=94.6%,
SD=9.8; HC: M=98.9%, SD=1.8) and Visual words (LPA: M=92.5%,
SD=11.7; HC: M=98.3%, SD=3.7). Within LPA, Auditory words were
impaired relative to Motor (p<.05) and Visual words (p=.06); Motor
words did not differ from Visual words, emphasizing the selective deficit for Auditory words in LPA. DC performed poorly on all word categories relative to HC (Auditory: M=90.3%, SD=9.5, p<.001; Motor:
M=90.0%, SD=11.9, p=.001; Visual: M=93.3%, SD=7.4, p<.05). Within DC,
word categories did not differ. Quantitative MRI studies of LPA verify
auditory association cortex thinning. CONCLUSIONS: These findings
are consistent with the “sensory-motor” theory of semantics suggesting
that word meanings rely on feature representations in modality-specific
association cortices, and this patient work provides converging evidence
for fMRI studies.

G77

RIGHT HEMISPHERE ROLE IN NEW WORD ACQUISITION AND POSSIBLE
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES Travellia Tjokro1, Christine Chiarello1;

1University of California, Riverside — The current project investigated the
role of the right hemisphere in the process of acquiring new words and
meanings, and whether this is modulated by an individual’s reading
skill as measured by Nelson-Denny Reading Test. Beeman proposed that
the right hemisphere has a coarse coding style, and is better able to integrate distant semantic relations in contrast to more fine semantic coding
within the left hemisphere (Beeman & Chiarello, 1998), A coarse coding
style may help in learning the meanings of new words (Ince & Christman, 2002). In addition, a right hemisphere advantage in learning new
words may be influenced by reading skill (see Perfetti, Wlotko, & Hart,
2005). In the current 2-day study, new words and meanings were presented either 2 or 8 times, thereby varying the number of semantic learning contexts. Forced choice recognition tested learning of new words,
followed by the critical divided visual field semantic relatedness judgment test. It was predicted that skilled readers would utilize the most
appropriate hemispheric strategy, resulting in a left hemisphere advantage for more repeated words, and right hemisphere advantage for less
repeated words. Less-skilled readers were predicted to have less hemispheric asymmetry in the more repeated condition. The data suggest a

220

Language: Semantic
right hemisphere advantage for the less repeated condition, but only for
less-skilled readers. Richer semantic context significantly improved performance for skilled, but not less skilled, readers. The data suggest that
less-skilled readers utilized more of the coarse coding style of the right
hemisphere in learning new words.

G78

BEHAVIOURAL AND ERP EVIDENCE FOR EARLY RETRIEVAL OF LEXICOSEMANTIC INFORMATION IN VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION Olaf Hauk1;
1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit — Timing

information from electrophysiological data is increasingly becoming relevant for models of
visual word recognition. It is also important when specific stages of the
word recognition process are supposed to be compared between participant and patient groups. In this study, we were attempting to separate
stimulus- from response-related ERP effects, and provide a lower limit
for the earliest latencies of lexical and semantic information retrieval.
Subjects performed 3 different types of Go/NoGo tasks: lexical decision
(LD), semantic decision (SD), and orthographic decision (OD). Behavioural as well as 64-channel ERP data were recorded. Statistical analysis
of ERP data was performed using SensorSPMs in SPM5. Assignment of
stimulus category (e.g. words or pseudowords in LD) to Go or NoGo trials was counterbalanced across subjects. This allowed separating
response-related and stimulus-related effects. Reaction times around 350
ms after word onset already reliably distinguished stimulus categories in
LD and SD, and around 300 ms in OD. In the ERP data, a reliable difference between Go and NoGo conditions was observed around 200 ms in
all three tasks. Our results demonstrate that brain responses around 200
ms already reflect target detection or response preparation. Earliest
retrieval of lexical and semantic information must therefore have
occurred before 200 ms.

G79

NOVEL EVIDENCE FOR A CAUDAL-ROSTRAL GRADIENT OF
CONVERGENCE IN THE HUMAN TEMPORAL LOBE: A PROBABILISTIC MR
TRACTOGRAPHY STUDY Richard J. Binney1, Karl V. Embleton1, Geoffrey J.

M. Parker1, Matthew A. Lambon Ralph1; 1University of Manchester, UK — At
the turn of the decade, Mesulam proposed that cognition, and indeed
consciousness, arises from a gradual convergence and integration of sensory information. Such convergence occurs as information proceeds
from primary sensory cortex through a set of unimodal association
regions onto transmodal association cortices in which information from
different sensory modalities come together. The manner in which this
convergence occurs in the human temporal lobe is based primarily on
tracer-based connectivity studies of the non-human primate brain. Here
we present the first attempt to characterise connectivity within the
human temporal lobe, in vivo, using diffusion-weighted imaging tractography. The results suggest that while modality-specific processing
predominates over inferior-medial and superior structures, intermediary
areas exists along the entire length of the temporal lobe. In addition,
there are increasing degrees of cross-modal processing as information
flows in the caudal-to-rostral direction until the temporal pole, at which
the information encoded is principally amodal. Our findings are in
agreement with those of previous primate connectivity studies, but also
extend our knowledge of the way in which the human brain has evolved
to incorporate multiple interactive stages of integrative processing to
facilitate higher cognitive function and representation. Furthermore, this
convergence peaks at the temporal pole providing further evidence that
this region is key in the process of conceptualisation.
G80

THE FUNCTIONALLY HIERARCHICAL ORGANIZATION OF THE SUPERIOR
Maddox1,
Jon
TEMPORAL SULCUS IN SPEECH PERCEPTION Dale

Venezia1, Greg Hickok1; 1University of California, Irvine — The superior temporal sulcus (STS) plays an important role in the perception of intelligible speech. Previous studies of speech intelligibility have highlighted
both anterior and posterior portions of the STS (aSTS and pSTS, respectively). The functional distinction between aSTS and pSTS remains specCognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Semantic
ulative though. The posterior portions of the sulcus are thought to
support phonemic perception and the categorization of complex sounds,
whereas the anterior portions are responsive to sentence-level stimuli—
suggesting a role in semantic, syntactic, or prosodic processing. Here we
use a 3T fMRI block design to investigate the relative contribution of
semantic and syntactic information (in the absence of prosodic regularity) in driving aSTS response. The study also explores the neuronal
response to intelligible speech by contrasting it with spectrally inverted
(unintelligible) speech. The results indicate significant increases in BOLD
response throughout the STS and adjacent cortical regions (STG/MTG)
for the intelligible > unintelligible contrast. A region along the ventral
bank of aSTS shows increased activation for sentences with list-like prosody when compared to randomly ordered word lists. Signal changes in
this region are positively coupled with activity in the posterior superior
temporal plane (pSTS/STG). These findings are interpreted as evidence
that the posterior superior temporal regions are involved in the perception of intelligible speech, remaining active as more semantic and syntactic integration is required by the cognitive system, and a particular
portion of the ventral aSTS/ATL appears to be driven by combinatorial
or integrative semantic and syntactic operations in the absence of robust
prosodic cues.

G81

ASSOCIATION AND DISSOCIATION OF SEMANTIC AND LEXICAL
KNOWLEDGE OF ENGLISH WORDS: EVIDENCE FROM A NORMAL
POPULATION Lang Chen1, Timothy T. Rogers1; 1University of Wisconsin,
Madison — Previous neuropsychological studies have shown that
patients with serious semantic impairment can occasionally achieve normal accuracy on lexical tasks such as reading and recognizing regular
and irregular words. The reverse dissociation has also been observed,
and this double dissociation between semantic and lexical knowledge is
cited as strong evidence for the functional independence of semantic and
lexical representations of words. In seeming contradiction to this conclusion, studies of semantic dementia that produces the purest form of
semantic impairment reveal a strong association between lexical and
semantic impairment. This work favors a single-system model where
both kinds of knowledge are represented in a distributed and interactive
manner. The present study aims to reconcile the apparent contradiction
in patient studies by examining, in healthy participants, the effects of
semantic interference on a lexical task, namely visual lexical decision
(vLD). Two experiments were conducted to test (i) whether semantic
processing interferes with visual word recognition, and (ii) how semantic interference varies with individual differences in orthographic knowledge, reading experience, and cognitive control. The results showed (1)
substantial semantic interference on vLD in the majority of participants,
but (2) no interference in a small number of individuals with superior
cognitive control ability and/or orthographic knowledge. Thus in most
people, word recognition appears to depend upon semantic input, but
for a small proportion with especially well-developed orthographic representations, such input may not be necessary. This view is consistent
with the single-system framework assuming that individuals vary in the
nature and extent of their linguistic experience.

G82

SENTENCE COMPREHENSION IN AGRAMMATIC APHASIA: EYETRACKING EVIDENCE FOR A LEXICAL INTEGRATION DEFICIT Aaron M.

Meyer1, Jungwon J. Choy1, Cynthia K. Thompson1; 1Northwestern University —

Swinney et al. (1989) have argued that agrammatic aphasics fail to activate less frequent (subordinate) meanings of ambiguous words (e.g.,
"bank") or activate these meanings slowly. In contrast, Hagoort’s (1993)
lexical integration deficit hypothesis argues that individuals with aphasia are able to access lexical-semantic information, including subordinate
meanings, but have difficulty integrating this information with context.
We tested these hypotheses in a comprehensive manner by examining
subordinate- and dominant-meaning selection in both biasing and neutral sentence contexts (e.g., Dominant-Biased: “The man had a good job
while working at the bank for a while”; Subordinate-Biased: “The man

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session G
had a nice nap while relaxing on the bank for a while”; Neutral: “The
man had a big smile while staring at the bank for a while”). On critical
trials, aphasic participants and age-matched control participants viewed
an array of clip-art pictures that contained the dominant and subordinate referents and two unrelated distractors. Looks to each type of picture were tracked over time while participants listened to the sentence
stimuli. Fixation proportions indicated that the meaning that was consistent with context (subordinate or dominant) was selected, and the dominant meaning was selected in a neutral context. However, agrammatic
aphasics’ fixations of the correct picture were delayed in the dominantbiased context, compared to age-matched control participants. These
results indicate that both dominant and subordinate word meanings are
activated in agrammatic aphasia, but the integration of lexical-semantic
information with context is delayed under some conditions. These findings support the lexical integration deficit hypothesis.

G83

BROCA’S AREA IS ENGAGED DURING CONDITIONAL REASONING IN
NATURAL SENTENCES Jörg Bahlmann1, Jutta Mueller1, Michiru Makuuchi1,

Angela Friederici1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — During language processing the brain does a
remarkably good job in the interpretation of the content of a particular
sentence. The content of a sentence can be either affirmative or negative.
Sentential negation is a linguistic feature that triggers the truth value of
the content. Behavioral studies that investigated sentential negation
showed higher processing costs for negations in comparison to affirmations. Only few fMRI that manipulated the truth value of sentences
experiments have been accomplished so far. None of these studies
reported activation in the classical perisylvian network including the left
inferior frontal and the superior temporal cortex. To our knowledge,
double negations have not been tested yet in an fMRI setting. In the
present study we applied double negation sentences. Double negations
have frequently been examined in the research field of logical or propositional reasoning. Usually, reaction times increase during the processing
of double negations (If not p, then not q) compared to single negations (If
p, then not q) or to no negation (If p, then q). The resolution of a double
negations is considered to be associated with the difficulty to generate a
conclusion. As a result, we found a network comprising of the left pars
opercularis (BA 44), and the bilateral inferior parietal gyrus (BA 40) to be
activated during the processing of double negations as compared to
affirmations. The study shows that a typically language-related area (left
BA 44) interplays with areas related to cognitive demands and logical/
conditional reasoning, in order to process double negations.

G85

CONFLICT BETWEEN SEMANTIC AND SYNTACTIC CUES DURING
SENTENCE COMPREHENSION: AN FMRI STUDY Malathi Thothathiri1,2,

Albert Kim3, John Trueswell1, Sharon Thompson-Schill1; 1University of
Pennsylvania, 2Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute, 3University of
Colorado — A number of fMRI studies have investigated the role of left
inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) in sentence comprehension. These studies
typically manipulate syntactic factors such as complexity and distance
between different constituents. The results have been used to argue that
LIFG specifically underlies the representations or resources that support
syntactic processing (e.g., working memory, syntactic movement). Here,
we investigated the role of LIFG in integrating semantic and syntactic
information. Participants judged the acceptability of visually presented
sentences. We contrasted three sentence types: 1. active sentences that
contained conflict between semantic and syntactic cues (The check was
cashing the accountant); 2. correct passive sentences that contained no
such conflict (The final grades were posted by the teacher); and 3. syntactically anomalous passive sentences that also contained no conflict (The
building plan was modify by the architect). Two regions of interest
(ROIs: left frontal and left temporal cortex) were extracted from a group
analysis of all sentences versus a baseline false font condition. Active
sentences with conflict showed more activation in both ROIs than correct

221

Poster Session G
and anomalous passives that contained no conflict. These results provide
insight into the interaction between semantic and syntactic factors during sentence processing. In particular, they argue against a solely syntaxfocused role for LIFG because passive sentences, which are more syntactically complex, showed *less* LIFG activation than simpler active sentences. Instead, the results suggest that LIFG involvement is sensitive to
the conflict between semantic and syntactic cues.

G86

REVERSING CAUSAL COHERENCE THROUGH LINGUISTIC CUES:
EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Ming Xiang1, Abigail

Swain2, Gina Kuperberg2; 1University of Victoria, 2Tufts University — We used

ERPs to examine neural activities associated with establishing causal
coherence across sentences. 180 sets of three-sentence scenarios were
constructed, each with four conditions. A critical word in the final sentence (“closed”) was either causally coherent or incoherent with its context (1a&1b). The addition of the scalar term “even so”, in front of the
final sentence, reversed coherence (1d&1c). 1a/c "Carol listened to the
radio. The storm last night had dumped several feet of snow. (Even
so,)The schools were closed that day." 1b/d "Carol listened to the radio.
The storm last night had only left a dusting of snow. (Even so,)The
schools were closed that day." In Experiment 1, participants (n=28)
explicitly rated causal coherence on a 1-5 scale. Incoherent (1b) (vs.
coherent (1a)) critical words evoked an N400 followed by a P600 effect.
The addition of “even so” (1d&1c) led to both a larger N400 and P600
effect. In Experiment 2, participants (n=20) read the same sentences but
simply answered comprehension questions on 25% of trials. Incoherent
(versus coherent) critical words evoked only a small P600 effect. The
addition of “even so” led to both an N400 and a P600 effect. We conclude
that, in medium-constraint contexts, people can apply causal relations
across clauses to immediately process the semantics of upcoming words,
particularly under task conditions that encourage explicit coherence
linking or with the help of explicit linguistic cues. Indeed, such cues can
be used to effectively reverse causal coherence across clauses during
online neural processing.

G87

LANGUAGE-SPECIFIC CONTEXTUAL MODULATION OF BILINGUAL
SEMANTIC PROCESSING Lawrence Benjamin Lewis1; 1Loyola University,
New Orleans — Prior research has demonstrated that bilinguals engage a
frontal-parietal-subcortical network that powers the necessary language
shifting and inhibition cognitive mechanisms necessary to control the
use of their two languages (e.g., Abutalebi et al., 2008). The present study
employed a bilingual Stroop paradigm to assess the role of language
context on linguistic inhibition. Adult participants were asked to name
aloud the ink color of printed strings of nonlinguistic symbols to provide
a language context. Subsequently, they read the color words of one language using the color terms of the other (e.g., responding "rojo" to the
word "blue" printed in red ink). There were four types of trials separated
by distractor tasks. Trial 1 comprised naming ink colors on the context
sheet in English, then responding to Spanish color words in English.
Trial 2 had an English context, with English color words named in Spanish. Trial 3 provided a Spanish context, followed by naming Spanish
color words in English, while the context for Trial 4 was Spanish, with
English color words named using Spanish color terms. Results revealed
that participants' color naming times were significantly faster when the
context language matched the response language (M = 5.73 sec) than
when it did not (M = 15.85 sec), F(1, 252) = 31.40, p < 0.001. Priming the
response language through context strongly facilitated inhibition of the
written language in the task. These findings represent a step toward
quantifying the role of context on the inhibitory mechanisms involved in
bilingual language processing.

222

Language: Semantic
G88
Nuria AbdulSabur1,2, Ellen
Lau3, Diogo Almeida4, Chunmao Wang1, David Poeppel5, Allen R. Braun1;
1NIDCD, National Institutes of Health, 2University of Maryland,
3
Massachusetts General Hospital, 4University of California, Irvine, 5New York
University — The underlying neural mechanisms of the N400, a negative

LOCATING THE N400 IN TIME AND SPACE

event-related potential (ERP) deflection that onsets around 200 ms,
peaks around 400 ms and subsides around 600 ms after semantic violations in sentences, are still under debate. The N400 is characteristically
temporally broad and spatially inexact. Magnetoencephalography
(MEG) is an appropriate tool in that it allows for the superior localization
of sources in both time and space and is capable of decomposing different sources contributing to the N400 response. Although both MEG and
fMRI have previously been employed to localize the N400, this study utilizes the synthetic aperture magnetometry (SAM) beamforming method,
which results in a dataset that combines the temporal resolution of MEG
and spatial resolution of MRI. In the current study, healthy volunteers
underwent concurrent electroencephalograph (EEG) and MEG recordings while completing a traditional N400 paradigm in which sentencefinal words either upheld or violated the semantic context. A structural
MRI was completed afterward and used as an anatomical template for
MEG data. Results from the time period of the N400 (as defined by EEG
recordings) show activation in the frontal and temporal lobes that begins
with left-dominated activation, shifts to the right, and back to the left
hemisphere, indicating the involvement of a bilateral network of brain
regions. These findings demonstrate the N400 arises from a dynamic
series of neuronal events in both hemispheres.

G89

AN ERP STUDY OF CONCRETENESS EFFECTS IN IMAGERY AND
ASSOCIATE GENERATION: EVIDENCE FOR THE DUAL CODING THEORY

Marc Joanisse1, Allan Paivio1, Ken McRae1, Suzanne Welcome1; 1The
University of Western Ontario — Dual coding theory (Paivio, 1971) suggests
that concrete words activate both verbal and image-based codes, while
abstract words primarily activate verbal codes, resulting in processing
advantages for concrete words. This theory predicts that partially distinct neural substrates might support the processing of abstract and concrete words. Previous studies, using primarily lexical decision tasks,
have shown that word concreteness modulates ERP components, including the N400 and a later (N700) component. Because mental image generation may take several seconds, we chose to examine ERPs during
tasks that allow time for mental image generation to occur. In separate
blocks, participants were asked to form mental images or generate verbal associates to abstract and concrete words. In reaction time data, concreteness effects were significant under mental imagery instructions, but
not associate instructions. We saw no reliable difference in N400 amplitude between abstract and concrete words during either task. Later in
processing, abstract words in the imagery condition elicited a more negative waveform than concrete words, while no such difference was
observed for the associate condition. Time-frequency analyses revealed
that abstract words elicited more power in the 8-20 Hz range during
mental image generation in a time window centered around 800 msec
before responses. These results by demonstrate that concrete and
abstract words differ in both amplitude and time frequency analyses, as
predicted by dual coding theory. While generating verbal associates
results in relatively similar patterns of results for abstract and concrete
words, differences emerged when mental imagery of abstract words was
required.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Development & Aging

Perception & Action: Development &
Aging
G90

SLEEP DEPRIVATION AND AGING PRODUCE DISSIMILAR DISTORTIONS
IN LONG-TERM MEMORY FOR DURATION Brian C. Rakitin1, Yaakov

Stern1; 1Columbia University — The timing abilities of healthy elderly
(n=18, age = 75.5 ± 8.2), young sleep-deprived (n=27, age = 25.1 ± 3.8, 48
hours total SD) and young control participants (n = 16, age = 26 ± 3.8)
were compared over three consecutive days. On day 1, participants
acquired and reproduced 4.5 s and 7.5 s intervals with the assistance of
feedback, and then reproduced them without feedback (i.e., in delayed
free-recall) on days 2 and 3. Two tasks were used. In simple reproduction a single key was used regardless of the location of the timing cue. In
choice reproduction, participants indicated the elapsed interval with a 4
alternative forced-choice spatial discrimination with and incompatible sr mapping. Results indicated largely accurate reproduction in both tasks
for all groups on day 1. However, whereas young participants over-produced the intervals in simple reproduction free-recall, elderly participants under-produced, while sleep-deprived participants reproduced
most accurately. These results indicate a positive encoding bias (i.e., K*)
for long-term memory for duration in young participants, and a negative
encoding bias in elderly participants. The sleep-deprivation results most
likely represent a conservative decision bias that counteracts the positive
encoding bias. Choice reproductions were shorter, likely due to a nonspecific arousal effect stemming from the greater task demands. More
generally, these results emphasize that sleep-deprivation is a poor model
of cognitive aging, and perhaps more importantly, that expectations of
slowed performance in sleep-deprived individuals does not apply to
planned behavior in intermediate time-scales.
G91

AUDIOVISUAL TEMPORAL INTEGRATION IN THE INFANT BRAIN

Franziska Kopp1, Ulman Lindenberger1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human
Development, Berlin — Research shows that the temporal window of
audiovisual integration is about 300-350 ms in infants. However, looking
time measures alone – as often used in infancy research – cannot fully
exclude discriminative abilities when overt behavior is missing. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to investigate brain dynamics
related to audiovisual integration in 6-month-old infants using eventrelated potentials (ERP). In a behavioral experiment, infants were habituated to a synchronous audiovisual stimulus. Once infants met the
habituation criterion, an asynchronous test trial of the same stimulus
was presented in which the visual stream was delayed to the auditory
stream by 200 ms. Results showed that infants were not able to discriminate this asynchrony on behavioral level. In a subsequent EEG experiment, audiovisual film sequences were presented for 4000 ms in each
trial. In synchronous trials the visual and auditory stream were in synchrony, whereas in asynchronous trials the visual stream was delayed to
the auditory stream by 200 ms. ERPs revealed, in contrast to the behavioral data, that brain activity differed between the two conditions. In particular, Nc and P2 peak latencies differed in anterior electrodes. No
latency differences were found in posterior electrodes. Results suggest
that neural activity patterns might reflect an adaptation process for
audiovisual temporal integration. A temporal shift of brain activity
might be an adequate mechanism of the infant brain to integrate both
modalities into a coherent percept.

G92

EYES ON THE TARGET: A COMPARISON OF FINE-GRAINED SENSITIVITY
TO TRIADIC GAZE BETWEEN 8-10-YEAR-OLD CHILDREN AND ADULTS
Mark Vida1, Daphne Maurer1; 1McMaster University — Adults are able to

determine which object in the environment someone is looking at with
high precision (triadic gaze). A previous study (Doherty et al., 2009) indicates that by age 6 children can detect large (10°) differences in triadic

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session G
gaze. Here we developed a child-friendly procedure to compare sensitivity to small horizontal differences in triadic gaze between 8-10-year-olds
(n=12 tested to date) and adults (n=18). Participants sat in front of a computer monitor on which they saw faces fixating a series of points (separated by 1.6°) that were physically marked on a board halfway between
them and the monitor. The task was to indicate whether each face
appeared to be looking to the left or right of one of three target points
(center, 6.4° left or 6.4° right). Adults were highly sensitive to deviations
from the central target, with a mean error of 0.83° (calculated from the
.25 and .75 points on the fitted psychometric curves). The children were
not as sensitive (M error = 1.70°). When the targets were peripheral, participants overestimated the degree to which the face was looking toward
the periphery (e.g., judging the face to be looking to the left of the left target), with a larger error in children (M = 1.51°) than in adults (M = 0.91°).
These results indicate for the first time that, by age 8-10, children can
detect small differences in triadic gaze, but that sensitivity is not yet as
refined as it will become in adulthood.

G93

PERCEPTION OF TEMPORAL FINE STRUCTURES IN SOUND WHILE WE
AGE Bernhard Ross1,2, Bruce Schneider2, Claude Alain1,2; 1Rotman
Research Institute, 2University of Toronto, Canada — Age-related decline in

processing rapid fluctuations in sound contributes to older adult’s difficulties in understanding speech. We investigated auditory temporal resolution in young, middle-aged, and older listeners with neuromagnetic
evoked responses to gap stimuli of different leading marker (10 or 40ms)
and gap duration (4 or 16ms) and no-gap stimuli of corresponding durations. Auditory cortex source activities at low frequencies (<24 Hz),
around 40 Hz (gamma band) and around 80 Hz (high gamma band)
were modulated accordingly to the perceptual difficulty in detecting the
gap. Oscillatory 40-Hz responses were elicited by the onsets of leading
and lagging markers and constituted markers for the central representation of the physical stimulus elements. Early 40-Hz oscillations were
unaffected by age and were interpreted as related to the registration of
the key acoustical features of sound primitives. In contrast, activity in the
high gamma band, and low frequency responses with a latency around
200 ms declined significantly in the middle-aged and older groups, and
were interpreted as reflecting higher order processes of grouping sound
items into auditory objects and updating of memory for these objects.
The results indicate that age-related changes in auditory acuity likely
involve higher-order brain functions than previously thought.

G94

ACTION UNDERSTANDING IN AUTISM
1University of Nottingham — Poor

Lauren Marsh1, Antonia Hamilton1;

social cognition in autistic spectrum disorder (ASD) may extend to action understanding. The controversial broken mirror hypothesis of ASD predicts that people on the autistic
spectrum will have specific deficits in understanding the actions of others. Previous studies assessing action understanding in autism have
found contradictory results (see Dowell, Mahone and Mostofsky, 2009
and Hamilton, Brindley and Frith, 2007). The present study used an
adaptation of a gesture understanding task developed by Mozaz et al
(2002) which assesses understanding of transitive (object-directed)
actions and intransitive (socially-directed) actions. Twenty three adults
with ASD and 21 matched typical adults took part. Diagnoses were confirmed using the autism diagnostic observation schedule (ADOS, Lord et
al., 2000). Results showed no significant difference in reaction times
between groups or across action type. However, participants with ASD
made more errors than typical adults on both transitive and intransitive
action trials. Implications for the broken mirror hypothesis of autism are
discussed.

G95

DO PEOPLE WITH WILLIAMS SYNDROME PROCESS
HOLISTICALLY? EVIDENCE FROM BRAIN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY

FACES

Chingfen Hsu1,2, Katherin Cohen-Kadosh1, Jo Van Herwegen3, Dagmara Annaz1,4,
Annette Karmiloff-Smith1; 1Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development,
223

Poster Session G
Birkbeck College, London, 2Centre for Teacher Education, Huafan University,
Taiwan, 3Centre for Language Disorder and Communication, King’s College,
London, 4Middlesex University, London — This study aimed at systematically investigating the processing of socially important facial information in individuals with Williams syndrome (WS). Previous studies of
face identity had revealed a distinct pattern in WS compared to healthy
controls, both electrophysiologically and behaviorally (Grice, Haan,
Halit, Johnson, Csibra, Grant, & Karmiloff-Smith, 2003; Grice, Spratling,
Karmiloff-Smith, Halit, Csibra, de Haan, & Johnson, 2001; Mills, Alvarez,
George, Appelbaum, Bellugi, & Neville, 2000). The current study
focused on three social factors (identity, emotion, eye gaze) in the same
individuals, both behaviourally and electrophysiologically using high
density Event Related Potentionals. The three factors called on distinct
types of face processing: holistic, configural, and featural, respectively.
Face images were presented consecutively, with 0 change, 1 change, 2
changes, and 3 changes across the three factors. Individuals with WS
showed no difference to faces with a holistic or configural change, but
displayed higher sensitivity to faces with featural changes. Further evidence came from differences in response latency and error rates in the
behavioural task to holistic versus featural changes between controls and
individuals with WS. Taken together, the behavioural and ERP data
reveal that individuals with WS differ from controls in that their face
processing is indeed more feature-based.

G96

PINPOINTING EMERGING EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY IN THE HUMAN
BRAIN Kathrin Cohen Kadosh1,2, Roi Cohen Kadosh3, Frederic Dick2, Mark

H. Johnson2; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London,
London, 2Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, School of Psychology,
Birkbeck College, University of London, UK, 3University of Oxford, UK — Little

is currently known about the postnatal emergence of functional cortical
networks supporting complex perceptual and cognitive skills, such as
face processing. The current developmental fMRI study compared the
emerging cortical network for face processing in 7-11 year-old children
and adults. The participants did three fMRI target detection tasks where
they had to detect a specific facial identity, expression or direction of eye
gaze in a stream of consecutively presented faces. No significant behavioural differences were found for the three age groups in the different
tasks. We then compared the “core-face-network” in children and adults
using Dynamic Causal Modelling, and observed the gradual emergence
of this network during childhood. We found that while the relative
strength of functional connections in this network were differentially
modulated by task demands in adults, there was no such modulation of
the network in children. We suggest that this is due to continuous specialization and fine-tuning within the regions of the network and that
our results have important implications for future studies investigating
trajectories of cortical specialization both in typically and atypically
developing populations.

G97

PERCEPTUAL ANCHORING AND EMERGENT LITERACY SKILLS IN
KINDERGARTEN CHILDREN Karen Banai1, Rachel Yifat1; 1University of
Haifa — The anchoring deficit hypothesis suggests that reading acquisition in dyslexia is compromised as a result of a more general deficit in
implicitly forming or maintaining representations of repeated auditory
(speech and non-speech) stimuli in active memory (Ahissar et al., 2006).
The role of anchoring mechanisms in early reading skills, prior to formal
reading instruction however, remains unclear. Here we tested the
hypotheses that pre-reading children benefit from contextual information similarly to already reading individuals and that the degree of benefit is associated with emergent literacy skills. To that end a battery of
auditory frequency discrimination, short term verbal memory, phonological awareness, rapid naming and letter identification tasks was
administered to 37 kindergarten children (mean age 69±5 months). Frequency discrimination and verbal memory were tested twice – with and
without stimulus repetitions. Similar to older children, both frequency

224

Perception & Action: Development & Aging
discrimination and memory spans for syllables were significantly better
in the repetition condition compared with the no-repetition condition.
The amount of benefit in frequency discrimination was associated with
verbal memory spans, but not with any of the other emergent literacy
skills. On the other hand, children with better frequency discrimination
in the no-repetition condition had better phonological awareness and
verbal working memory skills and could recognize more letters than
children with poorer frequency discrimination in that condition. Taken
together these data suggest that like older children and adults, pre-reading children are sensitive to the perceptual context of stimulus presentation, but determining whether this sensitivity supports early reading
development requires further studies.

G98

INCREASING INVOLVEMENT OF FRONTAL AND PARIETAL BRAIN
REGIONS CHARACTERIZES DEVELOPMENT OF BOTH "DORSAL" AND
"VENTRAL" STREAM FUNCTIONS Sarah Noonan1,2, Frank Haist2, Brianna

Paul3, Joan Stiles2; 1San Diego State University, 2University of California, San
Diego, 3University of California, San Francisco — Considerable research has
shown that visual object and spatial processing in adults depend on relatively distinct neural systems. However, questions about the development of these processing systems remain largely unexplored. The
current study employed well-matched working memory tasks for faces
and locations to examine regional brain activation differences between
children (n=15, 8-10 years) and adults (n=15, 19-29 years) using BOLD
fMRI. In adults, the two tasks engaged a common set of distributed brain
regions, including classic face processing areas in bilateral fusiform
(FFA) and inferior occipital (OFA) gyri, as well as bilateral posterior
parietal cortex. For both tasks, the child group engaged a more limited
set of brain regions. Significant response to face processing was
restricted to areas of bilateral ventral occipital temporal (VOT) cortex in
children, including bilateral FFA and right OFA. Location processing in
children recruited right superior parietal cortex and right VOT regions
including the right FFA. Direct comparison of adults and children
revealed that adults produced reliably greater activation in both tasks,
predominantly in frontal and parietal regions. No areas of significantly
greater activation for the child group were identified for either task.
These results suggest that the rudiments for separate systems for face
and location processing are evident in school-age children, but that the
systems are far from fully mature. It appears that an important missing
element in the child networks is long-range integration of higher-order
frontal and parietal areas.

G99

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL AND BEHAVIORAL INDICES OF TIME
PERCEPTION Deana Davalos1, Alana Campbell1; 1Colorado State
University — Timing is an important part of human behavior and cognition. Walking, information processing and planning all rely on temporal
processes. The term temporal processing has historically encompassed a
wide range of tasks that measure various facets of timing abilities. In
addition, different timing tasks have involved varying degrees of attentional resources along with other cognitive processes, which makes the
direct study of timing difficult. In an attempt to begin addressing these
confounds, we used a pre-attentive event-related potential (ERP) called
mismatch negativity (MMN), to investigate potential relationships
between the behavioral and neurophysiological measures of temporal
processing. We recorded brain activation using MMN to assess neural
responses to changes in sub-second intervals in the absence of attentional demands. These same intervals were used in a behavioral discrimination task to explore the role of attention along with other cognitive
processes that may be employed in behavioral measures of temporal
processing. Brain activation (via amplitudes and latencies) was compared to behavioral performance using identical temporal intervals.
Results suggest that not only are there significant differences between
accuracy measured on behavioral tasks when compared to amplitudes
measured via ERPs, there were also differences within the behavioral
paradigm between performances on the temporal perception task (e.g.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Emotion & Social: Development & Aging
less than 1000 milliseconds) and temporal estimation task (e.g. greater
than 1000 milliseconds. These findings suggest that temporal processing
is not likely a unitary construct and that there may be slight variations in
the different neuroanatomical and cognitive processes that are employed
in each type of temporal processing task.

G100

DEVELOPMENT OF VISUAL ORIENTATION DISCRIMINATION IN
CHILDREN, TEENAGERS AND ADULTS Elise Labonte-LeMoyne1, Annie
Baillargeon1, Mathilde St-Louis-Deschenes1, Dave Ellemberg1; 1University of
Montreal — Little is known about the normal development of visual ori-

entation discrimination in children. Previous studies demonstrate that
adult orientation discrimination has still not been reached at age 5
(Lewis et al., 2007). The aim of this study was to investigate the development of orientation discrimination. Stimuli were white lines that were
8.5 cm long and 2 cm wide, presented against a black background. Using
a 2-alternative forced-choice discrimination task, three groups of participants [children (8-10 years of age); teenagers (11-16 years of age); adults
(> 18)] were asked to press a key every time the stimulus on the screen
was tilted from the vertical orientation. The results indicate that discrimination accuracy was similar in children and teenagers when the stimulus had a 3° tilt for the 8-10 year-olds, a 2.5° tilt for the 11-16 year-olds.
However, at a 2° tilt, the adults were more accurate than the younger
groups. These data suggest that visual orientation discrimination is still
undergoing maturational changes during adolescence. Further studies
investigating more precise age groups are required to chart the development of visual orientation discrimination.

G101

SENSORI-MOTOR INTEGRATION IN CHILDREN: EFFECTS OF DIFFERENT
FORMS OF TRAINING ON MELODY PROCESSING Elizabeth
M.

developmental
Wakefield1, Karin H. James; 1Indiana University — A
approach was taken to explore how recruitment of multiple brain systems influences how children learn, using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI). Specifically, we investigated how the activation
of motor systems in the brain during the learning of sung melodies
affected subsequent melody processing. Children (4-7 year-olds) learned
novel melodies under 2 conditions, incorporating a motor or visual system component with an auditory system component. After training, participants heard and differentiated between learned and new melodies
during an fMRI session. Neural activation patterns to melodies learned
in each of the conditions were analyzed. Functional data indicated that
upon subsequent melody presentation, melodies learned with motoric
hand signs activated areas of the middle frontal gyrus, motor cortex, and
right intraparietal lobule significantly more than melodies learned without a motor component. Behavioral data indicated that children more
often correctly recognized learned melodies as learned (as opposed to
new) if the melodies were taught with a motor component, as compared
to a visual component; however, this result was not significant, most
likely due to the small sample size. These results differ from results of a
previous study in which the same paradigm was used with adults
(Wakefield & James, in preparation), suggesting that children and adults
recruit different brain systems while learning with multisensory input.
Results of the present study have implications for understanding sensori-motor integration in the developing brain, and may provide insight
into why the use of the motor system is stressed in some music education techniques.

Emotion & Social: Development & Aging
G102

CONNECTIONS BETWEEN MOTOR EXPERIENCE AND SOCIAL
DEVELOPMENT IN THREE-MONTH-OLD INFANTS Klaus Libertus1, Amy

Needham2; 1Duke University, 2Vanderbilt University — Two abilities are necessary to successfully interact with other living beings: 1) the ability to
detect social partners and 2) the ability to act on the environment.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session G
Human infants come prepared with two skills that facilitate such interactions: Newborns preferentially attend to faces (Johnson, Dziurawiec,
Ellis, & Morton, 1991) and show object-directed arm movements (von
Hofsten, 1984). Both behaviors show similar developmental trajectories
where they decrease and reemerge around the same time (Maurer, 1985;
von Hofsten, 1984). Based on these observations, we hypothesize that
reaching behavior modulates face-preference behavior in young infants.
We test this hypothesis by actively manipulating infants’ reaching experience in two different ways. Active reaching experience affects both
domain-specific development (i.e. manual exploration) and social orienting in three-month-old infants. Following a two-week enrichment
period, infants who received active training showed more manual exploration of available 3-D objects (F(2, 47) = 6.128, p = .004) and also a significant preference for faces over toys presented on a computer screen (t(16)
= 2.65, p = .018). In both their manual and visual exploration, these
infants behaved similar to five-month-old infants. In contrast, objectdirected but passive reaching experience in three-month-old infants does
not affect face-preference behavior (t(17) = .207, p = .839). These results
demonstrate the importance of self-produced motor experiences for
social development and have implications for our understanding of the
etiology of developmental disorders in social cognition.

Thinking: Other
G103

TIME COURSE OF STIMULUS-DRIVEN OSCILLATORY SYNCHRONIZATION
AND ADAPTATION TO NUMERICAL CHANGES Melissa E. Libertus1,

Elizabeth M. Brannon1, Marty G. Woldorff1; 1Duke University — In a previous
study, we successfully used a novel frequency-tagging paradigm to
investigate the neural tuning to non-verbal numerical information.
Adults passively viewed rapid streams of multiple-element images of a
given numerosity that flickered at 12.5 Hz for 400 ms each while EEG
was recorded. After six of these 400-ms flickering-image blocks with the
same numerosity (i.e., 2400 ms), the number of elements changed by a
1:3, 1:2, or 2:3 ratio (e.g., from 8 to 24 elements). Analyses showed that
the EEG power at the flicker frequency increased over repeated presentation of the same numerosity across the 2400-ms blocks over posterior
scalp sites (synchronization effect). Moreover, the magnitude of this synchronization effect was modulated by the ratio of the numerosity
switches. Here, we investigated the temporal dynamics of the synchronization effect further by employing three different block lengths: 2400 ms
(as in the original study), 4800 ms, and 7200 ms. Again, adults passively
viewed rapid streams of multiple-element images, but with the durations for each numerosity randomly varying between the three block
lengths. The power at the flicker frequency again increased over 2400-ms
blocks over posterior sites, replicating our previous findings. This
increase in power continued until 4800 ms; however, no changes in
power were observed between 4800 and 7200 ms (adaptation effect).
Thus, the synchronization and adaptation effects together suggest a
driven oscillatory stabilization of the neural network encoding numerosity for the first few seconds of the presentation of a novel numerosity,
followed by a subsequent adaptation.

G104

COMPARISON OF SYMBOLIC AND NON-SYMBOLIC NUMERICAL
REPRESENTATIONS IN THE HUMAN BRAIN Casey Murray1, Elise Temple1,

Rick Granger1; 1Dartmouth College — The representation of numerical mag-

nitude has been argued to be an innate, pre-linguistic human capability
that is present in rudimentary form in infants (Cantlon, et al, 2006) and
in a host of animal species spanning phyla (Brannon & Terrace 2000.;
Hauser et al, 2003; Kilian et al. 2003). Numerical information can be presented in multiple forms, including Arabic numerals (e.g., 3) written
words (three), roman numerals (III), or non-symbolically, as in dot
arrays (e.g., ?). It is not known how brain responses to these distinct
inputs differ. We passively presented the numerals 1 through 9 in these
four ways, using fMRI to investigate the similarities and differences of

225

Poster Session G
resulting brain responses. As in prior reports (Nieder & Dehaene, 2009),
overlapping activations occurred in the horizontal intraparietal sulcus
(hIPS), but clear differences were found in our side by side comparisons:
(1) written words, roman numerals, and dot arrays all exhibited robust
activation of hIPS, indicating that both symbolic and non-symbolic signals rely on the same circuitry; (2) Arabic numerals elicited significantly
weaker hIPS activation, suggesting a possible difference between passive
viewing in the present experiments versus prior investigations actively
using numbers for comparison or arithmetic operations; (3) activation of
the hippocampal complex was stronger for symbolic forms than for dot
patterns, suggesting the triggering of a potential retrieval or spatial
transformation process for symbolic but not for non-symbolic information. These findings represent the first side by side investigation of brain
responses to multiple different kinds of number information.

G105
Lisa
Sprute1,
Elise Temple1; 1Dartmouth College — The use of symbols has allowed

REPRESENTATIONS OF FRACTIONS WITHIN THE BRAIN

humans to develop a numerical system that can evaluate exact quantities. Research on number processing uses the presence of a distance
effect, characterized by longer reaction times and reduced accuracy in
size judgments when the distance between numbers is small, as evidence
for a spatial, analogue representation of number. Further, this representation of number has been shown to rely on the intraparietal sulcus (IPS)
and lateral prefrontal cortex. Recent brain imaging studies have suggested that the IPS is also active when processing fractions. The present
study extended these findings by examining the effect of distance during
the comparison of fraction pairs that included many fractional magnitudes and discouraged processing of the fractions’ whole number components. In a fast, event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) design twenty-two healthy adults compared randomly presented
number pairs composed of simple, irreducible proper fractions. Distance
between fraction pairs was close (0 < x < 0.3) or far (0.5 ? x <0.8). Data
were collected on a 3T Phillips scanner using echo-planar imaging, while
accuracy and reactions times were recorded. Whole brain coverage was
achieved with 44 3 mm slices, 0 gap, and interleaved acquisition. Functional scans were followed by a 3D high-resolution anatomical scan.
Results showed significantly more blood oxygenation level–dependent
(BOLD) activity in the intraparietal lobule and lateral prefrontal cortex
for close verses far distances. These results suggest that the fully developed representation of fractions relies on a parietofrontal network similar to whole numbers.

G106

THE IMPACT OF SEX AND GENDER IN VISUOSPATIAL SKILLS Joel
Salinas1,2, Amy Conrad3, Peg Nopoulos2,3,4; 1University of Miami Miller School
of Medicine, 2University of Iowa Doris Duke Clinical Research Fellowship
Program, 3University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, 4University of Iowa
Neuroscience Graduate Program — Introduction: It is well-established that
there are sex differences in particular cognitive skills. For example, several studies demonstrate that males are more adept in mental rotation
and similar visuospatial tasks when compared with females. However,
what has not been fully explored is whether gender modifies this effect
(i.e., sex refers to biological traits [male/female] and gender to the
behavioral or psychological traits that are typically associated with each
sex). Methods: To investigate the relationship between visuospatial ability, sex, and gender, 54 males and 54 females aged 7-17 (matched for age
and full scale IQ) were administered the Block Design (BD) task, a test of
motor and visuospatial skills used in daily life, and the Children’s Sex
Role Inventory (CSRI), a self-rated scale of masculinity and femininity in
children. Results: In this sample, there was no sex difference found in BD
score between boys (mean=12.9, standard deviation=3.4) and girls
(mean=12.3, standard deviation=2.6). The interaction, however, of sex
and gender had a significant effect on the variance of BD scores (? =
1.101; p < 0.003). Identification with more masculine traits on the CSRI
correlated with higher BD scores in girls (r = 0.313; p < 0.05). Additionally, higher degrees of femininity in boys correlated with better perfor-

226

Thinking: Other
mance on the BD task (r = -0.272; p < 0.05). Discussion: These results
suggest a complex relationship between gendered behavioral traits and
visuospatial skills that may potentially be related to neurobiological sex
differences in parietal lobe morphology of young males and females.

G107

PSYCHOLOGICAL STRESS PROCESSING IN YOUNG ADULTS WITH
SUBCLINICAL LEVELS OF DEPRESSION: AN FMRI STUDY Katarina

Dedovic1, Annie Duchesne1, Sonja Damika Lue1, Julie Andrews1, Simona
Efanov1, Veronika Engert1, Thomas Beaudry1, Jens C. Pruessner1; 1Douglas
Mental Health University Institute, McGill University — Background:
Pro-

longed and chronic stress exposure has been suggested to contribute to
development of depression. While several studies have investigated
neural networks associated with the processing of psychological stress in
normal populations, to our knowledge no study has directly investigated this in a population with an explicit vulnerability to depression,
i.e. subclinically depressed individuals. In the present study, we examined the neural correlates of stress exposure in a group of healthy university students showing individual differences at the levels of
subclinical depression. Methods: We recruited 64 healthy college students (33 males) based on their scores on the Beck Depression Inventory
(BDI). Two groups were formed: a control (CTRL) (BDI?9) and a subclinical group (SUB) (10?BDI?18). Participants completed additional psychological questionnaires to assess their personality profiles. Subjects
completed two functional runs of the Montreal Imaging Stress Task
(MIST). Saliva samples were taken throughout the experiment to assess
stress reactivity. Results: Additional depression questionnaires revealed
that nine subjects scored at clinical levels of depression, forming a third
group of high-scoring subclinicals (hSUB). A mixed-design ANOVA
yielded a significant Group x Time interaction (F=3.054, p=.007), with
CTRLs having higher cortisol levels compared to the SUBs in response to
the MIST, but not differing from hSUB group. The fMRI analysis is in
progress, and results will be presented at the meeting. Conclusions:
Investigating the psychosocial stress processing in a subclinical population is essential for better understanding the ways in which dysregulation of specific processes may represent a vulnerability in the illness
proper.

G108

THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF CONCEPT FORMATION I: A BEHAVIORAL
PARADIGM John Foxe1,3,4, Aaron Krakowski1,3,4, Ariel Nemzeyano2, Adam

Snyder1,3,4, Inna Prehogan2, Lanny Fields1,2; 1The Graduate School of the City
University of New York, 2Queens College of the City University of New York, 3The
City College of the City University of New York, 4The Cognitive Neurophysiology
Laboratory, Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg,
NY — The ability to classify stimuli enables individuals to respond effec-

tively to different representations of the same event as encountered in
real world settings. After learning relations between some stimuli by
training, subjects recognize relations among stimuli that were not
trained. For example, after learning relations between the pseudo-words
'mok' and 'fow', 'fow' and 'jor', and `jor` and `kop`, individuals immediately recognize relations between 'mok' and 'jor', and `mok’ and `kop`,
without training. When that occurs, all four pseudo-words are functioning as an equivalence class. The `mok-jor` relation is said to be 'transitive'
with the pseudo-words linked by one node, while `mok` and `kop` are
indirectly linked by two nodes. Behavioral data show that the strengths
of 1- and 2-node relations are inverse functions of nodal separation.
Thus, they should engender different neural substrates. The following
protocol enabled us use ERPs to measure these neural differences.
Equivalence classes were formed using trials that contained two separately presented stimuli, followed by a response window. YES and NO
responses were correct on within- and cross-class trials, respectively. All
subjects formed classes. Whether a trial contained stimuli from the same
or different classes could be determined only during the second stimulus
in a trial. Thus, ERPs produced by the second stimuli in all trials were

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Thinking: Development & Aging
used to document the neural substrates of 0-, 1-, and 2-node relations.
The details of class formation are presented in this poster. The ERP data
are in the “The neural substrates of concept formation II.”

G109

THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF CONCEPT FORMATION II: HIGH-DENSITY
Fields1,2,
ELECTRICAL MAPPING OF EQUIVALENCE CLASSES Lanny

Aaron Krakowski1,3,4, Ariel Nemzeyano2, Adam Snyder1,3,4, Inna Prehogan2,
John Foxe1,3,4; 1The Graduate School of the City University of New York,
2
Queens College of the City University of New York, 3The City College of the City
University of New York, 4The Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, Program in
Cognitive Neuroscience and Schizophrenia, Nathan S. Kline Institute for
Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg — The ability to classify stimuli enables

individuals to respond effectively to different representations of the
same event as they are encountered in real world settings. This ability
involves learning relations between stimuli by explicit training, and also
to infer relations that have not been explicitly trained. For example, after
learning relations between the pseudowords 'mok' and 'fow', 'fow' and
'jor', and `jor` and `kop`, an individual will immediately recognize that
'mok' and 'jor' are related, as are `mok’ and `kop`, without any direct
training. When that occurs, all four pseudo-words are functioning as an
equivalence class. The emergence of the `mok-jor` relation is said to be
'transitive' with 'mok' and 'jor' connected by one common node, while
`mok` and `kop` are indirectly linked by two nodes. We trained subjects
using such pseudoword relations and then compared ERPs between 0node, 1-node and 2-node relations. There were clear differences over
both prefrontal and lateral occipital regions. One and two-node relations
produced large enhancements of activity over the left dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex, likely indicating large-scale recruitment of working-memory processes. In contrast, over lateral-occipital visual regions there was
evidence for sustained increases in activity for 0-node and 1-node relations, but not for 2-node relations. This likely reflects the fact that the
implicit relations between word-pairs in the 1-node condition have
begun to be more deeply encoded in sensory-perceptual areas, whereas
this process has not yet occurred for the more weakly associated 2-node
relations, which continue to rely on more frontal cognitive circuits.

G110

INVESTIGATING MIND-WANDERING AND ATTENTION DURING FOCUSED
MEDITATION USING FIRST-PERSON SUBJECTIVE INFORMATION Wendy

Hasenkamp1,2, Christine Wilson-Mendenhall1, Erica Duncan2,3, Lawrence
Barsalou1; 1Emory University, 2Atlana VA Medical Center, 3Emory University
School of Medicine — Studies have suggested that the default mode network (DMN) is active during states of mind-wandering (MW), which is
experienced at rest, or intermittently while attempting to maintain
focused attention (FA). People who train in FA meditation improve their
abilities to monitor distinct processes related to attention and distraction.
Subjective report of meditators’ mental experience in real time is a tool
that can be used to identify neural correlates of MW during meditative
states, and the dynamic shifts between attention and MW. Experienced
meditation practitioners underwent fMRI scanning while focusing on
the breath (a common form of FA meditation). Whenever participants
realized their mind had wandered away from the breath, they pressed a
button and returned their focus to the breath. We then used this first-person behavioral data to direct our fMRI analysis, which examined the
brain networks active during MW (just before the button press) and
return to FA (just after the button press). Analysis revealed elements of
the DMN active during self-identified states of MW, and elements of
fronto-parietal attention networks active upon re-focusing of attention.
Furthermore, patterns of brain activity in these states were dependent on
the amount of lifetime meditation experience. Thus, by leveraging the
ability of meditators to report on their conscious experience, we were
able to separate distinct brain states of attention and MW that are normally experienced in a fluctuating manner. Such neurophenomenological paradigms are useful for studying the cognitive correlates of DMN,
as well as the neural correlates of meditation practices more generally.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session G
G111

ABERRANT DEFAULT NETWORK ACTIVATIONS DURING VERBAL THOUGHT
GENERATION MAY CONTRIBUTE TO HALLUCINATIONS IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA Lucile Rapin1,2,3, Jennifer Whitman2,3, Paul Metzak2,3,

Todd Woodward2,3; 1Grenoble University I, Grenoble, France, 2University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada, 3BC Mental Health & Addictions
Research Institute, Vancouver, Canada — Schizophrenia, particularly hallucinations, has been associated with impairments in source monitoring,
whereby hallucinating patients tend to misattribute the source of a
speech event to an external agent. Previous research proposed that
abnormalities in generating thoughts may induce more vivid auditory
sensations, which could account for misattribution from an internal to
external source, possibly leading to auditory verbal hallucinations. In the
present study, we investigated the neural underpinnings of a verbal
thought generation (VTG) task using fMRI in 12 healthy controls and in 5
schizophrenia patients (DSM-IV). Two conditions were examined. In the
first condition, participants were required to mentally generate a definition of a frequent word presented on the screen. In the second condition,
participants were required to listen to the definition of a frequent word
presented on the screen. An event-related fMRI protocol was used over 2
sessions of 8 minutes each. Analysis using constrained principal component analysis with a finite impulse response (FIR) model indicated that,
during the mental generation task, default network regions including
bilateral posterior cingulate cortex (BA 30-31), medial frontal gyrus bilaterally (BA10) and left precuneus (BA 7-19) showed less complete deactivation in schizophrenia patients relative to healthy controls. No group
differences were found in task-positive networks, or the listening only
condition. These results suggest abnormalities in the default network
associated with the generation of thoughts, which may play a part in the
genesis of auditory verbal hallucinations.

Thinking: Development & Aging
G112

NEURAL SPECIALIZATION PREDICTS FLUID PROCESSING ABILITY (BUT
NOT CRYSTALLIZED KNOWLEDGE) IN OLDER ADULTS Joonkoo Park1,

Joshua Carp1, Andrew Hebrank2, Denise Park2, Thad Polk1; 1University of
Michigan, 2University of Texas, Dallas — Measures of fluid processing ability tend to decline with age. Nevertheless, some older adults show comparable performance to young adults. What distinguishes older adults
who continue to perform well from older adults who do not? One possibility is neural specificity, the distinctiveness of different neural representations, which has been hypothesized to influence behavioral
performance. In this study, we investigated whether individual differences in neural specificity could explain individual differences in cognitive performance in older adults. Older adults completed a battery of
fluid processing tasks (digit-symbol, dot-comparison, verbal-fluency,
trails-A, trails-B) as well as a test of crystallized knowledge (Shipley
vocabulary). Neural activation was also estimated using functional MRI
in visual (same-different judgments on faces and houses) and motor (left
and right finger tapping) tasks. Neural specificity was estimated based
on how accurately different experimental conditions could be distinguished from their patterns of neural activation using multivoxel pattern
analysis. Neural specificity in both visual and motor tasks was significantly correlated with performance on a variety of fluid processing tasks,
but not with the measure of crystallized knowledge. In fact, neural specificity of visual and motor activity together explained roughly half the
variance in a composite measure of fluid processing ability (constructed
from a principal component analysis of the five individual measures).
These results provide direct evidence that neural specificity affects fluid
processing ability in older adults.

227

Poster Session G
G113

NOT SO DEFAULT? MODULATION OF THE DEFAULT NETWORK BY TASK
DEMAND IN OLD AND YOUNG Brian Gordon1,2, Carrie Brumback3,

Gabriele Gratton1,2, Monica Fabiani1,2; 1University of Illinois, 2Beckman
Institute, 3University of California, Irvine — Very early on, studies using
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) noticed areas that not only increased with task,
but also those showing a decrease. These clusters of deactivation came to
be loosely referred to as “the default network” (Shulman et al., 1997).
This network has at different times been linked to mind wandering
(Mason et al., 2007) and mental self-projection (Buckner and Carroll,
2007). Although this phenomenon has received large amounts of scientific interest, much remains unknown. The relationship between default
network activation and task performance has not been systematically
investigated. To perform well on a behavioral task, it stands to reason
that the resources much shift away from the default network. Additionally, the homogeneity of the network itself remains to be determined. In
the current study, a Sternberg memory task was varied in difficulty in a
blocked fashion for both older and younger participants. The modulation of the default network by working memory load was examined
across several regions of interest. We modeled both a mean pattern of
deactivation as well as linear decreases associated with load. Several patterns emerged, with some areas showing both a mean decreases as well
as a linear effect (LOC, Parasylvian fissure, bilateral parietal areas) while
others were minimally modulated by load (precuneus, lingual gyrus,
middle frontal gyrus). Both old and young demonstrated this phenomenon, but the young had more robust deactivation. We then applied independent-component analysis to decompose the overall mean
deactivation pattern into sub-networks for both groups.

Thinking: Problem Solving
the coarse evaluation of the motivational significance of events. To our
knowledge this is the first normative study of the FRN during adolescence. Consistent with previous research in adults, the results showed
that the feedback-P300 was sensitive only to the magnitude of the feedback (F(25,1)= 18.34, p<.0001, ?p2=.423); whereas the FRN was larger to
losses than to gains (F(25,1) = 51.01, p<.0001, ?p2=.671).This was true for
both adults and adolescents. However, an interaction between magnitude and valence was present only in adolescents, whose FRNs for small
wins were similar to those elicited by loss trials (F(11,1)=13.304; p=.004,
?p2=.537).This may reflect a difference in adolescent incentive processing (i.e., a small win may be viewed as a negative event). This view is
consistent with fMRI studies examining reward processing in adolescents. Adolescents were also more likely than adults to make risky gambles. Furthermore, participants with larger FRNs were more likely to
make safer choices after a loss. Our results indicate that the neural mechanisms that aid rapid identification of good versus bad events, as
reflected by the FRN, are still developing during adolescence. Immaturity in the ability to process feedback and adapt behavior accordingly
may contribute to the increased propensity of risky behavior in adolescents.

Thinking: Problem Solving
G116

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
IN MENTAL ARITHMETIC AND NUMBER COMPARISONS OBSERVED IN
MIDDLE SCHOOL CHILDREN: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY

PROCESSING OF MUSICAL STRUCTURE IN AUTISM SPECTRUM
DISORDER Eve-Marie Quintin1, Anjali Bhatara2, Hélène Poissant1, Éric

Joshua J. White1, Matthew R. Brier2, Rebecca R. Egbert1, Michael A. Motes2,
Thomas C. Ferree3, John Hart Jr.2, Michael A. Kraut4, Mandy J. Maguire1,2;
1
Callier Center for Communication Disorders, University of Texas, Dallas,
2Center for Brain Health, 3The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 4The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — Mental
arith-

coherence (Happé & Frith, 2006) and enhanced perceptual functioning
(Mottron et al., 2006) theories of ASD using musical stimuli. Although
both theories recognize intact or enhanced local processing in ASD, the
former stipulates that this will impede global processing whereas the latter suggests that global processing will be spared or enhanced. Children
and adolescents (N=24; 7-17 years) with typical development (TD) or
with ASD (N=24; 10-19 years) were asked to solve a musical puzzle
made of 5 plastic cubes, each playing a segment of a melody. In the first
condition (creation), participants arranged the blocks in the order they
thought sounded best. In the second condition (replication), participants
replicated a musical excerpt they had listened to twice. For both conditions, there was no significant difference between groups (ASD vs TD)
for response times or for number of pieces of the puzzle that were placed
in the correct location or in the correct sequence independently of location. Potential covariates, such as chronological age, verbal and performance IQ and musical knowledge and ability were considered. The
effect of PIQ was significant but, when this effect was controlled for, the
difference between groups remained nonsignificant. Although more evidence is needed to assess musical processing in adolescents with ASD,
global processing in ASD does not seem to differ from adolescents with
TD. These results fail to support weak central coherence and are more
consistent with the account suggested by the enhanced perceptual functioning theory.

G117

G114
Fombonne3, Daniel Levitin2; 1Université du Québec à Montréal, 2McGill
University, 3Montreal Children's Hospital — This study aimed to test central

G115

THE FEEDBACK-RELATED NEGATIVITY (FRN) IN ADOLESCENTS Tina M.

Zottoli1,2, Jillian Grose-Fifer1,2; 1John Jay College of Criminal Justice, 2City
University of New York, Graduate Center — Increased risk taking in adoles-

cence may be due, in part, to immature incentive processing. A simple
gambling task was used to compare the feedback-related negativity
(FRN) and P300 in adolescents and adults. The FRN is thought to reflect

228

metic is a complex cognitive skill. While many children acquire mathematical concepts well, many others struggle but the source of this
difference is unknown. Seventeen 13-year-olds observed arithmetic
statements presented with one character on the screen at a time (e.g.,
4+4=8 or 4+4<10) while ERPs were collected. The problems contained
either an equal sign or a less than sign, and ended with a correct answer,
a nearby incorrect answer, or a distant incorrect answer. During the presentation of the first number, plus sign, and second number, a PCA
revealed that numbers elicited a more negative ERP deflection than the
plus sign over frontal regions at 450 msec after each stimulus. The size of
this effect was correlated with reaction time, reflecting how efficiently
number representations are encoded during a problem. The neural
responses to the final number revealed two significant effects: 1) Following an equals sign, correct and incorrect answers elicited ERP amplitude
differences over left frontal regions at 300 msec, and 2) Following a less
than sign, correct and incorrect answers elicited ERP amplitude differences over parietal regions at 400 msec. In each case, the amplitude difference between the correct and incorrect answers was correlated with
accuracy. These findings indicate that the best performers may have
identified explicitly the correct answer, and established an efficient
method to compare that answer with the candidate answer. By identifying the neural correlates of arithmetic performance in middle school children, it may also be possible to monitor changes with development and
training.

THE INFLUENCE OF LEFT TO RIGHT NUMBER REPRESENTATIONS ON
NUMBER COMPARISON Matthew Brier1, Mandy Maguire1, Nistha Jajal1,

Thomas Ferree2, John Hart1, Michael Kraut3; 1University of Texas, Dallas,
2University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, 3Johns Hopkins —
Performing basic arithmetic procedures requires that multiple processes
co-occur contemporaneously and in a coordinated manner. One such
process is that of number comparisons. Previous research has found that

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Thinking: Problem Solving
performance on number related tasks is improved if the magnitude of
the presented numbers increases from left to right. How this effect influences formal number comparisons is still unclear. This study uses behavioral and EEG measures to investigate how the direction of the
presentation of numbers (i.e., magnitude increasing left to right or right
to left) interacts with judgments of statement correctness. Previous studies have required the subject to press a button corresponding to the
larger or smaller number. This study, however, requires the subject to
indicate if an expression is correct (e.g., 3<4) or incorrect (e.g., 4<3). This
study found that expressions where magnitudes increased left to right
exhibited less theta band activity over right frontal regions compared to
expressions where magnitude increased right to left which is consistent
with previous proposals that left to right orientations are easier to process. Further, the condition where the expression is correct and magnitude increases left to right shows less alpha desynchronization over
frontal regions compared to all other conditions indicating less processing is required to process statements that are both correct and presented
left to right. Compared to simple number comparisons that can by handled entirely in the parietal lobe, comparisons involving an operator
demonstrate frontal involvement that is sensitive to both the correctness
of the expression and the direction it was presented.

G118

CONCEPTUAL COMBINATION AND NOVEL IDEAS: HOW PROPERTIES OF
THE TASK AND TAUGHT BEHAVIORAL STRATEGIES INFLUENCE LEVELS
OF EMERGENCE IN NEW IDEAS Catherine M. Mulvenna1, Steven M.

Smith2; 1University of California, Los Angeles, 2Texas A & M — Conceptual
combination is a key process in creative cognition. It involves combining
previously known concepts in order for new concepts to be generated.
This processes is used in a multitude of situations, from brain storming
techniques, to the evolution of art and science. Combined concepts can
be judged for newness or ‘emergence’, by whether they possess features
that are unique, and not shared with either of the parent concepts. Properties of the parent concepts have been manipulated in previous experiments (e.g. similarity of the concepts), and can result in different levels of
emergence. However, less understood are the different behavioral strategies that could be employed by individuals engaging in conceptual combination. In the present study, participants (n=73) generated definitions
to novel noun-pairs (e.g. ‘motortcycle carpet,’) and then generated feature lists for each definition, in a replication of a previous paradigm
(Wilkenfeld & Ward, 2001). Overall, conceptual combinations that consist of dissimilar categories led to significantly more creative emergence,
replicating previous findings. Three new behavioral strategies relating to
‘feature focus’ were taught to three separate groups. Data revealed significantly more creative emergence for medium and high levels of feature focus, compared to the low level. This was observed across both
similar and dissimilar combinations. The details of the different behavioral strategies and their significance to creative cognition are discussed.
G119

CREATIVE COGNITION BENEFITS FROM INCUBATION WITH
NEUROFEEDBACK Henk Haarmann1, Timothy George1, Joseph Dien1,

Jeffrey Chrabaszcz1, Alex Smaliy1, Suzanne Freynik1, Jared Novick1; 1University
of Maryland, College Park — We tested whether incubation with neuro-

feedback improves creative verbal problem solving on the remote associates test (RAT). Previous studies with the RAT have shown that
incubation helps overcome mental impasses (Smith & Blankenship,
1991) and that insight solutions are preceded by increased power in
alpha brain waves over the right parietal-occipital cortex at sensor location PO8 (Jung-Beeman et al., 2004). Seventy-six healthy adults completed two RAT blocks in this study. The first test block was made
difficult by presenting many items at a fast rate and by presenting an
item’s cue words together with distracting strong associates. The second
test block provided an opportunity for participants to solve RAT items
that were not solved during the first test block and indicate whether
solutions arose with or without insight. The two RAT blocks occurred in
immediate succession in a control condition, but were separated by a

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session G
period of electroencephalographic (EEG) neurofeedback in two incubation conditions. The neurofeedback was aimed at either decreasing or
increasing alpha power over PO8. Behavioral results revealed an incubation effect, i.e., greater benefit of second test block in the increase- and
decrease-alpha neurofeedback conditions than in the non-incubation
control condition. The incubation effect was particularly robust in the
increase-alpha neurofeedback condition. The EEG spectral results
revealed that the increase-alpha condition differed in two respects from
the decrease-alpha condition: a progressive increase in alpha power and
overall greater beta power during neurofeedback training. These results
suggest that neural oscillatory states play an important role in creative
cognition.

G120

HEMISPHERIC DISSOCIATION OF NUMERICAL FUNCTIONS IN CHILDREN
WITH FOCAL BRAIN INJURY Leila Glass1,2, Sarah Zelonis2, Anjan

Chatterjee1,3, Sabrina Smith1,2,3; 1Center for Cognitive Neuroscience,
University of Pennsylvania, 2Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, 3University of Pennsylvania — Performance of precise mathematical tasks has been localized to the left parietal lobe in adults, while
numerical approximation has been localized to the right parietal lobe.
Little is known about the neural correlates of these functions in children,
who are developing mathematical skills. The purpose of this study was
to assess how brain injury affects performance of precise and approximate calculation and quantity estimates in children. Approximate
numerical ability was evaluated using computer tasks (representational
and symbolic quantity estimates and approximate calculation). Precise
calculation and quantity estimation was assessed using a standardized
measure of mathematical achievement (WIAT -II). Clinical brain MRI
scans were reviewed to determine lesion location. Nine children (9-16
years) with chronic unilateral brain injury (5 right, 4 left) and 41 agematched controls participated. Single case analysis compared individual
brain injured subjects to controls. Impaired approximate performance
was defined by t-statistic <-1.65 (1-tailed p < 0.05) on at least one approximation task, and impaired precise performance was defined by composite standard score of < 80 on WIAT-II. Three of five right hemisphere
injured subjects had impaired approximation but average WIAT-II
scores (mean =96). Two of four left hemisphere injured subjects showed
deficits on precise tasks, yet approximation remained intact. Parietal lobe
injury was found in only 2 of 5 affected subjects. Therefore, a subset of
pediatric subjects demonstrated a hemispheric dissociation for numerical abilities, with left injury associated with impaired precise numerical
functions and right injury associated with impaired approximation.
Impairment was not specific to parietal lobe injury.

G121

MUSICIANS ARE MORE SUSCEPTIBLE THAN NON-MUSICIANS TO
DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION DISINHIBITING BROCA’S AREA AND
Cerruti1,2,
IMPROVING MENTAL ROTATION PERFORMANCE Carlo

Gottfried Schlaug2; 1Harvard Graduate School of Education, 2Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard School of Medicine — Transcranial

direct current stimulation (tDCS) modulates regional brain activity and
is an important tool of research. However, little is known about how
stimulation differs across different kinds of subjects. Musicians have
been shown to engage Broca’s area more than non-musicians when
doing 3D mental rotation (Sluming, 2007), and thus we examined MR
performance after several stimulation protocols in musicians and nonmusicians. We found a main effect of stimulation type over Broca’s in the
left hemisphere. Anodal stimulation, which increases neural activity,
improved MR reaction time across all subjects. Comparing musicians v.
non-musicians revealed a different pattern of interest. Musicians but not
non-musicians were significantly aided by cathodal stimulation of
Broca’s right-hemisphere homologue. Cathodal stimulation hyperpolarizes neurons and decreases activity. We thus interpret this as a disinhibition effect: decreased activity in Broca’s homologue also decreases
interhemispheric inhibitory projections. These findings develop insight

229

Poster Session G

Thinking: Problem Solving

into the complex interactions, both facilitatory and inhibitory, among
distributed processing regions during complex cognition. The data
extends our lab’s previous findings of interhemispheric disinhibition in
motor performance and semantic verbal categorization. This is the first
tDCS study we know of to examine how individual characteristics
(musicianship) affect susceptibility to the brain’s reaction to direct stimulation. Moreover, this is the first study to use multi-level regression to
examine the role of multiple predictors (e.g. age, sex, verbal and spatial
IQ) on different stimulation protocols (hemisphere, polarity of stimulation). Because tDCS research is still in its infancy, building such a knowledge base is critical for theory-driven research and effective
interventions.

G122

WHEN TWO PLUS TWO DOES NOT EQUAL FOUR: EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL RESPONSES TO INCONGRUOUS ARITHMETIC WORD
PROBLEMS Kristie Fisher1, Miriam Bassok1, Lee Osterhout1; 1University of
Washington — People often need to integrate a series of items into a meaningful whole (e.g. words into a sentence). This conceptual integration
process can be disrupted when one item is semantically incongruous
with the others. Extensive research measuring event-related brain potentials (ERPs) shows that such items elicit a more negative electrical potential, peaking at around 400ms, when compared to congruent items (N400
effect). The N400 effect is elicited by semantically incongruous words in
sentences and by incorrect answers to verbal and symbolic arithmetic
problems. To explore how these two domains interact, we recorded
ERPs as participants verified the correctness of simple addition and division word problem sentences (e.g., “Twelve roses plus three daisies
equals fifteen”). We manipulated the correctness of the mathematical
answers and the semantic congruence of the objects. Previous work in
problem solving shows that, based on their “real world” experience,
people tend to perceive categorically-related objects as being congruent
with the addition operation (e.g., roses plus daisies) and thematicallyrelated objects as being congruent with the division operation (e.g., roses
divided by vases). We therefore hypothesized that the perceived correctness of a problem’s answer would be modulated by whether or not the
problem’s objects matched well with its operation. Indeed, incongruous
objects caused correct answers to elicit “incorrect answer” ERP
responses; likewise, certain types of incorrect answers elicited “correct
answer” ERP responses. Thus, in order for arithmetic word problems to
be processed fluently, the problems must be mathematically sound as
well as make sense in the “real world.”

230

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Attention: Nonspatial
H1

ORIENTING ATTENTION IN TIME ACTIVATES LEFT INFERIOR PARIETAL
CORTEX FOR PERCEPTUAL, AS WELL AS, MOTOR TASK GOALS Karen

Davranche1, Bruno Nazarian2, Franck Vidal1, Jennifer Coull1; 1Université de
Provence et CNRS, Marseille, France, 2CHU La Timone, Marseille, France —
Temporal and motor attentional orienting have previously been shown
to activate very similar regions of left inferior parietal cortex. Since temporal orienting benefits were indexed by motor response speed, this neuroanatomical overlap could potentially reflect incidental recruitment of
motor orienting during these tasks. However, if left parietal cortex activation is a true reflection of temporal orienting, it should also be
observed in tasks with perceptual, rather than motor, task goals. Fifteen
participants performed both a motor detection task, in which targets
were detected as quickly as possible with a button-press, and a perceptual discrimination task, in which targets were discriminated from
among a rapid serial presentation of visually similar distractors. All trials were preceded either by (i) temporal cues, which predicted that the
target would appear after either short (600 ms) or long (1380 ms) cue-target intervals, or (ii) neutral cues, which provided no information concerning the length of the cue-target interval. As compared to neutral
cues, temporal cues significantly improved both detection speed and
perceptual discrimination. In the motor detection task, temporal cues
activated bilateral premotor cortex and left inferior parietal cortex, confirming previous findings. Critically, temporal cues also preferentially
activated left inferior parietal cortex in the perceptual discrimination
task. Conjunction analysis formally revealed that motor and perceptual
temporal cues, as compared to neutral cues, activated a shared network,
comprising supramarginal gyrus and intraparietal sulcus. These results
indicate that left inferior parietal cortex represents a core neural substrate for the orienting of attention in time, independent of task context.

H2

DISTINGUISHING ACTIVITY ELICITED BY INTRINSIC SALIENCE IN THE
FRONTOPARIETAL NETWORK USING AN ODDBALL PARADIGM WITH
NATURAL SCENES Norberto Eiji Nawa1, Hiroshi Ando1; 1Universal Media
Research Center, National Institute of Information and Communications
Technology — Oddball targets that infrequently interrupt a monotonous
stimuli stream reliably engage a frontoparietal network thought to subserve the detection of salient stimuli in the environment. Less clear is
how activity elicited by the occurrence of relevant stimuli that are temporally unusual (‘rare’), compare to responses evoked by relevant stimuli with unusual intrinsic features (‘strange’). To investigate that, we
measured hemodynamic brain activity using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while participants performed two identical versions of the oddball task, one using intact photographs of natural scenes
as targets and distractors, and another using scrambled photographs.
Half the photographs were manipulated resulting in scenes and scrambles with abnormal colors. In the temporal dimension, targets were
equally salient across tasks; however, in the semantic dimension, natural

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

scenes with abnormal colors were more salient targets than natural
scenes with normal colors. We examined neural responses in core
regions of the frontoparietal network: the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG),
specifically, BA 44/45, and the temporoparietal junction (TPJ). Results
confirmed that in both tasks, increased activation was elicited by the
oddball stimuli in the regions of interest. Further analysis revealed that
abnormal color scenes elicited greater activation than normal color
scenes only in the right BA 45. These results are in line with the hypothesis that the IFG subserves processes involved in the detection of salient
stimuli, but also suggest that differential recruitment occurs depending
upon the nature of salience, signaling a further functional specialization
within the IFG.

H3

FEATURE RELEVANCE OR SIMILARITY: DISSOCIATING MECHANISMS OF
GLOBAL FEATURE-BASED SELECTION WITH ELECTROMAGNETIC BRAIN
RECORDINGS Rowena Bondarenko1, Hendrik Strumpf2, Christian M.
Stoppel2, Mircea A. Schoenfeld1,2, Carsten N. Böhler3, Jens-M. Hopf1,2;

1Leibniz-Institute for Neurobiology, Magdeburg, Germany, 2Otto-von-Guericke-

University, Magdeburg, Germany, 3Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke
University, Durham, NC — Feature-based attention is known to operate in a
spatially global manner: the selection of a task-relevant feature in an
attended object is associated with the parallel selection of that feature in
other unattended objects. Here we show with electromagnetic brain
recordings that this form of global selection outside the focus of attention
can be dissociated into different operations that occur in a temporal
sequence. Subjects discriminated the orientation of a target grating (vertical/horizontal) in one visual field while irrelevant gratings, that gradually changed orientation between vertical and horizontal, were
presented concurrently in the unattended visual field. The electromagnetic response to the unattended gratings showed a modulation reflecting the operation of global feature-based attention. Importantly, this
modulation was bimodal with an initial phase (~130-200 ms) reflecting
the degree to which the distractor orientation matched either of the taskrelevant response alternatives, and a subsequent phase (~250-500 ms)
reflecting the similarity of the distractor orientation with the orientation
of the target that was actually presented on a given trial. These observations indicate that global feature-based selection involves a sequence of
operations, in which the selection based on task-relevant features has
(temporal) priority over the selection based on sensory similarity with
the target.

H4

MEASURING THE TIME COURSE OF TEMPORALLY SELECTIVE
ATTENTION William S. Bush1, Lisa D. Sanders1; 1University of
Massachusetts, Amherst — Behavioral and event-related potential (ERP)
studies have demonstrated that temporally selective attention is used to
preferentially process critical stimuli when an overwhelming amount of
information is presented rapidly. However, these studies only provide
information about the allocation of attention to the discrete times at
which probe stimuli were presented. In the current study, steady state
visual evoked potentials (SSVEPs) were employed as a continuous mea231

Poster Session H
sure to determine how attention is allocated leading up to and following
cued times. In separate blocks, participants were directed to attend to a
time 500, 1000, or 1500 ms after the onset of a warning tone to detect rare,
deviant digits presented in rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP)
streams primarily composed of letters. The entire visual presentation
was flickered at 17 Hz. Temporal attention modulated the amplitude of
the SSVEPs over posterior brain regions. Specifically, SSVEP amplitude
increased until the attended time, and then decreased relative to the
longer attention conditions. However, the changes in amplitude were
asymmetric and the rate of change differed for the three attention conditions. These results support previous findings that temporally selective
attention modulates the same early stages of visual processing as spatially selective attention when perceptual systems are overwhelmed by
too much information. Further, they provide the first evidence of precisely how the resources of temporal attention are allocated over time
under specific conditions, and demonstrate the promise of SSVEPs to
provide a continuous index of temporally selective attention under a
wide range of cuing and stimulus presentation paradigms.

H5

CAN VIGILANCE BE IMPROVED WITH A RISKY DUAL-TASK:
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL AND PERFORMANCE EVIDENCE Paul

Atchley1, Sabrina Gregersen1, Mark Chan1; 1University of Kansas — It

has
been clearly established that engaging in a dual-task while driving, such
as talking on a phone, is a risky behavior. However, another threat to
safety, especially on long drives, is a loss of vigilance. We investigated if
we could see either behavioral or physiological indicators of a sparing of
vigilance during the course of a long drive in which some participants
were allowed to talk on a phone while driving. Participants drove for
ninety minutes in a boring, simulated, environment. Participants either
engaged in a verbal task during the last ten minutes of the drive, a verbal
task in the first ten minutes followed by an intermittent verbal task every
two minutes, no conversation, or listened to the radio. Electroencephalographic (EEG) activity and driving performance (steering control and
reaction to an unexpected event) were measured. The performance data
indicted a loss of vigilance over time, as expected. This was worst in the
late conversation case. Increasing alpha and theta activity over time also
indicated a reduction in vigilance, as predicted. This occurred for all conditions, though an increase in beta activity for the full conversation
group suggests that the concurrent conversation did allow those drivers
to maintain some level of alertness. We conclude that the physiological
data suggest that a concurrent conversation may help drivers maintain
alertness, but that the performance data suggests that gains to alertness
may not result in better driving safety, given the costs for dual-task coordination.

H6

ALPHA-MEDIATED ATTENTIONAL SUPPRESSION OF IRRELEVANT VISUAL
FEATURES Adam C. Snyder1,2, John J. Foxe1; 1City College of New York, 2The
Graduate Center of City University New York — Many recent studies have
shown that retinotopically specific alpha-band (8-15Hz) oscillatory
power increases reflect suppressed processing of irrelevant parts of the
visual field in visuospatial attention. We asked if alpha plays a role in the
non-spatial preparatory biasing of visual attention as well, or if it is specific to spatial attentional sets. We used visual word cues to inform 12
subjects about a task-relevant feature of an upcoming visual stimulus
(S2) while we recorded electrical brain activity (EEG) from the scalp. The
cue and S2 were separated by an interval during which no stimulation
occurs. We examined the brain activity in this interval, which reflects
internal preparatory attentional processes. Subjects were cued each trial
to attend to either the color or direction of motion of an upcoming dot
field stimulus, and respond if they detected that a portion of the dots differed from the majority as to the target feature (i.e., they had a different
color or moved in a different direction). We used the features of color
and motion, which have well-known, spatially-separated cortical processing areas, to distinguish shifts in alpha power over areas processing
each feature. We found that alpha power from dorsal regions increased

232

Attention: Nonspatial
when motion was the irrelevant feature (i.e., color was cued), and that
alpha power from ventral regions increased when color was irrelevant.
This pattern of results is consistent with the role of alpha-band mechanisms in spatial attention, that is: suppression of potentially distracting
information. Furthermore, feature-selectivity of alpha-band effects
related to subject performance.

H7

BACKWARD MASKING OF A FIRST TARGET ATTENUATES THE P3 EVENTRELATED POTENTIALS ELICITED BY BOTH TARGETS IN THE ATTENTIONAL
BLINK Benoit Brisson1,2, Nicolas Robitaille2, Alexandrine Deland-

Bélanger2, Thomas Spalek1, Vincent Di Lollo1, Pierre Jolicoeur2; 1Simon Fraser
University, British Columbia, Canada, 2Laboratoire de Neurosciences
Cognitives, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada, — Masking of the first

target increases the magnitude of the attentional blink (AB: a decline in
second target report accuracy at short intertarget lags) relative to when
the first target is not masked. We examined the underlying causes of this
effect in two experiments. In Experiment 1, a single target was presented
in a rapid serial visual presentation stream. The P3 to the target was isolated by subtracting infrequent target category trials from frequent target
category trials. The distractor immediately trailing the target (i.e., at lag
1) was present in the masked condition and replaced by a blank screen in
the not-masked condition. Masking the target by presenting a distractor
at lag 1 significantly reduced the amplitude of the target-locked P3, but
had no effect on P3 latency. In Experiment 2, a second masked target was
always presented three positions after the first target (i.e., at lag 3). We
show that, compared to a condition in which no intervening distractor
was presented, presenting a distractor at lag 1 attenuates the P3 elicited
by both the first and the second target. In contrast, presenting a distractor at lag 2 had no such effect. Accuracy for both targets mirrored the
masking effects on the P3 component. These results clearly link the attenuation of the target-locked P3 observed in Experiment 1 to the AB effect.
Implications for extent models of the AB are discussed.

H8

ATTENTIONAL SENSITIZATION OF UNCONSCIOUS COGNITION: TASK SETS
MODULATE SUBSEQUENT MASKED SEMANTIC PRIMING Markus

Kiefer1, Ulla Martens1,2; 1University of Ulm, Germany, 2University of Osnabrück,
Germany — In classical theories of automaticity and attention, unconscious automatic processes are thought to be independent of higher-level
attentional influences. However, refined theories assume that the cognitive system has to be configured in a certain way for automatic processes
to occur. In our attentional sensitization model, we propose that automatic processing depends on attentional enhancement of task-congruent
processing pathways: A stimulus can only elicit an automatic process if
the process-relevant stimulus dimension belongs to the active attentional
set. This hypothesis was tested with a modified masked semantic priming paradigm during a lexical decision task by measuring event-related
potentials (ERPs): Before masked prime presentation, participants
attended in an induction task either to semantic or perceptual stimulus
features, which should activate a semantic and perceptual task set,
respectively. Following the unconsciously presented masked prime a
semantically related or unrelated target was shown, on which the lexical
decision had to be performed. Semantic priming effects on the N400 ERP
component (reduction of N400 amplitude), an electrophysiological index
of semantic processing, were obtained when a semantic task set was
immediately induced before subliminal prime presentation. In contrast,
a previously induced perceptual task set abolished N400 priming. Comparable results were obtained regardless of the difficulty level and the
verbal or non-verbal nature of the induction tasks. In line with the proposed attentional sensitization model, unconscious semantic processing
is enhanced by a semantic and attenuated by a perceptual task set.
Hence, automatic processing of unconscious stimuli is susceptible to topdown control for optimizing goal-related information processing.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Attention: Nonspatial

Poster Session H

H9

H12

MODULATION OF SENSORY AND EXECUTIVE ATTENTION PROCESSING IN
INDIVIDUALS WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA AND FAMILIAL HIGH RISK Sarah

THE NEURAL BASIS OF GREAT EXPECTATIONS AND SUBSEQUENT
DISAPPOINTMENTS Sarah Mohammed1, Nienke Hoogenboom1, Klaus

J. Hart1,2, Michael Casp2, Mary-Agnes McMahon2, Aysenil Belger1,2;
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, 2Duke
University Medical Center — Deficits in attentional selectivity and control

1

in schizophrenia have been described as core changes underlying global
cognitive dysfunction. However, the neuroanatomical basis for these
deficits has remained poorly understood. Furthermore, it is unclear
whether changes in specific mechanisms engaged during voluntary
attention may reflect vulnerability markers in individuals at high risk for
developing schizophrenia. The goals of this study were to characterize
how sensory and executive attention processes are affected in individuals with schizophrenia (SCZ) and with familial high risk (FHR). We used
functional MRI to test these mechanisms of voluntary attention in 12 participants with schizophrenia, 18 participants with FHR for schizophrenia, and 13 controls. Participants were presented with a series of green
and red letters and digits matched for perceptual complexity, with the
goal of identifying green letters as targets. Sensory attention processes
were measured during early selection of stimuli with the task-relevant
color, and executive attention processes were measured during stimuli
with the targeted category. We found that during sensory attention processing, both the groups with SCZ and FHR showed hyperactivation relative to controls in the prefrontal, parietal, and occipital cortices. During
executive attention processes, the SCZ group showed decreased activation relative to controls in the insula, parahippocampal gyrus, and prefrontal, parietal, and anterior cingulate cortices. The FHR group, in
contrast, showed no significant differences from controls. The results
suggest that sensory attention changes may reflect a vulnerability
marker associated with familial risk for schizophrenia, while modulation
of executive attention may be more related to disease state.

H11

SURPRISE! EARLY VISUAL NOVELTY PROCESSING IS NOT MODULATED
BY ATTENTION Elise Tarbi1, Xue Sun1, Phillip J. Holcomb2, Kirk R. Daffner1;
1Division

of Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 2Tufts University, Medford,
MA — We have proposed a model of visual novelty processing that
involves several stages: relatively early detection of a mismatch between
perceptually novel stimuli and stored representations (indexed by the
anterior N2); voluntary allocation of resources dependent on the context
in which the novel event occurs (indexed by the P3); and, when appropriate, more sustained processing of novelty (indexed by late slow wave
activity). There is disagreement in the literature regarding the extent to
which the early detection of visual novelty, as indexed by the anterior
N2, is dependent on direction of attention. In the current study, the anterior N2 was measured in 32 young subjects under two conditions that
manipulated attention. Under both conditions, subjects were presented
standard, target/rare, and perceptually novel visual stimuli. Under the
Attend condition, subjects responded to designated visual targets.
Under the Ignore condition, subjects performed a difficult n-back task in
the auditory modality while passively being exposed to the visual stimuli. We found that under the Ignore condition, the anterior N2 was much
larger in response to novels than rares or standards. Of particular interest, the size of the anterior N2 to novel stimuli did not differ under the
Ignore and Attend conditions. Furthermore, under the Ignore condition,
the anterior N2 to visual novel stimuli was not affected by the level of
difficulty of the auditory n-back task (3-back vs. 2-back). Our findings
suggest that the early processing of visual novelty, as measured by the
anterior N2, is not strongly modulated by direction of attention.

Kessler1; 1Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, University of Glasgow, UK —
Raising expectations about visual events can be beneficial when targets
must be rapidly selected from distractor information. However when
expectations are built-up, yet unsatisfied, they may have detrimental
effects. To study target expectations, we used composite targets that
could be gradually built up over time. In this way, we presented a full
target (3 digits), partial targets (1 or 2 digits) or no target (0 digits).
Expectations for the full target were incrementally built as digits were
consecutively unveiled within the RSVP stream. In several behavioural
experiments we found that the partial target of 2 digits had a strong detrimental effect on detection of a subsequent target. We suggest that builtup but unsatisfied target expectations interfered with processing of
downstream targets. In a follow-up MEG experiment, we employed the
composite target task to investigate the neural dynamics of these expectations. Group ERPs (n=15) reveal a temporo-parieto-frontal P300 to
each incoming digit. Preliminary TFR analysis suggests modulations in
the 8-12 Hz range, with distinct topographic patterns with no target (0
digits), partial targets (1 and 2 digits) and the full target (3 digits). Behaviourally, we have shown that incrementally raising expectations about a
target event strongly influenced the processing of subsequent targets.
The greatest consequence for these downstream targets (i.e., attenuated
performance) was revealed in the condition with the highest but unfulfilled target expectations (with 2 digits). Thus, expectations seem to play
an essential role in visual selective attention and our MEG results reveal
their neurodynamic basis.

H13

REDUCED ATTENTIONAL CONTROL IN HUMANS EXPRESSING THE GENE
FOR A SUB-CAPACITY VERSION OF THE CHOLINE TRANSPORTER Elise

Demeter1, Surya Sabhapathy1, Randy Blakely2, Martin Sarter1, Cindy Lustig1;
1University of Michigan, 2Vanderbilt University — Everyone has experienced

mind wandering and inattention, but individuals differ in their ability to
control this tendency. The University of Michigan Cognitive Genetics
program was established to investigate whether genetic variation in the
choline transporter (CHT) contributes to differences in attentional control. The capacity of the cortical cholinergic system in mediating attention is determined by the uptake rate of choline into cholinergic neurons
by CHT. DNA from 164 participants was genotyped for a non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphism of CHT (Ile89Val; Okuda et al.,
2002). We identified 19 subjects heterozygous for the I89V variant. Choline uptake assays in mammalian cells expressing this variant show a 4050% decrease in CHT’s uptake capacity. We predicted I89V individuals
would show impairments in attentional control and an increased susceptibility to distraction. Participants completed a battery of self-report measures designed to assess inattention, distractibility, and related
constructs, including the Short Imaginal Processes Inventory (Huba et
al., 1982) and Thought Occurrence Questionnaire (Sarason et al., 1986). A
subset of participants (I89V, n = 6, Ile/Ile, n = 8) completed further cognitive testing. Between-group comparisons reveal participants heterozygous for the I89V variant score significantly higher on measures of
distractibility and display differences in alerting compared to Ile/Ile participants. The reduced uptake capacity of the I89V CHTs may thus contribute to a physiological inability to maintain elevated levels of
cholinergic transmission. The cognitive consequences of this limitation
may manifest themselves as impairments in the ability to stay on task
and employ top-down mechanisms to combat the effects of distractors.

H14

NEURAL BASES OF HYPNOTIZABILITY ASSESSED BY A FLANKER TASK
Yann Cojan1,2, Camille Piguet1,2, Patrik Vuilleumier1,2; 1University of Geneva,
2
Centre Interfacultaire de Neurosciences — The neural bases of individual

differences in sensitivity to hypnotic suggestions are unknown. Modern
theories of hypnosis have proposed a role for distinct abilities in atten-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

233

Poster Session H
tional control. High-susceptible subjects (highs) might have better executive function than low-susceptible ones (lows) outside the hypnotic
context, and thus be more apt to focus attention (Gruzelier, 1998); or
alternatively, highs might be more prone to automaticity and thus
should be more sensitive to distracters. We acquired fMRI images in 30
subjects performing a flanker task in which a central colored target was
surrounded by flankers with a different color which could be associated
with either the same hand (congruent condition) or the other hand
(incongruent condition). Flankers could contain faces or scrambled faces.
Behaviorally, we found no correlation between susceptibility to hypnosis
and flanker interference on reaction-times, replicating previous results
outside the hypnotic context (Iani, 2006). However, we found a positive
correlation between susceptibility to hypnosis and activity in the fusiform gyrus when presenting faces compared to scrambled flankers in the
congruent condition, suggesting that visual distracters are processed by
highs more than lows in this easy condition. Conversely, posterior parietal regions, superior frontal gyrus, and left prefrontal cortex showed a
negative correlation with to hypnosis in the incongruent condition when
comparing face vs scrambled stimuli suggesting that avoiding distraction by faces is more demanding when subjects are less susceptible to
hypnosis in conflict situations. We conclude that susceptibility to hypnosis is depending on individual attentional filtering abilities that are measurable outside hypnosis context.

H15

VISUAL WORKING MEMORY AND ATTENTION: INSIGHTS FROM
INATTENTION Nikos Gorgoraptis1,2, Paul M. Bays1,2, Masud Husain1,2;
1

Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, UK, 2Institute
of Neurology, University College London, UK — Spatial working memory and
attention are closely linked, both behaviourally and in their neural substrates (Awh & Jonides, TINS, 2001). However, the relationship between
non-spatial working memory and attention is less well understood. In
the present study, we investigated non-spatial, visual working memory
in hemispatial neglect, classically considered a disorder of spatial attention following focal brain damage. Rather than only probing whether or
not an item is stored in memory, we used a novel, more detailed
approach that has been implemented successfully to examine the precision with which an item is remembered in healthy observers (Bays &
Husain, Science 2008). We measured precision of memory for orientation
of sequentially presented visual stimuli, all displayed at central fixation,
comparing neglect patients with age-matched controls and stroke
patients without inattention. Precision was lower in patients with
neglect, when compared with healthy or stroke controls. In all three
groups, precision was highest for a single item, but decreased with
increasing sequence length. In neglect patients, resolution in memory for
the first of three items was lower when compared to one item followed
by a blank of matching duration, suggesting that poorer performance
cannot be explained by a deficit in sustained attention. These results
demonstrate a deficit of non-spatial visual working memory in individuals with spatial inattention.

Attention: Other
H16

NUMERICAL VALUE AND NUMEROSITY MODULATE DIGITS
PROCESSING Ziad Safadi1, Sharon Naparstek2,3, Avishai Henik2,3, William

B. Lawson1, Limor Lichtenstein-Vidne2,3; 1Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
Howard University, Washington DC, 2Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer
Sheva, Israel, 3Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel — Objective: The current research was designed
in order to study whether attention and task relevance modulate numerical processing in a Stroop-like flanker task. Method: In two experiments,
normal adults were presented with a single-digit target (1, 2, 6 or 7),
flanked by a distractor having two dimensions—numerosity and numerical value (following Henik et al., 1999). The flanker and target could be
congruent (e.g., central 2 flanked by two 2's) incongruent close (e.g., cen-

234

Attention: Other
tral 2 flanked by three 3's) or incongruent far (e.g., central 2 flanked by
seven 7's). In Experiment 1, subjects were asked to report the target's
numerical value, while in Experiment 2, subjects were asked to perform
a comparative judgment task (i.e., decide whether the target was larger
than or smaller than the reference 5). In both experiments, subjects were
instructed to focus their attention on the central target while ignoring the
distractor flanker. Results: Only the flanker's numerical value affected
performance in Experiment 1, whereas both flanker value and numerosity affected performance in Experiment 2. Conclusion: The results suggest that numerosity and numerical value differ in their automatic
activation during numerical conflict tasks. Specifically, numerical value
is always activated even when irrelevant to the task at hand, whereas
automatic activation of numerosity is dependent upon task requirements.

H17

CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE CEREBELLUM TO SUSTAINED ATTENTION: A
CTBS STUDY Carla P. Arasanz1, William R. Staines1, Tom A. Schweizer2;
1University of Waterloo, 2University of Toronto — Attention

deficits have been
reported in cerebellar patients, independent of motor function or action
planning. Sustained attention is the ability to maintain focus and concentration during the presentation of repetitive, non-arousing stimuli. One
classic paradigm used to assess this is the sustained attention to response
task (SART). Imaging studies have reported cerebellar activation associated with fronto-parietal activity during SART, suggesting its involvement in maintaining the task goal on-line. We investigated the effects of
reducing cortical excitability to the left or right posterior/lateral cerebellum using continuous theta burst stimulation (cTBS). We hypothesized
that the effects of cTBS on the cerebellar cortex would increase the number of commission and omission errors during the retest condition for
SART. The experiment consisted of 25 sequences of numbers 1-9 visually
presented in a random order, where the task is to quickly respond to all
digits except for 3. SART was performed before and after cTBS either the
left or right posterior/lateral cerebellar hemisphere using separate subject groups. Analysis of the results pre/post stimulation revealed a significant increase in the number of omission errors for both left and right
hemisphere groups during retest (p < 0.05), but no significant difference
in commission errors. Thus cTBS increased lapses of attention (omission
errors) but had no effect on failure of inhibitory processes (commission
errors), regardless of localization. Our results suggest that the cerebellum is involved in a neural network necessary for maintaining and coordinating attentional processes.

H18

EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS TO ALCOHOL RELATED STIMULI IN
COLLEGE-AGED DRINKERS AND NON-DRINKERS Barbara C. Banz1,

Deana B. Davalos1; 1Colorado State University — In recent years, researchers
have begun to investigate whether there are neurophysiological differences in individuals who drink heavily compared to those who do not
drink. Research has shown significantly reduced P3 amplitudes in
response to visual stimuli in alcoholics and their children, except when
those images are alcohol-related. The purpose of the current study is to
further investigate this phenomenon comparing event-related potentials
(ERP) of high drinkers to non drinkers when presented, positive images,
negative images and alcohol related images. Participants were categorized as a drinker or non drinker based on the Alcohol Use Disorders
Identification Test (AUDIT), a self report measure of alcohol use. Preliminary group comparisons were made based on differences in amplitude
and latency of the P2 and the late positive potential (LPP), a component
which is believed to be more evaluative in nature. This data has shown
no significant difference in the amplitude or latency of the P2, meaning
initial attention is equal between groups. However, we have found LPP
amplitudes to be different between drinkers and non-drinkers, suggesting there may be neurophysiological indices for binge drinking which
may be useful for identifying individuals who are either at risk or currently abusing alcohol.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Attention: Other
H19

CORTICAL ORIENTING RESPONSE TO NOVELTY IS ENHANCED IN
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER Norbert
Kathmann1,
Moritz
Ischebeck1, Tanja Endrass1; 1Humboldt-Universitaet zu Berlin, Germany —

Clinical research in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) revealed various alterations in cognitive and affective processes and their brain correlates. Such deficits may serve as endophenotypes which are helpful in
the search for the genetic basis of the disorder and might also be targets
for new interventions. We studied novelty processing using eventrelated brain potentials under various conditions. Novel pictures which
were task-irrelevant but had either neutral or negative affective valence
were presented among frequent standards and rare targets. As expected,
aversive novels elicited larger P300 amplitudes than neutral novels
across groups. OCD patients had increased P300 amplitudes compared
to healthy control probands after novel simuli, but not after targets.
Moreover, affective valence had no effect on group differences. This pattern was confirmed in a replication study. In a further experiment, a
three-stimulus auditory novelty oddball task was used. Early-onset but
not late-onset patients showed increased P300 amplitudes after novel
sounds. To evaluate the effect of affective context we then studied auditory novelty responses during a memory task in which in context A only
neutral and in context B mixed (neutral and aversive) pictures were
memorized. Here, enhanced auditory novelty P300 amplitudes were
found primarily in the neutral condition. It is concluded that novel
events elicit larger ERP responses in OCD patients than in controls probably indicating augmented involuntary shifts of attention to infrequent
irrelevant events. This abnormally high cortical orienting response is
independent from the affective significance of event or context. However, it may depend on the subtype of OCD pathology.

H20

CAN ATTENTIONAL MANIPULATION MODERATE SELF-ESTEEM AND THE
CORTISOL RESPONSE? Laura Copeland1,3, Julie Chamberlin1, Nida Ali1,3,

Cory Cooperman1,3, Mark Baldwin3, Jens Pruessner1,2; 1McGill Centre for
Studies in Aging, 2Douglas Mental Health Institute, 3McGill University — Stress
is part of daily life, but not all individuals respond to stressful situations
in the same manner. Recent research suggests that interindividual differences in personality traits directly influences how individuals respond to
challenging situations. The literature demonstrates that negative attentional bias, primarily seen in individuals with low self-esteem (SE), can
be manipulated through repetitive training. Training individuals to
accept rather than reject positive information elevates SE, which modulates stress responsivity such that cortisol responses to stressful situations are reduced. This project examines the cognitive mechanisms
involved in stress perception by manipulating early appraisal processes
through the use of an attentional training task. Participants were trained
to focus on positive aspects of situations through a computerized perception task that involves attending to a smiling face amidst a matrix of
frowning faces. The HPA axis was stimulated via the Trier Social Stress
Test (TSST) and biological stress response was determined though cortisol measures. The current project was unable to replicate previous
research findings that demonstrated the impact of antecedent-focused
strategies on the late-stage consequences of stress. The training may
have elevated SE, eliciting the predicted lower stress response but it may
have also inadvertently primed participants to focus on facial expressions, making social evaluative aspects of the TSST a more salient stressor for participants who had completed the experimental versus control
training. To circumvent the priming effect of the training, participants
will complete the training several days prior to exposure to the TSST.
Preliminary results are in line with past findings.

H21

PREVENTING SLIPS OF ACTION BY SLOWING TASK PACE Amanda
Clark1, Shant Alajajian1, Daniel Smilek1, Eric Roy1; 1University of Waterloo —
Errors of attention, or slips of action, are very common occurrences; perhaps you walk into a room and forget what you went there to do or

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session H
maybe you fail to add sugar to your coffee because you were interrupted
by a phone call. While many of these attention errors are simple nuisances, action slips can also have damaging consequences. This study
was designed to induce slips of action in a well-learned task to determine if slowing the pace of task execution can reduce the frequency of
attention errors. Sixty young adults (18 – 25 years) were instructed to
complete a well-learned action sequence either as quickly and accurately
as possible or at a fixed pace of five to seven seconds, where timing feedback was given after every trial. We induced slips of action by occasionally requiring participants to deviate from the learned routine by
changing one of the movement goals in the sequence. As predicted, participants who completed the task at their own pace executed each
sequence significantly faster than those who were in the fixed pace condition. Also, while both groups committed numerous slips on the task,
those who completed each sequence more slowly in the fixed pace condition were significantly more accurate (44%) than those in the self paced
group (21%). These results suggest that a key component to preventing
action slips in daily life could be executing tasks slowly enough to allow
time for making changes to well-learned action routines when circumstances warrant such adjustments.

H22

COGNITIVE MODULATION OF FRONTO-STRIATAL NETWORKS IN
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER PATIENTS Martin Desseilles1,2,

Alice Muselle3, Christel Devue3, Virginie Sterpenich2, Thien Thanh Dang Vu1,3,
Genevieve Albouy1, Christina Schmitd1, Christian Degueldre1, Christophe
Phillips1, Marc Ansseau3, Pierre Maquet1,3, Sophie Schwartz2; 1Cyclotron
Research Centre, University of Liège, Belgium, 2University of Geneva,
Switzerland, 3University of Liege, Belgium — The obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a frequent psychiatric condition characterized by obsessions and/or compulsions. In these patients, attentional biases play a
major role in the initiation and maintenance of the symptoms. We
hypothesize that attentional dysfunction in fronto-parietal network may
also affect processing within fronto-striatal regions and thus contribute
to both cognitive as well as affective dysfunctions in OCD patient. Here,
we tested with functional MRI (fMRI) whether OCD patients show
altered attentional effects on the neural filtering of irrelevant visual stimuli in visual cortices. Sixteen OCD and sixteen matched controls scanned
while they performed an easy or difficult detection task at fixation, while
irrelevant colored visual stimuli were presented in the periphery. Our
fMRI results reveal that patients with OCD show (i) an increased filtering of irrelevant information in visual cortex, (ii) a suppression of ventromedial prefrontal/orbitofrontal cortex (vmPFC/OFC) with increasing
task difficulty (high attentional load), and (iii) an increased activity in
ventral striatum at baseline. These findings suggest that hyper-vigilance
seen in OCD patients might result in an increased attentional filtering in
visual cortex. In addition, OCD patients showed a reduction of vmPFC/
OFC activity during high load, as reported after successful psychotherapy. In addition, hyper-activity in striatal regions observed at baseline in
OCD was significantly modulated by attentional load. Together, these
findings suggest a possible therapeutic role for cognitive training in regulating brain circuits that underlie this common psychiatric disease.

H23

SIMULATED DRIVING PERFORMANCE IN PATIENTS WITH FOCAL
CEREBELLAR LESIONS Karen Kan1, Michael Cusimano1,2, Tom
Schweizer1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto —

Patients with cerebellar damage have been shown to have attentional
and executive impairments, but few studies have looked at this in the
context of real world tasks. Driving is a cognitively complex task that
requires optimal motor skills and high-level executive skills (e.g. planning, coordination, multitasking). This study examined the effects of cerebellar damage on performance in simulated driving. Eight patients with
focal cerebellar lesions and eight healthy participants with valid driver's
licenses were tested on a commercially available driving simulator
(STISIM Drive). Participants were asked to navigate traffic while per-

235

Poster Session H
forming audio and visual divided attention tasks designed to mimic
driving with distraction (e.g., talking to a passenger, scenery diversions).
The cerebellar lesion group drove more cautiously, with a slower mean
speed than the control group. During unprotected left turns, when drivers must make rapid decisions regarding the speed of oncoming cars,
judge a safe turning distance, watch for pedestrians and monitor the traffic light colour, the cerebellar group was significantly slower than controls (p < 0.05). There were no differences between groups in simpler
driving tasks such as turning without oncoming traffic. These results
indicate that cerebellar patients are slower at responding to more attentionally demanding aspects of driving, and cannot be explained by a
general motor slowing. This is consistent with previous findings in our
lab showing patients with cerebellar lesions are impaired on tests of
attention, multitasking and executive functions. This is the first study to
shed light on the potential impact cerebellar lesions have on driving.

H24

HOW JOURNAL ARTICLES ARE READ UNDER TIME PRESSURE:
SACRIFICING DEPTH FOR BREADTH Lisa Meschino1, Grayden Solman1,

Michael G. Reynolds2, Daniel Smilek1; 1University of Waterloo, 2Trent
University — Most of the reading required at universities is task-specific
and time-sensitive. We read to gain information necessary for completing a task within a specific time-frame. What is unclear is how attention
is allocated during reading when there is limited time available. Our
study examines how attentional strategies change when reading journal
articles under differing time constraints. Participants viewed two 5-page
articles from the journal, Psychological Science. Undergraduate participants were divided under four experimental conditions based on reading time: a baseline condition with unlimited reading time, as well as 10minute, 5-minute, and 2-minute reading conditions. In all conditions,
each article was followed by a comprehension test. An eye monitor
tracked eye movements and recorded the location, frequency, and duration of each fixation. Two models were generated from the baseline data,
demonstrating two possible strategies for reading under varying time
constraints. In a linear reading model, participants read the articles from
the beginning until time runs out, prioritizing early regions of the article
(i.e., abstract, introduction) and sacrificing later regions (i.e., methods,
results, discussion). In a linear skimming model, participants reduce
their reading time per region and distribute their attention to encompass
more regions of the article within the allotted time. Data for each of the
2-minute, 5-minute, and 10-minute conditions support a linear skimming model. These findings suggest people engage in linear skimming
of all regions with emphasis on the initial parts of the article. Therefore,
it seems that, under pressure of time, undergraduates sacrifice depth of
information for breadth.

H25

INTRAMODAL ATTENTIONAL PROCESSING DURING A MONOTONOUS
CAR DRIVING SIMULATION: AN EEG STUDY Manfred F. Gugler1, Claudia

Sannelli2,3, Stefan Haufe3, Ruth Schubert1, Michael Schrauf4, Wilhelm E.
Kincses4, Michael Tangermann3, Gabriel Curio1; 1Charité University Medicine,
Berlin, Germany, 2idalab GmbH, Berlin, Germany, 3Berlin Institute of
present
Technology, Germany, 4Daimler AG, Sindelfingen, Germany — The
study aimed at monitoring attentional processes in an intramodal
(visual) setting during a monotonous car driving simulation by means of
the EEG. Two different conditions were included in the study. Condition
C1 consisted in watching a grey screen on which sometimes a red light
appeared. Subjects had to react to this stimulus by pressing a foot pedal.
Condition C2 consisted in actively driving a simulated car by performing a lane change task additionally to the first visual task. The whole session lasted approximately three hours. The EEG results revealed a main
effect of condition showing a reduced parieto-occipital alpha band activity for C2 and a main effect of reaction time with a reduced frontal alpha
band activity for short reaction times. No interaction between condition
and reaction time was found. Thus, for a demanding dual task with
intramodal stimulus competition, a short reaction time requires the

236

Attention: Other
strong activation of executive frontal cortices as shown by a strong alpha
desynchronisation. In contrast, a previous study (Schubert et al., 2008)
involving an intermodal (auditory-visual) distribution of attention
showed that fast reactions to auditory stimuli are accompanied by
increased alpha oscillations over parieto-occipital cortices. Considering
these results we can conclude that the relation between brain rhythms
and reaction times can be interpreted only in its specific context, i.e., both
(low and high) alpha states are reasonable correlates of an efficient sensory-motor coupling leading to fast reactions.

H26

ATTENTIONAL BIASES FOR CIGARETTE AND ANTI-CIGARETTE CUES IN
EX-SMOKERS Kristin Iodice1, Jane W. Couperus1; 1Hampshire College —
Attentional biases for cigarette-related and cigarette-aversive stimuli are
often seen as a feature of cigarette addiction in current smokers.
Although this saliency for cigarette-related stimuli does not appear to be
permanent, it is unclear when this change occurs in ex-smokers. The current study is designed to better understand the timeline of this bias elimination and to examine how cigarette-aversive stimuli affect ex-smokers
over the course of cessation by using Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) to
measure attentional biases. Four groups, non-smokers, smokers, recent
ex-smokers (within six months of quitting), and long term ex-smokers
(nine or more months since quitting), were tested for within-group comparisons of electrophysiological brain responses to cigarette-related, cigarette-aversive, and neutral stimuli. The results found that smokers and
recent ex-smokers elicited a significantly enhanced P300 (P3b) for cigarette-related and cigarette-aversive stimuli in comparison to neutral
stimuli. Among long term ex-smokers, the P300 response was significantly greater in amplitude only for cigarette-aversive stimuli when
compared to neutral stimuli. Non-smokers did not display any significant differences between stimulus responses. These results suggest that
current smokers and recent ex-smokers have an attentional bias for cigarette-related and cigarette-aversive stimuli while long term ex-smokers
only possess an attentional bias for cigarette-aversive stimuli. In comparison, non-smokers did not present any attentional biases for cigaretterelated or cigarette-aversive stimuli. Interestingly, when participants
were asked to give explicit ratings for each stimulus, results supported
neurophysiological data by showing that cognitive attitudes toward cigarette-related and cigarette-aversive stimuli change depending on
smoker status.

H27

DYNAMICS OF SPATIAL-TEMPORAL PATTERNS EEG AND VISUAL EVENTRELATED POTENTIALS DURING OF POSTURE STABILITY IN CHILDREN
WITH ADHD Alexander Trembach1, Ekaterina Vitko1, Galina Grishina1, Olga

Gorbatova1; 1Kuban State Unuversity of Physical Education, Russia — Aims:

In children with Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
training of standing posture by visual feedback increased of posture stability and decreased inattention and impulsivity (Trembach et al, Gate &
Mental Function, 2008). The purpose investigation was to study central
mechanism of correction of mental and motor function. Methods: The
participants were 22 children with ADHD. Test of Variable of Attention,
3D Video motion of postural sways, posturography and EEG (4-60 Hz)
recorded in the ascent on tiptoe with open eyes before and after training.
In additional analyzed cognitive event-related potential (ERP):
responses of preparation and inhibition during a visual Go/No-go task.
Results: The training posture stability reduced the level to inattention
and impulsivity. Training posture stability improved control of body in
space. Motions in shoulder, articulation of hip and knee joints became
synchronous, its amplitude increased from knee to shoulder joint. Spatial-temporal patterns EEG were changed after training. Power spectrum
EEG was decreased in bands 4-7; 8-10 Hz in frontal and central areas and
increased in occipital areas. Power spectrum EEG in bands 36-47, 48-60
Hz increased in frontal and central of areas of the cortex. Amplitude of
wave P 300 in conditions Go task increased in Pz and response on No-go
task (P 400) increased in Cz. Conclusion: Increasing high-frequency EEG
and cognitive event-related potentials after training posture stability in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Attention: Other
areas, which control voluntary movements and attention, can be neurophysiologic mechanism of correction inattention and impulsivity in children with ADHD. Supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research
No 08-04-99034

H28

TRAINING-INDUCED PLASTICITY IN LARGE-SCALE BRAIN NETWORKS
FROM THE ACQUISITION OF SKILLED SPACE FORTRESS
PERFORMANCE Michelle W. Voss1, Ruchika S. Prakash2, Kirk I. Erickson3,

Walter Boot4, Chandramallika Basak1, Mark Neider1, Monica Fabiani1,
Gabriele Gratton1, Kramer Arthur1; 1University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, 2Ohio State University, 3University of Pittsburgh, 4Florida State
University — The goal of the proposed project is an enhanced understanding of learning and transfer of complex skills. The Space Fortress (SF)
game was developed by cognitive psychologists as a tool to study learning and training strategies (Donchin et al., 1989). Therefore SF provides a
good platform for examining plasticity of organization and integration
of interacting cognitive networks. The present study examines low-frequency (.008<.08 Hz) coherence of undirected functional networks during fMRI runs of real-time, uninterrupted SF game-play, compared to
runs without game-play before and after training. Results show
increased functional connectivity (Fc) in an attentional network derived
from an initial seed in the Supplementary Motor Area (SMA) that was
specific to runs in which SF was played. Areas of increased Fc to the
SMA included the Right Angular Gyrus, the Bilateral Caudate, and the
Left Superior Frontal Gyrus (Z>2.33, p<.05). Greater increases in Caudate Fc to the SMA was positively associated with learning rate. Training-induced inclusion of the hippocampus into the Default Mode
Network (DMN) during game play was also positively associated with
learning rate. That improved game performance was specifically associated with changes in Fc during SF suggests that functional plasticity of
even large-scale neurocognitive networks is expressed with contextspecificity. Yet importantly, understanding what aspects of large-scale
networks change as a result of training, and individual differences
wherein carries important implications for understanding fundamental
mechanisms behind learning and transfer of trained abilities to novel
real-world tasks such as driving, sport, or neurorehabilitation.

H29

BRIEF MINDFULNESS MEDITATION TRAINING IMPROVES MOOD AND
COGNITION Fadel Zeidan1, Suan Johnson2, Zhanna David2, Sasha Levons2,

Rachel Hinson2, Bruce Diamond3, Mark Faust2, Paula Goolkasian2; 1Wake
Forest University, 2University of North Carolina at Charlotte, 2William Paterson
University — Long term meditation training has been found to be effective
at improving cognition. Specifically, researchers have found that longterm mindfulness meditation practices increases the ability to sustain
attention. Unfortunately, the effects of brief mindfulness meditation
training have not been fully explored on attentional processes. In this
study, we examined if brief meditation training would improve mood
and cognition when compared to an active control group. Participants
with no prior meditation experience, participated in four sessions that
involved training in either meditation training (N = 24) or listening to a
book recording (N = 23). We assessed mood, mindfulness, and anxiety
ratings before and after the brief interventions. We assessed the effects of
brief mindfulness meditation training on cognition by implementing
cognitive tasks assessing verbal fluency, complex visual tracking, and
working memory. Both groups were similarly effective at improving
mood. However, meditation was more effective at reducing fatigue, anxiety, and increasing mindfulness, when compared to the controls. The
meditators were effective at improving complex visual processing, as
well as working memory performance, in comparison to the controls.
These results indicate that both meditation and listening to a book are
pleasurable activities, evidenced by improvements in mood. However,
only the meditation group was effective at improving visuo-spatial processing, working memory, and cognitive control. Moreover, our findings
suggest that brief meditation training effectively enhanced participants’

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session H
ability to sustain attention, findings found with long-term meditation
practitioners. These data find that the benefits on cognition can be realized after a brief mental training regimen.

H30

ATTENTIONAL PROCESSES UNDERLYING EVENT LEARNING Marta

Andreatta1, Andreas Muhlberger1, Marta Bainchin2, Matthias Wieser1, Paul
Pauli1, Alessandro Angrilli2; 1University of Wuerzburg, 2University of Padova —

For survival, an organism avoids threats and seeks rewards. Prompt
detections of such aversive and appetitive events need attentional
resources. It has been shown that differences in the temporal sequence
(event timing) between a conditioned stimulus (CS+) and an aversive
unconditioned stimulus (US) leads to opposite responses. Thus, defensive responses are provoked by a CS+ preceding an aversive US (CS+/
US); whereas appetitive responses are activated by a CS+ following US
(US/CS+). However, the role of attentional processes in determining
such opponent responses is still unknown. We investigated the electrocortical and subjective responses of 34 participants. One group of participants underwent a forward conditioning (CS+/US), the other one a
backward conditioning (US/CS+) procedure. CS+ and control stimuli
were flickering geometrical shapes and the US was a painful electric
shock. Steady-state visual evoked potentials (ssVEP) were recorded to
assess sensory and attentional processing of CS+. Independently from
the temporal sequence between CS+ and US, participants rated CS+ as
‘emotionally’ more negative compared to a neutral control stimulus after
both forward and backward conditioning. However, participants
showed increased ssVEP amplitude during CS+ compared to a neutral
control stimulus. Such an increase was stronger either during the last
seconds of forward CS+, i.e. just before the shock or during the first seconds of backward CS+, i.e. ‘just’ after the shock. Therefore, visual attention seems to be allocated to aversive conditioned cues both in forward
and backward conditioning, a strategy probably aimed at optimizing
fast and efficient responding to danger situations.

H31

CONTINGENT CAPTURE AT FIXATION DELAYS RE-ENGAGEMENT OF
ATTENTION TO PERIPHERAL TARGETS: EVIDENCE FROM HUMAN
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY Henry S. Cheang1,2, Boutheina Jemel1,2, Pierre

Jolicoeur2; 1Hôpital Rivière-des-Prairies, 2University of Montreal — Visuospatial attention is prone to involuntary capture by distractors with characteristics that match top-down attentional settings defining visual targets
(Folk & Leber, 1992). For example, visual target detection can be appreciably more difficult if a distractor sharing selection features with the target was present. Distractors at fixation also produce attentional capture;
Folk and colleagues claim such capture is “nonspatial” (Folk et al., 2008).
Our aim was to discern whether contingent attentional capture at fixation also impacted subsequent visuospatial attentional deployment. We
report results based on the electrical brain activity of 25 participants who
performed a visual task that tapped nonspatial and visuospatial attention. We used the N2pc component of the event-related potential as an
index of visuospatial attentional deployment. Subjects were presented
with a briefly-appearing array of four eccentrically-located coloured
squares with gaps and were required to indicate via button press
whether a square of a particular colour had a gap in the top side. A gapless distractor square coloured white, in a non-target colour, or in the target colour, always preceded the array at fixation. There were two main
results: first, accuracy was significantly reduced only for target-coloured
distractors, and second, a significant delay in N2pc onset latency
occurred only on trials where target-coloured distractors were presented. The results demonstrate that contingent capture, at fixation, can
produce a delay in the subsequent visuospatial attentional deployment
when a distractor matches the selection feature for the peripheral target,
but not for equally-salient stimuli equated for luminance, spatial location, and stimulus duration.

237

Poster Session H
H32

ANTICIPATING OBJECTS IN SPACE AND TIME Janice J. Snyder1, Anjan
Chatterjee2; 1University of British Columbia Okanagan, 2University of
Pennsylvania — Deploying attention in both space and time optimizes

behaviour by allowing us to locate and anticipate events or objects,
respectively. Directing attention to the location of an impending target or
to the temporal interval when an impending target will occur confers a
processing advantage as measured by decreases in reaction time and
increases in accuracy. Importantly, spatial and temporal attention can act
cooperatively to maximize behavioural efficiency. The linking of spatial
and temporal processes raises the question of whether they are mediated
by common neural structures. Although some research suggests that
right and left hemisphere structures are critical for spatial and temporal
attention, respectively, other research suggests that right hemisphere
structures are critical for both. Twenty patients with diverse right hemisphere lesions performed a detection task in which attention was
directed to either the likely (i.e., 80% valid) (i) location of the target (3? or
5? on the vertical axis from fixation) via a central symbolic cue or (ii) time
that the target would appear (300 ms or 900 ms after the cue) via duration of the fixation stimulus. If spatial and temporal attention are subserved by common neural structures, then facilitation effects observed in
both the spatial and temporal tasks should be impaired by critical lesions
and performance patterns should be correlated. The pattern of results
revealed a mild negative correlation for spatial and temporal facilitation
effects. This finding suggests that our abilities to anticipate objects in
space and time are likely to be mediated by different neural circuits.

Executive Processes: Development &
Aging
H33

FUNCTIONAL MRI MEASUREMENT OF AGE-RELATED FAILURES OF
DYNAMIC ALLOCATION OF ATTENTIONAL CONTROL Trey
Hedden1,2,

Emily Shire1, Randy Buckner1,2,3,4; 1Massachusetts General Hospital, 2Harvard
Medical School, 3Harvard University, 4Howard Hughes Medical Institute —
Over-activation of frontal areas in older compared to younger adults is a
well-observed phenomenon in the cognitive neuroscience of aging. Multiple hypotheses have been advanced to explain this phenomenon. Parametric experimental manipulations provide additional information
regarding the trajectory of age differences in functional activation across
levels of task difficulty. We propose that failures to dynamically allocate
attentional control across levels of task difficulty may be observed with
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and may be as important
to understanding age differences in performance as the more general
phenomenon of over-activation. We use a parametric manipulation of
task difficulty in a global-local paradigm that involves both inhibition
and shifting to examine failures of dynamic allocation of attentional control. Fifty-two younger (aged 18-27) and 63 older adults (aged 60-87) participated in the global-local task paradigm while undergoing fMRI
scanning. All older adults were cognitively normal individuals with a
Clinical Dementia Rating of 0. Older adults displayed a pattern of
greater activation than younger adults in frontal and parietal regions
associated with attentional control. However, older adults who exhibited
a pattern of increasing activation as task difficulty increased also exhibited better performance than did older adults who exhibited a failure to
dynamically modulate activation across task difficulty levels. These
results were observed independently of participants’ amyloid-beta burden as measured with Pittsburgh Compound B, suggesting that such
failures of dynamic allocation of attentional control are primarily associated with the neuro-cognitive effects of normal aging.

Executive Processes: Development & Aging

Executive Processes: Monitoring &
Inhibitory Control
H34

RELATIONSHIP OF NOGO N2/P3 AND ERN/PE ACROSS WORKING
MEMORY LOAD TO AUTONOMIC CARDIAC REGULATION IN YOUNGER
AND OLDER ADULTS Lesley Capuana1, Jane Dywan1, William Tays1,

Segalowitz Sidney1; 1Brock University — Our goal was to examine the relations among behavioral, electrocortical, and autonomic indices of anterior cingulate (ACC) function as older and younger adults engaged in a
response inhibition task that was made more difficult by increasing
working memory load (WML) across levels. The question addressed
here is whether the stimulus-locked N2/P3, usually associated with successful response inhibition in classic NoGo paradigms, is functionally
equivalent to the response-locked ERN/Pe, usually associated with the
commission of an error on performance monitoring tasks. Although both
component complexes have been linked to ACC activation, their associations with age and with cardiovascular regulation have not been
assessed within one single paradigm. We recorded these components as
participants responded to an inhibitory control task in which WML consisted of 2, 4, or 6 items. As WML increased, the amplitudes of both N2/
P3 and ERN/Pe diminished for both groups. Components also tended to
be smaller in older relative to younger adults. However, correlations
with error-rate and cardiovascular measures were found only for the
error-related components. ERNs (not N2s) were reduced in size as a
function of sympathetic predominance at higher WM loads in the
younger group, and larger Pe’s (not P3s) were related to more inhibitory
control errors in the older group. Thus, it would appear that despite similar ACC activation patterns, the ERN/Pe relative to the N2/P3 have different functional significance as individuals attempt to control arousal
while inhibiting responses, especially when WMLs are higher.

H36

THEY ALWAYS TOLD YOU ‘DON’T SAY F*CK’: SOCIAL CONTROL VERSUS
SELF CONTROL Marcel Brass1, Els Severens1, Simone Kuehn1, Rob

Hartsuiker1; 1Ghent University — In our daily life we sometimes have to
prevent ourselves from saying or doing things that are socially or otherwise not acceptable. Recently, we argued that a specific part of the
fronto-median wall is crucially involved in the intentional decision to
stop such impulsive behaviour. We dissociated this area from fronto-lateral brain regions that are involved in environmentally-guided stopping
as required in stop signal tasks. The aim of the present study was to test
whether the inhibition of automatically primed taboo words would be
guided by an external stopping mechanism in which the social context
acts like a stop signal or by an intentional decision not to say the taboo
word. External stopping should lead to activation in the fronto-lateral
cortex (right inferior frontal gyrus, IFG) while intentional stopping
should lead to fronto-median brain activation (dorsal anterior frontomedian cortex, dFMC). Participants were led to produce a spoonerism
(exchange of phonemes in a word pair) that could either result in a taboo
or a non-taboo phrase. When comparing the situation where a taboo
word was implied with the situation where a non-taboo word was
implied we found activation in the right IFG. This finding clearly supports the idea that the inhibition of taboo words involves brain mechanisms that are similar to those involved in externally-guided stopping.
The social context seems to act like an external signal that prevents us
from doing socially undesirable things. One could speculate how this
finding is related to the internalization of external rules.
H37

ANXIETY AND MAOA INTERACTIONS FOR COGNITIVE CONTROL: AN ERP
STUDY Aminda O'Hare1, Omri Gillath1, Joseph Dien2, Melanie Canterberry1,

Dean Stetler1; 1University of Kansas, 2Center for the Advanced Study of
Language — The ability to efficiently resolve conflict by inhibiting extraneous information is a crucial aspect of executive functioning. Individual

238

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Monitoring & Inhibitory Control
differences in cognitive control and sensitivity to the environment can
influence one’s conflict resolution ability. The current study uses trait
anxiety levels and a genetic marker for mono-amine oxidase A (MAOA),
which codes for products involved in the metabolism and function of
serotonin, as measures of cognitive control and sensitivity. High-density
event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded while participants completed an emotional version of the Flanker task. The N2 ERP component
was focused on, because it is thought to be an index of inhibitory and
impulse control (Stieben, et al., 2007). Earlier N2 latencies were found for
individuals high in anxiety with the high-expression MAOA allele variation for Flanker trials preceded by neutral primes, and earlier N2 latencies were found for individuals high in anxiety with the low-expression
MAOA allele variation for Flanker trials preceded by socially negative
primes. These different patterns of cognitive control for high anxiety
individuals in different emotional contexts fit a dual-model of anxiety
(Heller, et al., 1997).

H38

A DEVELOPMENTAL FMRI STUDY OF RESPONSE INHIBITION IN
PEDIATRIC BIPOLAR DISORDER AND ATTENTION DEFICIT
HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER Alessandra Passarotti1,2, John Sweeney1,
Pavuluri1,2; 1Center

for Cognitive Medicine, University of Illinois at
Mani
Chicago, 2Institute for Juvenile Research, University of Illinois at Chicago —
Pediatric bipolar disorder (PBD) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) share high comorbidity rates and present overlaps in
diagnosis and symptoms that may hinder intervention. Therefore it is
important to better differentiate the underlying pathophysiologies at a
neural and behavioral level. Poor behavioral inhibition, impulsivity and
inattention are prominent executive function deficits in PBD and ADHD.
We examined the neural substrate of response inhibition in PBD and
ADHD relative to each other and to healthy controls (HC). Fifteen unmedicated adolescents with PBD (Type I, manic/mixed), 11 un-medicated adolescents with ADHD, and 15 HC (mean age = 13.5 years; S.D. =
3.5) were scanned during a Response Inhibition Task examining the ability to inhibit a motor response to a target when a stop cue appeared
shortly after. The PBD and ADHD groups did not differ on behavioral
performance, but were less accurate than the HC group. fMRI findings
from a whole-brain analysis in AFNI showed that for trials requiring
response inhibition, the ADHD group, relative to the PBD and HC
groups, demonstrated reduced activation in both ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and increased bilateral caudate activation compared to HC. The PBD group, relative to HC, showed
decreased activation in left VLPFC, at the junction of inferior and middle
frontal gyri, and in right anterior cingulate cortex. The present findings
revealed prefrontal dysfunction in both the ADHD and PBD groups relative to HC, although it was more extensive and accompanied by sub-cortical over activity in the ADHD group.

H39

THE PREFRONTAL MECHANISM UNDERLYING INHIBITORY CONTROL:
MONITORING OR STOPPING? Christopher Chatham1, Tim Curran1, Marie
Banich1, Albert Kim1, Yuko Munakata1; 1University of Colorado, Boulder —

Inhibitory control is widely thought to rely on the functioning of the prefrontal cortex and of the right inferior frontal gyrus (rIFG) in particular.
Many theories emphasize the role of these regions in stopping per se, but
inhibitory control also requires monitoring for task-relevant stimuli. This
raises the possibility that the rIFG does not actually implement a stopping process, and may therefore not be specific to inhibitory control. To
test this possibility, we used fMRI and EEG to compare the stop signal
task to an oddball task using nearly identical stimuli. Both tasks required
monitoring but only the former required stopping. Our hybrid fMRI
design reveals that the transient prefrontal recruitment observed in the
stop task is completely overlapping with that observed in the oddball
task (including in the rIFG), suggesting that the prefrontal mechanism
involved in inhibitory control may reflect the monitoring demands common to both tasks. Likewise, analyses of sustained task-related activity

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session H
demonstrate complete overlap between the tasks in the rIFG, a result
that is consistent with a tonically-active monitoring process in the rIFG.
Finally, our ERP results show that the fine-grained temporal profiles of
prefrontal activity are highly correlated across tasks, indicating that the
same temporal dynamics of prefrontal activity underlie these tasks
despite their different demands on stopping processes, but consistent
with their common demands on monitoring processes. We conclude that
the prefrontal mechanisms involved in inhibitory control may subserve a
monitoring role, and thus be more domain general than previously
thought.

H40

IMPAIRED ERROR AWARENESS IN ABSTINENT DRUG ABUSERS CAN BE
RESCUED BY THE USE OF EMOTIONALLY VALENCED STIMULI Kristen

Morie1,2, Ryan Bell1,2, Emma Jane Forde2, Pierfillipo DeSanctis1,2, Hugh
Garavan2,3, John J. Foxe1,2,3; 1Program in Cognitive Neuroscience, City
University of New York, 2The Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, Nathan S.
Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, 3Trinity College Institute of
Neuroscience, Dublin, Ireland — We examined differences in cognitive control between abstinent cocaine and heroin abusers (N=20) and healthy
age- and education-matched controls (N=20), using high-density eventrelated potentials. Our aim was to assess whether increasing emotional
salience of stimuli to be acted upon might ameliorate performance decrements typically seen in this population. The main dependent measures
were the Error Related Negativity (ERN) and Error Positivity (Pe). The
ERN occurs when there is a cognitive mismatch between predicted outcomes and the actual outcome. The Pe is a sensitive measure of subsequent error awareness. Participants responded with a button push to a
series of picture presentations, but were required to withhold their
response for occasional repeated stimuli. Using only neutral nonvalenced stimuli (from the IAPS stimulus set), abstinent abusers made
significantly more commission errors than controls. The ERN to these
errors did not differ between groups but in stark contrast, the Pe was
almost completely absent in drug abusers. We then repeated the experiment, this time using repetitions of stimuli drawn from a set of emotionally-valenced stimuli from the IAPS set. Using these considerably more
salient pictures, the Pe difference between groups was fully corrected.
Combined, the results suggest that cocaine and heroin abuse may be
more closely related to impaired awareness of errors rather than a weak
cognitive mismatch signal. Increasing the salience of stimuli may help
correct this behavior.

H41

DEVELOPMENT OF MEDIAL FRONTAL ACTIVATION DURING
PERFORMANCE-MONITORING: A FMRI STUDY OF SINGLE SUBJECT
ACTIVATIONS Suzanne Perkins1, Emily Stern1, Welsh Robert1, Taylor

Stephan1, Fitzgerald Kate1; 1University of Michigan — The medial frontal cor-

tex (MFC) is often divided into functional zones, with more cognitive
processes in the posterior region and social-emotional processes more
common in the anterior extent. Differential engagement of these functional zones during performance monitoring may occur during development. The Multi-Source Interference Task (MSIT) was used to test for
individual differences in these zones during error and interference.
Method – The sample consisted of 23 children ages 8-17 and 21 adults
ages 23-51. An event-related fMRI version of the MSIT was used to
examine to distinguish error (minus correct) and interference (high
minus low) processing. Individual peaks from a large area of comprising
posterior and anterior zones of medial prefrontal cortex (coordinate
bounds: x = -18 to +18, y = 1 to 71, z = -18 to 72) were recorded. A
topograhic analysis of the distribution of activation peaks was performed (Stern et al, 2009). Results - Error Activations in both Youth and
Adults spanned the both the posterior and the anterior zones of the MFC
During interference, youth activate more anterior regions and adults
activated more posterior regions of the MFC, ? (1, n = 164) = 28.471, p =
.000, although the standard, voxel-wise group conference failed to show
group differences. Conclusion – Topographic analysis of individual acti-

239

Poster Session H

Executive Processes: Monitoring & Inhibitory Control

vation maps can show group differences where voxel-wise group averages do not. Here, the analysis showed that developmental differences in
the location of MFC activation may exist during interference, possibly
because cognitive monitoring regions have not matured in youth.

H44

H42

Robert Hester4; 1Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands, 2Unversity of Oxford, United Kingdom, 3University
of Amsterdam, the Netherlands, 4The University of Melbourne, Australia — A

ERROR-RELATED BRAIN ACTIVITY IN UNAFFECTED SIBLINGS OF
CHILDREN WITH OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER Melisa

Carrasco1, Christina LaRosa2, Christina Hong3, William Gehring4, Gregory
Hanna4; 1University of Michigan Neuroscience Graduate Program, 2Wayne
State University School of Medicine, 3University of Michigan College of
Literature, Science, and the Arts, 4University of Michigan — Abnormalities in
the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) have been reported in studies of
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). The error-related negativity
(ERN/Ne) is an ACC-generated component of the event-related potential, and is also an established neurobiological index of performance
monitoring. The ERN has been found to be increased in both adults and
children with OCD. The purpose of this study was to assess the ERN and
the error positivity (Pe) and their behavioral correlates in OCD probands
and their unaffected siblings performing an Eriksen flanker task. The
dataset will consist of 25 probands with a lifetime diagnosis of OCD, 25
unaffected siblings of the OCD probands, and 25 healthy controls ages 8
- 17. OCD proband diagnosis has been established using two semi-structured diagnostic interviews. In addition, all subjects have been assessed
with parent-report and youth self-report questionnaires. Preliminary
analyses of 18 OCD probands, 12 siblings, and 24 controls showed
enhanced ERN and Pe amplitudes in OCD. ERN amplitude had significant correlations with age and obsessive-compulsive (OC) symptom ratings in all subjects and with OC symptom onset age in the OCD subjects.
Pe amplitude had significant correlations with OC and other internalizing symptom ratings in all subjects. Results provide further support for a
relationship between OC symptoms and exaggerated medial-frontal
error processing.

H43

ERROR-PROCESSING AND TASK-RELATED FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Karla E. Becerril1, Grega Repovs1,2, Deanna M.
Barch1; 1Washington University in St. Louis, 2University of Ljubljana — Indi-

viduals with schizophrenia demonstrate reduced anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) responses to error-commission. However, whether other
regions known to demonstrate robust error-related activity in healthy
controls also show abnormal activity in schizophrenia is less clear. In this
study 37 Individuals with schizophrenia and 32 matched healthy controls performed a non-verbal 2-back working memory task while being
scanned. We selected regions previously reported to demonstrate reliable error-related activation as a priori ROIs. fMRI data was first analyzed using a General Linear Model (GLM) estimating brain activity for
correct and incorrect trials making no assumptions about the response
shape. ANOVAs using accuracy (correct, incorrect) and timepoint within
trial (frames 1-7) as a within-subject factor and group as between-subject
factor revealed small regions in the ACC, bilateral insula, left anterior
prefrontal cortex and left cerebellum showed a significant effect of accuracy that interacted with time, but not with group. However, larger and
additional regions in all ROIs demonstrated abnormal error-related
activity in the schizophrenia group. In addition, we examined whether
our ROIs integrated into functional networks during task performance in
the same way in healthy controls and individuals with schizophrenia.
We found evidence of reduced connectivity in a prefrontal-thalamo-cerebellar loop in the schizophrenia compared to the control group. Our
results suggest abnormalities in brain responses to errors among individuals with schizophrenia extend beyond the dorsal ACC to almost all
of the regions involved in error-related processing in healthy individuals. Further, alterations in fronto-thalamo-cerebellar connectivity may
contribute to abnormalities in responses to errors in schizophrenia.

LEARNING FROM ERRORS: FEEDBACK-RELATED NEGATIVITY AND P300
IN PROCESSING NEGATIVE FEEDBACK AND ENCODING CORRECT
INFORMATION Ellen de Bruijn1, Rogier Mars2, Richard Ridderinkhof3,

recent fMRI study has demonstrated the involvement of posterior
medial frontal cortex (pMFC) in learning from errors in an associative
learning task (Hester et al., 2007). The paradigm used in that study presented feedback information along with the correct answer and did thus
not allow for a dissociation between negative feedback processing and
encoding of the correct information. The aim of the current study was to
disentangle these processes by making use of event-related potentials
(ERPs). The feedback-related negativity (FRN) is an ERP component elicited by negative feedback originating from pMFC. Eighteen subjects performed an associative learning task in which participants had to recall
the spatial locations of 2-digit targets and were provided with immediate
feedback regarding accuracy. After a short delay the correct answer was
also provided. This short delay allowed us to disentangle the ERP components associated with negative feedback processing (FRN) and encoding the correct information (P300). Incorrect trials that were responded
to correctly upon the next presentation were compared to errors that
were responded to incorrectly again. The results showed that FRN
amplitude was increased for negative feedback following incorrect trials
that were subsequently corrected compared to trials that remained incorrect. Interestingly, the P300 in response to the presentation of the correct
answer did not differ between these two conditions. The present study
provides further support for the role of pMFC in learning from errors
and demonstrates that processing of negative feedback is directly related
to later encoding processes.

H45

EXAMINING THE NEURAL TIME COURSE OF CONFLICT ADAPTATION
DURING RULE-SWITCHING Matthew Waxer1, J. Bruce Morton1; 1University
of Western Ontario — A central aspect of cognitive control is the ability to
flexibly adjust one’s performance in light of changing contextual circumstances. For example, the behavioral cost of conflict is reduced following
high- relative to low-conflict trials. This “conflict adaptation” effect is
thought to be subserved by anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) activity on
high conflict trials which signals the need for increased cognitive control.
The conflict adaptation effect has been documented across a number of
diverse tasks; however it is unclear whether conflict-driven control
mechanisms operate in a domain-general or domain-specific manner. To
investigate this question high-density event-related potentials (ERPs)
were collected while adult (n = 20) participants performed a deductive
rule-switching task in which task-switching was orthogonally crossed
with conflict processing. Participants were slower on incongruent trials
that were preceded by congruent trials (cI trials) than incongruent trials
that were preceded by incongruent trials (iI trials). There was no interaction between switching and the conflict adaptation effect. Analysis of
ERP’s time-locked to stimulus presentation revealed a frontocentral N2
whose amplitude was modulated by preceding trial type. More specifically, the amplitude of the N2 was greater on cI trials than on iI trials.
Distributed cortical source modeling of these data revealed increased
current density activations in the vicinity of the medial prefrontal cortex
and rostral anterior cingulate for cI trials relative to iI trials. Together,
these data suggest that conflict-driven control mechanisms operate in a
domain-general manner.
H46

HOW NORMAL WEIGHT, OVERWEIGHT, AND OBESE BRAINS WORK
DIFFERENTLY: DIFFERENTIAL NEURAL RESPONSES TO FOOD STIMULI
AND INHIBITION TASKS Kirk I. Erickson1, Destiny L. Miller1, Andrea M.

Weinstein1, John M. Jakicic1; 1University of Pittsburgh — Unhealthy

eating
habits can affect brain morphology and function. Prior neuroimaging

240

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Monitoring & Inhibitory Control
studies show that obese individuals respond differently to both visual
and olfactory food cues than individuals within normal weight limits
(Babiloni et al., 2009). In addition, previous research suggests that the
compulsion to overeat in overweight and obese individuals may stem
from increased brain signals in the hypothalamus and decreased inhibition during top-down modulation by prefrontal regions. Our pilot data
explores the brain’s role in regulating mechanisms related to healthy and
unhealthy eating habits, as well as the effect of body mass index (BMI)
on inhibitory processing. We hypothesize that obese individuals may
exhibit a deficit in inhibitory control regulated by the prefrontal cortex
(PFC). We used magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to assess brain function in response to appetitive (i.e. images of food) and non-appetitive
(i.e. images of tools) stimuli as a function of BMI. In normal (n = 9), overweight (n = 5), and obese (n = 8) individuals, we provide preliminary
data to suggest that BMI modulates neural activity in response to viewing appetitive images. Specifically we found that the obese group
showed increased activity in the hypothalamus and decreased activity in
the PFC for appetitive stimuli when compared to individuals with a normal BMI. Using a classic test of inhibitory function, the Stroop Task, we
found that individuals in the normal BMI range showed increased PFC
and parietal activity during inhibition, while overweight and obese individuals failed to show the same increased activation.

H47

BRAIN ELECTRICAL RESPONSES TO MONETARY GAINS AND LOSSES ARE
DIFFERENTIALLY RELATED TO WHITE MATTER MICROSTRUCTURE

Josep Marco-Pallarés1,2, Estela Cámara1,3, Thomas F. Münte4, Antoni
Rodríguez-Fornells1,2,5; 1University of Barcelona, 2Institut d'Investigació
Biomèdica de Bellvitge, 3University College London, 4Otto von Guericke
University, 5Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats — Human
behavior is guided by the desire to maximize rewards and to minimize
negative events. The temporal dynamics of the brain responses to
rewards and negative events have been studied using electrophysiological measures. A particularly robust finding has been the Feedback
Related Negativity (FRN), an event-related brain potential peaking
approximately 250-300 ms after a participant is informed about a negative outcome of an action. Besides, after a positive outcome an increase
of power in the Beta/Gamma band (20-30 Hz; 250 to 400 ms) has been
described. In the present investigation we address whether these two
electrophysiological indices reflect different processing modes of a common system by correlating them with a measure of the microstructure of
brain white matter, fractional anisotropy (FA), derived from diffusion
tensor imaging (DTI) (N = 47 healthy, university students). Two distinct
patterns of correlations were encountered for the loss-related FRN and
gain-related Gamma increase. Significant positive correlations were
found between FA and the FRN-amplitude in areas located in the ventral
part of the pons and the midbrain, projecting to areas near the thalamus.
In contrast a significant correlation was found between FA and gainrelated Gamma increase at the right anterior cingulum bundle. The
present findings suggest that individual differences in the amplitude of
evoked and induced brain electrical responses are closely related to individual differences in the microstructure of white matter tracts connecting areas participating in a certain cognitive task. In addition they
suggest that rewards and losses (punishments) are processed by partially distinct brain networks.

H48

DISTINCT NEURAL CORRELATES FOR MONOLINGUALS AND BILINGUALS
FOR EFFICIENT COGNITIVE CONTROL Gigi Luk1, John Anderson1,2, Ellen

Bialystok1,3, Fergus Craik1,2, Cheryl Grady1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute,
2
University of Toronto, 3York University — Recent research has shown that
bilinguals respond faster than monolinguals in tasks that involve cognitive control. The present study used fMRI to identify brain networks
whose activity correlated with responses in a flanker task. Nine monolinguals and nine bilinguals were told to respond to the direction of a target
chevron that had different flankers. The trials were baseline (no flanker),

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session H
neutral (diamond flankers), congruent (same direction flankers) and
incongruent (opposite direction flankers). fMRI data were analyzed
using a multivariate technique (partial least squares, PLS) that is similar
to a principal components analysis. Differences in response time (DRTs)
for congruent and incongruent trials relative to baseline (control for
motor response) and neutral trials (control for motor response and visual
search) were the behavioral measures. PLS identified two patterns of
activity correlated with DRTs, the first of which revealed correlations
between activity and DRTs for congruent trials that applied equally to
monolinguals and bilinguals. The second pattern showed regions where
increased activity was correlated with smaller DRTs for congruent and
incongruent trials; these regions were different in the two groups. Activity in right middle frontal gyrus, right occipital areas, bilateral superior
parietal areas, left cingulate gyrus and right SMA correlated with lower
DRTs in monolinguals. For bilinguals, activity in bilateral inferior frontal
gyri, left middle frontal gyrus, left lingual gyrus, and left inferior temporal gyrus correlated with lower DRTs. In summary, bilinguals and
monolinguals showed brain-behavior correlations involving different
brain regions, suggesting unique pathways for achieving efficient cognitive control.

H49

ERROR AWARENESS: PUPIL DILATION PREDICTS ANTAGONISTIC BRAIN
NETWORK DYNAMICS Helga A. Harsay1, Mike X. Cohen1,3, Marcus Spaan1,

Wouter Weeda1, Sander Nieuwenhuis2, K. Richard Ridderinkhof1; 1Amsterdam
Center for the Study of Adaptive Control in Brain and Behavior, University of
Amsterdam, 2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, Leiden University,
3
University of Arizona, Tucson — Although it is widely known that the anterior insula cortex plays a crucial role in error awareness, its multifaceted
autonomic and brain network functions have prevented a clear distinction of its precise contributions to error awareness. Here, we used pupillometry and fMRI to clarify how error awareness arises from local- and
network activity of anterior insula cortex and how both are modulated
by preparatory autonomic arousal. To this end we studied errors in an
antisaccade task that are not recognized as such by the participants, who
evaluate their performance after each trial. Results show that individual
differences in preparatory pupil diameter before an aware error predicted not only increased activation in the salience network (anterior
insula cortex, rostral cingulate zone and primary somatosensory cortex)
and deactivation in the default mode network, but also predicted
increased functional connectivity among anterior insula cortex and other
nodes within the salience network with a concurrent decrease of functional connectivity of anterior insula cortex with nodes of the default
mode network. These patterns appear to reflect an autonomic foreshadow of neural readiness for salience processing and provide a mechanistic perspective on the neural networks responsible for error
awareness.

H50

FNIRS AND FMRI REVEAL THE INVOLVEMENT OF FRONTAL AS WELL AS
TEMPORAL REGIONS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF AUTOMATICITY

Shaaista Bhasin1, Gelareh Jowkar-Baniani1, Jonathan Fugelsang2, Kevin N.
Dunbar1; 1University of Toronto, 2University of Waterloo — Despite hundreds
of Behavioral, fMRI and ERP experiments, as well as computational
models of the nature of automatic and controlled processes in the Stroop
task, there remains considerable controversy as to the sources of interference and its underlying neural mechanisms. Using either a manual or
vocal response we used fMRI and fNIRS to investigate the development
of automaticity in a color/shape analog of the Stroop task. Participants
received training over 0, 9, or 16 days of practice at associating a particular shape with a color. On each day participants received approximately
950 training trials. In fNIRS, we found evidence of increased Frontopolar
and Supplementary Motor activation with practice. However, an interesting finding was the lack of change in activation in the DLPFC in
fNIRS (vocal task), whereas significant changes in this region were
observed in fMRI (manual task). Surprisingly, in fNIRS, we found

241

Poster Session H
opposing activation patterns for the left Temporapolar cortex with practice, where activation increased in shape naming and decreased in ink
naming. Also, activation in left Broca’s area decreased under both conditions, but more so for shape naming. Overall, unlike the fMRI findings,
the fNIRS results show involvement of Temporal regions suggesting
alternative neural mechanisms of activation in the Stroop task.

H51

THE AMPLITUDE OF THE ERROR-RELATED NEGATIVITY DEPENDS ON THE
SPECIFIC COMBINATION OF EFFECTORS USED TO ELICIT IT: TOWARD A
NEW PERSPECTIVE ON THE FUNCTIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE ERN

Eldad Hochman1, Joseph Orr1, William Gehring1; 1University of Michigan —
Here we provide evidence that the error-related negativity (ERN) is sensitive to the specific combination of response features required to produce the error response and those required to produce the correct
(correction) response. Right-handed participants performed versions of
two-choice flanker task in which differing finger-pair combinations were
assigned to the two response keys. Condition 1: Participants performed
blocks of left vs. right index, left index vs. left middle and right index vs.
right middle. Condition 2: Participants performed blocks of right index
vs. right middle and blocks where the right index either remained in
place or moved between two keys. The ERN was larger for hand errors
(and bigger for right vs. left hand) than for finger errors (and bigger for
index vs. middle), which showed a larger ERN than movement errors.
Thus, the ERN varied with the amount of response activation common
to the error and correct(ion) response. Only early Pe, however, was sensitive to whether the index finger remained in place to tap a key vs.
moved to a different key. Findings were not due to response repetition.
In their current form, mismatch theories of the ERN do not predict asymmetries in which, when one member of a pair produces the error, the
ERN is larger then when it produces the correct(ion) response. Although
the theories could be amended, we suggest an alternative: that the ERN
represents a process that inhibits or replaces those movement features
that are not shared with (i.e., that interfere with) the opposing response.

H52

STROOP AND STOP-SIGNAL MEASURES OF INHIBITION: WHAT IS BEING
MEASURED? AN FMRI INVESTIGATION WITH ADULTS EXHIBITING HIGH
AND LOW BELIEF-BIAS IN DEDUCTIVE REASONING Kiat Hui Khng1, Kerry

Lee1, Steven Graham2; 1National Institute of Education, Nanyang
Technological University, 2National University of Singapore — There has been
considerable debate regarding what is actually captured in behavioral
measures of cognitive tasks such as the widely used Stroop and stop-signal paradigms. Behavioral evidence has provided conflicting evidence
regarding whether similar or distinct processes underlie inhibition in the
two tasks. The present study examined whether inhibition in the Stroop
and stop-signal tasks is achieved by common neural mechanisms or
overlapping networks activated in different ways. Functional relationship between inhibition in the two tasks and behavioral performance
measures will also be examined. Behavioral and functional data were
collected from 26 adults performing the Stroop and stop-signal tasks.
Participants were pre-grouped into High- and Low-belief-bias groups
based on their susceptibility to interference from prior knowledge in a
syllogistic reasoning task. A 2 (Group: High- vs. Low-belief-bias) × 2
(Task: Stroop vs. Stop-signal) × 2 (Trial-type: Inhibitory vs. Non-inhibitory) mixed rapid event design was used. Functional data were analyzed
using General Linear Model (GLM) random effects analysis (RFX). Data
analysis was in progress at the point of abstract submission. Preliminary
results indicate both common and unique regions related to inhibition in
the Stroop and stop-signal tasks, as well as areas differentially activated
by High- and Low-belief-bias groups. Planned correlation analyses
between behavioral measures and functional activation in identified
regions will provide some insight on the debate regarding what conventional behavioral measures of tasks like the Stroop and stop-signal are
capturing.

242

Executive Processes: Monitoring & Inhibitory Control
H53

COMT GENOTYPE MODULATES THE RELATION OF ANTERIOR CINGULATE
ACTIVATION TO TRAIT IMPULSITVITY AND AGGRESSION Zarrar
Shehzad1, Yoona Kang1, Colin DeYoung2, Elena Grigorenko1, Jeremy Gray1;
Yale University, 2University of Minnesota — Converging evidence suggests a

1

modulatory function of dopamine-related genetic variation on cognitive
control. The catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene has been found
to influence prefrontal dopamine levels and cognitive functioning (Egan
et al., 2001). Deficits in cognitive control are often observed in people
with high levels of impulsivity and aggression, or “externalizing behavior” (EB; Andersson & Sommerfelt 2001), and this relation appears to
depend on dopamine-related function (DeYoung et al. 2006). In the
present study, we tested whether the effect of COMT on brain activity
depends on EB – i.e., a modulatory effect of variations in COMT Val158
Met genotype on the relation between EB and cognitive control. In 98
male participants, we examined neural activity during a Stroop-like task
(MSIT; Bush & Shin 2006) as a function of COMT and EB. Using fMRI,
we measured brain activation while they performed trials imposing high
or low demands on cognitive control (incongruent or congruent trials,
respectively). As expected, incongruent trials activated regions of the
cingulo-frontal-parietal cognitive/attention network more strongly than
congruent trials. Within ACC, such activation depended conjointly on
EB and COMT: stronger activation in ACC was found with higher levels
of EB, but only for subjects with the Val allele. In contrast, there was no
significant relation between EB and ACC activity for the other two genotypes. This suggests that absence of Met allele lowers efficiency in inhibitory control thus requiring greater recruitment of ACC. We plan to
further explore this interaction using other dopamine-related genes, and
a working memory task.

H54

TIME COURSE ANALYSIS OF STROOP INTERFERENCE: AN ERP STUDY

Emily Coderre1, Kathy Conklin1, Walter van Heuven1; 1University of
Nottingham — The time course of the Stroop interference effect was investigated by varying the stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) of colour and
word stimuli while recording concurrent high-density event-related
potentials (ERPs). Three SOAs were used: -400, in which the word
appeared 400ms before the colour; +400, in which the word appeared
400ms after the colour; and zero, in which both appeared simultaneously. Behaviourally, the greatest amount of Stroop inhibition
occurred at zero, with a lesser, but still significant, amount at -400ms,
and no significant inhibition at +400ms. The zero SOA showed an
increased negativity in the incongruent condition from 350-500ms over
left centro-parietal electrodes. This incongruent negativity component
may reflect conflict resolution in the incongruent condition. Comparisons of the difference waves in the zero and -400 SOAs indicate a significantly earlier and larger incongruent negativity peak in -400 compared
to zero SOA. A later parietal positivity in the incongruent condition (late
positive component; LPC) from 600-900ms was also found in the zero
SOA; this may reflect semantic processing of words following response
conflict. In the -400 SOA, this component is shifted forward, beginning
400ms after colour onset. Interestingly, an apparent discrepancy exists
between ERP and behavioural data: the -400 SOA shows an earlier and
stronger negative peak in the difference waves, but less behavioural
inhibition, compared to zero SOA. This suggests that pre-exposure to an
irrelevant word in the -400 SOA leads to earlier and more effective conflict resolution, as reflected by the earlier negative peak, which leads to
less behavioural interference.

H55

EXECUTIVE FUNCTION DEFICITS IN DEPRESSION: GENERAL OR TASKSPECIFIC? Wei-Ming Huang1, Li Jingling1, Kuan-Pin Su1,2; 1Graduate
Institute of Neural and Cognitive Sciences, China Medical University, Taichung,
Taiwan, 2China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan — Patients with
depression have been found to have impaired functions of controlling
and inhibition in performing executive function tasks, as revealed in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Monitoring & Inhibitory Control
Stroop tasks. However, it is not clear whether this deficit could apply to
other tasks or are task-dependent. In this study, other tasks that also
require cognitive control or inhibition were tested. If deficits in depression are general, patients should perform worse in all tasks. Twenty-one
patients fulfilling DSM-IV criteria for depression and forty healthy control participants were enrolled in this study for three tasks, the set
switching, the Stroop, and the response inhibition tasks. In set switching
task, participants performed two tasks alternatively. Three indices, the
mixing cost, the switching cost, and the congruency effect, were estimated. In Stroop task, participants quickly named the ink color of words.
Inhibition (incongruent-neutral) and facilitation (congruent-neutral)
effects were estimated. In response inhibition task, participants quickly
clicked mouse to the target except for the trials with a beep sound. Stop
signal response time was estimated by the sound interval for 75% correct
inhibition. The results of all indices were analyzed by a MANCOVA
with three covariates (age, sex, and education level). Univariate test
showed a significant group effect for inhibition effect in Stroop task, and
age effect for mixing cost in set switching task and the facilitation effect
in Stroop task. In conclusion, our data did not support for the idea that
the deficit in depression is general; rather, they performed worse only in
the Stroop task.

H56

DISSOCIATING INHIBITORY CONTROL: RIGHT INFERIOR FRONTAL GYRUS
IS NECESSARY FOR INTERFERENCE SUPPRESSION IN THE ERIKSEN
FLANKER BUT NOT THE STROOP TASK Maiya Geddes1, Ami Tsuchida1,

Mandana Modirrousta2, Weidong Cai3, Adam Aron3, Lesley Fellows1; 1McGill
University, Montreal, 2University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 3University of
California, San Diego — We evaluated the generality of the role played by
right inferior frontal gyrus (RIFG) in inhibitory control. Converging evidence suggests that motor response inhibition, such as that required in
the stop-signal task, relies on a ‘stopping network’ that includes RIFG.
Here we asked whether the putative role for RIFG in response inhibition
extends to inhibition of inappropriate responses in two widely used
tasks requiring interference suppression. Four patients with focal RIFG
damage and seven demographically-matched healthy subjects performed the Eriksen flanker and Stroop tasks. The degree of slowing on
incongruent versus congruent trials (i.e. Stroop and flanker effects) were
the measures of interest. The flanker effect was inflated in RIFG patients
(p = 0.03), while the Stroop effect was not (p = 0.97). Intact RIFG is necessary for optimal selection between competing response options in the
flanker task, arguing for a role for this region in inhibitory control that
goes beyond simple ‘stopping’. However, damage to the RIFG does not
affect interference suppression in the Stroop task. While the Stroop and
flanker tasks differ in several ways, perhaps the most obvious is in their
verbal and spatial content, respectively. These findings indicate that the
Stroop and flanker tasks probe different aspects of inhibitory control,
with intact RIFG critical only for the latter. Prefrontally-mediated interference suppression may be domain-specific, at least across verbal and
non-verbal domains.

H57

FEEDBACK PROCESSING DURING RISKY DECISION-MAKING IN
BORDERLINE PERSONALITY DISORDER Beate Schuermann1, Norbert

Kathmann1, Sonia Kessler-Scheil1, Babette Renneberg2, Christian Stiglmayr2,
Tanja Endrass1; 1Humboldt-University, Berlin, 2Free University, Berlin — Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD) is characterized by altered risk-taking and feedback processing that involve fronto-medial brain functions.
Neuroimaging studies in BPD support the notion that brain regions
involved in reinforcement processing are impaired. Consequently, it is
suggested that BPD patients have deficits in the integration of reinforcement signals when choosing between risky options. Nevertheless, the
number of studies investigating decision-making impairments is still
small and there has been little evidence of altered reinforcement processing in BPD. Thus, the present study aimed to investigate whether decision-making deficits in BPD are due to deficits in feedback processing. A

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session H
probabilistic two-choice gambling task was conducted to address decision-making in BPD and matched healthy controls. Participants had to
choose repeatedly between two options which differed in expected risk
(high vs. low) while expected values were identical. Simultaneously,
event-related brain potentials (ERPs) were recorded to examine the feedback-related negativity (FRN) and the P300. The FRN is a neural correlate of cognitive feedback processing, while the P300 represents a later
top-down controlled process of affective feedback evaluation. Behavioral
results suggest that BPD patients showed more risky choices than did
the healthy controls. ERP data reveal that FRN amplitudes in BPD were
diminished compared to healthy controls, which might reflect reduced
performance monitoring and ACC dysfunctions in BPD. Further, BPD
patients had increased P300 amplitudes following negative feedback,
indicating that negative events were associated with higher motivational
significance in BPD. In sum, results suggest deficits in decision-making
in BPD which might be caused by altered feedback processing.

H58

HEMODYNAMIC CORRELATES OF FEEDBACK-BASED LEARNING IN
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER Christian
Kaufmann1,
Tanja

Endrass1, Rosa Gruetzmann1, Katja Zschenderlein1, Anja Riesel1, Jan-Carl
Beucke2, Norbert Kathmann1; 1Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Clinical
Psychology, 2Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School —
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is associated with overactive performance monitoring and dysfunctional cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical
paths on the neural level. Behaviourally, the disease is characterized by
higher sensitivity to avoid punishment and, persumably, better implicit
avoidance learning. The aim of the present study was to elucidate neural
correlates of feedback-based learning in OCD: So far, 14 patients with
OCD and just as many healthy controls performed a probabilistic selection task while BOLD activity was measured. The two alternative forced
choice learning task allowed us to determine how decision making is
influenced by past positive and negative learning experience. Although
both groups achieved comparable learning performance the patient
group showed significantly more negative learning behavior compared
to the control group, i. e. patients with OCD were more susceptible to
negative feedback. Feedback-locked analysis of hemodynamic signals
revealed that the task activated mainly ventral as well as dorsal striatal
regions, medial orbitofrontal, and cingulate regions. Negative feedback
activated the globus pallidus more in patients than controls while there
was no effect for positive feedback between groups. These data indicate
that patients with OCD show altered processing of negative feedback
linked to a key structure of the basal ganglia which usually relays information from the putamen and the caudate nuceleus to the thalamus.
Therefore the patient's superior implicit avoidance learning might be
associated with overactive basal ganglia activity.

H59

HOW WRONG WAS I?: THE IMPACT OF CORRECTIVE INFORMATION ON
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF ERROR PROCESSING

Jeffrey Cockburn1, Clay Holroyd2, Michael Frank1; 1Brown University,
2University of Victoria — The error-related negativity (ERN) is a component
of the event-related brain potential that occurs following negative feedback (fERN) and erroneous responses (rERN). Recent theories have associated the ERN with a prediction error signaled by the midbrain
dopamine system. Within this framework, the fERN is an index of the
discrepancy between the predicted and actual outcome of an action.
However, it is not clear how targets of the prediction error use this signal
to improve future performance, and in turn, how target system activity
gives rise to the fERN. To investigate this question, we examined the
fERN with respect to the amount of corrective information encoded in
the feedback stimulus. Participants performed a time estimation task in
which they estimated the duration of one second. Each participant experienced four different types of feedback stimuli, each with a varying
degree of corrective information. Correct feedback was identical in all
conditions, while incorrect feedback consisted of: 1) A binary condition

243

Poster Session H

Thinking: Reasoning

indicating incorrect only, 2) a direction condition indicating too fast or
too slow, 3) a magnitude condition indicating error size, and 4) a combined condition in which both error magnitude and direction were provided. Our results show that the fERN is sensitive to the amount of
corrective information supplied in response to an action, decreasing in
size with increasing information. We provide a model-based explanation
of these results building upon previous models of the fERN.

Thinking: Reasoning

H62

H60

EMOTIONAL CONTENT SHIFTS ACTIVATION TO VENTROMEDIAL
PREFRONTAL CORTEX DURING BELIEF BIAS SUPPRESSION IN LOGICAL
REASONING Melanie Stollstorff1, Stephanie E. Bean1, Lindsay M.

Anderson1, William N. Parrott1, Noah Schoenholtz1, Adam D. Evans1, Chandan
J. Vaidya1,2; 1Georgetown University, 2Children's National Medical Center —
The interplay between emotion and cognition has fueled much debate
amongst philosophers, psychologists, and cognitive neuroscienists. It is
possible that the brain may be able to provide insight into some of their
questions. Reasoning and decision-making research is beginning to yield
promising results. One well-documented bias in logical reasoning is the
belief-bias effect, which occurs when one’s beliefs about the world influence reasoning. Emotional content can intensify this effect. Neuroimaging studies have found that successful belief-bias suppression with nonemotional content recruits lateral prefrontal cortex (Goel&Dolan, 2003a).
It has also been found that logical reasoning with emotional content
recruits ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) (Goel&Dolan, 2003b). It
is unknown which brain region supports the suppression of belief-bias
with emotional content. The present study used fMRI to scan healthy
adults while completing a logical reasoning task (3-term relational transitive inference problems), which included congruent trials (beliefs in
accordance with conclusion validity) and incongruent trials (beliefs discordant with conclusion validity) with emotional or non-emotional content. Behaviorally, significant belief-bias was found (participants were
faster and more accurate for congruent than incongruent trials), and participants showed similar levels of belief-bias for emotional and non-emotional conditions. Neuroimaging results showed that bilateral vmPFC
was more active for emotional than non-emotional belief-bias suppression, whereas bilateral superior frontal (BA9) and anterior cingulate
gyrus was more active in the reverse comparison. Therefore, inclusion of
emotional content to a reasoning task shifted activation to ventromedial
prefrontal activation indicating a distinct neural substrate for bias suppression in “emotional” logical reasoning.

H61

TRAINING SOFTWARE INCREASES EARLY CHILDHOOD BRAIN
DEVELOPMENT AND INTELLIGENCE Sylvain Moreno1, Raluca Barac1,
Cepeda1,

Schellenberg2,

Chau3,

Bialystok1,4; 1York

Nicholas
Glenn
Tom
Ellen
University, 2University of Toronto Mississauga, 3Bloorview Research Institute,
4
Rotman Research Institute — This paper reports the results of a study of
software designed to improve cognitive skills through music/singing
training. Music expertise has been shown to improve several cognitive
skills such as general intelligence. This music advantage has mainly been
shown after long periods of training with professional musician population. These findings have been attributed to training requirements for
musicians that involve high levels of control and memorization. The
present study used a pre-test/post-test design with 60 children, 4-to 6years old, with no previous musical or visual art (control group) training, to determine 1) whether a short period of training can improve global skills such as intelligence and more specialized skills such as
grapheme-phoneme conversion and rhyming, and 2) whether a short
period of training can also induce modification in brain processing. Following the first testing session, children were pseudorandomly (controlling for age, IQ score, and maternal education) assigned to computerized
music or visual art training for 1 month and were tested again after train-

244

ing with the same tests. Here, we report the results of ERP recordings as
children performed a visual Go-Nogo task. Children were also tested on
reading skill (Woodcock) and intelligence (WIPPS). Children in the
music training, but not the visual art training, showed an increase of N2
ERP wave related to conflict detection and response inhibition and
enhanced reading abilities and verbal intelligence. These results show
that one month of musical training suffices to significantly speed up
development of these skills and modify brain processing in early childhood.

GAINS IN FLUID INTELLIGENCE AFTER TRAINING NON-VERBAL
REASONING IN 4-YEAR-OLD CHILDREN: A CONTROLLED, RANDOMIZED
STUDY Sissela Bergman Nutley1,2, Stina Söderqvist1,2, Sara Bryde1,2, Lisa

B. Thorell1,2, Hans Matsson1, Myriam Peyrard-Janvid1, Juha Kere1,3, Keith
Humphreys1, Torkel Klingberg1,2; 1Karolinska Institutet, 2Stockholm Brain
Institute, 3University of Helsinki — Fluid intelligence (Gf) predicts performance on a wide range of cognitive activities, and children with
impaired Gf often experience academic difficulties. Previous attempts to
improve Gf have been hampered by poor control conditions and single
outcome measures. It is thus still an open question whether Gf can be
improved by training. The main aims of this study were therefore to
investigate: (1) if Gf is improved through computerized training on nonverbal reasoning tasks, (2) if training working memory or non-verbal
reasoning would result in any transfer to measures of the non-trained
construct, Gf and working memory, respectively. This study included
101 4-year old children who performed computerized tasks 15 min per
day for 25 days, of either non-verbal reasoning, working memory, a combination of both, or a placebo version of the combined training. Compared to the placebo group, the non-verbal reasoning training group
improved significantly on two non-trained tests of problem solving.
Smaller gains on problem solving tests were seen in the combination
training group. These gains were also evident when Gf was analysed as
a latent variable of several reasoning tasks. The group training working
memory improved on measures of working memory, but not on problem solving tests. Molecular analyses of polymorphisms in 5 genes
involved in the dopamine neurotransmitter pathway, indicated that the
T allele of rs27072 in the gene coding for the dopamine transporter
(DAT1/ SLC6A3), positively influenced the effect of training. This study
shows that it is possible to improve Gf with training in young children.

H63

DEVELOPMENTAL TRAJECTORIES OF NUMERICAL AND NON-NUMERICAL
ORDINALITY PROCESSING IN THE BRAIN: AN FMRI STUDY Stephan

Vogel1, Liane Kaufmann2; 1Numerical Cognition Laboratory, University of
Western Ontario, Canada, 2University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria — A large

body of evidence has implicated the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) in number
processing. However, most studies have focused on quantity (i.e. discrete set size) rather then ordinality representaion (i.e. serial order).
Recent findings from studies with adults have revealed that the anterior
IPS is involved in processing both numerical and non-numerical ordered
stimuli such as numbers and letters. Relatively little, however, is known
how these processes change over developmental time. To further investigate the role of the anterior IPS and to identify its possible role in the
development of odinality processing, we asked eleven children and
eleven adults whether three horizontally presented stimuli are linearly
ordered. Stimuli consisted of either a) three one-digit numerals that varied in numerical magnitude or b) artificial symbols that differed in their
physical size. Participants task was to determine whether the three stimuli (numerals or artificial symbols) were arranged in linear order or not.
Stimuli were presented in a pseudo-randomised block-design within a
1.5.Tesla functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) scanner. The
analysis of functional data revealed significant main effects of group and
task within the IPS. Most importantly, the left supramarginal gyrus
(SMG) was significantly modulated by a group x task interaction.
Parameter estimation in children yielded a stronger SMG activation in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Thinking: Reasoning
response to the non-numerical condition. In adults both tasks showed a
similar activation extend. Taken together, the present data demonstrate
that areas in and around the left anterior IPS undergo an ontogenetic
specialization for the representation of numerical and non-numerical
order.

H64

TIMELINES AND NUMBER LINES: ARE HISTORIC YEARS PROCESSED
MORE LIKE NUMBERS OR EVENTS? Margaret M. Gullick1, Elise Temple1;
1Dartmouth College — While

numbers generally cue processing of quantity or order, they can also contain semantic information, as in the case of
historic events (e.g., “1492” calls forth associations of Columbus sailing
the ocean blue). Whether these numbers are processed as quantities or
events may depend on the context in which they occur. This study
employed a comparison paradigm using either dates and large nonsemantic numbers, or dates and historic events described in words. Participants were asked to choose the larger number (N=16 subjects), or the
later (N=16) or more recent (N=16) event, of two presented comparators,
creating separate Number and Event contexts. A Distance Effect was
found across stimuli and conditions, while a SNARC effect, indicating a
spatial understanding of order, was present only for date and number
stimuli. Dates were processed consistently across conditions, and were
generally similar to numbers, presenting normal Distance, Minimum,
and SNARC Effects. However, word-events, while much slower,
showed a normal Distance Effect, but no SNARC effect and a “Maximum
effect,” being faster for more recent events (thus larger numbers). No differences were found between the “later” and “more recent” event conditions. These results suggest that historic dates are automatically
processed as numbers, regardless of the context. This paradigm is being
extended to fMRI to investigate the relative activities of specific brain
areas important for processing number (e.g., intraparietal sulcus) and
semantics across stimulus types and between question contexts.

H65

A BIAS AGAINST DISCONFIRMATORY EVIDENCE (BADE) IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA IS ASSOCIATED WITH REDUCED ACTIVATION IN A
TASK-POSITIVE NETWORK INVOLVING THE DORSAL ANTERIOR
CINGULATE CORTEX (DACC) Katie Lavigne1,2, Jen Whitman1,2, Paul

Metzak1,2, Patrick Carolan3, Todd Woodward1,2; 1University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada, 2British Columbia Mental Health and
Addictions Research Institute, Vancouver, Canada, 3Simon Fraser University,
Vancouver, Canada — A bias against disconfirmatory evidence (BADE) has
been observed in schizophrenia, and may underlie the fixedness aspect
of delusions. In the current study we investigated neural regions
involved in the processing of disconfirmatory evidence using eventrelated functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Twenty healthy
controls and eight schizophrenia patients performed a perceptual interpretation task in which they rated the degree to which a morphed image
composed of two different animals appeared to be an image of one of the
two animals. Following a delay, participants rated a second image composed of the same animals morphed at a different ratio. In the disconfirmatory evidence condition, the second image switched to primarily
resembling the other animal (e.g. Image 1 - 70% seagull, 30% armadillo;
Image 2 - 10% seagull, 90% armadillo). Constrained principal component
analysis (CPCA) revealed two neural networks, one task-positive network involving primarily activation in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), and a task-negative network involving deactivation in the
ventral anterior cingulate cortex (vACC). Healthy subjects showed
greater activation in the dACC system relative to schizophrenia patients,
but no differences emerged for the vACC system. These preliminary
results suggest that the bias against disconfirmatory evidence (BADE)
prevalent in schizophrenia patients may result from reduced activity in a
task-positive network involving the dACC. The dACC has been implicated in the detection and resolution of cognitive conflict; therefore, a
reduced ability to detect cognitive conflict may underlie the BADE
observed in schizophrenia.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session H
H66

THE ROLE OF TASK-RELATED DEACTIVATIONS IN THE COMPARISON OF
COMPETING HYPOTHESES DURING A PROBABILISTIC REASONING
TASK Jennifer Whitman1, Todd Woodward1,2; 1University of British Columbia,

2
Simon Fraser University — We used fMRI to investigate the brain regions
involved in the comparison of competing hypotheses. On each trial of a
probabilistic reasoning task, participants judged how strongly the available evidence supported a given focal hypothesis, relative to its alternative. In order to identify brain regions involved in comparing evidence
for competing hypotheses, we contrasted activation during the hypothesis comparison task with activation during a closely matched evidence
assessment control task. In the regions with significantly different activation during the hypothesis comparison task, we then examined how activation varied as a function of two factors relevant to hypothesis
comparison. The first of these factors was whether the evidence led participants to accept or reject the focal hypothesis. The second was the difficulty of the comparison task; namely the extent to which the evidence
favored one hypothesis over the other. Both factors significantly affected
the task-related deactivations observed in right posterior temporal cortex (BA 37) and the left middle temporal gyrus (BA 21). In these regions,
the deactivations were greater when evidence favored the alternate
hypothesis than when it favored the focal hypothesis. This suggests that
more neural suppression is required to reject the hypothesis one is considering than to accept it. This difference was larger when the evidence
only weakly favored one hypothesis over the other than when it strongly
favored one hypothesis. These results indicated that the degree of neural
suppression required to reject a hypothesis increases as a function of task
difficulty.

H67

COGNITIVE STYLES AND SEMANTIC RETRIEVAL OF COMMON OBJECT
KNOWLEDGE David J. M. Kraemer1, Nina S. Hsu1, Sharon L. Thompson-

Schill1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Recent work has begun to investigate
the psychological and neural underpinnings of visual and verbal cognitive styles. These styles putatively represent preferred modes of processing information, such as whether an individual prefers to think in terms
of pictures or words during reasoning. Following this line of research,
the present study examines how cognitive style interacts with the
semantic retrieval of object knowledge. Participants completed the Verbalizer-Visualizer Questionnaire (Kirby et al., 1988), assessing their selfreported cognitive styles on two independent dimensions (visual and
verbal). A separate task required participants to make two different
types of similarity judgments about common objects – color or general
semantic meaning. A probe word was presented with two potential target words. During color judgment trials, the correct target (e.g., pencil)
matched the probe (lemon) on the color dimension. The incorrect target
(apple) acted as a lure, and matched the probe on the meaning dimension. Similarly, on meaning judgment trials the correct target was related
to the probe in general semantic meaning, while the incorrect target
acted as a lure on the color dimension. Performance on both judgments
was correlated with self-reported cognitive style. Participants who
reported a preference for the verbal cognitive style were more distracted
by the semantic associate lures during color judgments. Similarly, participants who reported a preference for the visual cognitive style performed worse on meaning judgments. The present results indicate that
individual differences in self-reported cognitive styles are associated
with differences in how individuals access semantic information about
common objects.
H68

AN ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY STUDY OF TWO FORMS OF
REASONING Chaille Maddox1, Karen Froud1, John Black1; 1Teachers
College Columbia University — In inference-making, humans can alternate
between strategies which are principally syntactic and rule-governed,
and those which rely on aspects of meaning (Schwartz & Black, 1996;
Gentner & Stevens, 2001; Johnson-Laird, 1983). ERP studies have shown

245

Poster Session H
that violations of syntactic or semantic expectancy in linguistic processing are associated with specific brain responses (P600 and N400, respectively). We used ERP to examine brain responses to rule-based and
relational visual reasoning tasks, to establish whether there are similar
neural signatures associated with these distinct processing modes. Participants were trained in rule-based (RB) or mental modeling (MM) reasoning strategies for visual problem solving. They viewed videos
depicting dynamically rotating gears, and used the strategy to predict
which way the last gear should turn. Their expectation was either met
(“expected”) or not (“unexpected”). High-density EEG was concurrently
recorded and ERPs were derived offline by segmentation and averaging.
Grandaveraged responses to expected and unexpected stimuli were
compared for the RB and MM trained conditions. In the MM condition,
an anterior N300-N400 complex was found, reflecting unexpectedness
within image-specific representational networks (Sitnikova et al., 2006;
Federmeier & Kutas, 2001; McPherson & Holcomb, 1999). In contrast to
predicted P600 responses to the RB condition, we found a posterior
N400/N700, a large ramp-like negativity. When present anteriorly this
has been linked to syntactic expectancy for phrasal heads (Van Petten &
Kutas, 1991; Brown et al., 1999). We propose for the RB task, the presence
of the N400/N700 at posterior sensors reflects violation of rule expectancy with visual-spatial stimuli.

Perception & Action: Vision
H69

DISENTANGLING SENSORY INTEGRATION AND MOTOR PLANNING
DURING PERCEPTUAL DECISION-MAKING Flavia Filimon1, Niels A.

Kloosterman1, Jonathan D. Nelson1, Marios G. Philiastides1, Hauke R.
Heekeren1,2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany,
2Freie Universitaet Berlin, Germany — Perceptual decision-making lies at
the interface of sensory evidence integration and motor output selection.
For instance, one might decide if a stimulus is a cat or dog, and choose a
particular response to indicate one’s choice. Recent studies have claimed
that sensorimotor regions (e.g. LIP or FEF) that guide one’s response
(e.g. an eye movement) also integrate the sensory evidence for the signaled perceptual decision. However, previous studies always paired
perceptual categories with pre-assigned motor responses. This raises the
possibility that rather than accumulating sensory evidence towards perceptual decisions, effector-dominant premotor and parietal regions are
instead planning the response associated with each perceptual category.
In our event-related fMRI study, we sought to disentangle response
planning from perceptual decisions. Fifteen subjects viewed face and
house images containing high or low sensory evidence, without knowing how they were going to indicate their decision. After a variable
delay, subjects were informed of the effector (hand or eye) they were to
use to indicate their choice, and of the possible target locations representing each possible decision. Only then were they able to start planning a
particular response. Our results suggest that when motor planning is
dissociated from the perceptual decision, parietal and frontal effectordominant regions guiding hand or eye responses do not integrate the
sensory evidence for particular decisions. This process appears to be
implemented in prefrontal cortex. Area LIP shows greater activation to
easy compared to difficult decisions only during the motor planning
stage. This suggests differential prefrontal and parietal contributions to
decision-making.

H70

ENCODING OF TEMPORAL PROBABILITIES IN THE HUMAN BRAIN

Domenica Bueti1,2, Bahador Bahrami2, Vincent Walsh2, Geraint Rees2,
Emiliano Macaluso1; 1Neuroimaging Laboratory, Fondazione Santa Lucia,
Rome, Italy, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London,
UK — Anticipating the timing of future events is a necessary precursor to
preparing actions and allocating resources to sensory processing. This
requires elapsed time to be represented in the brain and used to predict
the temporal probability of upcoming events. While neuropsychological,

246

Perception & Action: Vision
imaging, magnetic stimulation studies and single unit recordings implicate the role of higher parietal and motor related areas in temporal estimation, the role of earlier, purely sensory structures remains more
controversial. To investigate the neural correlates of temporal expectancy in sensory cortices and other cortical structures, we ran two functional MRI (fMRI) experiments where participants were trained to
anticipate the occurrence of either a visual (an annulus changing in color,
experiment 1) or an auditory event (the sound of hands-clapping or of a
hammer-hammering, experiment 2). In both studies we demonstrate that
the temporal probability of expected visual and auditory events is
encoded not by a single area but a wide network that importantly
includes neuronal populations at the very earliest cortical stages of
visual and auditory processing. Moreover we show that activity in those
areas changes dynamically in a manner that closely accords to temporal
expectations. In experiment 2 this modulatory effect included extrastriate visual areas known to process body-parts and tools, despite these
were never presented visually during the experiment.

H71

HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE ABLE TO CONTROL A P300-BASED BRAINCOMPUTER INTERFACE (BCI)? Gunther Krausz1, Christoph Guger1, Eric

Sellers2; 1G.tec Medical Engineering GmbH, Austria, 2East Tennessee State
University — An EEG based brain-computer interface (BCI) can be used to

control systems such as computers, wheelchairs or virtual environments.
One of the most important applications is a spelling device to aid
severely disabled individuals with communication. In this study, 100
subjects tested a P300 based BCI system to spell a 5-character word with
only 5 minutes of training. 8 EEG signals were acquired while the subject
looked at a 36 character matrix (6x6) to spell the word WATER. Two different spelling methods were used: the RC (row-column) and the SC
(single character) spelling mode. The BCI system classifier was trained
on the data collected for the word WATER. During the real-time phase of
the experiment, the subject spelled the word LUCAS. 72.8% (N=81) were
able to spell with 100% accuracy in the RC paradigm and 55.3% (N=38)
spelled with 100% accuracy in the SC paradigm. Less than 3% of the subjects did not spell any character correctly. This study shows that high
spelling accuracy can be achieved with the P300 BCI system using
approximately five minutes of training data for a large number of nondisabled subjects, and that the RC paradigm is superior to the SC paradigm. 89 percent of the 63 RC subjects were able to spell with accuracy
80% – 100%. A similar study using a motor imagery BCI with 99 subjects
showed that only 19% of the subjects were able to achieve accuracy of
80% – 100%.

H72

LEARNING AND IDENTIFICATION OF FACIAL IMAGES WITHOUT
AWARENESS Tammy Ott1, Vanessa Vakili1, Harry Funk1; 1Smart Information
Flow Technologies, Minneapolis — It is now well accepted that complex
cognitive activity can be affected by events that cannot be consciously
perceived or remembered. We theorize that both the learning of new
information and the later identification of that information can occur
without the conscious attention and awareness of an observer, thus bypassing the dual-task bottleneck. For this behavioral study, we used
unconscious priming techniques to aid observers in becoming familiar
with previously unseen faces while identification of these primed faces
occurred through the monitoring of the observer’s skin conductance
response (SCR). Specifically, brief exposures of faces (with happy, angry,
or neutral expression) were presented to observers engaged in a baggage
screening task. Presentations followed a mere exposure (ME) or evaluative conditioning (EC) paradigm. Later both primed and unprimed faces
were consciously shown to observers while evidence of information
transfer was tested using physiological and behavioral measures of
affect. No significant SCR effects with ME priming were found, but
behavioral measures indicated that primed angry faces were liked more
than unprimed angry faces. When EC was used a significant interaction
between priming and expression type suggested the peak amplitude of
SCRs was larger for primed angry faces compared to unprimed angry
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Vision
faces. Additionally, both the onset latency of SCRs and peak latency of
SCRs were significantly greater for primed angry faces compared to
unprimed angry faces. Overall, results demonstrate that unconscious
identification of unconsciously learned faces can occur when angry facial
expressions are paired with negatively arousing images in an evaluative
conditioning paradigm.

H73

VISUAL AWARENESS AND ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INDICES OF FACESPECIFIC PROCESSING DURING MOTION-INDUCED BLINDNESS

Joseph A. Harris1, David L. Barack1, Alex R. McMahon1, Marty G. Woldorff1;
1
Duke University — In motion-induced blindness (MIB), covertly attended
static visual targets superimposed on a globally moving distracter array
spontaneously disappear from visual awareness before perceptually
reappearing. Accordingly, this effect can be used to investigate the
extent of visual-object processing that occurs in the absence of visual
awareness. The present study sought to extract an electrophysiological
index of object-level processing -- the N170 event-related potential (ERP)
component for faces relative to other objects -- that might be associated
with both the physical and the perceptual (MIB-mediated) reappearance
of face stimuli. If face processing is abolished during MIB, face-specific
activity following MIB would be expected to mirror that associated with
physical onsets. Alternatively, if face processing at all levels continues
unaffected by MIB, no face-specific enhancement would be expected to
occur following MIB. The results showed hallmark face-specific ERP
activity in response to the perceptual reappearance of face stimuli following MIB that was very similar in distribution to that elicited by physical reappearance, although at reduced amplitude. These intermediate
results suggest that face processing is only partially disrupted during
MIB, or only at certain levels of the system. For example, feed-forward
face-specific activity in extrastriate visual regions may continue uninterrupted during MIB, but there may be reentrant processing to the face
module associated with allocation of attention to the face stimulus following re-emergence of perceptual awareness of it. The present results
are consistent with behavioral data demonstrating considerable levels of
visual processing during MIB, and suggest possible mechanisms for how
it disrupts visual awareness.

H74

THE IMPACT OF ANIMATED ADVERTISEMENTS ON READING IN THE
INTERNET Jaana Simola1,2, Jarmo Kuisma1, Anssi Öörni1, Liisa Uusitalo1,
Jukka Hyönä3; 1Aalto University, 2University of Helsinki, 3University of Turku —

Animated advertisements on web pages constitute a constant change in
the visual field. As human vision is sensitive to motion, animated ads in
the visual periphery may disrupt on-line reading. We conducted three
eye-tracking experiments with real web pages to investigate to what
extent advertisements attract visual attention and affect on-line reading.
In experiment 1, a horizontal ad was placed on top of a central text and a
vertical ad to the right from the text. In congruous conditions, both ads
were either static or animated. In incongruous conditions, the other ad
was animated and the other one static. Number of fixations, fixation
durations and number of regressive saccades were higher in incongruous conditions, indicating more distraction in incongruous relative to
congruous conditions. Experiments 2 and 3 included an abrupt onset of
the ads. Results showed a significant correlation between the ad onset
time and the time when the eyes first entered the vertical ad, indicating
that ads in the proximity of the text attracted attention. To test the effect
of task load, the participants in experiment 3 were instructed to scan the
web pages according to their own interest, whereas in experiments 1 and
2 the task was to read for comprehension. During scanning, participants
entered the text area later, made longer saccades, but fewer fixations and
regressions than in the reading task. In conclusion, the results suggested
that animated ads attract attention and distract reading, especially when
the task is to read for comprehension.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session H
H75

AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION OF EFFECTIVE AND
INEFFECTIVE MASKS IN OBJECT SUBSTITUTION MASKING Jarrod
R.

Dowdall1, Matthew S. Tata1; 1University of Lethbridge — Object Substitution
Masking (OSM) occurs when a salient object (the mask) interferes with
perception of a unique shape (the target) at the same location. This effect
occurs when attention cannot be efficiently oriented through a cluttered
visual scene and when appearance of the mask lags behind the target by
about 180 ms. Previous studies demonstrated that attentional selection of
the target prior to mask onset decreased mask effectiveness (Di Lollo,
Enns & Rensink, 2000; Tata, 2002). For example, targets that “pop out” of
the display are highly resistant to masking. Here we investigated the
electrophysiological activity associated with effective and ineffective
masks as modulated by the context in which the target appeared. Participants viewed a search array of 8 letters, either Cs or Os, arranged in a
notional circle around fixation. A brief square mask, concentric with the
target, appeared after an onset asynchrony (SOA) of 180 ms. Cortical
responses to target and mask onsets were measured using 128-sensor
electroencephalography (EEG). We found that popout and non-popout
targets were differently susceptible to masking and that this perceptual
difference was reflected in a series of differences in the cortical response
to mask onset. The mask tended to elicit more distinct electrical activity
when it was effective relative to when it was ineffective. These data suggest that masking occurs when neural representations of the mask and
target overlap in time.

H76

PRESERVED ENCODING UNDER HIGH ATTENTIONAL LOAD IS SPECIFIC
TO FACES: ERP EVIDENCE Markus F. Neumann1, Tarik N. Mohamed1,

Stefan R. Schweinberger1; 1University of Jena — According to recent models
of selective attention, processing of task-irrelevant stimuli is abolished
when attentional resources are fully consumed by task-relevant material
(high load). However, task-irrelevant familiar faces can elicit repetitionrelated neural modulations despite high load at initial presentation
(Neumann & Schweinberger, 2008). Although faces may access a facespecific attention resource, it is also possible that the processing of familiar faces requires very little general attention resources. In Experiment 1
we tested whether task-irrelevant unfamiliar faces also elicit repetition
modulations under high load. Participants performed a letter identification task by indicating whether an “X” vs. “N” was among 6 different
(high load) or 6 identical (low load) letters. Letter strings were superimposed on task-irrelevant faces. Following letter identification, participants detected occasional butterflies among S2 probes, which were
either identical repetitions of S1 faces or new faces. ERPs revealed an
occipito-temporal N250r-repetition effect to unfamiliar faces that was
unaffected by load at S1 presentation. In Experiment 2 we tested whether
preserved encoding under high load is specific for faces, employing
hands and houses as additional categories. Body parts have been discussed to attract attention in a similar fashion as faces, and therefore
appear likely candidates for preserved encoding under high load. However, while N250r-repetition effects were replicated for faces, repetitionrelated neural modulations were absent under high load for both houses
and hands. This strongly suggests that encoding under high load is
mediated by a separate face-specific attention resource, which cannot
facilitate encoding of body parts or artificial objects.
H77

EFFECT OF OPPEL-KUNDT ILLUSION ON SIMPLE REACTION TIMES

Silvia Savazzi1, Barbara Emanuele1, Paige Scalf2, Diane Beck2; 1University of
Verona and Nazional Institute for Neuroscience, Italy, 2University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign and Beckman Institute — The Oppel-Kundt Illusion
(OKI) consists of the perception of a filled space as larger than an empty
space of the same size. Here, we used a modified version of that illusion
composed of a gradient of vertical lines whose spacing decreased progressively from one side to the other: space is expected to be perceived as
larger where the lines are more compressed. In this experiment we tested

247

Poster Session H
the hypothesis that a horizontal stimulus presented in a space perceived
as larger will produce faster RTs. Twenty healthy subjects were asked to
respond as quickly as possible to lateralized stimuli (horizontal line, vertical line and circle) presented on different backgrounds (control condition: evenly spaced vertical lines; illusory conditions: vertical lines
progressively compressed to the right or left portion of the monitor). For
horizontal stimuli only, subjects’ RTs were reliably faster for stimuli presented on the compressed side of the gradient (275.8 ms) than on the
relaxed side (279.9 ms). To verify the illusion of size, in a second experiment, the same subjects were asked to adjust the size of a stimulus (horizontal line, vertical line and circle) presented on the same backgrounds
as Exp. 1 to make it equal to a reference stimulus. For horizontal lines,
subjects produced adjustments in accordance with the predicted effect of
the illusion. Together, these data show that the OKI produces a distortion of space for the horizontal dimension only and that RTs are influenced by the perceived and not the physical size of the stimuli.

H78

INVESTIGATING ERP MODULATION TO AFFECT AND CONGRUITY:
IMPLICATIONS FOR POLITICAL PSYCHOLOGY Scott McLean1, Sandra

Wiebe2, Michael Dodd1, Kevin Smith1, John Hibbing1, Kimberly Andrews Espy1;
1University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 2University of Alberta — Recent
findings

suggest a role for genetic factors in political attitudes (Alford et al., 2005).
Progress has been made to identify the intermediate links, often referred
to as enodophenotypes (Gottesman & Gould, 2003), between genes and
political attitudes. Using a modified Eriksen flanker paradigm, we have
found that processing of affective stimuli across dimensions of congruity
vary across political dimensions (McLean et al., In Progress). The purpose of this study is to investigate the neurological correlates of these
findings. We recorded high density EEG while right handed undergraduate students from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln completed the
Eriksen flanker paradigm with normally rated affective faces in congruent and incongruent trials. Participants pressed one of two buttons indicating like/dislike of the target image, ignoring flankers. Fifty percent of
trials were incongruent. Participants reported their political orientation
and completed a series of politically relevant questionnaires. Analyses of
mean amplitudes by a repeated measures ANOVA reveal a main effect
of target type around the peak amplitude 250-300 ms after stimulus
onset (p=.011) in left centro-frontal leads. This finding revealed lower
mean amplitudes for trials with happy targets compared to angry targets. Later (~280-300 ms) there was a significant interaction of flanker
type and self reported political party around this later negative component (p =.047), where Republicans showed lower mean amplitude to
happy flankers and Democrats showed lower mean amplitude to angry
flankers. Results suggest processing differences in different political orientations. These findings are discussed in terms of implications to previous findings in political psychology.

H79

ERP CORRELATES OF FACIAL DISTINCTIVENESS: P2 SENSITIVITY TO
IDENTITY STRENGTH Xin Zheng1, Catherine J. Mondloch1, Sidney J.

Segalowitz1; 1Brock University — Recent animal research and human imaging studies suggest neural responses are affected by the distinctiveness
of face identity. Here we examined the influence of face distinctiveness
on scalp-recorded event-related potentials (ERPs). We varied distinctiveness (identity strength) by morphing each of 36 faces (4 target and 32
non-target) with the average face created from the entire set; the relative
weighting of the original face in each identity continuum ranged from
100% to 10% in 10% decrements. Seventeen female participants performed a face identity task with 4 blocks of trials, with participants
pressing a button whenever a target face was detected. As faces move
towards the “average” face, they became less distinctive, and participants’ ability to identify target individuals follows a classic categorical
boundary at 30%-to-50% weighting. P1 and N170 components to the
nontarget faces were not affected by the distinctiveness of faces. The distinctiveness effect occurred later in the ventral parietal P2 component
between 230 and 270 ms post stimulus-onset: as faces moved towards

248

Perception & Action: Vision
the “average” face, the P2 amplitude became smaller (p<.001) with no
categorical boundary effect. When individual participant data were
examined, this negative relationship between face distinctiveness and
ventral P2 amplitude was found in 14 out of 17 participants from both
left and right sides. Similar effects were also found when individual
faces were examined after averaging across all participants. Our data are
consistent with findings from previous imaging and animal research,
and provide an ERP index to the neural mechanisms for the representation of face identities.

H80

DISSOCIATING BIOLOGICAL MOTION FROM FORM RECOGNITION: AN
ERP STUDY Nicole White1, Jonathan M. Fawcett1, Aaron J. Newman1;

1Dalhousie University — Humans are particularly sensitive to the movement of living creatures, and can recognize biological motion on the
basis of only a few points of light (PLs) located on the body, in the
absence of explicit form information. Indeed, human body forms and
biological motion are preferentially processed by distinct occipito-temporal regions. The time course of neural activity associated with human
form and motion information has been studied less extensively. Prior
work demonstrated sensitivity of a posterior temporal event-related
potential (ERP) component, the N300, to biological motion using PL
stimuli, but did not dissociate the recognition of static human forms
from that of biological motion. Thus, it is unclear whether the N300 is
specific to recognition of human forms from motion, or if it indexes a
more generic form-recognition process. To test these competing hypotheses, we recorded ERPs while participants viewed stimuli across 4
blocks: (1) static (non-moving) PL displays of humans performing
actions; (2) static stick figures with clear forms; (3) PL biological motion;
(4) static PL displays (repeated from block 1). An N300 was elicited by
human forms in all blocks, and reliably discriminated between upright
and inverted forms in blocks 2-4. Experience with PL stimuli over the
course of the experiment led to greater N300 amplitude to static PL
forms in block 4, an effect that was more pronounced for upright than
inverted stimuli. The results suggest that the N300 indexes the recognition of human forms but is not specific to biological motion.

H81

A UNIFIED INFORMATION PROCESSING BOTTLENECK IN HUMAN
PREFRONTAL CORTEX Michael Tombu1, Christopher Asplund1, Paul Dux1,2,

René Marois1; 1Vanderbilt University, 2University of Queensland — Information processing is characterized by bottlenecks that constrain throughput. The limitations imposed by these bottlenecks are especially evident
when multiple streams of information are processed concurrently, as is
the case in multitask settings. For example, working memory encoding
can impair conscious perception of a concurrently presented target and
ongoing decision-making in one task invariably postpones subsequent
decision-making in a second task. While capacity-limited encoding and
decisional processing are often treated separately, there is some behavioral and electrophysiological evidence that they require access to a common capacity-limited mechanism. In two dual-task experiments we
explore the neural underpinnings of this putative unified bottleneck
using time-resolved fMRI. The first experiment served to isolate a network of prefrontal brain regions that underlie the central, amodal bottleneck in response selection that limits dual-task performance. In the
second experiment, we determined whether these brain regions were
also affected by a manipulation of encoding load. Behaviorally, increasing the encoding load of Task 1 slowed down Task 2 response times at a
short, but not at a long, SOA. Delayed peaks in hemodynamic activity,
corresponding to reaction time delays associated with both encoding
and decision-making bottlenecks, were found in a network of prefrontal
regions. This core prefrontal network, including bilateral insula, left inferior frontal junction and anterior cingulate cortex, appears to constitute a
unified information processing bottleneck responsible for operations as
diverse as working memory encoding and decision-making.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Vision
H82

RAPIDLY CHARACTERISING MULTIDIMENSIONAL NEURAL TUNING TO
SENSORY AND SEMANTIC FEATURES OF REAL-WORLD OBJECTS USING
DYNAMICALLY ADAPTIVE IMAGING Rhodri Cusack1, Michele Veldsman1,
Lorina Naci2, Daniel Mitchell1, Annika Linke1; 1MRC CBU, Cambridge, UK,

2University of Cambridge, UK — fMRI

studies using multi-voxel pattern
analysis have shown that different classes of realistic objects evoke distinct patterns of activity in human ventral visual cortex. As object classes
differ in multiple sensory and semantic features from this it is not clear
which subset of features the region encodes. Previous attempts to characterize encoding have used abstracted stimuli such as computer-generated objects or line drawings, and manipulated single features.
Critically, the ability to generalize from these studies depends upon
whether each feature independently determines the neural response. On
the contrary, there is evidence from electrophysiology that neural tuning
to objects reflects multidimensional selectivity to conjunctions of features, and from computational models, that object recognition proceeds
through selective responses to complex combinations of features such as
key parts of object classes. Here, we used a new real-time neuroimaging
method, Dynamically Adaptive Imaging (DAI), that could reveal simultaneous tuning along a number of feature dimensions, permitting the
use of naturalistic stimuli. As predicted, we found tuning to multiple
features, both sensory and semantic, but with different patterns of selectivity for different objects. These results suggest: (1) there are limitations
to studying single features independently; (2) feature selectivity differs
in the neighbourhood of different object classes, as would be expected
from some computational models of object recognition; and (3) DAI provides a powerful tool for the investigation of neural representations.

H83

WHAT'S THAT SECOND THINGY? ERP CORRELATES OF OBJECT
RECOGNITION IN MULTI-STIMULUS DISPLAYS Sophie Trauer1, Thomas

Gruber1,2, Matthias M. Mueller1; 1University of Leipzig, 2University of
Osnabrueck — Only few event-related potential (ERP) studies examined
familiarity of visual objects in terms of their conceptual long-term memory representations. Furthermore, the impact of rivalling objects within
the spatial focus of attention remains largely unexplored. To shed some
light on these unresolved issues, we presented line drawings of wellknown objects and unnameable pseudo-objects, either as single or overlapping double stimuli, whereas always one of the drawings (the cued
target) had to be judged as ‚existing‘ or ‘not existing‘. Earliest familiarity
effects appeared for the posterior N1 (160-210ms), which was larger for
unfamiliar compared to familiar stimuli. This effect might be explained
by ongoing activity in early visual areas while no matching conceptual
representation is found. From 250ms onwards, pseudo-objects led to
more positive deflections at posterior sites. Two distinct components
were identified: an early lateral-occipital component (220-280ms)
reflected the overall amount of recognizable stimulus content in the display. The subsequent P3b-like positive complex reflected the required
response, showing smaller amplitudes when the target was familiar. The
influence of a second irrelevant drawing on that deflection was reduced
to an interaction, which resulted in decreased familiarity effects under
higher segmentation demands. Familiarity and segmentation demands
separately shaped the late positive complex (500-750ms): a widespread
parietal positive component mirrored the number of drawings, whereas
its negative counterpart at frontal sites was modulated by familiarity of
the target object. Thus disentangling sub-processes during object recognition, the present results indicate ERP components useful for future
studies of visual processing in natural scenes.

H84

IS REPETITION SUPPRESSION MODULATED BY EXPERTISE?

Alumit
Ishai1, Martin Wiesmann1; 1University of Zurich, Switzerland — The extent to
which repetition suppression is modulated by expertise is currently
unknown. We used event-related fMRI to test whether architecture students would respond faster to building stimuli and would exhibit stron-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session H
ger repetition suppression in the fusiform gyrus (FG) and
parahippocampal cortex (PHC) than students from other disciplines.
Our subjects performed a working memory task with buildings from
Barcelona and Tel Aviv. In each trial, a behaviorally relevant target and
task-irrelevant distracter were repeated twice among novel distracters.
Behaviorally, we found shorter response latencies with target repetition
in all subjects. Moreover, the repetition of targets and distracters was
associated with decreased neural responses in the FG and PHC in all
subjects. Interestingly, in control, but not in architecture students, reaction times during the first repetition of the target were correlated with
activation in multiple brain regions (cuneus, lingual gyrus, inferior parietal lobule, insula, and anterior cingulate cortex). Thus, despite the similar behavioral and neural responses observed in all subjects, the nonexperts had to recruit additional regions in order to perform the task.
Our findings suggest that as a result of their expertise, architecture students were able to encode and detect building stimuli at a lower neural
cost.

H85

PERCEPTUAL LEARNING OF COMPLEX OBJECTS: MECHANISMS OF
INTEGRATION ACROSS MULTIPLE VIEWS OF A NOVEL OBJECT IN
CLUTTERED SCENES Lauren Emberson1, Dima Amso1; 1Weill-Cornell
Medical School — We used a combined eye tracking/fMRI methods
approach to examine the mechanisms by which the system integrates
across multiple experiences of an object to achieve veridical perception.
We asked whether repeated exposure to an occluded, novel object in
variable contexts would result in perception of the object as a unified
whole rather than two broken parts. In the structured condition, an
“ambiguous” scene was paired with three others scenes that all included
the occluded object in varying positions, orientations, and states of
occlusion. In the unstructured condition, a similar “ambiguous” scene
containing the same occluded object was paired with three visually unrelated scenes. We found that only structured exposure resulted in perception of the occluded object as unified, as revealed by post-test
performance. Analyses of on-line eye movements revealed significant
differences in fixation patterns across exposure conditions. Subjects
directed a larger proportion of fixations at the occluded object in the
structured condition versus at the occluder in the unstructured condition. Preliminary neuroimaging findings indicate occipito-hippocampal
involvement in this task. Taken together, these data suggest that learning
mechanisms, in concert with visual experience, shape the perception of
complex novel objects supporting robust perception and segmentation.
H86

LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF PRENATAL EXPOSURE TO OMEGA-3 FATTY
ACIDS ON VISUAL FUNCTION IN SCHOOL-AGE CHILDREN: A VISUAL
EVOKED POTENTIAL STUDY Caroline Jacques1,2, Ethier Audrey-Anne1,2,

Muckle Gina3, Jacobson Sandra4, Bastien Celyne3, Dewailly Eric5, Ayotte
Pierre5, Levy Emile1,2, Jacobson Joseph4, Saint-Amour Dave1,6; 1CHU SainteJustine, Montréal, 2Université de Montréal, 3Université Laval, 4Wayne State
University, 5Centre Hospitalier de l'Université Laval, 6Université du Québec à
Montréal — Findings from several studies indicate that omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3 PUFAs) are beneficial for the development of
the visual system. However, little is known about the long-term effect of
n-3 PUFA intake during gestation on child visual development. The
long-term effects on visual development were assessed using visual
evoked potentials (VEPs) in a cohort of school-age Inuit children
exposed to high levels of n-3 PUFAs during gestation. VEP protocols
using color and motion stimuli were used to assess parvocellular and
magnocellular responses, respectively, in 136 children from Northern
Quebec. Concentrations of the two major n-3 PUFAs (DHA and EPA)
were measured in umbilical cord blood at birth and in child blood samples obtained at time of testing, reflecting pre- and postnatal exposure,
respectively. Associations between n-3 PUFAs and VEPs were assessed
by multivariate regression analyses to adjust for environmental contaminants and other potential confounding variables. No significant associa-

249

Poster Session H
tions were found with motion-onset VEPs or with the child’s current n-3
PUFA body burden. However, after adjustment for confounders, cord
blood concentrations of DHA were associated with shorter latencies of
the N1 and P1 components of the color VEPs. This study is the first to
demonstrate beneficial effects of DHA intake during gestation on visual
system function at school age. The data suggest that DHA is particularly
important for the early development and long-term function of the parvocellular pathway, which plays a major role in visual processing of
stimulus detail and chromatic analysis.

H87

THE SPEED OF FACE CATEGORIZATION IN THE HUMAN BRAIN:
DISENTANGLING LOW-LEVEL PARAMETERS FROM HIGH-LEVEL FACE
REPRESENTATIONS Stéphanie Caharel1, Bruno Rossion1; 1Université
Catholique de Louvain, Belgium — The speed at which a visual stimulus is
categorized as a face by the human brain remains debated. Indeed,
despite years of research, event-related potentials (ERP) recordings have
reported face-sensitive responses on the human scalp varying from 60
ms to 200 ms following stimulus onset (Bentin et al., 1996; Braeutigam et
al., 2001; Itier & Taylor, 2002; Jeffreys, 1989; Rossion et al., 2000). Here,
we disentangled the contribution of low-level parameters and high-level
visual representations in accounting for early face-sensitivity in the
human brain, by means of a factorial paradigm including faces and
familiar objects (cars) and their respective scrambled counterparts using
a Fourier phase randomization procedure. In fifteen participants, we
replicated an early face-sensitivity - larger response to pictures of faces
than cars – at the level of the P1 component (80-100ms). Importantly, this
sensitivity to faces was accounted for completely by low-level parameters, the P1 being larger for scrambled faces as compared to scrambled
cars (no interaction between phase-scrambling and category). In contrast, the following N170 component reflected the brain response to
meaningful shapes, being almost non-existent for scrambled stimuli. As
usually observed, the N170 was much larger in amplitude for faces than
cars, an effect that was not accounted at all by low-level parameters (no
significant difference between scrambled faces and cars). These observations indicate that preferential responses to faces may arise at several
points in time, but that the earliest access to high-level face representations does not precede the occipito-temporal N170 onset in the human
brain.

H88

TRACKING DOWN THE NEURAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING PHASE
INFORMATION PROCESSING OF FACES AND OBJECTS IN COMPLEX
VISUAL SCENES Lisa Lombardi1,2, Marine Houssa1,3, Younes Zerouali1,4,

Bruno Rossion3, Boutheina Jemel1,5; 1Research Laboratory Neuroscience and
Cognitive Electrophysiology, Hôpital Rivière-des-Prairies, 2Concordia
University, Montréal, Canada, 3Université Catholique de Louvain-La-Neuve,
Belgium, 4École des Technologies Supérieures, Montréal, Canada, 5Centre de
Recherche Fernand-Séguin, Université de Montréal, Canada — While it is
generally agreed that the outcome of early vision constitutes the building block of visual perception (face and object perception), it still remains
unclear how the output of early visual processes temporally and spatially aggregate within the visual cortical pathways leading to a face or
object percept. To address this issue, we investigated event-related
potential responses (ERPs) to shape detection of cars and faces in complex visual scenes. Shape information was manipulated by gradually
scrambling the distribution of phase values of each image using 6 levels
of phase randomization (28%, 48%, 56%, 65%, 74%, 100%). Face-car
detection rates improved in a non-linear fashion with decreasing levels
of phase randomization. Interestingly, they were very high (~ 85.2%)
when only 52% of shape information was available in the images (i.e.
48% scrambling level). Early visual ERPs (i.e. P1) did not show any
amplitude difference between scene images with faces and cars and
more importantly across phase scrambling levels. Moreover, amplitude
changes at the level of the occipito-temporal N170 component for both
faces and cars occurred only between 28% and 48% phase randomization

250

Perception & Action: Vision
levels. No N170 amplitude differences were found between phase randomization levels from 48% to 100%. Our ERP findings indicate that
early visual areas send undifferentiated input signals about phase information to higher-level visual areas where they are integrated (synthesized) into a coherent meaningful shape, and thus further support the
notion that face and object shape processing is temporally tied to the
occurrence of the N170 electrophysiological response.

H89

ILLUSION OF VISUAL MOTION INDUCED BY ELECTRICAL STIMULATION
OF HUMAN AREA MT+ Andreas M. Rauschecker1,2, Aslihan Selimbeyoglu3,

MoD Dastjerdi3, Josef Parvizi2,3; 1MSTP Training Program, 2Neuroscience
Program, 3Stanford University — We explored the relationship between
task-induced fMRI BOLD and electrophysiological activity and alteration of human conscious visual perception by electrical stimulation of
the brain. Three patients with epilepsy, which were later implanted with
intracranial electrodes, underwent functional imaging during a visual
motion perception (MT-localizer) task aimed at identifying motionresponsive areas within the brain. In each subject, a higher level of BOLD
signal was seen bilaterally in an area consistent with the location of area
hMT+ during moving compared to static stimuli. In one subject who performed the same MT-localizer task during intracranial electrophysiological recording, higher theta and gamma band power was seen, during the
motion compared to static condition, only in the area overlapping the
BOLD region in the hMT+. In two subjects, only when the electrical
charge was delivered in the electrodes within the BOLD region, idiosyncratic and stereotyped illusory percept of visual motion was elicited.
One subject experienced displacement of the entire visual field to the
contralateral side (optical allesthesia), and another subject experienced
vibrating and moving of parts of the contralateral visual field in a directionally-specific manner. In the third subject, in whom the electrical stimulation was near, but not within the BOLD area, electrical charge
delivery did not elicit any subjective experience related to visual motion.
Our findings provide evidence, in the human brain, for a clear relationship between task-induced fMRI BOLD and electrophysiological activity, and that electrical charge delivery into the hub of this activity leads
to a change in the conscious human experience.

H90

DORSAL STREAM ACTIVATION AND VENTRAL STREAM SUPPRESSION
IMMEDIATELY PRECEDE PERCEPTUAL REVERSALS DURING BINOCULAR
RIVALRY: AN ELECTRICAL SOURCE IMAGING STUDY Juliane
Britz1,

Michael Pitts2; 1University of Geneva, 2University of California, San Diego —

Pre-stimulus fluctuations of neuronal activity usually dismissed as noise
have recently been shown to influence subsequent stimulus processing.
In a previous study, we found that spontaneously emerging activity as
indexed by pre-stimulus EEG topography predicts perceptual reversals
of the Necker cube. The sources of the pre-stimulus EEG topographies
dissociated perceptual reversals from non-reversals in right inferior parietal cortex. In the present study, we investigated perceptual reversals for
intermittently presented stimuli during binocular rivalry and physical
alternation while the ongoing EEG was recorded from 64 channels. We
identified EEG topographies (functional microstates) immediately preceding the stimulus-onset and identified two topographies that doubly
dissociated perceptual reversals from non-reversals. The estimated
intracranial generators associated with these topographies were stronger
in right inferior parietal cortex and weaker in the ventral stream before
perceptual reversals. No such differences were found for physical alternation of the same stimuli. Post-stimulus ERPs and their concomitant
sources differed in three time windows: reversals were associated with
increased activity in early visual areas (~100 ms) and decreased activity
in the ventral stream (~200 – 300 ms) and frontal areas. Taken together
with our previous findings, these results suggest common neural mechanisms associated with perceptual reversals during binocular rivalry and
ambiguous figure perception. In both cases, the dorsal stream is more
active while the ventral stream is less active before perceptual reversals.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Vision
H91

MAGNOCELLULAR PROCESSING DIFFERENCES FOR PERIPHERAL
STIMULATION AMONG CHILDREN WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM
DISORDERS: EVIDENCE FROM HIGH-DENSITY EEG Natalie
Russo1,2,

Hans-Peter Frey1,2, Edmund Lalor3, Sophie Molholm1,2, John J. Foxe1,2,3; 1City
College of New York, 2Albert Einstein School of Medicine, 3Trinity College,
University of Dublin — Individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD)
frequently show self stimulatory behaviors related to visual processing
such as gazing at objects or their fingers in the periphery. This behavior,
termed ‘lateral glancing’ is considered by some to reflect an attempt to
filter visual stimulation. The origin of this behavior is thought to be
related to differences in ASD in the functioning of magno- and parvocellular visual pathways. Here we present electrophysiological data on
children with ASD and typically developing children (TD) assessing the
integrity of magno- and parvo-cellular pathways. To this end, we used
standard visual evoked potentials (VEP) which contain information from
both pathways and the novel event-related potentials technique known
as the VESPA (Visual Evoked spread Spectral Analysis) to independently stimulate magno- and parvo-cellular pathways via the use of low
and high contrast flickering stimuli respectively. Participants detected an
infrequent target presented in the center of the screen to ensure that they
were fixating, while checkerboards flickered at the appropriate contrast
(VEP, magno and parvo VESPA). Stimulation was presented in both central and peripheral locations. Centrally, evoked responses were similar
across all conditions. At peripheral locations, parvo VESPA were similar
between groups, but the magnitude of the VEPs and magno VESPA
were much larger in the children with ASD than in the group of TD children. These findings support the notion of a relatively typical parvo- and
an atypical magno-cellular system among children with ASD in the
visual periphery.

H92

OPTIMAL
SPATIAL-FREQUENCY
RANGE
FOR
THE
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSE TO FACES Marine Houssa1, Lisa

Lombardi2, Frédéric Gosselin3, Boutheina Jemel3; 1Université Catholique de
Louvain La Neuve, 2Concordia University, 3Université de Montréal — It
has
been shown that face recognition depends on a limited range of spatial
frequency (SF) bands (centered on ~10 c/f —cycles/face—and ~1.5
octave wide). In addition, the M170, an electromagnetic brain response
to faces, was found to be sensitive to a similar SF band. The present
experiment was designed to further document the response tuning of the
N170 event-related potential component to faces using contrast-sensitivity measures. Stimuli consisted of bandpass filtered face images, using 5
non-overlapping SF bands with 1-octave bandwidth each: 1.5-3, 3-6, 612, 12-24, 24-48 c/face. Stimulus energy was equated across SF conditions. Seven Weber contrast-luminance levels were applied to each SF
condition, from 10 to 70% with steps of 10%. ERP responses were
recorded while participants viewed faces with different SF bands and
contrast levels. ERP results show that N170 amplitudes were modulated
both by SF and contrast. Interestingly, we found that the N170 responses
exhibited low contrast thresholds to faces with 6-12 c/f SF and more particularly those with 12-24 c/f bands. N170 showed high contrast thresholds to faces with 24-48 c/f SF band. The N170 peak was very small to
faces with 1.5-3 c/f SF band. Our N170 findings indicate that the neural
responses to faces are tuned to specific spatial frequency bands, the
range of which is slightly shifted toward higher spatial frequencies compared to the one showed to be critical for recognizing faces.

H93

THE BANK OF STANDARDIZED STIMULI (BOSS): A NEW SET OF 538
NORMALIZED PHOTOS OF OBJECTS TO BE USED AS ECOLOGICAL
STIMULI IN VISUAL COGNITION RESEARCH Mathieu
B.
Brodeur1,

Melissa Chauret2, Genevieve Dion-Lessard2, Tina Montreuil3, Emmanuelle
Dionne-Dostie2, Martin Lepage1; 1McGill University, 2Universite de Montreal,
3Universite du Quebec a Montreal — There are currently several normalized
databases available to investigate psycholinguistics and visual cognition.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session H
Norms represent valuable information that can be used as experimental
variables of interest or they can be systematically controlled to limit their
potential influence on another experimental manipulation. The most
established normalized database of stimuli to be used in visual cognition
is the Snodgrass and Vanderwart (1980) set of black and white pictures.
The present work proposes an alternative set of 1,460 high quality photo
stimuli. Stimuli are common objects among which 538 were normalized
for name, category, familiarity, visual complexity, object agreement,
viewpoint agreement, manipulability, color, color diagnosticity, and
material. Of these objects, 209 have more than one exemplar and 386
have been photographed under different viewpoints. Stimuli are also
available in greyscale, blurred, scrambled, and line-drawn version. This
Bank Of Standardized Stimuli (BOSS) proposes ecological stimuli and
new norms and was created specifically to meet the needs of scientists in
cognition, vision and psycholinguistics.

H94

MAGNITUDE COMPARISON IN FEMALES WITH THE FRAGILE X
PREMUTATION Naomi J. Goodrich-Hunsaker1, Ryu I. Hashimoto2, Naomi V.

Hatt2, Heather M. Shapiro3, Lyndsey Marcelino3, Yingratana McLennan3,
Christine Godwin3, Flora Tassone3,4, Susan M. Rivera2,3, Tony J. Simon3;
1
NeuroTherapeutics Research Institute, University of California, Davis Medical
Center, 2Center for Mind and Brain, University of California, Davis, 3M.I.N.D.
Institute, University of California, Davis Medical Center, 4School of Medicine,
University of California, Davis — Fragile X premutation carriers (fXPCs) are

defined by the presence of a trinucleotide expansion between 55 and 200
CGG repeats in the in the 5’ untranslated region of the fragile X mental
retardation 1 gene (FMR1). It is unclear to what extent female fXPCs are
neurocognitively affected as recent reports of visual processing and spatial attention deficits suggest previously overlooked cognitive dysfunction. Our purpose was to assess magnitude estimation in fXPCs and
correlate behavioral and fMRI results with molecular variables of the
FMR1 gene (e.g., CGG repeat length). Female fXPCs and neurotypical
(NT) control participants completed a magnitude comparison task in
which they judged which of two stimuli was larger. Response time and
error rate were used to assess performance. To determine the neuroanatomical correlates of magnitude comparison, participants completed a
magnitude comparison task variant during an fMRI scan. Female fXPCs
responded more slowly than NT participants, yet there were no significant differences in error rates between the two groups (< 10%). On the
fMRI variant, female fXPCs performed similarly to NT participants both
in reaction time and accuracy. However, NT participants had significantly greater intraparietal activation compared to fXPCs. Significant
negative correlations with CGG repeat length were primarily found
bilaterally in the intraparietal sulcus and in the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Results from this study provide novel evidence for disrupted magnitude comparison competence and atypical neural
activation in female fXPCs that appears to relate to the “dosage” of the
FMR1 gene mutation.

H95

NEURAL CORRELATES OF TEMPORAL INTEGRATION IN FACE
RECOGNITION: AN FMRI STUDY Yunjo Lee1, David Anaki2, Cheryl Grady1,3,

Morris Moscovitch1,3; 1Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre, 2Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, 3University of Toronto — Anaki
and
Mosco-

vitch(2007) showed that face parts, separated by intervals up to 400ms,
can be combined into a unified representation and undergo configural
processing; beyond 400ms part-based processing prevails. Using fMRI,
we investigated the neural correlates of facial temporal integration and
whether regions implicated in face recognition differ for short vs. long
intervals. In each trial, top and bottom parts of a famous face were presented for 17ms each with a 0ms(ISI0), 200ms(ISI200), or 800ms interval(ISI800) between the parts. As a control, a misaligned face whose top
and bottom parts were spatially separated was shown for 17ms(MIS).
Participants responded whether they recognized the face. A post-scan
test(outside the scanner) examined the participant's knowledge about

251

Poster Session H
famous faces shown in the scanner and faces unknown to each participant were excluded from data analysis. A multivariate analysis explored
the relationship between brain activity and recognition performance.
Better recognition in ISI0 and ISI200 was associated with increased activity in classical face recognition regions, such as right fusiform and bilateral inferior/middle occipital gyri, as well as lingual, inferior/middle/
medial frontal, middle temporal, cingulate gyri and precuneus. Successful recognition in ISI800 and MIS relied on increased activity in left anterior fusiform gyrus, left inferior frontal and bilateral middle temporal
gyri. Integration of face parts with a short interval involves areas implicated in configural face processing, whereas recognition with an 800ms
interval involves regions implicated in part-based processing, which also
are used to recognize misaligned faces. It is possible that configural processing involves temporal integration over short intervals.

H96

IS GLOBAL STEREOPSIS PRESENT IN MICROSTRABISMIC CHILDREN?

Mariline Pageau1, Danielle de Guise1, Dave Saint-Amour1,2; 1Université de
Montréal, 2Université du Québec à Montréal — Convergent strabismus is a
common condition in children which has been divided into several categories including microstrabismus. It is generally accepted that stereopsis
is present in patients with microstrabismus, although it is reduced. However, this concept relies primarily on the evaluation of local stereopsis,
which contains visible local indices and monocular cues. A sample of 26
children (6 to 14 years of age) with microstrabismus was selected at the
Clinique Universitaire de la Vision of University of Montreal. All 26 children were diagnosed with microstrabismus. Their local and global stereoscopic thresholds were obtained using the Randot® test. Nineteen
children with microstrabismus (19/26, 73%) had local stereopsis of 50
seconds of arc or worst. A complete lack of stereopsis was observed in 7
(27%) children. Interestingly, none of the children tested was able to perceive global stereopsis with the exception of one child during only one of
the follow up visits. This study shows the relevance of testing both local
and global stereopsis to assess the integrity of binocular vision. Many
patients with microstrabismus show some degree of depth perception
but only when measured with local stereopsis. Normal stereoscopic
vision implies also the ability to discriminate random dot stereograms. A
measurement of global stereoscopic threshold should therefore be performed with all patients in order to acquire a much more reliable estimate of their level of stereoscopic vision. A pilot psychophysical study to
compare local and global stereopsis capacities in microstrabismic children to precisely determine their stereoperception ability has already
begun.

H98

EARLY VISUALLY EVOKED ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES OVER
THE HUMAN BRAIN (P1, N170) SHOW STABLE PATTERNS OF FACESENSITIVITY FROM 4 YEARS TO ADULTHOOD Dana Kuefner1, Adelaide

deHeering2, Corentin Jacques3, Ernesto Palmero-Soler1, Bruno Rossion1;
Universite Catholique de Louvain, 2McMaster University, 3Stanford
University — The aim of this experiment was to characterize the develop1

mental trajectory of event-related potential (ERP) components related to
face-processing, and to determine if any age-related changes in these
components are specific to faces. Studies recording event-related potentials (ERPs) in response to faces from 5-16-year-old children report large
age-related changes in amplitude, latency (decreases) and topographical
distribution of the early visual component P1 and the occipito-temporal
N170 (Taylor, Batty & Itier, 2004). To test the face specificity of these
effects, we recorded high-density ERPs to pictures of faces, cars, and
their phase-scrambled versions from 72 children between 4 and 17 years,
and adults. We found that none of the age-related changes in amplitude,
latency or topography of the P1 or N170 were specific to faces. Most
importantly, when we controlled for age-related variations of the P1, the
N170 appeared remarkably similar in amplitude and topography across
development, with much smaller age-related decreases in latencies than
previously reported. At all ages the N170 showed equivalent face-sensi-

252

Perception & Action: Vision
tivity; it was absent for scrambled stimuli, larger and earlier for faces
than cars, and had the same topography across ages. These data also
illustrate the large amount of inter-individual and inter-trial variance in
young children’s data. We propose that this variability causes the N170
to merge with a later component, the N250 in grand-averaged data,
explaining the previously reported “bi-fid” N170 of young children.
Overall, we conclude that the classic electrophysiological markers of
face-sensitive perceptual processes do not appear to change from 4 years
to adulthood.

H99

VISUAL REHABILITATION OF MACULAR DEGENERATION PATIENTS
EXPANDS REORGANIZED MAPS ON THE VISUAL CORTEX Keith Main1,

Temilade Adelore1, Donna Inkster2, Jeff Horton2, Susan Primo2,3, Paul
Corballis1, Eric Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2Emory Eye
Center, 3Emory University School of Medicine — Recent research indicates
that an alteration of retinotopic maps (cortical reorganization) can occur
in adult humans with the eye disease macular degeneration (MD), a retinopathy that results in the loss of central vision (Baker et al., 2005, Schumacher et al., 2008, Dilks et al., 2009). Questions remain, however,
regarding whether observations of “reorganization” represent a feedforward alteration of cortical circuitry or simply the expansion of attentional feedback into the lesion projection zone (Masuda et al., 2008). In
order to better understand how retinotopic reorganization may relate to
the visual abilities of those with low vision, we performed fMRI scans on
MD patients before and after they underwent visual rehabilitative therapy. The therapy was designed to strengthen the use of the preferred retinal locus (PRL), an area of the retinal periphery that MD patients often
use for fixation in the absence of a functional macula. Visual stimulation
of the PRL revealed an expansion of cortical maps into the lesion projection zone after visual rehabilitation, particularly for attention demanding tasks. These findings suggest that adaptive patterns of attentional
allocation and oculomotor control may influence the presence and
degree of reorganization within the primary visual cortex. This knowledge could potentially help visual scientists understand the physiological mechanisms of reorganization as well as its relationship to visual
adaptation.

H100

TWO ROUTES TO ACTION PRODUCTION OF NOVEL OBJECTS Asmaa
Dabbagh1, Eric A. Roy1, Genevieve Desmarais2, Mike J. Dixon1; 1University of
Waterloo, 2Mount Allison University — Past research using novel objects has
shown that action production is affected by the similarity of objects to
which actions are associated. However, the role of semantics in producing actions for novel objects remains unclear. In our study, we asked participants to learn novel object-label-action associations using meaningful
labels. Half of labels were semantically similar and half were semantically dissimilar. After a first learning session (day 1), participants practiced actions of objects over three sessions (days 2-3-4) before being
tested on the associations again (day 5). In addition, participants were
tested on actions using a cylinder, where they were provided with one of
previously learned labels and were asked to produce the action on the
cylinder corresponding to that label. Analysis showed that before and
after practice, participants made more action errors with cylinder for
objects associated with semantically similar labels than objects associated with semantically dissimilar labels. In addition, before practice, participants produced more action errors for objects associated with
semantically similar labels than objects associated with semantically dissimilar labels. However, after practice, participants made equivalent
numbers of action errors for objects that are associated with semantically
similar and dissimilar labels. Overall, when producing actions with cylinder or with novel objects before practice, participants were likely using
indirect route to action production via semantics. However, when producing actions with novel objects after practice, participants were likely
using direct route to action production after practice.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Vision
H101

DIFFERENT SPATIAL FREQUENCY TUNING FOR FACE IDENTIFICATION
AND FACIAL EXPRESSION RECOGNITION IN ADULTS Xiaoqing
Gao1,
Daphne Maurer1; 1McMaster University — Facial identity and facial expres-

sion represent invariant and changeable aspects of faces, respectively.
The current study investigated how human observers (n=5) use spatial
frequency information to recognize identity versus expression. We measured contrast thresholds for the identification of faces with varying
expression and for the recognition of facial expressions across varying
identity as a function of the center spatial frequency of narrow-band
additive spatial noise. At a viewing distance of 60 cm, the peak threshold
representing maximum sensitivity was at 11 cycles/face width for identifying the faces of two males or two females with varying expression.
The peak threshold was significantly higher for recognizing facial
expressions across varying identity: it was at 16 cycles/face width for
discriminating between happiness and sadness, and between fear and
anger, whether the expression was high or low in intensity. In a second
phase we investigated the effect of viewing distance. As viewing distance increased from 60 to 120 and 180 cm, the peak threshold for identifying faces shifted gradually from 11 to 8 cycle/face width, while the
peak threshold for recognizing facial expressions shifted gradually from
16 to 11 cycles/face width. In conclusion, we found that the optimal spatial frequency band for the recognition of facial expressions is higher
than for the identification of faces regardless of viewing distance. The
patterns suggest that finer details are necessary for recognizing facial
expressions than for identifying faces and that the system is only partially scale invariant.

H102

ELEMENTAL AND CONFIGURAL BODY REPRESENTATION IN THE
EXTRASTRIATE AND FUSIFORM BODY AREA Barbara Vogt1, Nicole

David2, Simone Schütz-Bosbach1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2University Medical Center HamburgEppendorf, Hamburg, Germany — Previous research on visual processing of

the human body has suggested a qualitatively different involvement of
two specific regions in the visual cortex: the extrastriate body area (EBA)
and the fusiform body area (FBA). While the EBA seems to process bodies on the level of single elements, the FBA may analyze the configuration of bodies in a holistic manner. Further investigating this potential
functional distinction, using fMRI, we presented participants with static
human body photographs of varying completeness (from arm or leg to
full body), in intact or scrambled configuration. If the EBA processed
bodies only on the level of parts, we expected the fMRI response magnitude to increase gradually as a function of the amount of body shown,
irrespective of configuration. If the FBA processed human body shapes
holistically, we expected to find increased activation of the FBA for intact
versus scrambled bodies. We found that the FBA showed a preference
for intact bodies, compared to scrambled body stimuli, whereas the EBA
did not show this differential activation. However, no gradual increase
of activation was observed in either area as a function of amount of body
displayed. Our findings nevertheless suggest that the EBA indeed processes body parts rather than the body as a whole, while the FBA seems
to represent body configuration in a holistic fashion.

H103

PATIENTS WITH PARKINSON’S DISEASE SHOW NEGATIVE BIAS OF
FACIAL EXPRESSIONS Chia-Yao Lin1, Li-Chuan Hsu1,2, Chon-Haw Tsai1,3,

Yi-Min Tien4; 1Graduate Institute of Neural and Cognitive Sciences of the China
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, 2Medical College of the China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan, 3Neuroscience Laboratory, China Medical
College Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan, 4Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung,
Taiwan — Besides movement disorder, Parkinson disease (PD) patients
are revealed to have non-motor deficits (Zgaljardic, et al., 2003). Moreover, they are often diagnosed as having depression (Cummings, 1992;
Doonief, et al., 1992). Depressed patients are reported to be associated
with some deficit in emotional perception (Gur et al., 1992), such as

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session H
“negative bias” in which they tend to misperceive a happy face as a neutral one or to misperceive a neutral face as a negative one. The main purpose in the present study is to investigate whether PD patients have
negative bias as showed in depressed people. In Experiment 1, we asked
PD patients and age-matched normal controls to directly discriminate
positive and negative faces (emotional discrimination task, EDT). In
Experiment 2, we asked them to identify gender (male or female) according to faces (gender identification task, GIT). The GIT is an indirect task
in which participants did not have to pay attention to the facial expression. We found PD patients discriminated positive faces much slower
and less accurate than negative faces (Experiment 1). We also found their
performance in the GIT would be interfered when the face was positive
(Experiment 2). We concluded PD patients, as depressed people, misperceived emotional faces in both tasks, regardless of whether the task
demand was explicitly related to facial expressions or not. The relationship between PD’s performance on emotional perception and their
depressed index from Beck Depression Inventory was also discussed.

H104

OPTIMAL EYE-FIXATION POSITIONS FOR FACE PERCEPTION: A
COMBINED ERP AND EYE-TRACKING STUDY Younes
Zerouali2,3,

Boutheina Jemel1,2; 1Université de Montréal, 2Hôpital Rivière-des-Prairies,
Montréal, 3École de Technologie Supérieure, Montréal — Previous research
has outlined the existence of a saliency map among facial features, where
the general order of saliency is eyes, nose, mouth. In addition, eventrelated potential studies showed that the face-sensitive N170 is particularly sensitive to face features, being larger to isolated eyes relative to
other face features, and even to a whole face. Although these results suggest that the N170 could be triggered by the eye-region, there is as yet no
direct investigation of the N170 response profile when viewers fixate
specific facial features within a whole face context. To address this question, EEG and eye-tracking measurements were recorded and monitored
simultaneously to allow an accurate sampling of electrical brain signals
from fixated face regions, while participants viewed faces in upright or
inverted presentations. ERPs were averaged by gaze location (eyes,
inion, eyebrows, nose, mouth and jaws). Analyses revealed that the optimal fixation position on an upright face (i.e., eliciting the largest N170s)
is located around the nasion (triangle between to two eyes and the upper
ridge of the nose). Interestingly for inverted faces, the optimal positions
are more variable, but mainly clustered in the upper part of the visual
field (around the mouth). Our results suggest that the N170 is not driven
by the eyes per se, but could rather arise from a general perceptual setting (upper-visual field advantage). It is also possible that the upper part
of faces (eyes) serves as an artificial horizon to align a face stimulus on a
stored face template.

H105

BRAIN CORRELATES OF HUMAN MOVEMENT PERCEPTION: A
QUANTITATIVE VOXEL-BASED META-ANALYSIS Susan Beaton1, MarieHelene Grosbras1; 1University of Glasgow — Numerous brain-imaging stud-

ies have investigated neural correlates of perceiving social signals conveyed by face, hand and body movements. But, single fMRI studies often
employ only one type of stimulus and context, producing disparate
results. Pooling results from several studies enables a clearer picture of
which brain regions are consistently engaged when we watch other people moving. We performed a voxel-based meta-analysis of 63 brain
imaging studies using Activation Likehood Estimation. For each experiment, each reported stereotaxic coordinates of maxima were modeled as
a gaussian distribution to derive a probability map. Averaged probability maps are computed for each condition (Face, Hand and Body),
reflecting, at each voxel, the probability that any study examining this
category of movement perception would report an activation. Only bilateral MT and a region of the right posterior superior temporal sulcus
(STS) showed reliable across-study convergence for all conditions. We
observed significant activation likelihood in precentral, parietal and
middle temporal cortice for all conditions, but maxima for the different
conditions were topographically organized. We observed specificity for

253

Poster Session H
face perception in pre-SMA and anterior superior temporal gyrus; and
specificity for Body in the fusiform gyrus, superior marginal gyrus and
amygdala. This is the first quantitative synthesis of brain imaging data
on biological motion perception. It points towards a special role for posterior STS and supports specificity for body parts in precentral and parietal areas, in accordance with the putative mirror neuron system
organization. Finally, it provides important reference to ground further
brain imaging, brain stimulation and patients studies.

H106

SUMMARY STATISTICS OF A SET OF STIMULI OCCURS IN PARALLELS

Nicolas Robitaille1, Irina Harris2; 1BRAMS, International Laboratory for Brain,
Music and Sounds Research, 2University of Sydney — Despite the several
processing limitations that have been identified in the visual system, it
was shown that statistical information about a set of objects could be perceived as accurately as the information about a single object. This processing, refer to as summary statistics, was always assumed to occurs in
parallels, but this has never been demonstrated directly. We created a
new task that allowed us to calculate the reaction time necessary to
extract statistical information (average of orientation or size) from a set
of stimuli. Precisely, we used a single fixed target for the entire experiment, and subjects had to indicates as quickly as possible if the average
of the set was, for example, bigger of smaller that the target. We found
that increasing the number of stimuli in the set does not increase the time
required to make a judgement about a statistics of the set (either the orientations of bars or the size of disks), while identifying a specific
instance of these object does increase reaction time, thus creating the
classical positive search slope. In fact, in most case the actual reaction
time decreased when the numbers of items was increased. In every case,
the accuracy was either stable or increased with the numbers of items.
These results indicate that, in addition to the well-studied capacity-limited processing pathway, there is complex information that can be
extracted in parallels from several objects.

H107

NON-OBJECT IMPLIED MOTION IN PAINTINGS ACTIVATES MOTION
PROCESSING REGION MT+ Preston P. Thakral1, Lauren R. Moo2, Scott D.
Slotnick1; 1Boston College, 2Massachusetts General Hospital — Implied

object motion, which is commonly elicited by static images of moving
objects, can activate motion processing region MT+. We hypothesized
that MT+ would also be activated by non-object implied motion in paintings, conveyed via brushstrokes (e.g., van Gogh’s ‘Starry Night’). During
fMRI, participants made pleasant-unpleasant responses when presented
with 20 van Gogh paintings (which were repeated), selected to span a
wide range of subjective motion from no implied motion to a high
degree of implied motion (participants were instructed to make an
approximately equal number of both responses, to motivate detailed
analysis of each painting). Participants also completed an MT+ localizer
comprised of alternating periods of moving/stationary dots. Post-scanning, each participant rank ordered the previously presented paintings
from the lowest to the highest degree of subjective motion, and also
marked a boundary below which paintings were stationary and above
which paintings were moving. A region-of-interest (ROI) analysis was
conducted where, on an individual participant basis, left and right MT+
were identified using the localizer and then event-related activation
timecourses were extracted corresponding to stationary and moving
paintings (based on each participant's stationary-moving boundary). In
support of our hypothesis, in left MT+, paintings classified as moving
produced significantly greater activity than paintings classified as stationary. A parametric analysis further revealed a significant correlation
between the degree of subjective motion and the magnitude of activity in
left MT+. Based on these findings, we speculate that paintings are not
processed holistically, but rather are neurally decomposed into implied
component visual features.

254

Perception & Action: Vision
H108

FMR ADAPTATION OF PARTS AND WHOLES IN VISUAL CORTEX

Anthony
Cate1, Xiaojian Kang1,2, Timothy Herron1, David Woods1,2,3,4; 1Veterans Affairs
Northern California Health Care System, 2University of California, Davis,
3
University of California, Davis, Center for Neuroscience, 4University of
California, Davis, Center for Mind and Brain — This study distinguished
between responses to object parts or to whole shapes by presenting the
same stimuli in different combinations in a blocked fMR adaptation
design. Planar shape parts were joined together to form the top and bottom of abstract objects, which were presented during three kinds of stimulus set: one with 4 unique objects created from a set of 4 parts (two
unique top parts, two unique bottom parts); 4 objects from 8 parts; and
16 objects from 8 parts. All part combinations appeared with equal frequency in all conditions. Sets of stimuli were presented sequentially at 2
Hz during 16 s epochs, with interleaved fixation epochs. Analysis
included regressors that modeled the effects of the frequency of 1-back
repetitions (for both parts and objects) independently from the effects of
total number of unique parts or objects in an epoch. Two ventral stream
regions (lateral occipital sulcus and fusiform gyurs) responded to
increased shape variety; in both regions part-sensitive voxels were anterior to object-sensitive voxels. Thus independent representations of part
shapes may persist at relatively high levels of the ventral visual hierarchy. In contrast, the medial intraparietal sulcus, retrosplenial cortex and
posterior parahippocampal gyrus showed greater responses when the
number of unique objects (but not parts) was lower, as well as when the
same object (but not part) repeated. Integrated objects appear to be a unit
of analysis not only in the posterior parietal lobe, but also in functionally
connected ventromedial regions.

H109

GAMMA OSCILLATIONS DURING SWITCHES IN OBJECT PERCEPTION

Hans-Peter Frey1,2, Marnix Naber3, Wolfgang Einhauser3, John Foxe1,2; 1City
College of New York, 2Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, 3PhilippsUniversity Marburg — The neurophysiological mechanisms of conscious
object perception are largely unknown. Several theoretical and experimental studies have suggested that gamma oscillations play an important role in this process. Ambiguous figures are prominent stimulus
candidates for examining object perception. Observers usually perceive
these figures as switching between different states even though the
physical stimulus isn’t changed. In this study we examine the role of
gamma oscillations in switches of object perception. Participants were
presented a stimulus consisting of a square that translates behind three
occluders. The perception of this stimulus switches between a square
translating around the fixation spot and edges in an up-down motion.
The great advantage of this type of stimulus is a long duration of each
object percept (usually around 5s). Static and rotating Necker cubes were
used as control stimuli for rivalrous perception and motion integration.
We recorded high-density EEG while participants indicated endogenous
perceptual switches between the different percepts. We determined EEG
gamma-band activity using the Hilbert-transform of IIR filtered data and
calculated the phase locking value. In addition to decreased amplitude
we find a decrease of phase coherence across trials in a narrow band
around 40 Hz starting around 650ms before indicated switches of perception for the translating square. This decrease likely signals switches
in object perception, since it is absent in static and rotating Necker cube
trials. Our results suggest that oscillatory gamma activity plays a role in
switching between different object percepts.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Development & Aging

Long-Term Memory: Development & Aging
H110

CORTISOL INCREASES IN MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT OCCUR ONLY
IN INDIVIDUALS WHO PROGRESS TO DEMENTIA Genevieve ArsenaultLapierre1, Sonia Lupien2, Howard Chertkow1; 1McGill University, 2Université de

Poster Session H
H112

REGION-SPECIFIC REDUCTIONS IN HIPPOCAMPAL VOLUMES IN OLDER
ADULTS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH DEFICITS IN SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL
CONTEXT MEMORY RETRIEVAL Natasha Rajah1, Jens Pruessner1, Michelle

Kromas1, Jung Eun Han1, Rafael Languay1, David Maillet1, Luc Valiquette1;
1McGill University — Aging is associated with deficits in context memory

Montréal — Patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) secrete more cortisol
(a stress hormone) than normal elderly (NE). Recently it has been shown
that individuals with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI), who are at
increased risk for progression to AD, also have higher levels of cortisol
than NE. However, it is not clear if this is due to disease progression or
to other factors, such as time or age. Therefore, the goal of our study was
to verify that cortisol secretion is stable in NE but increases over time in
MCI, especially those who progress to AD. Sixty-one MCIs and 30 ADs
were recruited from the Jewish General Hospital (JGH) memory clinic
and 34 NEs were recruited from the JGH family medicine clinic and
newspapers. MCIs were followed annually and were diagnosed as either
progressors (MCIp) or non-progressors (MCInp). Salivary cortisol samples were collected one day at baseline and two years later at follow-up.
Paired t-tests were performed. Twenty-one NE, 18 MCInp, 4 MCIp and
11 AD complete d the study. They did not differ from the initial cohort,
but more MCIp were lost to attrition. AD included in our study were
older (p=0.03). Cortisol levels of NE, MCInp, and AD were statistically
stable from baseline to follow-up (all p>0.05), whereas the cortisol levels
of MCIp showed a statistically significant increase (p=0.01). These results
suggest that time (or age) is not a factor in cortisol increase. Our results
suggest that increasing cortisol may reflect disease progression, or
accompanying stress related to worsening memory loss.

retrieval (Rajah et al., 2009). FMRI studies have shown that encodingrelated activity in the hippocampus (HC) is associated with subsequent
successful context memory retrieval in young adults (Davachi et al 2003)
and aging is associated with changes in the structure of HC (Head et al.,
2008). Therefore, age-related changes in HC volume may contribute to
the context retrieval deficits seen in older adults. In the current MRI
study we used manual segmentation techniques to investigate how
regional grey matter volumes of bilateral HC head, body and tail regions
of interest (ROIs) differed between healthy young and older adults
(Pruessner et al, 2001) and how regional HC volumes correlated with
recognition vs. context memory performance within groups. Twenty-one
young (mean age = 24.3) and 21 older adults (mean age 67.7) participated
in this study. A Group (2) X HC ROIs (6) repeated measure ANOVA was
significant, with post-hoc tests indicating a significant group difference
between volumes of the right head and body of the HC (p<.05 corrected).
Correlation analysis revealed that right head of HC was significantly
correlated with memory performance on all tasks in young (p<.05), but
not older adults. Significant correlation between left head and right body
of the HC with context retrieval performance was also seen in young, but
not older adults. In older adults, left head of the HC was correlated with
item recognition alone. Implications of these results will be discussed.

H111

HIPPOCAMPAL CONTRIBUTION TO RETRIEVAL OF ITEM-CONTEXT
ASSOCIATIONS: A DEVELOPMENTAL FMRI STUDY Dana
DeMaster1,

IDENTIFYING REGION-SPECIFIC PREFRONTAL CORTEX VOLUME
CHANGES THAT ARE ASSOCIATED WITH AGE-RELATED DECREMENTS IN
CONTEXT MEMORY RETRIEVAL Rafael Languay1, Luc Valiquette2, Natasha

Rajah3; 1Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Research Centre,
2Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Gerontopsychiatry Division,
3
McGill University — Our lab published results from an event-related fMRI

study in which 21 healthy young adults (mean age 24.3) and 21 healthy
elderly (mean age 67.7) performed item recognition, spatial context
retrieval and temporal context retrieval tasks within the same experimental session (Rajah et al., 2009). The fMRI results indicated that agerelated reductions in context retrieval were associated with changes in
left superior frontal gyrus (SFG) and right middle frontal gyrus (MFG)
activity. In this followup study we examined the volumes of these PFC
regions of interest (ROIs): bilateral SFG and MFG, in the same sample of
young and older subjects using a semi-automatic segmentation method
called DISPLAY (Collins, L et al., 1999). We conducted a group-by-PFC
ROI analysis of variance to determine which ROIs exhibited age-related
reductions in volume. We also examined the 3-way correlations between
PFC ROI volumes, activity and accuracy, within task, for each age group.
Our results indicate that older adults exhibited smaller volumes in all
four PFC ROIs; however the effect was greater in right versus left hemisphere for SFG and for MFG. The correlations analyses showed young
adults exhibiting negative associations between volumetric measures
and activity levels for all PFC ROIs. Interestingly, in young adults,
smaller right MFG volumes were related to greater right MFG activity
and improved context memory performance. This was not observed in
older adults. Older adults exhibited a positive association between PFC
ROI volume and recognition accuracy, but the association between PFC
ROI volume and activity was unclear.

H113
Simona Ghetti1; 1University of California, Davis — Our research investigates

memory for details associated with the context in which an item was
originally studied. In the present study, children age 8- to 11-years-old (n
= 16) and adults (n = 14) participated in an fMRI study. In this two-task
study, participants viewed drawings surrounded with a border of either
green or red (the color association task) or viewed drawings presented
either in the left or right side of the screen (the spatial association task).
During fMRI data acquisition, participants completed a self-paced recognition test containing studied drawings and novel drawings. In the color
association task participants indicated the color of the border within
which the item was studied or that the item was thought to be novel. For
the spatial association task, participants indicated the location where the
item appeared during study or that the item was thought to be novel.
Our behavioral results confirm age-related improvements in memory for
item context in both the color association task and spatial location task.
Age-related increase in item recognition is also observed in the color
association task but not in the spatial location task. Our neuroimaging
results provide preliminary evidence of age-related changes in the
recruitment of the hippocampus for correctly remembered item context
in both tasks. We predict that further analysis will show that activity in
the posterior parahippocampal cortex is more associated with memory
for spatial context than color context.

H114

THE POTENTIATION OF ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY BY POSITIVE AND
NEGATIVE EMOTIONS: A ROSTROCAUDAL SPECIALIZATION WITHIN THE
MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE David Luck1,2, Marc Pelletier3, Martin

Lepage1,2; 1University Institute in Mental Health, Douglas Research Centre,
2
McGill University, 3CHU Sainte-Justine — Establishing associations between
multiple information is essential for the formation of long-term memories, and is closely linked to the neuronal activity of the medial temporal
lobe (MTL). However, it remains unclear how emotion affects memory
for associations. Thus, this event-related fMRI study attempted to identify the neural correlates of the influence of positive and negative emotions on associative memory. Seventeen participants were scanned

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

255

Poster Session H

Long-Term Memory: Development & Aging

during the encoding phase. Participants were instructed to memorize 90
pairs of standardized pictures. Each pair was composed of a central
scene and a peripheral unrelated object. Trials were either neutral, positive or negative according to emotional valence of the scene. In a subsequent associative recognition test, participants had to decide whether
pairs were identical to the encoding phase or rearranged. At the behavioral level, participants exhibited better performance for both positive
and negative trials relative to neutral trials. Within the MTL, a rostrocaudal dissociation of the parahippocampal gyrus (PHG) was observed,
with greater bilateral activations for emotional trials in the anterior parts
and greater activation for neutral trials in the posterior parts. In addition,
emotional trials induced greater activations than neutral trials in the
right amygdala, which was correlated with the right but not the left anterior PHG. This fMRI study suggests that both positive and negative emotions can promote efficient associative memory performance by
enhancing activity in the right amygdala and anterior PHG. This study
also provides some evidence for a rostrocaudal specialization within the
medial temporal lobe regarding the emotional valence of associations.

was created to confirm group assignment using distance traveled during
the treadmill test, accelerometer data, and self-reported activity. The
fMRI task was a blocked, covert word retrieval paradigm where participants saw a category and silently produced members until they saw the
word ‘stop’ (e.g. birds: eagle, robin, owl…). This task was also performed overtly outside the MRI scanner to obtain the number and accuracy of words produced. We found that sedentary older adults activated
a different network than old active and young adults during semantically-based word retrieval by differentially recruiting the non-task-dominant hemisphere and exhibiting attenuated posterior midline
deactivations, all of which have been associated with age-related brain
changes. It can be concluded that sedentary older adults may be more
vulnerable to age-related brain activity changes than their active counterparts, and that physical activity may slow down age-related brain
activity changes in older adults.

H115

Malhotra2; 1Brunel University, West London, UK, 2Imperial College London,
UK — It has been established that episodic memory deteriorates during

DOPAMINE MODULATION OF LEARNING WITH IMMEDIATE VS. DELAYED
FEEDBACK: EVIDENCE FROM PARKINSON’S DISEASE Karin Foerde1,

Erin Kendall Brown1, Nathan Clement1, Daphna Shohamy1; 1Columbia
University — Multiple systems in the brain support different forms of
learning and memory. Feedback-based, incremental learning of stimulus-response associations depends on the basal ganglia, whereas rapidly
formed episodic memories of single-trial episodes depend on the medial
temporal lobes (MTL). Emerging evidence suggests a critical role for
dopamine in modulating both neural systems. However, fundamental
questions remain about the behavioral consequences of dopaminergic
modulation for different kinds of learning. We sought to address this
question by testing the hypothesis that the presence and timing of
response-contingent feedback is a critical factor driving learning to
depend on one system or the other. To determine the role of dopamine in
modulating both forms of learning, we tested individuals with Parkinson’s disease either ‘on’ or ‘off’ dopaminergic medication. Patients and
matched control participants engaged in trial-and-error associative
learning task, wherein feedback was delivered either immediately or
after a delay. We predicted that patients would be impaired at learning
from immediate feedback but not from delayed feedback, and that
dopamine modulation would impact both conditions. Results indicated
that, overall, patients with Parkinson’s disease were impaired when
learning with immediate feedback but not when learning with delayed
feedback. Furthermore, learning with immediate feedback was equally
compromised in patients both on and off dopaminergic medication. By
contrast, learning with delayed feedback was differentially affected by
medication status. These results suggest that the basal ganglia are essential for learning from immediate but not delayed feedback. Modulation
of dopamine, by contrast, impacts multiple forms of learning.

H116

BRAIN ACTIVITY DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SEDENTARY AND PHYSICALLY
ACTIVE OLDER ADULTS DURING WORD RETRIEVAL: A CROSS-SECTIONAL
FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (FMRI) STUDY Zvinka
Zlatar1, Keith McGregor1, Andrew Bauer1, Stephanie Phan1, Matthew Cohen1,
Bruce Crosson1; 1University of Florida — With increasing age, humans expe-

rience cognitive decline and word retrieval problems which affect quality of life, thus investigating interventions to ameliorate age-related
processes has become a crucial public health concern. The purpose of
this study was to investigate brain activity differences of sedentary and
active older adults as compared to younger adults during word retrieval.
Ten self-reported physically active and nine sedentary old adults (ages
60-85), as well as ten young adults (ages 19-26) participated in this study.
They underwent neuropsychological testing, a 12-minute treadmill test,
fMRI, and were monitored for one week via self-reported activity questionnaires and accelerometer measures. A physical activity composite

256

H117

FAILURE OF SPATIAL REPRESENTATION CONTRIBUTES TO MEMORY
DECLINE DURING AGING Charlotte Russell1, Stephanie Spencer1, Paresh

normal aging. A critical component of accurate episodic memory for
events and scenes is the correct recollection of spatial relationships both
from one’s own perspective and between individual items. A series of
studies examined whether aging might differentially affect memory for
these two forms of spatial information. Older (55-79 yrs) and younger
participants (18–25 yrs) were asked to mentally construct to-be-remembered scenes from a number of different perspectives. The two groups
did not differ in the ability to remember these scenes immediately after
presentation, but when presented with photographic images after an
interval period, older participants revealed a significant impairment.
Older adults consistently failed to reject images being viewed from an
alternative perspective. In contrast, further study revealed that between
group performance is equivalent when inter-object relationships are
manipulated. This specific impairment was more severe than older-toyounger group differences in standard word recall tests, revealing a particular inability to reliably recall self–perspective information. This deficit might underlie the development of unreliable memories as we age;
without accurate spatial scene reconstruction from an egocentric point of
view, episodic memories are likely to be less accurate and more vulnerable to error.

H118

THE INFLUENCE OF POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS ON HIPPOCAMPALLYMEDIATED SPATIAL MEMORY John King1, Isabella Foustanos1, Chris

Bird2, Tom Hartley3, Neil Burgess2; 1Research Department of Clinical,
Educational and Health Psychology, UCL, UK, 2Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, UCL, UK, 3University of York, UK — Intrusive memories in
PTSD have been explained in terms of anxiety-related impairment to the
storage of hippocampally-mediated contextual information about the
traumatic event. In the absence of stored context, sensory aspects of the
event dominate in memory, manifesting as involuntary intrusive imagery (Brewin, 2007). Additionally, chronic stress associated with PTSD is
hypothesised to result in organic damage to the hippocampus, possibly
due to raised levels of cortisol (Bremner et al 2008). Prior memory studies of PTSD have suggested that PTSD involves verbal, but not visual,
memory deficit. In contrast, we predicted that PTSD sufferers will show
impaired performance on allocentric visuospatial memory tests, which
have been demonstrated to depend on intact hippocampal functioning.
We present data from a group of PTSD patients undertaking a novel test
of spatial memory, the Four Mountains Task, which has been demonstrated to be sensitive to hippocampal damage (Hartley et al 2007). Data
revealed a significant relationship between severity of PTSD symptomatology and performance. PTSD is commonly comorbid with depression,
which also impairs explicit memory, but critically, for spatial memory
the relationship persists when depressive symptomatology is factored

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Development & Aging
out, suggesting that PTSD has a specific relationship with hippocampal
memory impairment. These findings are consistent with the theoretical
frameworks mentioned above, and are discussed in relation to a new
neurobiologically informed model of traumatic memory (Brewin et al, in
press), and in relation to therapeutic intervention.

H119

TRAINING ASSOCIATIVE ENCODING IN OLDER ADULTS: COSTS AS WELL
AS BENEFITS? Kristin E. Flegal1, Cindy Lustig1; 1University of Michigan —
Older adults often fail to self-initiate the deep, associative encoding processes that facilitate later memory and to activate the prefrontal regions
that support such encoding. These deficits can be at least temporarily
remediated with encoding instructions that encourage such processing
(e.g., Craik & Byrd, 1982; Logan et al., 2002), making encoding processes
an attractive target for cognitive training interventions. However, in
addition to enhancing accurate memory for relevant items, increased
associative encoding may increase susceptibility to false memory for
related information. A relatively large (n > 85) sample of older adults
(65-92 years) completed memory training under conditions that either a)
mandated a semantic, associative encoding strategy (forming sentences
that link to-be-remembered words), b) attempted to suppress such
encoding by mandating rote rehearsal, or c) encouraged effort towards
encoding (by enforcing study times) but allowed participants to choose
their own strategies. On a surprise test for unstudied lures from the final
training session, accuracy in the associative-encoding condition did not
differ from chance, suggesting that strong associations between target
items at encoding reduced lure processing at retrieval. For the rehearsal
and strategy-choice conditions, larger training-task improvements correlated with better resistance to false memory in a post-training DeeseRoediger-McDermott task, but not for the associative-encoding condition. Instead, in the associative-encoding condition, poor lure recognition correlated with high susceptibility to false memory, suggesting that
such encoding supports rejection of unrelated lures but impairs rejection
of associated lures. These findings suggest that training to boost older
adults’ associative encoding has both benefits and costs.

H120

THE AGE EFFECTS ON THE NEUTRAL CORRELATES OF EPISODIC
RETRIEVAL MODE: AN ERP STUDY Juan Li1, Ting Zhou1, Yanan Niu1,

Pengyun Wang1; 1Center on Psychological Aging, Institute of Psychology,
Chinese Academy of Science — OBJECT: Retrieval mode is a tonic cognitive state that is maintained while episodic retrieval is required. Eventrelated potentials (ERPs) were employed to investigate its neural correlates and age-related differences. METHODS: ERPs were recorded by a
64-channel Neuroscan system when young (n=15, mean age of 22.9 years
old) and older subjects (n=14, mean age of 68.2 years old) performed
retrieval tests. After a same study phase in which an animacy judgment
was required to words, subjects were demanded to make episodic
retrieval (new / living / nonliving judgment) and semantic retrieval (living / nonliving judgment) in two separate tests. The neural correlates of
episodic retrieval mode were revealed by the contrast between the ERPs
elicited by new words in these two tasks, since the new items per se were
literally same except different instructions were applied to make judgment (episodic vs. semantic). RESULTS: 1) A greater positivity through
the new-item ERPs contrast occurred 300ms after stimulus onset and
restricted in PFC areas, which were sustained during whole retrieval
course, independent of explicit memory performance and with absence
of age-related differences, may representing one kind of automaticbased processes. 2) Another larger positivity occurred later (600-900ms
in the young, 900-1200ms in the old) with a broader scalp distribution,
and showed robust age-related differences and significant correlations
with explicit memory performances, may denoting a relatively high-controlled processes. CONCLUSION: The results suggested that there may
be two cognitive components in retrieval mode processes associated
with divergent aging effects and dissociate correlations with explicit
memory ability.

Poster Session H
H121

BRAIN VOLUME CHANGES IN SUCCESSFUL AGING Selam Negash1,2,
Jeremiah Aakre2, Stephen Weigand2, Glenn Smith2, Shane Pankratz2, Yonas
Geda2, David Knopman2, Bradley Boeve2, Rosebud Roberts2, Rober Ivnik2,
Clifford Jack2, Ronald Petersen2; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2Mayo Clinic,
Rochester — The goal of the present study was to determine whether MRI
measurements can differentiate between successful aging and typical
aging. The project drew upon a community-based cohort of healthy individuals recruited in the Mayo Clinic Alzheimer’s Disease Patient Registry (ADPR). Successful aging was defined using subtests in four
cognitive domains: memory, attention/executive function, language,
and visual-spatial skills. A global z-score was generated from the four
cognitive domains, and subjects with mean global z-score in the top 10%
were classified as “successful agers” whereas those in the remaining 90%
were classified as “typical agers”. Participants who had all the neuropsychological data needed to generate criteria for successful aging were
selected, and there were 560 such participants. Of those, 125 subjects
who had had Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the head constituted the sample for this study. Each MRI scan was graded for hippocampal volume and ventricular size on 3D T1 weighted images. Results
showed no significant differences in hippocampal volume (p= 0.2) or
ventricular volume (p = 0.3) between successful agers and typical agers.
This suggests that, in comparing individuals aging successfully to those
aging normally, brain volume differences are minimal and unlikely to
account for the performance differences observed between the two
groups.

H122

EVENT CONGRUENCY AND EPISODIC ENCODING: A DEVELOPMENTAL
FMRI STUDY Anat Maril1, Rinat Avital1, Niv Reggev1, Liat Ben Sira2, Neta

Livneh1; 1The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 2Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv
Sourasky Medical Center, Dana Children's Hospital — A main known contributor to adults’ superior memory performance compared to children’s
is their differential reliance on existing knowledge-base: compared to
adults, children’s semantic networks are less accessible and less established. Using the “congruency effect”, we manipulated the encoded
stimuli in the present experiment such that the use of knowledge-base at
encoding was more, or less, accessible, in both children and adults.
Adults’ fMRI studies of the congruency effect target a priori regions of
interest for a developmental comparison – the Prefrontal cortex (PFC)
and the medial-temporal lobe - as they are known to undergo prolonged
anatomical and/or organizational development. While being scanned,
children (ages 8-11) and young adults (current N=24) saw printed noun
/ color combinations, and were asked to indicate whether each combination existed in nature. A subsequent recognition test was administered
outside the scanner. Behaviorally, both age groups showed the congruency effect, but importantly, while adults showed the usual memory
advantage for the congruent nouns, children’s memory was similar to
adults’ for the incongruous ones. Children’s congruency-related activation was observed in medial inferior parietal regions, while the adults’
occupied medial and left lateral frontal cortices. Subsequent memory
analysis revealed a region in the left inferior frontal cortex in both age
groups; in the children group, an additional large medial parietal region
was also observed in this contrast. Results point to different patterns of
activation for congruency processing between adults and children, as
well as similar regions in the PFC that support episodic encoding of congruent items.

H123

CORTISOL LEVELS IN RESPONSE TO STRESSFUL VERSUS NONSTRESSFUL TESTING ENVIRONMENTS Shireen Sindi1,3,5, Catherine

Lord6,7, Bruce Pike1,2, Jens Pruessner1,2,3, Sonia Lupien4,5; 1McGill University,
2
Montreal Neurological Institute, 3Douglas Mental Health University Institute,
4University of Montreal, 5Centre de Recherche Fernand Seguin, 6McMaster
University, 7Women's Health Concerns Clinic — Elevated cortisol levels can
impair cognitive performance, but do testing environments themselves

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

257

Poster Session H
function as stressors? The goal of this study was to assess whether the
cortisol stress response (CSR) differs as a function of testing environments manipulated to induce higher or lower distress. As part of a larger
study, twenty eight adults ages 18 to 35 were each tested in three different conditions: 1) Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI - Low stress)
tested on university grounds in the afternoon by a young graduate student; 2) Douglas Hospital (DH -High stress) tested far from the university in the morning by an older adult; 3) Douglas Hospital re-visit (DH-R
- High stress) for exposure to a psychosocial stress task. Salivary cortisol
was repeatedly measured in all conditions. To test whether different testing environments are stressful, we calculated Area Under the Curve
with respect to ground (AUCg) was calculated for the CSR in each session. One-way repeated measures ANOVA were performed with three
levels for the different contexts followed by paired samples t-test for significant effects. Results revealed that DH AUCg was significantly higher
than the MNI AUCg. DH-R AUCg was also significantly higher than
MNI AUCg. That healthy young adults experienced higher CSRs in both
stressful conditions (morning testing) versus the non-stressful condition
(afternoon testing) stresses the importance of context when testing cognitive performance. Our findings hold important implications for studies
testing populations which may be more sensitive to the testing environment, such as patients with certain mental health conditions and older
adults.

H124

AGE-DEPENDENT MEMORY IMPAIRMENTS FOLLOWING TRANSIENT
GLOBAL ISCHEMIA: RELATIONSHIP TO HIPPOCAMPAL PATHOLOGY
Carl J. A. Bourdage1, Dave G. Mumby; 1Concordia University — Most

human
stroke victims are part of an older population while most animal models
of ischemia employ young adult rodents. To add generalizability to
rodent models of global ischemia, and its associated neuropathology and
memory impairments, to the human stroke population, this study examines the effect of a 15-min global ischemia via four vessel occlusion in
rats that were 8-weeks and 50-weeks of age. Rats were tested for objectlocation memory, using a 24-hour retention delay and object-recognition
memory, using 15-min and 24-hour delays. Rats with sham-ischemia in
all age groups showed a preference for the moved object during the
novel-object-in-place test of spatial memory, and for the novel object
during the 15-min and 24-hour novel-object-preference (NOP) test. Rats
that received ischemia displayed impairments in all age groups in the
spatial memory test. However, only the 50-week group displayed
impairments in the 24-hour NOP test of object recognition. Ischemic rats
in all age groups had significantly fewer cells in the CA1 and hilus subfields of the hippocampus, than did sham-ischemia controls. Only the
50-week ischemia group had significant damage in CA3 and the dentate
gyrus. Performance in the NOIP test was correlated with cell counts in
CA1 and the dentate gyrus, however no relationship was found between
cell counts of the hippocampus and performance in the NOP test. These
findings indicate that the severity of memory impairments and neuropathology due to ischemia are influenced by the age of the brain and support the concept of distinct memory systems in the rat.

H125

MIDLIFE IMPROVEMENT IN COGNITIVE ABILITIES IS RELATED TO
OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE Anne L. Richards1, Tara Madhyastha1, Paul R.

Borghesani1, K. Warner Schaie1, Sherry L. Willis1; 1University of Washington —

Our goal was to determine how change in various cognitive abilities during midlife (age 46-53) relates to midlife personality. We also investigated whether personality is related to brain volume of regions
associated with cognitive abilities. Openness to Experience is one trait
from the Five-Factor model of personality and relates to being receptive
to new experiences and ideas. We validated our measure of Openness by
relating it to daily activities using the Moos scale of home and work
environment (N=321). We found several correlations with openness,
including expressitivity (r=.147, p=.008), intellectuality (r=.142, p=.011),
and active recreation (r=.192, p=.001) in home environment, and control
(r=.234, p<.000), innovativeness (r=.276, p<.000) and autonomy(r=.176,

258

Long-Term Memory: Development & Aging
p=.002) in work environment. We retrospectively categorized participants from the Seattle Longitudinal Study according to executive and
memory ability changes in midlife. The categories were gainers (whose
cognitive ability improved during midlife), decliners (whose cognitive
ability worsened during midlife), and stables (everyone else). General
Linear Model (GLM) analysis showed that executive ability groups differed in Openness (N=979, df=2, F=5.601, p=.004) as did memory ability
groups (N=979, df=2, F=3.392, p=.034). Gainers in both cognitive abilities
scored highest on Openness. MRI data from 145 participants showed
that Openness correlated with left hippocampal volume (r=.220, p=.008)
but did not correlate significantly with volume of segments within a prefrontal cortex slab. These preliminary findings show evidence that
changes in cognition in midlife are related to personality. Future work
will continue to examine the relationship between midlife change in cognitive ability, personality, and brain structure.

H126

FEEDBACK-BASED LEARNING AND GENERALIZATION IN YOUNGER AND
OLDER ADULTS Erin Kendall Braun1, Karin Foerde1, Kate Johnson1, Nathan

Clement1, Daphna Shohamy1; 1Columbia University — Throughout

the
course of healthy adult aging, the capacity for learning is dampened.
However, questions remain about how aging affects specific cognitive
processes during learning. Guided by neurobiological evidence for an
age-related decline in dopamine transmission, we sought to assess how
aging impacts two different aspects of learning: (a) Learning from feedback, which depends on dopamine modulation of the striatum; (b) Generalization of learned knowledge, which depends on the hippocampus
and may also be modulated by dopamine. To understand how feedbackbased learning and subsequent generalization are affected by healthy
aging we used a two-phase learning and generalization paradigm with
healthy young adults (18- to 30-years) and older adults (50- to 85-years).
In the first phase, participants used trial-by-trial feedback to learn a
series of associations. In the second phase, participants were asked to
generalize what they learned to novel stimulus combinations. We found
that older adults made many more errors during learning (on average
more than 10 times the number of errors of the younger adults), indicating an impaired ability to use feedback to drive learning. Independent of
this learning impairment, we also found that a subset of the older adults
failed to generalize what they learned. These findings suggest that aging
impacts multiple independent learning processes that may be accounted
for by age-related changes in dopamine transmission of multiple different learning systems.

H127

ERP INDICES OF EPISODIC AND SEMANTIC MEMORY DEFICITS IN
PATIENTS WITH AMNESTIC MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT (AMCI)

Patric Meyer1, Michael Hoppstaedter2, Michèle Wessa1, Lutz Froelich1,
Johannes Schroeder3, Andrea V. King1, Herta Flor1; 1Central Institute of Mental
Health, Mannheim, Germany, 2Experimental Neuropsychology Unit, Saarland
University, 3Section of Geriatric Psychiatry, University of Heidelberg,
Germany — Dual process models of recognition memory assume that recognition judgments are subserved by recollection and familiarity. Moreover, neuroimaging and neuropsychological data have supported an
anatomic dissociation within the medial temporal lobes with respect to
these processes. Recollection has been linked to hippocampal function
while familiarity appears related to rhinal cortices. Interestingly, even at
a pre-dementia clinical stage, significant pathology is present in the
mesio-temporal lobe in patients with aMCI which has been conceptualized as a transitional state from normal aging to clinical Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Several investigations showed that familiarity-based
memory, as opposed to recollection, appears largely intact in healthy
aging. Thus, familiarity, perhaps as a marker of rhinal integrity, may be a
specific measure for differentiating those with very early AD pathology
from those with memory decline due to ‘normal’ aging. This should also
hold for semantic processing - as expressed in the N400 - which has also
been associated with rhinal functioning. The present study sought to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Executive Processes: Goal Maintenance & Switching

Poster Session H

evaluate recollection, familiarity and semantic processing and their electrophysiological correlates in aMCI by means of event-related potentials.
Patients with aMCI and age- and education-matched controls were
tested on a recognition memory and a semantic priming paradigm. Preliminary data show that in aMCI familiarity was impaired to at least the
same extent as recollection and that semantic processes were significantly delayed. Especially, the apparent sparing of familiarity in aging
suggests that the impairment of processes mediated by the rhinal cortex
may offer a relatively specific marker for early AD.

Executive Processes: Goal Maintenance &
Switching

H128

mental resources flexibly to adapt to new a task. While task switching is
known to be detrimental on behavioral performance, there is a dearth of
studies concerned with the exact locus of task switching on the processing of target stimuli. We measured event-related potentials to explore
the neural consequences of task switching on semantic processing. Using
two well-known dual-task paradigms—the attentional blink and the
psychological refractory period paradigms—we examined the contextsensitive N400 component evoked by the second of two target words
under conditions that involved either a task switch or no switching.
Whereas the N400 was unaffected by the temporal distance separating
the targets in the absence of switching, it was delayed and strongly
attenuated, if not completely suppressed, in the switch condition when
the targets occurred in rapid succession. This was true whether the first
task required the first target to be processed at a lower, perceptual level
(with no N400 triggered by the first target) or at a higher, semantic level
(where the first target evoked an N400). These findings suggest that task
switching imposes strong processing limitations as it momentarily prevents meaning extraction. Moreover, by showing that the presentation of
a word at fixation is not sufficient for eliciting an N400, the present
results provide further evidence for the nonautomaticity of semantic
processing of words.

EVERYDAY MEMORY ERRORS IN OLDER ADULTS: FREQUENCY AND
ASSOCIATION WITH COGNITIVE MEASURES Lynn Ossher1, Kristin E.

Flegal1, Cindy A. Lustig1; 1University of Michigan — There are many laboratory studies documenting age differences in memory, and these differences are an important target for many cognitive training programs.
However, very little is known about which memory problems are most
commonly experienced by older adults in their everyday lives outside of
the lab, or how those problems relate to laboratory-based cognitive measures. In this study, a relatively large (n > 90) sample of healthy older
adults (65 – 92 years) completed the Everyday Memory Questionnaire
(EMQ; Sunderland et al., 1983), standardized cognitive and questionnaire measures, and several laboratory memory tasks. Higher reports of
errors on the EMQ were negatively associated with scores on the Mini
Mental Status Exam (Folstein et al., 1975) and the Extended Range
Vocabulary Test (Educational Testing Services, 1976), but did not correlate with age or education. The most commonly reported memory errors
were speech-related. Errors related to speech and to learning new things
correlated with subscales of the Memory Self-Efficacy Questionnaire
(Berry et al., 1989), and a higher score on the Need for Cognition Scale
(Cacioppo et al., 1984) was associated with fewer memory errors in
learning new things. Effects were modified by gender. The data acquired
provide a basis for factor analysis of the EMQ, as previously carried out
using other populations. The results suggest that memory errors experienced by older adults in daily life are largely verbal, associated with
other cognitive measures, and may be different for men and women.

H130

IMPAIRED MEANING ACCESS DURING TASK SWITCHING: EVIDENCE
FROM THE SUPPRESSION AND POSTPONEMENT OF THE N400 UNDER
MULTITASKING Francois Vachon1,2, Pierre Jolicoeur1; 1Universite de
Montreal, 2Universite Laval — The cognitive system is able to reconfigure

H129

AN N400 STUDY OF RISKY SENTENCE PROCESSING IN ADOLESCENTS

Jill Grose-Fifer1, Steven Hoover1, Andrea Rodrigues1, Tina Zottoli1, Sheyla
Celin1; 1John Jay College of Criminal Justice, City University of New York —
Despite an increasing facility to reason analytically, adolescents frequently engage in risk-taking behaviors that are potentially harmful.
Avoidance of risky situations is aided by rapid access to semantic networks that alert one to danger. The goal of this study was to investigate
whether the organization of these networks is immature in adolescence.
World knowledge and long-term memory content can modulate the
N400 priming effect. Therefore, an N400 sentential priming paradigm
was used to compare risky, predictable and incongruent sentence processing in adolescents and adults. Our results suggest that adults and
adolescents process predictable sentences in a similar way, as evidenced
by equivalent N400 priming in comparison to the incongruent condition.
However, in adults, more activation is required to access final words in a
risky sentence than when the situation is more predictable and benign.
This is evidenced by a larger N400 to the final word in a risky sentence
compared to that in a predictable sentence. Furthermore, in adults there
was no difference between the N400 to a risky sentence and that elicited
by an incongruent sentence ending. In contrast, adolescents showed little
difference between the N400 generated in the risky condition and that
elicited by expected sentences. This indicates that the risky scenario final
words were unexpected for adults but not for adolescents. The data suggest that teenagers have different semantic memory organization for
risky sentences compared to adults. This may help to explain why teenagers engage in risky activities when there is little time for deliberative
thought.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

259

Language: Development & Aging
I1

BETRAYED BY THE VOICE: HOW PARKINSON’S DISEASE AFFECTS
IMPRESSIONS OF PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL COMPETENCE Abhishek

Jaywant1, Marc D. Pell1; 1McGill University — In Parkinson’s disease (PD),
basal ganglia dysfunction and accompanying motor signs frequently
lead to impairments in speech production and communication. Importantly, motor deficits and alterations to the speaking voice may contribute to changes in how Parkinsonian speakers’ linguistic and social
competence is viewed from the perspective of listeners. To test this
hypothesis, thirty listeners unaware of speakers’ disease status listened
to discourse recordings produced by 18 non-demented PD speakers and
17 healthy controls (HC). Using linear rating scales, listeners rated each
discourse sample on several dimensions of personality and linguistic
competence. Acoustic characteristics of the discourse recordings were
analyzed and correlated with listener ratings. The results demonstrated
that PD speakers were rated as significantly less happy, friendly, interested, and involved compared to HC speakers. These negative social
impressions were related to speech intensity (volume) and temporal
characteristics (dysfluencies such as increased pause length and pause
time). However, the negative impressions of PD speakers were not influenced by the linguistic content of speech because their discourse was
perceived as coherent, comprehensible, organized, and unimpaired
overall. Our findings indicate that listeners use vocal cues to infer social
and personality characteristics of speakers, and that due to motor limitations in the speaking voices of PD patients, listeners arrive at potentially
erroneous impressions of Parkinsonian speakers that may not reflect
their underlying socio-emotional state.

I2

BRAIN CORRELATES OF AGE-RELATED COGNATE AND NON-COGNATE
LEARNING Daniel Adrover-Roig1, Karine Marcotte1,2, Gaëlle Raboyeau1,

Ana Inés Ansaldo1,2; 1Centre de Recherche de l’Institut Universitaire de
Gériatrie de Montréal, Canada, 2Faculté de Médecine, Université de Montréal,
Canada — Goals. We investigated the neural correlates of second-language lexical learning, regarding age, learning phase, and word type in
French-speaking young and elderly participants who learned Spanish
cognates and non-cognates by means of a computer program. Methods.
Participants performed an overt naming task during er-fMRI scanning at
an early learning phase and after consolidation of word learning.
Results. At the early phase, younger adults were more accurate than the
elderly, being this most evident with non-cognates, which induced more
non-responses. A full factorial analysis showed cognate naming to trigger activations in the left anterior cingulate (ACC), whereas non-cognates significantly activated the left cerebellum, the occipital cortex
bilaterally, the right ACC, the right fusiform, superior temporal, and
right frontal gyri. The activity in the right insula reflected non-cognate
early processing. The early phase showed bilateral frontal, bilateral cerebellar and right caudate activations, whereas at consolidation significant
activations were constrained to the postcentral gyri. Older adults signifi-

260

cantly activated more posterior bilateral areas than younger adults, particularly when naming non-cognates. Further, they showed larger right
frontal and bilateral temporal activations than the younger when naming them at the early phase. Conclusions. Overlapping lexical representations (cognates) are processed faster and entail interference control
(ACC); non-cognate naming encompasses maximal articulatory effort at
the early phase (right insula). In comparison to the young, older adults
rely more upon visual processing, and engage executive and semantic
processing areas, particularly during the early phase of non-cognate
learning.

I3

AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN RESOLVING A SYNTACTIC AMBIGUITY:
EVIDENCE FROM FMRI Delani Gunawardena1, Corey McMillan1, Vanessa
Troiani1, Murray Grossman1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Left inferior fron-

tal cortex (IFC) and left posterolateral temporal cortex (PLTC) are often
implicated in a core sentence processing network. Healthy seniors may
need to upregulate regions beyond this network. We used fMRI to investigate age-related differences in ambiguous sentence processing. We
tested 13 young adults and 14 healthy seniors using a passive movingwindow reading task. The verb in all sentences preferred a direct-object
structure. Half had a “more compatible” structure, where the verb was
followed by a direct object (e.g. “The mayor heard the election result on
the radio”). Half had a “less compatible” structure, where the verb was
followed by a sentential complement (e.g. “The mayor heard the election
result was fixed”). We also assessed working memory (WM) using a
reading span task. A subgroup of seniors had equal WM performance as
young adults (Good-WM; n=7). Another subgroup had significantly
poorer WM (Poor-WM; n=7). Our analyses compared the ambiguity resolution phrase across groups for less compatible versus more compatible
stimuli. Young adults activated left PLTC compared to Good-WM consistent with a core sentence processing network. Good-WM recruited
right IFC relative to young adults. A comparison of Poor-WM relative to
Good-WM and young adults revealed no significant activation. Even
though biological changes associated with aging may yield diminished
neural resources, seniors with good WM may recruit right IFC to support the processing demands required for comprehending syntactically
ambiguous sentences. Seniors with diminished WM resources are not
able to upregulate regions and therefore may have limitations in comprehending ambiguous sentences.

I4

FROM FUNCTIONAL BRAIN MAPPING TO GENETIC MAPPING: GENETIC
DETERMINANTS OF FUNCTIONAL CEREBRAL ASYMMETRY DURING
READING Philippe Pinel1,2,3, Fabien Fauchereau4,5, Antonio Moreno1,2,3,

Jean-Baptiste Poline2, Alexis Barbot6, Thomas Bourgeron4,5, Stanislas
Dehaene1,2,3,7; 1INSERM, U562, Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, France, 2CEA,
DSV/I2BM, NeuroSpin Center, France, 3Paris-Sud University, IFR49, France,
4
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, 5Paris VII University, France, 6IMAGEN, 6th
Framework European Research Project, France, 7Collège de France, Paris,
France — While reading ability essentially relies on culture and education, familial aggregation of a reading specific developmental disease

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Development & Aging
(dyslexia) suggested that its cerebral correlates are under strong genetic
influences. Some of these genes were recently isolated from association
with dyslexic cohorts. However, effects of these genes onto the reading
cerebral circuit have never been reported. Using a functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) / genetic database of one hundred healthy
subjects, we first illustrated the effects of the genetic polymorphism onto
the cerebral functional asymmetry during a reading task along the most
well know gene associated with reading performance: KIAA0319. Our
result showed for the first time that single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) previously associated to a risk of dyslexia are also associated
with a lower degree of functional asymmetry in the superior temporal
cortex in healthy population. Second, we used the same method and
endophenotype for hunting genes onto genetic candidate areas (chromosomes 2, 3, 6, 15 and 18). This exploratory approach allowed us to draw
up the map of the genetic determinants of the functional asymmetry during reading. Importantly, our results overlap with some of the genes
already associated to dyslexia (ROBO1), but also help to refine the
description of the published dyslexia susceptibility loci, distributed
along almost 2% of the genome. This work illustrates the feasibility and
the potential of exploring jointly the functional and the genetic dimensions of a complex human cognitive capacity, and point out new genetic
hotspots that should be investigated by geneticists in the near future.

I5

PROSODY IS THE KEY: ERP STUDIES ON WORD SEGMENTATION IN 6 AND
12-MONTH-OLD GERMAN INFANTS Claudia Männel1, Angela D.
Friederici1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences,
Leipzig, Germany — Most speech directed towards infants consists of mul-

tiword sentences. Thus, before lexical-semantic learning can take place
infants have to segment individual words from continuous speech. Previous studies have shown that between 7.5 and 10 months, infants begin
to recognize sentence-embedded words, when previously familiarized
with these words in isolation (e.g., Jusczyk, Houston, & Newsome, 1999;
Kooijman, Hagoort, & Cutler, 2005). These studies indicate that infants
start to segment familiarized words from continuous speech at around 7
months. In the current ERP studies, we investigated word segmentation
following infants’ natural environment by presenting whole sentences
during familiarization. We explored the impact of prosody on infants’
word segmentation abilities by using infant-directed speech with or
without accent on the words to be familiarized. Six- and 12-month-olds
listened to blocks of eight different sentences each containing the same
low-frequency bisyllabic word. Each block was followed by four test
tokens of the familiarized and a new word. During test, ERPs of 6month-olds revealed differences between word types, but only for those
words that had been prosodically marked during familiarization. This
indicates that even 6-month-olds are able to segment words from sentences, but only when these words are prosodically accentuated. For 12month-olds, who showed word segmentation independent of prosodic
realization, prosody still facilitates word recognition as indicated by
more negative ERP responses to previously accentuated words than
non-accentuated ones. In conclusion, the current data emphasize the crucial role of prosody in infants’ early arising ability to segment words
from continuous speech.

I8

EYE MOVEMENTS IN YOUNG GERMAN DYSLEXIC CHILDREN: WORD
LENGTH AND WORD FREQUENCY EFFECTS Alexander N. Sokolov1, Ute

Dürrwächter1, Jens Reinhard1, Gunther Klosinski1, Susanne TrauzettelKlosinski1; 1University of Tübingen, Germany — We combined orthogonally

the word length and word frequency to examine if the difficulty of reading material affects eye movements in readers of German, which has
high orthographic regularity, comparing the outcome with previous
findings available in other languages. Sixteen carefully selected young
German speaking dyslexic children (mean age 9.5 years) and 16 agematched controls read aloud four lists, each comprising ten unrelated
words. The lists varied orthogonally in word length and word frequency: high-frequency, short; high-frequency, long; low-frequency,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session I
short; low-frequency, long. Eye movements were measured using a scanning laser ophthalmoscope (SLO). In dyslexic children, fixation durations and the number of saccades increased both with word length and
word frequency. The percentage of regressions was only increased for
low-frequency words. Most of these effects were qualitatively similar in
the two groups, but stronger in dyslexic children, pointing to a deficient
higher-level word processing, especially phonological deficit. The results
indicate that reading eye movements in German children are modulated
by the degree of difficulty, and orthographic regularity of the language
can determine the nature of modulation. The findings suggest that similar to Italian but unlike English readers, German children prefer indirect
sub-lexical strategy of grapheme phoneme conversion.

I9

PRESCHOOL CHILDREN INTERPRETING TOPICALIZED OBJECTS: NEURAL
S.
CORRELATES OF THEIR BEHAVIORAL PERFORMANCE Christine

Schipke1,2, Regine Oberecker1, Angela D. Friederici1; 1Max Planck Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2Berlin School of Mind
and Brain, Berlin, Germany — Adults do not show any differences in their
event-related potentials (ERP) when processing case marked topicalized
object noun phrases in German sentences (object/accusative before subject/nominative) compared to the canonical word order (subject/nominative before object/accusative) (Frisch & Schlesewsky, 2005). Here, we
investigated the development of case marking and word order processing for the interpretation of argument structures in preschool children.
We conducted an ERP study with children at the age of 3, 4;6 and 6
years. In addition, we tested the same children behaviorally in a sentence-picture matching task. Word order and case marking were manipulated in main clauses including transitive verbs and noun phrases
referring to animate arguments. Behavioral data showed a significant
increase in the correct response to the subject-first condition between 3
and 4;6 years. A significant improvement for the processing of objectfirst pictures, however, occurs only between 4;6 and 6-year-olds. The
present ERP results give detailed insights into the neural mechanisms
underlying this development: 3-year-olds do not differ in the processing
patterns of object-first vs. subject-first sentences, children at the age of
4;6, however, display an early frontocentral negativity for the object-first
condition. In contrast, 6-year-olds show a late positivity in response to
the same stimuli. These findings suggest that 4-year-olds, unlike 3-yearolds, detect differences in the two sentence structures indicated by a
scrambling negativity for case marked topicalized objects. The positivity
in 6-year-olds, which reflects syntactic integration processes, together
with the behavioral results indicate that only these children start to
accomplish the comprehension of object-first sentences.

I10

ITALIAN GRAMMAR LEARNING IN GERMAN BABIES Regine Oberecker1,
Jutta L. Mueller1, Angela D. Friederici1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences — The structure of any natural language crucially requires the acquisition of dependencies between non-adjacent elements (AXB) for which the underlying rules are complex. We tested
whether 4-month-old German infants can learn and track non-adjacent
dependencies (AXB) in a novel language (Italian) to which they were
exposed only during the experiment. The stimulus material consisted of
natural Italian sentences containing dependencies between non-adjacent
elements (i.e., the auxiliary and the suffix of the following verb: sta Xando, può X-are). During four learning phases the infants were familiarized with correct sentences (e.g. sta X-ando, può X-are). Interspersed
between the learning phases, there were four test phases containing correct and incorrect sentences (e.g. sta X-are, può X-ando). The ERPs to the
verb and its suffix were averaged across the four test phases to reveal the
grammaticality effect. The brain activation indicates a more positivegoing wave in response to grammatically incorrect compared to correct
sentences. In order to demonstrate that the observed positivity occurred
due to learning within the experiment, we compared the first test phase
to the average of the last test phase. While no ERP difference for correct
and incorrect sentences can be detected in Test Phase 1 a significant dif-

261

Poster Session I
ference can be seen in Test Phase 4. The finding indicates that the
observed positivity for the processing of the syntactically incorrect sentences occurred due to infants´ learning structural dependencies across
the four learning phases during the experiment.

I11

Language: Development & Aging
rginal gyrus (verbal memory), middle frontal gyrus (verbal memory and
IQ), and caudal orbitofrontal cortex (memory). The results of this study
give new critical insight into possible local developmental changes
caused by abnormal TH levels during early development and associated
behavioral impairments.

EFFECTS OF LANGUAGE PROFICIENCY ON EVENT-RELATED BRAIN
POTENTIALS IN SCHOOL-AGE CHILDREN Amanda Hampton Wray1,

I13

receptive language has been shown to affect event-related brain potentials (ERPs) in both monolingual and bilingual adults (Pakulak & Neville, in press; Weber-Fox, et al., 2003; Weber-Fox & Neville, 1996).
However, little is known about the relationship between language proficiency and ERPs in young school-age children who display normal language abilities. In this study, measures of expressive and receptive
language proficiency, reading ability, and verbal working memory were
obtained for normally developing second-graders. The children were
categorized as demonstrating either “high” or “normal” language proficiency. ERPs were collected while children made judgments of correctness about natural speech sentences containing semantic anomalies
(“The fireman breaks the soup with his hammer”) or phrase-structure
violations (“The fireman breaks the glass with this his hammer”).
Semantic anomalies elicited smaller amplitude N400s in the high-language children compared to the children with normal-language proficiency. Additionally, phrase-structure violations elicited larger
amplitude anterior negativities and P600s in the children with high language abilities, consistent with findings in young adults (Pakulak &
Neville, in press). These findings suggest that children with above-average language abilities may be less reliant on contextual information for
sentence processing and process syntactic information more efficiently.
The current study provides evidence of a continuum for semantic and
syntactic processing among typically developing children that goes
beyond the distinction of normal and language impaired groups, and
highlights the need to consider the impact of varying language abilities,
even in the normal range, on the interpretation of neural processes elicited for language tasks.

Cristina D. Dye2, Margareta Jennische1, J. Bruce Tomblin3, Michael T. Ullman2;
1
Unit for Speech and Language Pathology, Uppsala University, Sweden, 2Brain
and Language Lab, Georgetown University, 3Child Language Research Center,
University of Iowa — Specific Language Impairment (SLI) is a developmen-

Christine Weber-Fox1; 1Purdue University — Proficiency in expressive and

I12

DEVIATIONS IN THYROID HORMONE LEVEL DURING EARLY
DEVELOPMENT CAUSE LOCALIZED ABNORMALITIES IN CORTICAL
DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATED WITH IQ, LANGUAGE AND MEMORY
IMPAIRMENTS. CVVV XDXVCDDDVCV Jurgen
Germann1,2,
Karen

Willoughby2, Jason Lerch1,2, Joanne Rovet2; 1The Mouse Imaging Centre, 2The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada — Thyroid hormone (TH) is

essential for early brain development and in the first half of pregnancy,
is derived from the maternal thyroid supply and in the second half, from
both maternal and fetal supplies. Thus if either of these sources is insufficient, abnormal brain development will occur. Several conditions involving reduced TH availability during pregnancy are maternal
hypothyroidism (Hypo); treatment for maternal hyperthyroidism
(Hyper); and congenital hypothyroidism (CH). While each of these conditions contributes to adverse neurocognitive sequelae –different among
conditions- their specific effects on the brain development are unknown.
The present study investigated possible changes in cortical development
and their relationship with measures of cognitive ability in 10-12 year
old children from the three TH-deficient groups using a MRI measure of
cortical thickness, which has been shown to be sensitive to developmental changes and often altered with abnormal development. Results indicated that compared to normal controls, TH-deficient children had
localized cortical thickness abnormalities in 12 areas throughout the left
hemisphere. Additionally, these localized signs of developmental abnormalities were correlated with cognitive measures in which TH-deficient
children were significantly impaired: the anterior cingulate (memory),
frontal pole (verbal memory), temporal pole (IQ), posterior insula (IQ),
pars opercularis (language), pars triangularis (memory), Heschl's gyrus
(memory), parahippocampal gyrus (memory), precuneus (IQ), suprama-

262

PROCEDURAL LEARNING DEFICITS IN CHILDREN WITH SPECIFIC
LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT Martina Hedenius1,2, Antoine Tremblay2,

tal disorder that affects language, in particular grammar. However, the
disorder is also associated with deficits of non-linguistic functions such
as motor skills. The Procedural Deficit Hypothesis (PDH; Ullman & Pierpont, 2005) proposes that SLI can be largely explained by abnormalities
of brain structures that constitute the procedural memory system. This
system, which is rooted in frontal/basal-ganglia circuits, seems to be
specialized for the implicit learning of rules and sequences, in both
motor and cognitive domains, including grammar. The PDH predicts
deficits at learning in procedural memory. We tested language-impaired
(N=31, mean age=10) and typically-developing (N=31; mean age=10)
children on a non-language procedural learning task, the Alternating
Serial Reaction Time task (ASRT; Howard & Howard, 1997). This differs
from the classic Serial Reaction Time task in that the pattern sequence is
interspersed with random stimuli, thus allowing the examination of a
continuous learning curve. Mixed-effects regression analyses indicated
that typically-developing children quickly learned the sequence,
whereas the language-impaired children showed no learning at all. Various potentially confounding variables were matched between the
groups and/or statistically controlled for, including age, sex, handedness, performance IQ (PIQ). The results support the PDH. Additionally,
PIQ did not predict learning (in either group); because the languageimpaired subjects were distributed both above and below the PIQ cut-off
(85) typically used for differentiating children with SLI from children
with Non-specific Language Impairment (NLI), this result strengthens
the view that SLI and NLI are not distinct disorders.

I14

NEURAL BASIS OF PHONOLOGICAL TRAINING IN LOGOGRAPHIC
WRITTEN SYSTEM Yuan Deng1, James Booth2, Tai-li Chou3, Guo-sheng

Ding4, Dan-ling Peng4; 1Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, P. R. China, 2Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 3National Taiwan
University, Taiwan, 4Beijing Normal University, Beijing, P. R. China — Neural
changes related to learning of the pronunciation of Chinese characters in
English speakers were examined using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI). We examined item specific learning effects for trained
characters, and the generalization of phonetic knowledge to novel transfer characters that shared a phonetic radical (part of a character that
gives a clue to the whole character’s pronunciation) with trained characters. Behavioral results showed that shared phonetic information interfered with accuracy for trained characters but improved performance for
transfer characters. Neuroimaging results found a significant learning
effect for trained characters in bilateral lingual gyrus and the learning
effect in left inferior frontal gyrus (BA 44) correlated with behavioral
improvement. Moreover, the activation at late stage of training in these
two regions for the transfer characters was correlated with knowledge of
the phonetic radical in a delayed recall test. The current study suggests
that bilateral lingual gyrus and left inferior frontal gyrus are crucial for
learning of Chinese characters and generalization of that knowledge to
novel characters. Inferior frontal gyrus is likely involved in phonological
segmentation, whereas bilateral lingual gyrus may subserve processing
visual information regarding the phonetic radicals.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Development & Aging

Poster Session I

I15

I17

AMYGDALA VOLUME IN INFANCY RELATES TO SPECIFIC LANGUAGE
ABILITIES AT 5 YEARS OF AGE Silvia Ortiz-Mantilla1, Myong-sun Choe2,3,

NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL INDICES OF SPEECH PERCEPTION IN INFANCY:
LANGUAGE EXPOSURE AND MATURATION Yan Yu1, Arsenia Barias1, Hia

Judy Flax1, P. Ellen Grant3,4, April A. Benasich1; 1Center for Molecular &
Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 2Center
for Morphometric Analysis, Pediatric Neurology, MGH at Harvard Medical
School, 3Fetal-Neonatal Neuroimaging and Developmental Science Center,
Children's Hospital Boston at Harvard Medical School, 4Athinoula A. Martinos
Center for Biomedical Imaging, MGH at Harvard Medical School — By age 5,
when normally-developing children have fairly stable semantic and syntactic skills, they begin to develop phonological awareness, that is, the
knowledge that words consist of discrete bits of sounds. This oral-language skill is critical for successful acquisition of reading, writing and
spelling. Recently, we reported associations in normally-developing children between amygdala volume at 6-months and global language abilities in the preschool years. Infants with larger right amygdalae at 6months had significantly lower receptive and expressive language scores
at 2, 3, and 4 years of age. In the present study, we investigated whether
amygdala volume in infancy was also related to more specific oral-language abilities, such as phonological awareness. At 6-months, nonsedated structural MRIs were collected. At age 5, phonological awareness was assessed with the Phonological Awareness Test (PAT) and the
Comprehensive Test of Phonological Processing (CTOPP). We found
that children with larger total amygdala volume at 6-months had lower
(p >0.05) Rhyming (PAT), and lower (p >0.05) Elision and Blending
Words scores (CTOPP) at age 5. These results support our previous findings that amygdala volume in early infancy seems to influence later language and extends the predictive associations observed to the specific
phonological abilities important to reading, writing and spelling competence. The mechanisms involved are as yet unclear and are in need of
further investigation. We speculate that the functional amygdala lateralization found during early language acquisition might evolve to reflect a
wider amygdalar contribution as more discrete metalinguistic abilities,
such as phonological awareness, emerge.

I16

EFFECT OF STIMULUS QUALITY ON LANGUAGE PROCESSING IN
YOUNGER AND OLDER ADULTS Daniel Roberts1, Cady K. Block2, Jane

Barrow1, Brian Taylor1, George Buzzell1, Carryl Baldwin1; 1George Mason
University, 2University of Alabama — Previous research examining eventrelated potentials (ERPs) of language processing have observed that
while the N100, thought to reflect sensory processing, is delayed in older
relative to young adults, the N400 component, reflecting semantic processing, is not. One explanation for the delayed N100 response in older
adults is reduced sensory acuity, while the comparable timescale of the
younger and older adult N400 component may be due to greater experience among older adults in utilizing context. This was investigated using
a sentence verification task presented at low and high stimulus intensity
levels. Older and younger adults indicated whether the last word of a
sentence was semantically congruent or incongruent with prior sentence
context. Older adults were expected to exhibit delayed N100s, relative to
younger adults, and this delay was expected to be particularly evident
when sentence stimuli were presented at low signal intensity. Younger
adults were expected to exhibit delayed N100 responses to low relative
to high signal intensities. Further, due to their greater reliance on context
to disambiguate degraded stimuli, older adults’ N400s were expected to
be less susceptible to lower signal intensities. Results partially confirmed
these predictions. Older adults exhibited the typical pattern of delayed
N100 relative to younger adults. Reduced signal amplitude resulted in
delayed N100s and N400s in both age groups. However, the older
adults’ N100 and N400 responses were not differentially delayed relative
to those of younger adults despite behavioral evidence for reduced accuracy and increased response times among older adults for the lower signal intensity conditions.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Datta1,2, Valerie Shafer1; 1The University Center and Graduate School, City
University of New York, 2The Sackler Institute for Developmental
Psychobiology, Cornell University — Many studies have shown that language exposure influences the development of speech discrimination,
but few have examined the development of speech perception in children raised in a bilingual environment. This study investigates the maturational changes of event-related potential (ERP) Mismatch Responses
(MMRs) in monolingual and bilingual infants. Over 80 infants (from
three months to 15 months of age) listened to 250 ms, phonetically similar English vowel contrasts (I vs. E) presented in an oddball paradigm
while ERPs were recorded from 65 scalp sites. Monolingual infants came
from English-speaking household, and bilingual infants came from
Spanish-English households. The results revealed both a positivity (pMMR_followed by a negativity (n-MMR) at fronto-central scalp sites for
the majority of children. Both the p-MMR and n-MMR shift earlier in
latency with increasing age. The topography and latency of the MMRs
were most strongly influenced by age, but both gender, for children
under one year of age, and language experience affected the responses.
Earlier onset of the n-MMR was observed for female infants and for toddlers with more English exposure. We speculate that the n-MMR indexes
increased attention to the vowel differences and is the precursor to the
adult mismatch negativity (MMN).

I18

LEFT PREMOTOR AND INFERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX ACTIVITY IN
RESPONSE TO NON-NATIVE SPEECH SOUNDS DECREASES FROM
CHILDHOOD TO EARLY ADOLESCENCE Yoon Han1,4,5, Stephen Wilson2,

Kristin McNealy3,4, Marco Iacoboni1,4, Mirella Dapretto1,4; 1David Geffen
School of Medicine at University of California, Los Angeles, 2University of
California, San Francisco, 3University of California, Los Angeles, 4AhmansonLovelace Brain Mapping Center, University of California Los Angeles, 5Howard
Hughes Medical Institute Research Training Fellowships for Medical Students,
Chevy Chase, MD — It has been proposed that the developing brain
becomes increasingly efficient at processing the patterns embedded in
the ambient language through a process of neural commitment whereby
expertise in processing one language may actually hinder the acquisition
of other languages as the brain ‘commits’ to the sounds of one’s native
language. While this process begins in early infancy, the neural mechanisms underlying phoneme perception throughout development have
not been well characterized. In this study, 25 thirteen-year-olds and 10
six-year-olds underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
as they repeatedly listened to 25 non-native and 5 native consonants
each embedded between two [a] vowels. As expected, all participants
showed strong bilateral activity in temporal regions while listening to
both types of stimuli as compared to rest. Albeit weaker, significant
activity was also observed in premotor areas. When directly comparing
activity associated with listening to non-native versus native phonemes,
both children and young adolescents showed significant activity in bilateral superior temporal cortex. However, only the younger children
showed robust, statistically significant activity in left premotor cortex as
well as in inferior parietal lobule. Direct between-group comparisons
confirmed that activity in these regions was significantly stronger in children than adolescents. Our results support the notion that the auditorymotor networks in the left hemisphere may aid the formation of new
phonetic codes for novel phonemes during childhood. Diminished
involvement of this network by early adolescence may be related to the
increased challenge of learning a new language with native like proficiency with age.

263

Poster Session I
I19

SPEECH DEVELOPMENT OF MONOLINGUAL AND BILINGUAL TODDLERS:
LANGUAGE MEASURES AND EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL RESPONSES

Carol Tessel1, Nancy Vidal1, Yan Yu1, Hia Datta1, Arsenia Barias1, Valerie
Shafer1; 1The Graduate Center, City University of New York — Several studies

suggest that speech perception in bilingual versus monolingual infants
develops differently (e.g.,Bosch & Sebastian-Galles, 1997). The current
study employed Event-related Potential (ERP) Mismatch responses
(MMRs to investigate developmental changes in speech processing from
16 months to 3 years of age in monolingual and bilingual toddlers and to
explore whether bilingual exposure to Spanish and English affects processing of vowel sounds that are phonemic only in English. . Over 60
toddlers (between 16 months and three years of age) listened to 250mslong, phonetically similar English vowel contrasts (I vs. E) presented in
an oddball paradigm while ERPs were collected from 65 scalp sites.
English-learning children were recruited from monolingual Englishspeaking household, and bilingual children were from Spanish-English
household. Detailed language background questionnaire and a battery
of language-related tests were administered. ERP results show that a
positive MMR followed by a negative MMR were obtained from the
majority of monolingual and bilingual children across all the age groups.
The latency of these MMRs shifted earlier with increasing age. A number
of children from the bilingual group demonstrated later p-MMR
responses than the age-matched monolingual controls. The shortening of
peak latency of the p-MMR is likely to be due to the increase in amplitude and shortening of latency of the following n-MMR. We hypothesize
that this n-MMR is the precursor of the adult MMN and can serve as an
index of the development of phonological categories.

I20

AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN CONTEXT USE IN INTACT AND
DISTORTED SPEECH: AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION

Kate Dupuis1, Natalie Phillips2, Katie Boodhoo2, Kathleen Pichora-Fuller1;
1University of Toronto, 2Concordia University — Investigations using measures of event-related potentials have consistently identified a negativegoing waveform approximately 400 milliseconds after stimulus onset
(N400) which is more strongly elicited by unpredictable (The men talked
about the mouse) than predictable sentence-final words (The cat chased
the mouse). Thus, the N400 is sensitive to word integration into a context. While previous studies have shown that increased age and degradation of auditory stimuli attenuate the N400, these factors have not
been studied simultaneously using sentence stimuli. In the current
study, we investigated the effects of both age (younger: ages 18-30 years,
older: ages 65-75 years) and stimulus degradation (intact, degraded) on
participants’ ability to successfully identify sentence-final words. Multiband noise-vocoding was used to degrade the speech. Notably, the
amount of distortion was varied to equate intelligibility across the two
age groups (younger: 6-band vocoding, older: 8-band vocoding). All participants were more accurate in identifying the final words of high- compared to low-predictability sentences, and accuracy was reduced by
degradation. Importantly, the difference between high and low context
sentence accuracy was larger in the degraded condition. The N400 was
observed for both age groups, but its amplitude was significantly attenuated by increased age, high context, and signal degradation. Importantly, in the degraded listening condition the difference in N400
amplitude between the two contexts was smaller for younger than for
older adults, suggesting that the older group continued to use contextual
information to improve processing, even under challenging listening
conditions.

I21

CORTICAL SYSTEMS UTILIZED FOR READING AND TEMPORAL
PROCESSING IN DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA Marita Partanen1, Dorothy

Edgell2, Bruce Bjornson1, Deborah Giaschi1; 1University of British Columbia,
2
University of Victoria — Developmental dyslexia is defined as difficulty

learning to read. Children with dyslexia often have deficits in phonolog-

264

Language: Syntax
ical processing (encoding and decoding sounds of words), but they may
also have deficits in temporal processing (perception and integration of
rapidly presented stimuli). Behavioural research has indicated a link
between reading and temporal processing ability, however, the cortical
basis for this link has not been established empirically. The purpose of
this project was to determine whether some of the same cortical regions
are involved in reading and in temporal processing, and also if these
regions are impaired in dyslexia. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to measure cortical activity in children with average
reading ability and children with dyslexia between 13 and 16 years of
age. Participants completed 2 reading tasks (phonological and orthographic) as well as 2 temporal processing tasks (auditory and visual).
Results demonstrated that children with average reading ability did not
have overlapping regions between reading and temporal processing.
Children with dyslexia, however, showed overlapping regions between
visual temporal processing and phonological reading. These results
illustrate that a relationship between temporal processing and reading
may only be important for those with reading problems. The current
findings may assist in understanding the etiology of dyslexia.

Language: Syntax
I22

FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING OF SYNTACTIC AND
PROSODIC COMPLEXITY EFFECTS Asaf Bachrach1, Elodie Cauvet1,

Christophe Pallier1; 1INSERM-CEA Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, Neurospin,
France — Many fMRI studies of sentence processing have manipulated
syntactic complexity, attempting to identify neural networks involved in
syntactic computations. However, most of them have made use of materials that confounded structural complexity per-se with other factors
such as working memory (Stromswold et al 1996), verbal valance (Shetreet et al 2009) or prosodic structure. The present study manipulated
syntactic and prosodic complexity in a crossed design, minimizing other
differences. The stimuli were 4-member coordinated phrases (e.g. “The
goat or the dog and the pig or the chicken”). Three types of syntactic
structures were compared: fully right branching, complex middle
branch, and complex left branch trees. Prosodic complexity was manipulated by varying the number of prosodic embeddings (3 vs. 2). Subjects
performed a truth-verification task against a display presented at
phrases' onsets. We found syntactic complexity effects in the Precuneus :
both left branching structures activated it more than the right branching
structure. 3 levels of prosodic embeddings produced increased activation relative to 2 levels of embeddings in the bilateral anterior Insula as
well as the right inferior frontal gyrus. That the Precuneus plays a role in
sentence processing has been pointed out by a number of recent studies
(Ferstl et al 2008). Our results provide finer characterization of its function, demonstrating that its role is not tied (only) to lexical representation
of certain verbs (Shetreet and colleagues) but is implicated in the representation of the abstract syntactic structure itself. Our results suggest a
role for the Insula in prosodic structure processing.

I23

THE STRUCTURE SENSITIVITY OF MEMORY ACCESS: ERP EVIDENCE

Brian Dillon1, Wing Yee Chow1, Taomei Guo2, Fengqin Liu2, Peiyao Chen2, Colin
Phillips1,3; 1University of Maryland, 2State Key Laboratory of Cognitive
Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, P. R. China,
3
Neuroscience and Cognitive Science Program, University of Maryland —
There exists a debate as to the role of parallel and serial access memory
mechanisms in the construction of online syntactic dependencies. One of
the main sources of evidence that bears on this is the impact that structural distance has on the construction of these dependencies. We report
evidence from evidence from event-related potentials (ERPs) that the
construction of antecedent-anaphor dependencies is sensitive to the
structural distance between the anaphor and its referent. We investigated the Mandarin Chinese long-distance reflexive ziji, which requires
an animate, syntactically prominent antecedent. We manipulated the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Syntax

Poster Session I

position and availability of ziji's antecedent in three conditions: local
antecedent (LA), long-distance antecedent (LDA), and no antecedent
(NA). ERP responses to these three conditions reveal two effects. First,
the NA condition elicits a central N400 relative to the LA and LDA conditions. Second, the LDA condition elicits a later sustained anterior negativity relative to the LA and NA conditions. This sustained negativity is
qualitatively similar to ERP effects that obtain when processing referential ambiguity, as reported in Van Berkum et al. (2007). This pattern of
results is consistent with a model in which the resolution of the antecedent-anaphor dependency proceeds in two stages, where access to featural information precedes access to positional information. In
conjunction with existing behavioral evidence, we interpret these results
as support for theories of linguistic memory access that allow memory to
be accessed through privileged points of access that correspond to structural positions in the parse.

frontal electrode sites in response to word predictability. The effect
reported here had a similar time course and scalp distribution to that
previously reported on verbs in the passive, relative to active, grammatical voice. However, unlike grammatical voice, verb aspect was not found
to modulate ERPs in the later P600 time-window, nor did verb aspect
modulate ERPs within the N400 time-window. These data lend further
support to syntactic information being processed within the first
200msec of word onset. Additionally, these data support the role of an
early right parietal negativity (ERPN) component in language processing, distinct from other early linguisticly modulated components, such
as the ELAN, N1, and frontal P200.

I24

Schwartze1, Maren Schmidt-Kassow1, Katharina Mankel2, Karla Eggert2; 1MPI
for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Neurocognition of Rhythm in
Communication Group, Leipzig, Germany, 2Kompetenznetz Parkinson,
Neurologische Universitätsklinik Marburg, Germany — While motor deficits

ROLE OF GRAMMATICAL VERSUS SEMANTIC INFORMATION IN
LANGUAGE PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM AN ERP STUDY IN
CHINESE Youyi Liu1, Guangzhen Jia1, Qirui Zhang1, Hua Shu1, Ping Li2;

1State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal
University, P. R. China, 2Pennsylvania State University — There has been a

long-standing debate on the relative role and the time course of grammatical versus semantic information during language processing. Recent
electrophysiological studies of Indo-European languages suggest that
word category information plays a dominant role and could even block
semantic processing, leading to the syntax-over-semantics view. The
present study investigated this hypothesis in Chinese, a Sino-Tibetan
language that shows distinct grammatical and semantic features from
the languages studied so far. In Experiment 1, participants read sentences word by word. Compared to congruous sentences, combined
word category and semantic violation sentences elicited both N400 and
P600 effects. In contrast to previous studies, the current study indicated
no E/LAN on word category violation. In Experiment 2, participants
read classifier phrases - a firmer structure. Compared to congruous
phrases, semantic only violation phrases showed an N400 effect,
whereas combined word category and semantics violation elicited both
N400 and P600 effects. In Experiment 3, participants read Chinese idioms. No difference was observed between semantic only violation and
combined word category and semantic violation. Both conditions led to
a similar biphasic N400 - P600 effect. In short, word category violation
elicited no E/LAN in either of the three contexts. In addition, the N400
effect was also not affected by word category information. We conclude
that the relative dominance of syntax versus semantics may be different
for different languages. There is no evidence for the prevailing role of
word category information over semantics during sentence processing in
Chinese.

I25

NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR EARLY PROCESSING
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PERFECTIVE AND IMPERFECTIVE VERB
ASPECT Martin Paczynski1, Gina Kuperberg1,2; 1Tufts University,

2
Massachusetts General Hospital — Verb aspect, perfective versus imperfective, has previously been shown to affect discourse processing. For
example, locations and tools associated with an action are more readily
accessible following verbs in the imperfective aspect compared to the
perfective aspect. However, less is known about how verb processing
itself is modulated by verb aspect. In the current experiment we examined differences in event-related potentials (ERPs) evoked in response to
verbs in the perfective aspect (e.g. The ranchers had branded…) versus
those in the imperfective (e.g. The ranchers were branding…) aspect.
Verb aspect was found to significantly modulate ERPs within the P200
time window, with verbs in the imperfective aspect evoking a greater
negativity compared to those in the perfective aspect. Importantly, the
effect was observed over right, centro-parietal sites, in contrast to previous linguistic studies which have reported modulation of the P200 at

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

I26

EARLY NON-MOTOR SYMPTOMS IN DE NOVO PARKINSON DISEASE:
PREDICTORS OF NON-LINGUISTIC AND LINGUISTIC SPEECH
PROCESSING DEFICITS? Sonja A. Kotz1, Kathrin Rothermich1, Michael

are still considered as the primary dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease
(PD), recent evidence confirms that cognitive dysfunctions also develop
during the disease progression. This is not surprising if one considers the
multifunctionality of fronto-striatal circuitries. We investigated auditory
selective target detection, linguistic rhythm perception, and syntactic
processing in de novo PDs at disease onset (un-medicated) and one year
post-onset (medicated) with event-related brain potentials (ERPs). While
the P300 response to deviant auditory targets was comparable at disease
onset and one year later, detection of rhythmic shifts in speech did not
elicit the expected P600 at either time of measurement. The P600 elicited
by morphosyntactic violations responded sensitive to rhythmic compensation, but varied in amplitude as a function of disease progression. The
current results confirm that cognitive functions such as rhythmic and
syntactic processing are affected at the very onset of PD, while selective
target detection appears unaffected. The data are discussed in light of
our recent proposal (Kotz et al., 2009) that a pre-SMA-striato-thalamic
circuit in its capacity to tag temporal attributes (Pastor et al 2006) is
responsible for the synchronization of predictive temporal and sequential cues (i.e. syntax) in speech.

I27

ERP RESPONSES TO MORPHOSYNTACTIC AGREEMENT VIOLATIONS IN A
PASSIVE LISTENING TASK SHOW CONTINUITY BETWEEN CHILD AND
ADULT LANGUAGE PROCESSING Sarah Kresh1, Emily Zane1, Valerie L.

Shafer1, Richard G. Schwartz1; 1City University of New York Graduate Center —

In this study, we used ERP to examine processing of morphosyntactic
agreement violations in native English-speaking adults and children
(mean age 8yrs). Participants underwent a passive listening task in
which they were shown pictures of animals and heard habitual present
tense sentences such as "The dog plays," "The dogs play," in the grammatical condition, and *"The dogs plays," *"The dog play," in the
ungrammatical condition. The number of animals in the picture in the
ungrammatical and grammatical match conditions corresponded to the
grammatical number feature of the subject-NP in the auditory stimulus
sentence. ERPs from verb offset were compared. Results show a persistent bilateral anterior negativity for adults and for children. Bilaterally,
the children's negativity is slightly posterior to the adults'. On the left,
the negativity for adults begins approximately 100 ms post stimulus offset and 250 ms after stimulus offset for the children. In the right hemisphere, the onset of negativity is simultaneous to the offset of the
ungrammatical verb for both groups. These results evidence a striking
similarity between the responses of our two groups, in line with results
of previous ERP studies that have shown that the responses of children
to morphosyntactic violations are similar to those of adults but that they
are delayed. These results are important because this simple vocabulary

265

Poster Session I
and sentence structure along with the passive task are appropriate for
use with younger children and language-delayed populations.

I28

L1 GRAMMAR INFLUENCES L2 PROCESSING: ERP EVIDENCE OF
TRANSFER EFFECTS Karsten Steinhauer1, John E. Drury1, Nicolas

Bourguignon1, Kristina Kasparian1; 1Centre for Research on Language, Mind
and Brain; McGill University — In a recent review, Kotz (2009) notes that
ERP data demonstrating first language (L1) influence on second language (L2) processing is fairly scarce. We conducted a sentence reading/
judgment study in English examining adjective-noun word order violations (e.g., ‘He saw the white vase on the table’ vs. ‘He saw the vase
*white on the table’) with native English speaker participants and two
L2-English groups who had either French or Mandarin as their L1. Crucially, the adjectives were sub-divided into those that occur post-nominally in French (e.g., white = blanc, cf. le vase blanc, not le *blanc vase)
and those which, like English, occur pre-nominally (e.g., big = grand, cf.
le grand vase, not le vase *grand). Both of these types pattern pre-nominally in Mandarin. If French-L1 grammar influences on-line processing
of L2-English, then the patterns for the two adjective types should differ,
whereas no differences between these types were expected for either the
native or Mandarin-L1 groups. These predictions were confirmed. Both
the native and Mandarin-L1 groups showed an N400/P600 response to
post-nominal English adjectives, with no differences between the adjective sub-types. In contrast, this same pattern emerged for the French-L1
group only for the adjectives that occur pre-nominally in French (e.g.,
big). For the post-nominal adjectives, French-L1 speakers showed first a
P600-like effect associated with the L2-grammatical (but L1-ungrammatical) pre-nominal adjective, which was followed by the N400/P600 pattern for the L2-ungrammatical post-nominal adjective. L1-grammar
briefly impinges on L2 sentence processing, but these effects are rapidly
overridden.

I29

WHY “THE USE OF ELECTRONIC DEVICES ARE NOW PERMITTED ON THE
AIRCRAFT”: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MEASURES OF COMPLEXITY IN
LONG-DISTANCE AGREEMENT Darren Tanner1, Lee Osterhout1, Janet

Nicol2; 1University of Washington, 2University of Arizona — Language process-

ing in English requires the integration of grammatical features between
the subject noun phrase (NP) and verb inflections. Behavioral research
indicates that subject-verb agreement processing becomes more difficult
as the complexity of the subject NP increases (Bock & Miller, 1991; Pearlmutter et al, 1999). We investigated the neurocognitive correlates of complexity in agreement processing by recording event-related potentials as
subjects read English sentences. Experiments 1 and 2 studied the effects
of number interference on subject-verb agreement processing in sentences with complex subject NPs, where the number feature of the two
nouns in the subject either matched or mismatched and where the verb
either agreed or disagreed with the head noun (e.g., The boy with the big
trophy/trophies has/*have…). Results showed that disagreeing verbs
elicited a P600 response, but that P600 amplitude was significantly
smaller when the second noun was plural. Consistent with behavioral
findings, this suggests that the second noun’s plural feature interfered
with the computation of subject-verb agreement. Experiment 3 investigated the role of syntactic complexity on this number interference effect.
We contrasted length-matched prepositional phrase (PP) and relative
clause (RC) subject modifiers (The boy [with the big trophies/who won
the trophies] has/*have…). Agreement mismatches at the verb again
elicited a P600 effect, but no differences were found between the PP and
RC conditions. This finding suggests that RC modifiers may not exert an
‘insulating’ influence on a noun’s plural feature during comprehension,
as has been argued for speech production (Bock & Cutting, 1992).

Language: Syntax
I30

A LATE P600: EVIDENCE OF NP INTERPRETATION BEYOND FEATURE
CHECKING Veena D. Dwivedi1, Natalie A. Phillips2, Shari R. Baum3; 1Brock

University, 2Concordia University, 3McGill University — We used event-related

brain potentials (ERPs) to investigate the nature of morpho-syntactic
verb-argument violations that occurred in sentences containing anaphoric subjects. The majority of work that investigates morphosyntactic
subject-verb violations (e.g., Osterhout & Holcomb 1992, Hagoort et al.
1993) examines sentences that occur in isolation. In the present experiment, subject NPs were anaphoric to quantified NP subjects of the previous context. S1: Few brothers were eating pie. S2: The brothers were/
*was eating cake instead. Forty trials containing context sentences with
quantified subjects were developed. Half the time, the quantifier was an
existential "a" and the other half of the time, the quantifier was many,
most, few, all or no. Continuation sentences contained subject anaphors
which were either definite NP anaphors as above, or pronouns. We
examined ERPs at the auxililary Verb position and found a later than
usual P600 effect (which peaked at 800ms). We interpret the timing of
this effect to indicate that checking for subject-verb agreement requires
that the mind/brain interpret the meaning of the subject NP (via co-reference) prior to, or in addition to, simply checking whether there is a
simple morpho-syntactic match between number features of the subject
and verb. In addition, we found a left-lateralized N400 effect (trend only
at midlines). We interpret these findings in the context of hypotheses
concerning the syntactic/semantic status of the feature Number and reference; ie, the mismatch at the verb "was" is interpreted as a thematic
verb violation (cf. Kuperberg, 2007), in addition to a morphosyntactic
anomaly.

I31

WHEN COMPLEX GRAMMAR MUST PASS THE BOTTLENECK OF
DEGRADED ACOUSTICS: AN FMRI STUDY Lars Meyer1, Jonas Obleser1,

Angela D. Friederici1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — How does the analysis of language structure
(syntax) depend on acoustic signal analysis in auditory language comprehension? We scrutinised this interaction and tested the functional
neuroanatomy of increasing syntactic complexity (argument scrambling
to three varying degrees) using auditory fMRI (Exp. 1). Then, syntactic
complexity was additionally combined with three levels of acoustic degradation (8-, 16- and 32-band noise-vocoding; Exp. 2). In Exp. 1 (N=16),
left anterior and posterior STS/STG as well as the left IFG -- including
the frontal operculum -- were linearly more activated by increasing syntactic complexity. In Exp. 2 (N=14), while broadly confirming the activation pattern, additional introduction of acoustic degradation modulated
the syntax-related peaks: While increasing signal quality did not shift the
IFG activation, decreasing signal quality added up with syntactic complexity and shifted the IFG peak to a more posterior-medial-superior
location (most likely to the inferior frontal sulcus). Along STS, the syntactic complexity effects in Exp. 2 did also exhibit an anterior peak (just
anterior and inferior to Heschl’s Gyrus) and a posterior peak in STS.
However, both peaks were shifted towards the mid section of the STS
and into STG, when the additivity with decreasing signal quality was
taken into account. The results speak to an “upstream delegation”
hypothesis for auditory sentence processing: More signal-bound, presumably less abstract processing areas (mid sections of the STS/STG;
IFG posterior and superior to BA 44/45) become relatively more
recruited as the quality of the signal (from which syntactic structure has
to be decoded) drops.

I32

SYNTACTIC PROCESSING IN PROFICIENCY MATCHED ADULT
MONOLINGUALS AND LATE BILINGUALS: AN ERP-FMRI STUDY Eric

Pakulak1, Mark Dow1, Helen J. Neville1; 1University of Oregon — Several
event-related potential (ERP) and neuroimaging studies have reported
that neural organization for syntactic processing is altered by delays in
age of acquisition (AOA) as short as 4-6 years (e.g.,Wartenburger et al.,

266

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Language: Syntax
2003; Weber-Fox & Neville, 1996). However, as such delays in acquisition are typically associated with lower language proficiency (e.g.,
Johnson & Newport, 1989), it is difficult to assess whether differences in
AOA or proficiency lead to these effects. Here we explore this relationship by varying AOA while controlling for proficiency and by employing complementary neuroimaging methodologies, ERPs and functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). The neural response elicited by
phrase structure violations was compared in monolingual native English
speakers and native German speakers who began acquiring English
between 11-13 years of age and whose scores on standardized tests of
English proficiency matched those of the monolingual speakers. Syntactic violations in the ERP paradigm elicited both an early anterior negativity and a posterior positivity (P600) in the monolingual group, but only a
P600 in the bilingual group. In the fMRI paradigm, violations elicited
activation in inferior frontal as well as temporoparietal regions in the
monolingual group, but activation was limited to temporoparietal
regions in the bilingual group. These results provide converging evidence from complimentary methodologies that late bilinguals rely on
different neural regions to achieve a level of proficiency comparable to
some native speakers.

I33

SHOW US THE BASELINE: ON THE STATUS OF SYNTACTIC ELAN EFFECTS
IN READING STUDIES John E. Drury1, Michael T. Ullman2, Karsten
Steinhauer1; 1McGill University, 2Georgetown University — In

the seminal
work of Neville et al. (1991), event-related potentials were used to examine the processing of phrase-structure violations (e.g., "He criticized...Max's proof OF the theorem", versus "...Max's *OF proof..."). ERPs
time-locked to the preposition demonstrated three violation effects: (i) an
early left anterior negativity (their "N125", interpreted as an "eLAN"
effect in Friederici 1995 and subsequent), (ii) a left lateralized temporal/
parietal negativity (300-500 ms), and (iii) a subsequent late posterior positivity. We present data from two separate studies which aimed to replicate these findings. Though (ii)/(iii) were robust in our data, we found
evidence for (i) only in one of our two studies. Further, we also uncovered evidence raising serious concerns about this type of violation paradigm. ERPs time-locked to the onset of the words immediately
preceding the violation-point demonstrated significant sustained relative negativities with left/anterior scalp distributions for the violation
condition (i.e., for "Max's" relative to "proof"). This effect persisted
beyond the onset of the target prepositions, making it impossible to distinguish it from any actual violation effects. Furthermore, inspection of
the literature reveals that: (i) very early LAN effects are not reliable
across reading studies, (ii) every such study which has reported them
deployed contrasts with similar confounds. Moreover, eLANs have
never been found in reading studies which avoid such baseline confounds. Apart from the obvious methodological lessons for future studies of syntactic processing, the combined picture undermines one of the
most widely cited sources of evidence in favor of serial, "syntax-first"
models of sentence processing.

I34

ERP EVIDENCE FOR A ‘LATE CORRECTION’ MEMORY RETRIEVAL
STRATEGY IN OLDER ADULTS Kristine Wilckens1, Haoxuan Xu1, Eric

Signoff2, David Wolk3, Mark Wheeler1; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2George
impairWashington University, 3University of Pennsylvania — Age-related
ments often include difficulty accessing memories that require controlled processing. Jacoby et al (2005) propose that young adults may
adopt an ‘early selection’ retrieval strategy involving frontally-mediated
constraint of the memory search space, which may allow for more efficient retrieval. Older adults may instead use a ‘late correction’ retrieval
strategy. We provide behavioral and ERP evidence to support this model
of age-related differences in memory retrieval. Using a cued memory
task in which subjects switch or repeat the same retrieval task trial by
trial (Morcom & Rugg, 2001), we found that repeating the same memory
task increased memory performance in young but not older subjects. We
then examined differences in ERPs between age groups within the pre-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session I
paratory and retrieval phases. Consistent with previous findings (Morcom & Rugg, 2001; Herron & Wilding, 2006) within the preparatory
phase, young adults showed task-related differences in ERPs within
midfrontal sites for repeat, but not switch trials, suggesting young adults
may adopt a retrieval mode (Tulving, 1983). In contrast, the older group
did not show these preparatory differences in ERPs prior to retrieval.
Moreover, right frontal old/new effects were more sustained in older
subjects compared with the young, suggesting that older adults are more
likely to engage in post-retrieval monitoring. Taken together, these
results are consistent with the hypothesis that young adults tend to rely
on an ‘early selection’ retrieval strategy whereas older adults may tend
to rely on a less efficient ‘late correction’ strategy which may have a detrimental effect on memory performance.

I35

COMPLEX SYNTAX IN LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT: AN AUDITORY ERP
STUDY IN ADULTS AND CHILDREN Jens Brauer1, Anna Wilsch1, Angela D.

Friederici1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences —

Processes of language parsing can be described by event-related brain
potentials (ERPs) online. Languages with relative free word order like
German permit to investigate the application of grammatical principles
during sentence parsing. In this study, ditransitive sentence constructions were used to investigate the processing of syntactic complexity
(low, medium, and high complex) induced by word order variations in
German. Participants, children at age 10 and adults, were asked to indicate agent-patient relations as expressed in the sentences. Adults showed
broadly distributed negativities in ERPs between 400 and 600 msec after
noun phrase (NP) onsets with a parametric modulation of this effect on
the critical NP (NP2) driven by complexity level. Moreover, the final NP
(NP3) was characterized by a pronounced and sustained positivity in
high complex sentences. Children’s data revealed comparable ERP components, but different effects. They did not show the same modulation of
ERPs with increasing complexity as found for adults, rather the effects
for the medium complex condition resembled that of the high complex
condition. These data indicate that sentence parsing in children is characterized by the same relevant online processes as found in adults and
expressed by a negative and a positivity ERP component on NPs. Nevertheless, in 10-year-olds the parsing system has reached its limits for both
processes at a lower complexity level than found for adults. Behavioral
data support this view by demonstrating that performance in children is
decreased for both medium and high complex constructions.

I36

NEUROTRANSMITTER RECEPTOR DISTRIBUTION FOR FUNCTIONAL
ACTIVATIONS FOUND IN BROCA’S REGION IN THE HUMAN CEREBRAL
CORTEX Mareike Trams1, Karl Zilles2,3, Katrin Amunts2,4, Angela D.

Friederici1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences,
Leipzig, Germany, 2Neuroscience and Medicine, Research Center Juelich,
Germany, 3C. & O. Vogt Institute for Brain Research, Heinrich Heine University
Duesseldorf, Germany, 4University Hospital Aachen, RWTH Aachen University,
Germany — The density of neurotransmitter receptors varies between different regions in the human cerebral cortex. We hypothesized that this
variation may be correlated to the functional organization of the cortex.
In order to test this hypothesis, activation clusters from a functional
imaging study concerning human language processing in German syntax were analyzed by quantitative autoradiography. An upper part of
the Broca’s region, the cortex of the left inferior frontal sulcus, necessary
for working memory during processing of sentences with a long distance
between syntactically dependent elements (i.e. subject nouns and their
respective verbs) was compared to a posterior part of Broca’s region, the
cortex of the left pars opercularis, involved in the processing of structural complexity of language in response to hierarchical structured sentences (i.e. center-embedding of clauses). In the functional experiment
the two activations of language structure and working memory work cooperatively, so a similar receptorarchitectonic anatomy was predicted.
Thus, the activation clusters for working memory and hierarchical lan-

267

Poster Session I
guage structure were registered in three post mortem brains to determine the regional distribution of the densities of different receptor types
representing all classical neurotransmitter systems as well as the adenosine system. The receptor distribution patterns of brain areas with a cooperative function in hierarchical syntax processing, resemble each other
very closely, whereas they could be clearly segregated from other functionally identified cortical areas, such as the primary sensory or motor
cortex. Thus, receptor distribution patterns represent an organizational
structure strictly correlated with specific cognitive brain functions in the
human cerebral cortex.

I37

THE AUDITORY SENSORY HYPOTHESIS OF THE EARLY LEFT ANTERIOR
NEGATIVITY Evan D. Bradley1, Arild Hestvik1; 1University of Delaware —
According to Friederici (2002), early left anterior negativity (ELAN)
indexes unexpected syntactic categories. Dikker (2009) proposed a “sensory ELAN hypothesis” to account for its early occurrence, asserting sensory cortex accesses grammatical information, generating ELAN for
targets whose form violates top-down predictions. Previous studies
examined only visual processing, finding ELAN only for targets with
closed-class morphology. Our study extended this research to auditory
processing, comparing illicit filled-gap NPs introduced by closed-class
morphology (1) to bare NPs (2) (ERP computed between test (a) and control (b), time-locked to NP onset): (1a)*the zebra that the hippo kissed
[the camel] on the nose ran away. (1b) the weekend that the hippo kissed
[the camel] on the nose he ran away. (2a) *the zebra that the hippo kissed
[camels] on the nose ran away. (2b) the weekend that the hippo kissed
[camels] on the nose he ran away. Hestvik (2007) demonstrated ELAN
for (1a). The sensory hypothesis predicts no ELAN for (2a), which lacks
morphology facilitating auditory diagnosis; Friederici’s model predicts
ELAN for both. We found morphologically-marked targets elicited anterior negativity 300ms post-target, matching left anterior negativity
(LAN), indicating unexpected category; and centro-parietal positivity
600ms post-target, matching P600, indicating reanalysis. Morphologically-unmarked targets elicited central negativity 400ms post-target,
matching N400, suggesting semantic incongruity. Although no ELAN
occurred, N400 suggests later recognition of bare targets; without morphology, category is not extractable from form; the entire word is heard
before categorization occurs and semantic integration proceeds. Results
support the sensory hypothesis, but LAN/N400 interpretation questions
will be discussed.

I38

THE ROLE OF SYNTACTIC PARAMETERS IN L2 PROCESSING: EVIDENCE
FROM EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Adam Zawiszewski1, Itziar Laka1;
1University of the Basque Country, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain — Several

ERP studies on native versus non-native language processing have argued that
the observed differences result either from the speakers’ Age of Acquisition (AoA) or from the level of language proficiency attained, but the
impact of these factors is still unclear. Some recent results suggest that
the relative impact of AoA and proficiency on non-native language processing correlates with language distance. We suggest that maturational
effects obtain when a structural trait of the non-native (L2) language is
absent in the native (L1) grammar; otherwise, non-native processing will
approximate native processing as levels of proficiency increase. Here we
report the results of the head-parameter, object-verb (OV) agreement,
ergative case and semantic processing study in native and very proficient non-native speakers of Basque (AoA 3yrs), whose native language
is Spanish. Our data indicate that very proficient non-natives differ from
natives when processing aspects of grammar related to the head parameter (long frontal negativity) and ergativity (lack of P600), but do not
show differences when dealing with OV agreement (same N400-P600
pattern) or semantics (similar N400). These findings suggest that the
aspects of L2 syntactic processing that are influenced by even a relatively
minor delay in AoA involve a syntactic parameter (the head parameter
and ergativity in this case) that diverges in its specification from the
speaker’s L1, whereas aspects of the L2 that parametrically converge like

268

Long-Term Memory: Episodic
verb agreement in our study, or aspects that are not subject to parametric
specification like semantics, are not affected by age.

Long-Term Memory: Episodic
I39

NEUROMAGNETIC ACTIVITY DURING AN EMOTIONAL THINK/NO-THINK
TASK Anne Hauswald1, Johanna Kissler1; 1University of Konstanz — For
effective memory functioning, memory control processes are needed
that suppress outdated or unwanted information. The present study
investigated neuromagnetic dynamics underlying intentional memory
suppression using the think/no-think (TNT)-paradigm. Participants first
learned cue-target associations and were then asked to actively retrieve
(T-trials) or actively suppress (NT-trials) the target in response to cue
presentation. In the final retrieval task, participants were required to
retrieve all items regardless of the initial TNT instruction. Faces with
neutral expressions were used as cues and complex neutral and negatively arousing pictures as targets to explore whether memory control is
affected by emotional content of the suppression target. Magnetoencephalographic (MEG) activity of 28 participants was recorded and minimum-norm source localization was conducted to investigate the neural
correlates. Behavioral results suggest that while unwanted memories can
indeed be suppressed, not everyone is capable of this memory control
mechanism (suppressors - nonsuppressors). Further, no evidence was
provided for altered memory control of negative information. MEG data
showed that, during initial encoding, nonsuppressors exhibited
enhanced activity compared to suppressors, presumably reflecting
deeper encoding. During the TNT phase however, suppressors yielded
stronger activity in early latencies than nonsuppressors. Especially during T-trials suppressors showed increased activity in centro-parietal
areas in late time windows, presumably reflecting enhanced retrieval
attempts which might have secondary effects of impairing retrieval of
NT-items. The results indicate that, neutral and negatively arousing
memories can be actively suppressed and that this memory control
mechanism (1) is modulated by initial encoding and (2) is a byproduct of
retrieval effort.

I40

THE NEURAL BASIS OF JUDGEMENTS OF RECENCY: EVIDENCE FROM
FMRI Andrea Greve1, Amie Doidge1, Edward Wilding1; 1Cardiff University —
Remembering when an event occurred is a fundamental characteristic of
episodic memory, but knowledge about the neural processes supporting
‘when’ judgments is incomplete, as is knowledge about the relationship
between processes supporting ‘when’ judgments and other kinds of episodic memory decisions. Temporal judgments can be based upon distinct kinds of information. First, increases in a memory strength signal
can be used heuristically to gauge how recently events occurred. Second,
recovery of qualitative information can permit an event to be placed
accurately in time. To contribute towards an understanding of the neural
bases of temporal judgments, event-related fMRI data was acquired during a continuous verbal recognition memory task. The lag between presentation and re-presentation for test words was varied systematically
and participants indicated the old/new status of test words, as well as
estimating the number of intervening words (the ‘lag’) between first and
second presentations. Successful retrieval was associated with activation
in multiple brain regions, including lateral parietal cortex, precuneus,
occipital fusiform and frontal regions. The lateral parietal cortex showed
increased activation with shorter lag judgements, independent of the
actual lag. This pattern of findings suggests that this region supports
recency judgments in a strength-based manner. Occipital fusiform
regions, by contrast, predicted the accuracy of lag judgments in an all or
none manner: greater activation for correct than for incorrect lag judgments, independent of lag. These findings are consistent with the view
that two functionally distinct memory processes contribute to ‘when’
judgments.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Episodic

Poster Session I

I41

I43

MEMORY RETRIEVAL LIMITS THE CONTRIBUTION OF PREFRONTAL
CORTEX TO SUCCESSFUL ENCODING Noa Ofen1, Xiaoqian J. Chai1, John

STIMULUS-SPECIFIC ITEM AND DOMAIN-GENERAL CONTEXT MEMORY
ENCODING IN THE MTL Hilary Watson1,2, Edward Wilding1,2, Kim Graham1;

D. E. Gabrieli1; 1MIT, Cambridge, MA — Retrieval of information from memory requires strategic control over mnemonic processes. The interaction
between cognitive control and mnemonic processes is not fully understood. In particular, it is not clear whether increased demand for control
during memory retrieval can influence incidental encoding of novel
information. In this study, eighteen participants studies 140 pictures of
indoor and outdoor scenes, half of which were repeated 12 times (x12
pictures, strong memory), and half were repeated 3 times (x3 pictures,
weak memory). Participants were then scanned while making recognition decisions (old/new) for the studied pictures and 140 novel pictures
(foils), with x12 and x3 pictures presented in separate runs. Participants
were faster and more accurate in recognizing x12 pictures compared to
x3 pictures, suggesting that runs with x12 pictures constituted a strong
memory context while runs with x3 pictures constituted a weaker memory context. Activations in lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) were associated with retrieval success (Hit>CR) in the weak, but not strong,
memory context, indicating increased demand for cognitive control in
the weak memory context. Following the scanned recognition test, participants were given a second, surprise, recognition test with the previous foils and 140 novel pictures. Participants had similar rates of
successfully encoding foils from runs with weak and strong memory
contexts. Activations in the PFC, however, were associated with successfully encoding foils in the strong, but not in the weak, memory context.
These results suggest that increased demand for PFC involvement during controlled memory retrieval reduces its involvement in incidental
memory encoding.

I42

THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF SINGLE-ITEM AND MULTIPLE-CHOICE
RECOGNITION Brandon Ally1,2, Paul Costanza1,2, Joshua McKeever1,2,
Andrew Budson1,2; 1Boston University School of Medicine, 2Center for
Translational Cognitive Neuroscience, Bedford, VA — It is currently unknown

whether the cognitive and neural processes that occur during forcedchoice recognition differ from those that occur during yes/no recognition. Although research suggests that individuals tend to rely more on
recollection for single-item recognition and more on familiarity for multiple-choice recognition, previous studies have not taken into account
basic differences in experimental design that may explain behavioral
performance differences. We set out to determine the relative contribution of recollection and familiarity during these two tasks. In addition to
standard target and novel items, perceptually similar lures were presented at test for both single-item and multiple-choice tasks. Event
related potentials (ERPs) were recorded at test. The standard old/new
analysis with hits and novel correct rejections revealed a slightly more
pronounced FN400 associated with familiarity for the single-item format, but that there was no difference in parietal activity associated with
recollection between the two test formats. However, between approximately 150 and 600 ms, a prominent occipital effect was seen during the
multiple-choice test. This occipital effect, along with a late frontal effect,
was also present for the multiple-choice condition when novel correct
rejections were subtracted from the correct rejection of the lures. No ERP
effects were noted here for the single-item condition. We speculate that
early occipital activity may reflect implicit processing or bottom-up pattern matching to support recognition when faced with difficult decisions, such as with highly similar foils. Further, frontal regions may
work to modulate or inhibit responding based on enhanced processing
of an item or familiarity.

1Wales

Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology, Cardiff
University, Park Place, UK, 2CUBRIC, School of Psychology, Cardiff University,
Park Place, UK — One account of the role of the medial temporal lobe
(MTL) in recognition memory is that perirhinal cortex (PrC) processes
item information, parahippocampal cortex (PHC) context information,
and the hippocampus binds item and context (Diana et al, 2007). It is currently unclear how different MTL regions contribute to memory for different stimulus types. The current experiment was designed to address
this by investigating the neural correlates of item and context memory
encoding for objects and scenes. During fMRI scanning, participants
studied scenes and objects in one of two semantic encoding tasks. During test participants made item (old vs. new) and context (encoding task)
memory judgements. Functional localisers were used to identify voxels
sensitive to object and scenes within PrC, PHC, anterior hippocampus
(antHC) and posterior hippocampus (postHC). Item and context effects
were queried within these content sensitive voxels. Activity within the
postHC and PHC predicted item memory (hits vs. misses) for scenes, but
not objects The PrC exhibited an item memory effect for objects but not
scenes. Activity within antHC predicted context memory for both scenes
and objects, with greater activity for trials that were later identified in the
correct study context versus those that were not. Notably, this region
responded more to scenes compared to objects, which indicates that it
also shows a preference for spatial processing. These data suggest that it
is important to consider stimuli, as well as mnemonic information, when
observing the division of labour within the MTL.

I44

MNEMONIC BENEFITS OF EXPERIENCE AS REVEALED BY FMRI:
CONTRIBUTIONS OF SEMANTIC PROCESSING AREAS Jordan

Poppenk1,2, Anthony McIntosh1,2, Morris Moscovitch1,2; 1University of Toronto,
2Rotman Research Institute — Contrary to recent theories of novelty
enhancing memory, we have found that prior experience with stimuli
enhances memory when confounds are controlled (Poppenk et al., submitted). However, the reason for this enhancement is unclear. One possibility is that experience, by establishing the relevant features of a
stimulus, enables deeper and more efficacious encoding. Using fMRI, we
scanned participants as they encoded novel, repeated, and pre-experimentally experienced verbal materials (proverbs), then administered a
memory test. We replicated findings of superior memory for the two
types of experienced proverbs. At the brain level, relative to memory for
novel proverbs, memory for repeated proverbs was more closely associated with activity in semantic processing regions, such as the lateral
frontal poles, and less associated with activity in stimulus-focused and
language regions, such as the medial frontal pole and Broca's area. In
contrast, pre-experimentally familiar (English) and novel proverbs
shared similar memory-encoding mechanisms, but differed in the extent
to which they were activated. Semantic processing areas in prefrontal
cortex and anterior temporal lobes were more active throughout the
time-course for English proverbs, whereas stimulus-focused and language regions were more active for novel proverbs late in the timecourse. In showing that mnemonic experience effects are linked with a
shift of processing from stimulus-focused to semantic processing areas,
the current results suggest that depth of processing effects underlie mnemonic benefits of experience. This is consistent with proposals that preexisting semantic knowledge is required for robust episodic encoding to
occur.

I45

DISSOCIABLE EFFECTS OF REWARD AND PUNISHMENT MOTIVATION ON
MEMORY PRECISION FOR SEMANTICALLY-RELATED WORD LISTS

Katherine MacDuffie1, Vishnu Murty1, R. Alison Adcock1; 1Duke University —
Prior work has shown that reward motivation elicited prior to encoding
enhances declarative memory for complex scenes (Adcock et al., 2006).

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

269

Poster Session I
In the current study, we investigated the hypothesis that reward motivation has a qualitatively distinct effect on declarative memory formation
compared to punishment motivation. We describe a dissociation
between motivation by reward versus punishment on a subsequent
memory test using semantically related (DRM) neutral word lists as
memoranda. Each list of DRM words was preceded by a cue that indicated the reward (or punishment) associated with encoding (or failing to
encode) the upcoming items. Cues indicated either a cumulative monetary bonus (reward cue) for successful remembering, a cumulative duration of highly aversive noises (punish cue) for forgetting, or no
consequence for performance (control cue). In an immediate recognition
test, there was no difference between cue types on overall recognition
rate for studied items (F=1.58, p=.216). However, encoding motivated by
avoiding punishment was associated with significantly more falsely-recognized semantic associates (F=3.45, p<.05) compared to encoding motivated by obtaining reward (p<.05). In contrast, encoding motivated by
reward was associated with significantly greater source memory
(F=17.12, p<.001) compared to encoding motivated by punishment
(p<.05) and to the control condition(p<.05). Thus, motivation by punishment decreased discriminability by increasing false recognition memory,
whereas motivation by reward enhanced source memory for studied
items. These findings suggest that motivational states elicited by reward
and punishment engender qualitatively different encoding states or
strategies for declarative memory formation.

I46

FOR BOTH MEMORY AND PERCEPTION, DORSAL PARIETAL CORTEX
MEDIATES TOP-DOWN ATTENTION AND VENTRAL PARIETAL CORTEX
MEDIATES BOTTOM-UP ATTENTION Yonatan Mazuz1, Jared Stokes1,

James Kragel1, Ingrid Olson2, Elisa Ciaramelli4,5, Morris Moscovitch4,6,
Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke University, 2Temple University, 3University of
Pennsylvania, 4Rotman Research Institute of Baycrest Centre, 5University of
Bologna, 6University of Toronto — According to the Attention to Memory
(AtoM) model (Ciaramelli et al., 2008; Cabeza et al. 2008), dorsal parietal
cortex (DPC) mediates top-down attention processes that guide memory
search and monitoring operations according to retrieval goals, whereas
ventral parietal cortex (VPC) mediates bottom-up attention processes
that are captured by recovered memories. The AtoM model assumes that
these attentional processes are similar for memory and perception, and it
predicts that attention-related DPC and VPC activations for cognitive
functions should overlap. Although the overlap prediction is generally
consistent with meta-analyses of fMRI literature, the goal of the present
fMRI study was to test it directly by comparing the distribution of parietal activations during memory and perception tasks within-participants. In each trial of the memory task, participants covertly recalled a
previously-studied 4-word chain (e.g. dog >> cat >> tiger >> stripe) and
pressed a key upon recalling the fourth word. In each trial of the perception task, participants viewed a rapidly-presented stream of consonants
and pressed a key when detecting a vowel. In both tasks, top-down
“search” was modeled as sustained activity from trial onset to the
response, and bottom-up “detection” was modeled as transient activity
immediately before the response. Conjunction analyses showed searchrelated activity in DPC (intra-parietal sulcus—IPS) and detection-related
activity in VPC (temporo-parietal junction—TPJ) for both memory and
perception tasks. These findings are consistent with the AtoM model:
memory and perception engaged overlapping DPC regions for topdown attention and overlapping VPC regions for bottom-up attention.

I47

NEURAL CORRELATES OF WORD REPETITION, PROCESSING FLUENCY,
AND RECOGNITION MEMORY Heather D. Lucas1, Jason R. Taylor2, Rik N.

A. Henson2, Ken A. Paller1; 1Northwestern University, 2MRC Cognition and
Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge UK — When a stimulus is encountered for a
second time, both explicit recognition memory and implicit priming can
occur. Priming and recognition are mnemonic expressions commonly
attributed to neurobiologically distinct memory systems. However,

270

Long-Term Memory: Episodic
debate surrounds the extent to which recognition can be influenced by
the same increases in processing fluency that support priming for
repeated stimuli. Under some circumstances, fluency may give rise to
feelings that an item has been previously encountered, thus increasing
the likelihood that participants will endorse items as “old” on recognition tests. Woollams, Taylor, Karayanidis, and Henson (2008) used
masked primes immediately preceding test cues to identify distinct neural correlates of fluency and explicit memory during recognition testing.
The present study extends these findings by examining neural signals of
repetition priming with a 600-ms delay interposed between the prime
and test cue. Like Woollams and colleagues (2008), we found an increase
in the proportion of “old” judgments when the masked word was the
same as the test cue relative to when it was different (i.e., the JacobyWhitehouse effect, 1989). We also replicated previous findings of
reduced centroparietal N400 potentials associated with masked priming.
Additional patterns of neural activity were associated specifically with
priming of unstudied items, perhaps reflecting an aspect of conceptual
processing. These findings highlight that fluency can stem from multiple
sources—including orthographic, lexical, and conceptual levels of processing—that may differ in the timecourse with which they become
available after a prime is presented.

I48

THE EFFECTS OF SEMANTIC RELATEDNESS ON CONTEXT-SPECIFIC
OBJECT RECOGNITION Kevin Kawa1, Devin Duke2, Jonathan Parch1, Jose

Cardoza1, Lynn Nadel1, Lee Ryan1; 1University of Arizona, 2University of
Western Ontario — Hayes, Nadel, and Ryan (2007) demonstrated that
object recognition performance decreased by approximately 15% following a change in context from study to test, specifically, when objects
studied in a complex scene were then tested on a white background. The
decrement was observed regardless of whether encoding was intentional
or incidental, suggesting automatic binding between the object and the
scene. This automatic binding may have occurred because the objects
were presented in scenes that were strongly semantically related to the
object – a vase on a coffee table, a lamp on an office desk, etc. To investigate the influence of semantic relatedness on context-specific object recognition, the present study varied the specific context from study to test
while maintaining semantic relatedness between the object and the context. Household objects (e.g., teapot) were presented in a strongly
semantically related scene (e.g., a kitchen). The objects were then tested
in either the identical context (the same kitchen), a semantically similar
context (another kitchen), a different but equally semantically related
context (a dining room), or on a white background. Results showed a
stepwise decrease in recognition performance – the same kitchen >
another kitchen > a dining room > a white background. Thus, recognition was supported by both the semantic similarity of the context from
study to test, as well as the specific visual details of the scene. While optimal recognition occurs when the exact same context is presented, other
semantically appropriate contexts may still be used to aid in retrieval of
episodic information.

I49

WORKING MEMORY IS NOT THE PATHWAY TO THE CREATION OF LONGTERM MEMORY Bethany C. Y. Wu1, David E. J. Linden1, Christoph Klein1,

Stephan G. Boehm1; 1School of Psychology, Bangor University, Wales, U.K. —
Working and long-term memory have long been considered distinct
memory systems. For example, we have recently shown evidence from
event-related potentials (ERPs) of differences between memory systems
of the processes supporting memory encoding, the attempt to retrieve
from memory and the success of retrieval. Furthermore, it is widely
believed that working memory is the pathway to long-term memory.
Here, we attempted to replicate our previous findings. In addition, we
investigated the proposed pathway to the creation of long-term memory
by comparing long-term memory performance for items studied in
either a working or a non-working memory task. Famous faces were
encoded in a working memory or a familiarity task and tested later in
either an episodic memory or a priming test. ERPs showed topographi-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Episodic
cally and temporally different old/new effects for working (400-500 ms,
500-600 ms) and episodic memory (275-375 ms, 500-650 ms). ERPs of
retrieval attempt from working and episodic memory also differed. In
the episodic memory test, performance measures were not affected by
the study task. In the priming test, priming was present for faces from
both study tasks; similarly to the episodic memory test, the amount of
priming did not differ between study conditions. Our results replicate
our prior findings of dissociations in ERPs between working and longterm memory. Moreover, the lack of performance advantages from
working over non-working memory encoding challenges the common
view of working memory as the pathway to the creation of long-term
memory.

I50

EPISODIC RETRIEVAL OF PERCEIVED AND IMAGINED ITEMS STUDIED BY
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY (EEG) Timm Rosburg1, Axel Mecklinger1,

Mikael Johansson2; 1Saarland University, Germany, 2Lund University,
Sweden — In the current study, we investigated episodic retrieval of perceived and imagined items by event-related potentials (ERPs) and eventrelated spectral perturbations (ERSPs). 27 subjects took part in a recognition experiment, consisting of an incidental study phase and a subsequent test phase. During the study phase, 92 nouns characterizing
concrete objects were presented either followed by drawings of these
objects or followed by the instruction to mentally visualize them. During
the test phase, items of one category were defined as targets and had to
be classified as “old”, while items of the other category together with
newly presented items had to be rejected. ERPs and ERSPs were calculated for each category of items and compared between conditions.
Analysis of behavioral data revealed that perceived and imagined target
items were equally well recognized, but subjects responded significant
slower to imagined target items. The ERPs to imagined targets showed a
larger late posterior negativity (LPN) than the ERPs to perceived targets,
with differences starting at about 850 ms. This modulation of the LPN
was accompanied by systematic changes in the ERSP of delta band activity, but not by changes in phase-locking. Even though the equal memory
performance indicates that retrieval of imagined items was as successful
as retrieval of perceived items, both the longer reaction times and the
increased LPN suggest that the reconstruction of previously imagined
memory items requires more processing time and higher mental efforts.

I51

EFFECTS OF PERCEPTUAL EXPERTISE ON RECOGNITION MEMORY

Grit
Herzmann1, Tim Curran1; 1University of Colorado at Boulder — Although per-

ceptual expertise is known to improve early visual processing, there has
not been a direct investigation of its effect on memory. We used behavioral measures and event-related potentials (ERPs) to determine how
perceptual expertise facilitates recognition memory. The electroencephalogram of sixty-one subjects was recorded as they completed a remember/know paradigm with car and bird stimuli. Experts and novices for
cars were defined as the 20 participants with the highest and lowest performances for cars, respectively, in a subordinate matching task. ERPs
for all subjects were correlated with performance in recognition and subordinate matching. No group differences or correlations were found for
behavioral data or ERPs with birds, but expertise affected car recognition
in several ways. Experts recognized cars more accurately and “remembered” old cars more often than novices. Novices made more false
alarms. Memory performance correlated directly with subordinate
matching. The FN400, related to familiarity processes, was more pronounced over right frontal areas for experts. More positive differences in
amplitudes between “known” old and new cars at these areas were associated with fewer false alarms. The parietal old/new effect, related to
recollection processes, was found for experts but absent for novices. A
more positive parietal old/new effect was associated with more accurate
memory performance, more accurate “remembered” judgments, and
better subordinate matching. Perceptual expertise thus facilitates both
familiarity and recollection processes of recognition memory. Like perceptual processing, perceptual expertise can be assumed to sharpen the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session I
discrimination between exemplars in long-term memory by supporting
more detailed and distinct representations.

I52

TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF BLOOD-OXYGEN-LEVEL DEPENDENT (BOLD)
RESPONSES IN THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE DURING ASSOCIATIVE
ENCODING Katherine Duncan1, Bernhard P. Staresina1, Lila Davachi1; 1New
York University — Functional magnetic resonance imaging has proven to
be an invaluable tool for investigating the mnemonic roles of individual
medial temporal lobe (MTL) regions. The success of this tool, however,
has been curtailed by the poor signal-to-noise ratio of BOLD responses in
the MTL. In the current study, we used a slow-event related design to
assess how variability in the shape of BOLD responses (across individuals and across time) may contribute to this problem. During the scanning
session subjects performed an associative encoding task and then later,
outside the scanner, had their memory tested for the presented items
and associated source information. Preliminary imaging analyses show
that, while responses are relatively stable across runs in earlier visual
areas, responses in the hippocampus declined dramatically over the
hour-long scanning session. Additionally, large between-subject differences were found in the shape of hippocampal responses, with many
subjects’ responses being well fit by a canonical hemodynamic-response
function while others had responses with negative amplitudes and
extended widths. Interestingly, we found some evidence that this
between-subject difference in response shape may be reflected in their
subsequent memory performance. We are also exploring improvements
in the sensitivity of analysis approaches that take these sources of variability into account.
I53

NEURAL CORRELATES OF CUED-RECALL WITH AND WITHOUT RETRIEVAL
OF SOURCE INFORMATION: AN FMRI STUDY Hiroki R. Hayama1, Michael

D. Rugg1; 1Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, University of
California, Irvine — Numerous fMRI studies have investigated the neural

correlates of successful item or source memory. Few studies however
have investigated the neural correlates of successful cued recall, and
none have combined tests of cued recall and source memory. Accordingly, the present study addressed the question whether the neural correlates of cued recall vary according to whether or not source retrieval is
successful. The study comprised two identical study-test cycles. In each
study phase 60 words were presented, each word appearing either to the
left or right of fixation. Test items comprised three-letter word stems,
two-thirds of which corresponded to study items. The requirement was
to use each stem to try to recall a word from study. If recall was successful, the word and the side on which it had been presented at study were
stated. When recall failed, the first word to come to mind was stated.
Thus, two classes of ‘recollected’ item were identified – those correctly
recalled and associated with a correct source judgment, and those
recalled and associated with an incorrect judgment. Recall effects (Correct + Incorrect Source > Correct Rejection (CR)) were evident bilaterally
in retrosplenial/cingulate cortex, medial and lateral parietal cortex, dorsolateral and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, and the medial temporal
lobe. Source memory effects (Correct>Incorrect source) overlapped with
the recall effects in several regions, including retrosplenial/cingulate,
lateral parietal, and parahippocampal cortex. No regions demonstrated
effects unique to source retrieval. The findings suggest that cued recall
and source recollection depend on a common retrieval network.

I54

REDUCED THE VIVIDNESS OF MEMORY FOR COMPLEX STIMULI AND
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL EVENTS IN PATIENTS WITH TEMPORAL LOBE
EPILEPSY OR EXCISIONS Marie St-Laurent1,2, Morris Moscovitch1,3, Mary

Pat McAndrews1,2; 1University of Toronto, Canada, 2Krembil Neuroscience
Program, Toronto, Canada, 3Rotman Research Institute, Toronto, Canada —
Unilateral medial temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE), a condition that affects
the integrity of the medial temporal memory system, reduces the level of

271

Poster Session I
details of memory for personal episodes, or autobiographical memories
(AM). Perceptual details, such as visual scene elements, sounds, and
physical sensations, are especially prone to disruption. We assessed
whether vivid and non-vivid episodic memories are equally affected by
TLE, and whether this can be linked to their loss of AM vividness. We
compared AM to memory for complex stimuli (short stories) studied in
the laboratory in TLE patients and healthy controls. At encoding, the stories were shown under two different formats: as audio-visual film clips
(vivid), and as written narratives presented with a voice over (nonvivid). At retrieval, participants were instructed to reflect on their memory for the personal event or story for 16s, after which they described the
content and vividness of their retrieval experience using scales and free
recall. A preliminary analysis reveals a large deficit in perceptual details
in both the AM and the vivid story condition in our patients. While
healthy controls retrieved a greater number of perceptual details in the
vivid condition than they imagined in the non-vivid condition, this
increase was reduced for TLE patients. These results support previous
evidence that TLE disrupts the neural circuitry supporting the integration of vivid details into complex scenes.

I55

DISTINGUISHING THE ROLES OF PARAHIPPOCAMPAL CORTEX AND
HIPPOCAMPUS DURING OBJECT-SCENE RECOGNITION Devin Duke1,

Chun-Yu Lin2, Kevin Kawa2, Lynn Nadel2, Lee Ryan2; 1University of Western
Ontario, 2University of Arizona — Hayes et al. (2007) demonstrated that
object recognition decreases when objects are studied in a semanticallyrelated scene and then tested on a white background, compared to
objects tested in the same context. During study, parahippocampal cortex (PHC) activated during object-scene presentation and predicted subsequent object recognition. PHC also re-activated during recognition
testing, even when objects were tested on a white background. These
results suggested that PHC contributes to object-scene binding and acts
to reinstate that scene context during subsequent retrieval, even when
the context is no longer present. Left unanswered by this study is
whether PHC binds the specific object-scene pairs, or whether PHC activates when an object is presented in any semantically-related scene,
regardless of the specific visual details of that scene (suggested by Bar &
Aminoff, 2003). The present fMRI study involved young adults making
old/new recognition judgments for objects studied in semanticallyrelated scenes and then tested in four context conditions: i) the identical
scene, (ii) a novel but equally related scene, (iii) a familiar (old) but
recombined scene, or iv) a white background. During recognition, PHC
activity was equivalent for all three object-scene test conditions, regardless of whether the original object-scene pair was presented. In contrast,
bilateral hippocampus activated optimally when the object was presented once again in the identical scene, compared to a familiar but
recombined scene. These findings suggest that PHC may respond to
objects presented in any semantically-related scene, while hippocampus
codes for visually-specific object-scene pairs.

I56

SCAN ME ONCE, SCAN ME TWICE: EFFECTS OF REPEATED RETRIEVAL ON
NEURAL CORRELATES OF RECENT AND REMOTE EPISODIC
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORIES Hedvig
Soderlund1,
Morris

Moscovitch2,3, Namita Kumar2, Marina Mandic2, Brian Levine2,4; 1Uppsala
University, Sweden, 2The Rotman Research Institute, Toronto, Canada,
3University of Toronto, Canada, 4University of Toronto, Canada — Retrieving

an episodic autobiographical memory repeatedly may change the neural
underpinnings of that memory. Also, this change may differ between
recent and remote memories, with remote memories being more stable
across repeated retrieval than recent memories. To assess the effect of
repeated retrieval overall and as a function of memory age, we scanned
participants with fMRI on two occasions (61±17 days apart) while they
retrieved similar memories of varying remoteness. The memories
recalled were of the same events, although of two different aspects of the
event. An overall effect of repeated scanning was observed in the right

272

Long-Term Memory: Episodic
hemisphere in mainly the inferior parietal lobe, lingual gyrus and the
precuneus because of less activity during the second scan. Little change
in neural correlates was observed for the most recent memories (1 week
old at 1st scan; ~2 months old at 2nd scan) and the most remote memories (10 years old); much change was observed for the intermediately old
memories that were 1 month old and, to a smaller extent, 1 year old.
These changes included various regions of the autobiographical memory
network, but not the hippocampus. Implications for theories of system
consolidation will be discussed.

I57

SOURCE INFORMATION RETRIEVAL IN A RECOGNITION MEMORY
TASK Matthew V. Mollison1, Tim Curran1; 1University of Colorado at
Boulder — In a dual-process framework, two processes are involved in
successful recognition memory: recollection involves the retrieval of specific information from the study episode, and familiarity supports recognition without the retrieval of details. The differences between these
processes have been examined using correlated patterns of activity in the
electroencephalogram (EEG). Event-related potentials (ERPs) dissociate
between these recognition memory processes, specifically with an early
(approximately 400 ms) frontal effect relating to familiarity (the FN400)
and a later parietal (500-700 ms) effect relating to recognition. It has been
debated whether source information for a studied item (i.e., contextual
information from when the item was previously encountered) is only
accessible through recollection, or whether familiarity can contribute to
successful source recognition (Ratcliff et al., 1995). These alternatives
were examined in experiments involving source memory judgments for
pictures of common objects. Experiment 1 revealed results inconsistent
with the idea that only recollection supports retrieval of correct source
information: the FN400 ERP component was significantly different
between trials associated with correct and incorrect source judgments.
Here, source information were arbitrary contextual associations presented visually (screen side and border color). Source information in
Experiment 2 was defined according to the encoding task that subjects
completed during the study list (size or living/nonliving judgments),
and the FN400 did not differ between correct and incorrect source
retrieval. These results suggest that the contribution from familiarity
depends on the type of source information available, with familiarity
being more likely to contribute when the source attributes are perceptually defined.
I58

DEFICITS IN PAST REMEMBERING EXTEND TO FUTURE IMAGINING IN
DEVELOPMENTAL AMNESIA Nicole Carson1,2, Donna Kwan1, Donna Rose

Addis3, R. Shayna Rosenbaum1,2; 1York University, Toronto, Canada, 2Rotman
Research Institute, Baycrest, Toronto, Canada, 3The University of Auckland,
New Zealand — Neuroimaging and patient studies report that the ability

to remember one’s past episodes and the ability to envision one’s future
episodes are tightly interconnected. Remembering past personal events
and imagining personal future events recruit common brain areas, and
loss of the former ability is typically accompanied with loss of the latter.
However, it is unknown whether the same pattern holds true in individuals with developmental amnesia who have never had the ability to fully
re-experience their personal past but who are nonetheless capable of
semantic learning. To test whether the development of episodic memory
is necessary for episodic future imagining, we tested a developmental
amnesic person with bilateral hippocampal loss and demographically
matched controls on an adapted version of the Autobiographical Interview that included a Galton-Crovitz-like cueing method. Participants
were given a cue word and instructed to either recall a past personal
event or generate a novel future personal event. Transcriptions of the
narratives were segmented into internal (episodic) vs. external (non-episodic) details. Narratives were also assigned qualitative ratings to reflect
the overall episodic richness of the generated event. The developmental
amnesic person showed a parallel pattern of impairment for both past
and future event generation, such that narratives of both types of events
were similarly deficient. These results indicate that mental time travel is

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Episodic
compromised in hippocampal amnesia, whether acquired in early or
later life.

I59

RECOLLECTION ORIENTATION, RETRIEVAL SUCCESS, AND TASK
DIFFICULTY: THE ROLE OF PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND POSTERIOR
PARIETAL CORTEX DURING SOURCE AND ITEM MEMORY Scott
M.

Hayes1,2, Norbou G. Buchler3, Jared Stokes4, James Kragel4, Roberto
Cabeza4,5; 1Memory Disorders Research Center, Neuroimaging Research
Center, Boston VA Healthcare System, 2Boston University School of Medicine,
3
U. S. Army Research Lab, Aberdeen Proving Ground, 4Center for Cognitive
Neuroscience, Duke University, 5Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, Duke
University Medical School — The role of prefrontal cortex and posterior
parietal regions in memory retrieval is hotly debated. In the current paradigm, we used functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to investigate the neural correlates of recollection orientation and success in item
and source memory under ‘easy’ and ‘hard’ retrieval conditions. Young
adults studied words once (hard condition) or twice (easy condition)
while making either a pleasant/unpleasant or bigger/smaller than a
shoebox judgment. For the item memory task, participants were presented with studied and unstudied words, and made an old/new judgment. For source memory, participants saw studied words and indicated
which study task (pleasant/unpleasant or bigger/smaller) was associated with the word. Corrected recognition scores revealed equivalent
item and source performance and a main effect of difficulty (Easy >
Hard). fMRI analyses of recollection orientation, Source > Item, revealed
striking left-lateralized activation in lateral prefrontal, dorsal parietal
cortex, middle temporal gyrus and retrosplenial cortex. Importantly,
these activations were not attributable to retrieval difficulty, as the same
left-lateralized network was active in the Source Easy > Item Hard comparison, in which retrieval accuracy was matched. The results are consistent with the notion that these regions play a role in recollection
orientation, and are not related to retrieval difficulty. Analysis of Source
> Item high confidence hits revealed additional activation in right lateral
prefrontal cortex. Finally, comparison of Hard > Easy trials revealed activation in bilateral ventrolateral and dorsolateral prefrontal regions, dorsal parietal cortex, and visual cortex, reflecting top-down control
processes necessary for more challenging cognitive tasks.

I60

THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF VARYING DEGREES OF IMAGEABILITY

John G. Smolinsky1,2, Hector Y. Adames1,2, Andrew E. Budson1,2, Brandon A.
Ally1,2; 1Center for Translational Cognitive Neuroscience, Bedford VA Hospital,
MA, 2Boston University — Recalling previously learned material is influenced by our experience with that information at encoding. Previous
research has shown that easily imaged words are better recalled than
words that are not easily imaged. Understanding techniques that
increase recognition can help direct interventions to improve memory in
older and clinical populations. The goal of the current study was to
examine how increasing word imageability affects the neural correlates
of recognition memory. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were used to
examine changes in the underlying brain physiology associated with the
retrieval of words across three different degrees of imageability. We
expected that as word imageability increases, the putative correlate of
memorial recollection would be enhanced. Subjects were instructed to
create visual images for each of the words presented before advancing
during the self-paced study phase. Consistent with previous findings,
the behavioral results demonstrated that memorial accuracy increased as
word imageability increased. Also reaction times decreased both at
study while creating a mental image, and at test as word imageability
increased. Consistent with our apriori hypotheses, posterior brain activity between 500 and 900 ms post-stimulus associated with memorial recollection was enhanced as word imageability increased. We speculate
that increasing the degree of word imageability actually increases the
individual’s subjective experience of remembering. These findings have
several implications for future research and possible clinical interven-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session I
tions for memory impaired populations. Future research will investigate
whether these neural correlates will differ between younger and healthy
older adults, as well as those living with Alzheimer’s disease.

I61

DISSOCIATING DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES DURING SOURCE
MEMORY RETRIEVAL USING FMRI PATTERN ANALYSIS Alan Gordon1,

Jesse Rissman1, Corbett Bennett1, Anthony Wagner1; 1Stanford University —

Source memory retrieval is thought to require multiple neurocognitive
processes. These include the accumulation of mnemonic evidence in
relation to decision criteria and the subsequent implementation of an
appropriate motor response. In the present study, we used fMRI multivoxel pattern analysis to examine how these processes differentially
relate to fronto-parietal activation during source memory decisions. During each encoding trial, subjects encountered an adjective and generated
either a face or scene described by that adjective, thus giving rise to patterns of neural activity associated with word-face or word-scene encoding. During each retrieval trial, subjects were re-presented with the
words encountered in the encoding phase and were asked to indicate
with a left or right button press which of the two source tasks (face or
scene) was associated with each word. One multivoxel pattern classifier
was trained to distinguish patterns of distributed BOLD activity associated with the two encoding tasks, and a second pattern classifier was
trained to distinguish patterns of BOLD activity associated with left vs.
right button presses. These two classifiers were then presented the
BOLD data from retrieval, enabling quantitative measures of the degree
to which (a) mnemonic evidence for the face and scene encoding patterns were present during each retrieval trial, and (b) cortical regions relevant to the response selection were recruited during each retrieval trial.
Analyses revealed that left dorsolateral PFC and intraparietal sulcus
tracked mnemonic evidence, rather than response evidence, implicating
these fronto-parietal structures in decision-level processes during
retrieval.

I62

WORDS AND PICTURES GIVE RISE TO DIFFERENT NEURAL CORRELATES
OF RECOLLECTION: EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS
(ERPS) Ida-Maria Skavhaug1, Edward L. Wilding2, David I. Donaldson1;

1
University of Stirling, 2Cardiff University — The Event-Related Potential
(ERP) left-parietal old/new effect is widely believed to index generic recollection-based memory retrieval processes. The view that this is the
only ERP index of recollection, however, is inconsistent with recent
reports of an anterior distribution for recollection for faces (MacKenzie
and Donaldson, 2007; 2009). This anterior recollection effect occurs in the
same time period in which left-parietal ERP old/new effects are commonly observed, even when using identical operational definitions of
recollection for words and faces. Here we further investigate the material
specificity of recollection. We have previously shown that the left-parietal effect is modulated by Judgments of Learning (JOLs; estimations of
likelihood of future remembering, made during encoding); the higher
the JOL, the larger the amplitude of the effect. The current experiments
employed ERPs to examine retrieval of words (experiment 1) and pictures (experiment 2) using a JOL task. At study, participants made a JOL
to each item. At test, they were re-presented with each studied item
(along with unstudied items) and made an old/new recognition judgment to each. Correct recognition of words elicited the left-parietal ERP
old/new effect, whereas pictures gave rise to a widespread effect with a
focus over midline fronto-central recording sites in the same epoch (500800ms). Importantly, these two effects were both modulated by the JOLs
made at study (larger for high than for low JOLs), suggesting they index
similar cognitive processes. These observations strongly support the
view that the distribution of recollection-related activity is sensitive to
stimulus materials.

273

Poster Session I
I63

POOR SLEEP CONTRIBUTES TO POOR MEMORY CONSOLIDATION IN
AMNESTIC MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT Carmen E. Westerberg1,

Susan M. Florczak1, Eric M. Lundgren1, Sandra Weintraub1, M. Marsel
Mesulam1, Phyllis C. Zee1, Ken A. Paller1; 1Northwestern University — Recent
findings show that sleep is important for the consolidation of declarative
memories in healthy adults. Sleep disruptions are typical in Alzheimer’s
disease, but whether these disruptions contribute to memory impairment is unknown. Amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) is in
many cases a prodromal form of Alzheimer’s disease, characterized by
declarative memory deficits without dementia. Sleep has not been formally characterized in aMCI. We studied sleep and memory in 10 aMCI
patients and 10 age- and education-matched controls for 2 weeks. Sleep
was monitored with wrist-worn activity sensors and daily sleep surveys.
Memory was assessed with daily recognition tests for information
acquired just prior to test (short-delay recognition) and on the previous
day (24-hour recognition). Recognition was impaired and more variable
in aMCI patients compared with controls, but the two groups did not
differ on objective or subjective measures of sleep. In the aMCI group,
however, recognition accuracy on the 24-hour test but not on the shortdelay test was correlated with subjective sleep-quality reports. Furthermore, poorer recall performance assessed during a neuropsychological
test battery prior to the 2-week protocol was associated with greater variability in objective sleep measures across nights in aMCI and control
groups combined. The correlations observed here suggest that subjective
ratings of poor sleep are indicative of deficient sleep-dependent memory
consolidation in aMCI patients. Moreover, inconsistent daily sleep patterns may be detrimental to declarative memory. These findings will be
extended by including physiological sleep measures in aMCI to provide
further insight into declarative memory consolidation.

I64

PARIETAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO EPISODIC RETRIEVAL: EFFECTS OF
MEMORY AND DECISION CRITERIA J. Benjamin Hutchinson1, Melina R.

Uncapher1, Anthony D. Wagner1; 1Stanford University — While neuroimaging studies of episodic retrieval have consistently revealed activation in
posterior parietal cortex (PPC), there remains much debate about the
functional roles of dorsal and ventral PPC regions in memory. A parallel
literature implicates PPC in processes engaged during perceptual decision-making, suggesting similar processes may also contribute to episodic retrieval. The current fMRI study manipulated decision criteria in
order to disentangle PPC responses associated with mnemonic evidence
from responses associated with decision processes. Participants incidentally encoded visually presented words, and were subsequently scanned
while performing two recognition memory tests. In the first test, a
between-subject instructional manipulation varied whether participants
made a 1-5 point confidence rating about item novelty or item familiarity. In the second test, participants performed a standard old/new recognition task (making old/new/unsure responses). PPC regions showing
greater activation during hits vs. correct rejections (i.e., “old/new
effects”) on this latter test were interrogated for sensitivity to instructional framing in the confidence-rating test. Initial results suggest that
old/new sensitive regions in the inferior parietal lobule, near the intraparietal sulcus, are insensitive to decision criteria. Additional a priori
region of interest analyses suggest that a region within the superior parietal lobule tracks the decision uncertainty, whereas a region of angular
gyrus demonstrates an inverse pattern. These findings underscore that
multiple interacting processes within PPC contribute to episodic
retrieval.

I65

AUTOMATIC AND STRATEGIC RECRUITMENT OF MTL DURING MEMORY
AND NON-MEMORY TASKS Alexandra S. Atkins1, Norbou Buchler1, Ian G.
Dobbins2, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke
University, 2Washington University, St. Louis — Recent work has demon-

strated that medial temporal regions can distinguish new from studied

274

Long-Term Memory: Episodic
items independently from retrieval success. The present experiment
examined the influence of task context and top-down attention on automatic versus strategic recruitment of MTL regions. Using event-related
fMRI, we compared neural activity associated with old and new items
presented during a non-memory lexical decision task and an intentional
item recognition task. During intentional recognition, we manipulated
top-down attention to old or new items by instructing subjects to either
“focus on finding old words” or “focus on finding new words” on alternating task blocks. Apart from this instruction, these task blocks were
identical. Neuroimaging results for the lexical decision task show
increased activation in the right hippocampus associated with previously studied relative to novel word items, demonstrating automatic
stimulus-driven MTL activity can dissociate old from new items regardless of intention. Results from the intentional item recognition task show
that MTL activity can also be strategically mediated by top-down influences of attention. Although behavior was equivalent across focus old
and focus new recognition blocks, comparisons between these conditions revealed strategic modulation of bilateral MTL regions. Compared
to focus new, the focus old condition was associated enhanced posterior
MTL responses to old items and attenuated anterior MTL responses to
new items. Taken together results suggest that MTL can be recruited
automatically and in the absence of intentional retrieval. When there is
intent to retrieve, patterns of MTL activation may be strategically modulated by retrieval-specific task goals.

I66

ASSOCIATIVE AND INTEGRATIVE PROCESSING DURING MEMORY
ENCODING OF ABSTRACT FIGURES Erik A. Wing1, Scott M. Hayes2,

Maureen E. Ritchey1, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke University, 2Boston University
School of Medicine — Episodic recognition encompasses memory for both
individual items and for the associations between items, which may be
supported by distinct regions in the medial temporal lobes (MTL) and
prefrontal cortex (PFC). One account holds that the hippocampus is critically involved in forming associations between discrete items, while the
rhinal cortex mediates item memory. Recently, it has been suggested that
the perirhinal cortex may contribute to associative encoding when information can be integrated into unitized representations. To examine this
distinction between integrative and associative processes, we collected
fMRI data during recognition memory encoding. At study, subjects
viewed pairs of abstract shapes that were spatially overlapping, encouraging integration, or non-overlapping, relying more on association.
Stimuli from the two conditions were perceptually very similar. At test,
subjects made old/new recognition judgments that were used to classify
encoding trials as subsequently remembered or forgotten, thus permitting analysis of encoding success activity (ESA). Both conditions
engaged ESA in attentional and perceptual networks, including dorsolateral PFC, dorsal parietal regions, and occipital cortex, indicating common perceptual processing and engagement of top-down attention.
Despite the marked similarities between conditions, differences in ESA
were identified in anterior PFC and MTL. Association elicited increased
ESA in bilateral hippocampus and left PFC compared to integration,
whereas integration revealed greater ESA in rhinal cortex and right PFC.
Hemispheric lateralization may reflect differential involvement of
semantic versus heuristic processes; likewise, MTL results support a dissociation between hippocampal and rhinal contributions to association
and integration.

I67

SCHIZOPHRENIA PATIENTS SHOW DIFFERENCES IN ACTIVITY OF
NEURAL SYSTEMS UNDERLYING ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY ENCODING

Alexander Leung1, Paul Metzak1, Todd Woodward1; 1University of British
Columbia — We sought to reveal functionally connected neural networks
mediating associative memory encoding, and examine differences
between schizophrenia patients and control subjects. While undergoing
functional magnetic resonance imaging, 26 schizophrenia patients and
26 control subjects completed 90 association tasks (i.e., they were provided a cue word, and were required to choose the more strongly associ-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Long-Term Memory: Episodic
ated of two companion words). Following scanning, subjects were asked
to free-recall and cue-recall the word pairs viewed in the scanner. Using
constrained principal component analysis with a finite impulse response
basis set, three statistically significant components of neural activity
emerged. Component 1 involved activity in left inferior parietal lobe, left
superior temporal gyrus, bilateral visual cortices and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC). Component 2 showed activity in dACC/supplementary motor area, visual cortices, and left premotor cortex.
Component 3 showed deactivation in medial prefrontal cortices and posterior cingulate/precuneus. For all components, encoding words that
were later not recalled was associated with higher activation or deactivation than encoding free- or cue-recalled words; and encoding cuerecalled words showed higher activation or deactivation than encoding
free-recalled words. For components 1 and 3, schizophrenia patients
exhibited less activation or deactivation than control subjects when
encoding cue-recalled words (p < .05). Greater activity when encoding
non-recalled words, or those only recalled when cued, may reflect
increased difficulty or interference at the encoding stage. The differences
in activity of these components observed in schizophrenia patients may
help elucidate the variations in associative memory function thought to
underlie many characteristic features of this disease.

I68

USING ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY TO DISTINGUISH FAILED AND
SUCCESSFUL SPATIAL ENCODING AND NAVIGATION Krysta Chauncey1,
Tad Brunye2, Audrey Girouard1, Robert Jacob1; 1Tufts University, 2Natick
Soldier Research Development and Engineering Center — Electrophysiology

in its wide variety of analysis types (ERD/ERS, ERPs, spectral analysis,
etc) can provide some of the most detailed and direct insight into cognitive functions currently available; in this work, it is used to distinguish
failed from successful spatial encoding and navigation. Participants
were shown a map of a virtual space they were subsequently asked to
navigate, and EEG data collected both while they were viewing the map
and while they were navigating the space. Increases in positive activity
between 400-700ms during study periods that resulted in successful navigation were seen, and long-scale increases in positive activity were seen
during successful navigation periods. This supports the hypothesis that
differences in brain activity at encoding determine retrieval status and
are repeated during retrieval; these findings will be discussed in the context of current models of spatial representation and memory.

I69

REACTIVATION OF PRIOR EXPERIENCE DURING ENCODING OF
OVERLAPPING EVENTS SUPPORTS GENERALIZATION Dagmar

Zeithamova1, Alison R. Preston1; 1University of Texas at Austin — The ability
to generalize past experience to answer novel questions is a powerful
characteristic of memory. One process supporting generalization, integrative encoding, postulates that overlapping experiences are linked into
integrated representations during learning. Overlapping information
shared across events may elicit recall of prior experience, enabling integration of new experience into existing representations. However, evidence for such reactivation during encoding remains speculative. Here,
we used functional MRI to test whether reactivation of content specific
representations occurs during encoding of overlapping events in service
of generalization. During an associative inference paradigm, object (O)
and scene (S) stimuli were organized into triads containing a single stimulus type (3 objects: OOO, 3 scenes: SSS) or cross-domain content (OOS,
SSO). During functional scanning, participants encoded overlapping
pairs from each triad (e.g., pretzel-frog, frog-beach) across multiple
interleaved repetitions and were subsequently tested on the inferential
relationship between items (e.g., pretzel-beach) after scanning. Using a
localizer task, univariate region of interest analysis and multivoxel pattern analysis identified content-specific brain regions involved in scene
and object encoding. We then compared encoding activation for pairs of
the same content (e.g., SS) where the content of the unseen triad member
differed (scenes in SSS vs. objects in SSO), observing reactivation of content-specific networks reflecting unseen content that increased across
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session I
repetition. Univariate analyses further demonstrated activation in content-general regions that increased across learning regardless of information content. Together, these results provide evidence for an underlying
mechanism supporting the integration of overlapping events during
learning enabling generalization beyond individual experiences.

I70

RECOLLECTION HAS A THRESHOLD: DIRECT EVIDENCE FROM A NOVEL
SOURCE TASK Iain M. Harlow1, David I. Donaldson2; 1University of

Edinburgh, 2University of Stirling — By a dual-process view, episodic
retrieval is supported by two functionally dissociable processes, familiarity (an acontextual sense of oldness) and recollection (retrieval of
details about a specific episode). Familiarity is widely agreed to be
graded, in contrast there is considerable disagreement over how recollection should be characterized: as a thresholded process that can either
succeed or fail, or, like familiarity, one which provides some strength on
all trials. Most previous research addressing this question has focussed
on the distribution of confidence judgments, i.e. participants’ own
assessment of their memory strength, for a choice between two fixed
options (such as ‘old’ and ‘new’). Here we adopt an alternative
approach, measuring the accuracy – hence strength – of recollection
directly using a graded source task. Participants memorized word-location pairs. At test they were cued with the same words, selected the corresponding location as precisely as possible, and rated their confidence.
The distribution of accuracies (how close responses were to the correct
location) was closely fit by a thresholded model, whereby around half of
responses were guesses and the other half were essentially accurate.
Interestingly, the same data can appear graded when assessed using
confidence-based receiver-operator characteristic (ROC) curves - illustrating the limitations of that method despite its ubiquity in the field.
Our results appear to confirm a central but hotly disputed property of
recollection, providing an important constraint for models of memory:
while the quality of source information may vary slightly from episode
to episode, its retrieval is fundamentally thresholded.
I71

DIFFERENTIAL NEURAL ACTIVITY DURING RETRIEVAL OF SPECIFIC AND
GENERAL AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORIES DERIVED FROM MUSICAL
CUES Jaclyn Hennessey1, Donna Rose Addis2, Kelly Giovanello1; 1University

of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2University of Auckland — Previous studies
have sought to identify the neural underpinnings of specific and general
autobiographical memory retrieval. Many of these studies have utilized
cues associated with prior retrievals of the event, potentially changing
the retrieval processes being investigated. In the current study, musical
cues were used to naturally elicit memories from multiple levels of specificity (i.e. lifetime period, general event, and event-specific). Sixteen
young adults participated in an fMRI study in which they retrieved autobiographical memories associated with the musical cues. Musical cues
led to the retrieval of highly emotional memories that had low levels of
prior retrieval. Owing largely to the use of music, memories from the
three levels of specificity were retrieved in equal numbers, allowing for
comparison of memory characteristics and neural correlates of retrieval.
Subjects rated vividness, emotional intensity, and re-experiencing as
greater for event-specific compared to general memories. Additionally,
these memories were associated with increased activation in regions
within the core autobiographical memory network, such as the hippocampus, thalamus, and visual processing regions. However, other regions
within the network, such as the medial prefrontal cortex and posterior
cingulate, were activated during all autobiographical memory conditions. The results of this study suggest that regions in the autobiographical memory network may be involved in different processes during
retrieval, some being engaged during all autobiographical retrieval conditions and others that being preferentially engaged during retrieval of
event-specific memories.

275

Poster Session I
I72

A GENETIC VARIATION OF THE NORADRENERGIC SYSTEM IS RELATED TO
DIFFERENTIAL AMYGDALA ACTIVATION DURING ENCODING OF
EMOTIONAL MEMORIES Bjoern Rasch1,2, Klara Spalek1,2, Sarah

Buholzer1,2, Roger Luechinger3, Peter Boesiger3, Andreas Papassotiropoulos2,
Dominique de Quervain1; 1Division of Cognitive Neuroscience, University of
Basel, 2Division of Molecular Pychology, University of Basel, 3Institute for
Biomedical Engineering, University and ETH Zürich — Emotional events are

better remembered than neutral events. The memory enhancing effect of
emotional arousal critically depends on noradrenergic activation of the
amygdala. We have recently shown that a functionally relevant deletion
in a gene coding the adrenergic receptor (?2B-adrenoceptor) enhances
emotional memory in healthy humans and traumatic memory in war
victims. Here we show using functional magnetic resonance tomography (fMRI) that healthy carriers of the deletion variant exhibit a marked
increase in activation of the amygdala during encoding of emotional pictures as compared to no deletion carriers. The genotype-dependent differences in brain activity during encoding of emotional events may
underlie the increased emotional memory and vulnerability to traumatic
memories in deletion carriers.

I73
Duss1,
Oliver Markes1, Thomas Reber1, Simon Ruch1, Daniel Oppliger1, Johannes
Mathis1, Corinne Roth1, Katharina Henke1; 1University of Bern — A heatedly

MEMORY CONSOLIDATION DURING A DAYTIME NAP Simone

discussed issue in sleep research concerns the beneficial effects of sleep
on the retention of information learned before sleep: is this effect due to
active consolidation processes or due to the lack of interference during
sleep? In our experiments, subjects incidentally learned either face –
written city combinations or single faces before a daytime nap or a relaxation training. Subjects retrieved half of the learning material before and
half following the 90 min. study-test interval filled with sleep or relaxation. For retrieval, faces were presented alone for the cued recall of the
associated cities. Single face retrieval was assessed with a recognition
test. Sleep benefited the retention of both face-city associations and faces
(d’). The relaxation group forgot more associations and faces over the 90
minutes study-test interval than the sleep group. A median split
revealed that only those subjects within the nap group with long slowwave sleep durations (over 17 minutes) could retain much of the learned
information. Subjects with less slow-wave sleep forgot significantly
more information. Total sleep duration did not correlate with any of the
pre-post memory score differences. At follow-up testing between three
and six months after the experiment, the nap group still showed above
chance retrieval performance. Memory retention was probably supported by an active consolidation process rather than lack of interference
during sleep because retrieval was better in the nap group than in the
low-interference relaxation group, and because only subjects who spent
much time in slow-wave sleep retained the learned information.

I74

SELECTIVE FAMILIARITY IMPAIRMENTS IN TEMPORAL LOBE EPILEPSY
WITH DÉJÀ VU Chris Martin1, Seyed Mirsattari1, Brent Hayman-Abello1,
Jorge Burneo1, Stefan Köhler1; 1University of Western Ontario — Recognition

memory is thought to rely on two component processes, i.e. familiarity
and recollection. Recollection involves remembering contextual details
from a specific past stimulus encounter. Familiarity, by contrast, gives
rise to recognition without recovery of such contextual detail. We
recently reported the case of NB, an individual who exhibits selective
impairments in familiarity with preserved recollection after surgical
treatment for intractable temporal-lobe epilepsy (TLE). Her rare resection included the left anterior temporal lobe with hippocampal sparing.
Interestingly, prior to surgical intervention, NB experienced seizures
that were accompanied by feelings of déjà vu. Déjà vu is an impression
of familiarity that co-exists with a feeling of inappropriateness. Here, we
examined whether ictal déjà vu in pre-surgical TLE patients is associated
with lasting, impairments in familiarity similar to those observed in NB

276

Long-Term Memory: Episodic
post-surgery. A remember-know task and an exclusion task for scenes
were administered to TLE patients with déjà vu and to control participants. In both tasks, TLE patients with unilateral seizure focus exhibited
a pattern of recognition memory performance that suggests selective
familiarity impairments. In bilateral cases, by contrast, deficits were
found to include impairments in recollection as well. Our findings show
that selective familiarity deficits can be observed in cases other than NB.
Moreover, they confirm the hypothesized link between déjà vu and
experimental measures of familiarity assessment. The broader recognition impairment observed in bilateral cases suggests, finally, that intact
recollection is not a prerequisite for identifying familiarity feelings as
inappropriate in the context of ictal déjà vu experiences.

I75

CORRELATIONS BETWEEN BEHAVIOURAL PERFORMANCE AND
MAGNITUDE OF HEMODYNAMIC RESPONSE PEAK IN CONTEXTUAL
MEMORY TASKS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA PATIENTS AND HEALTHY
CONTROLS Paul Metzak1,2, Liang Wang1,2, Elton Ngan1, Todd Woodward1,2;
1

University of British Columbia, 2BC Mental Health and Addicitions Research
Institute — In the current study, we sought to investigate the neural networks that underlie successful contextual memory performance. While
undergoing functional MRI scanning, 21 schizophrenia patients and 21
healthy controls performed the recall portion of a contextual memory
task in which they were asked to indicate which of four operations they
had previously performed while encoding each word (reading, hearing,
semantically associating, or unscrambling letters). Using a Finite
Impulse Response (FIR) basis set modelling the peristimulus time points
in conjunction with constrained principal component analysis (CPCA)
for fMRI data, we extracted 3 functionally interacting but separate components. The first component was characterized by activations in "task
positive" regions including occipital cortex, medial supplementary
motor /dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, and sensori-motor cortical
regions. The second component was characterized by decreased activation in “task negative” regions, including medial prefrontal cortex and
precuneus and posterior cingulate cortex. The third component was
characterized by activations in the dorsolateral prefrontal, orbitofrontal,
and dorsal anterior cingulate cortices. Subsequent analyses revealed
that, in the healthy controls, performance accuracy was significantly correlated with the estimated peak hemodynamic response for component
1, whereas, for the schizophrenia patients, performance accuracy was
significantly correlated with the estimated hemodynamic response
peaks for both component 1 and component 2. The difference between
the patient and control samples correlations on component 2 was also
found to be significant. This analysis suggests that schizophrenia
patients require coordinated activity in these two neural systems in
order to successfully complete contextual memory recall tasks.

I76

SEMANTIC GENERATION INDUCES EPISODIC FORGETTING: AN EVENTRELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Mikael Johansson1, Robin Hellerstedt1, Sofie

Nilsson1; 1Lund University — Selective memory retrieval is considered to
involve inhibitory control mechanisms recruited to overcome interference from competing memory representations. A consequence of such
control is that the inhibited memories are reduced in their accessibility
and forgotten on subsequent memory tests. In the present event-related
potential (ERP) study, we investigated the neural correlates of inhibitory
control and later episodic forgetting by varying levels of interference
during selective semantic memory retrieval. After having studied items
from different categories (e.g. FRUIT-Apple, DRINK-Water), subjects
engaged in semantic generation of unstudied items from half of the categories (e.g. FRUIT-M___), and were finally asked to recall all studied
items. Generation-induced forgetting (GIF) was observed in impaired
recall of studied items from categories included in the generation task as
compared to studied control items (e.g. DRINK-Water). Importantly, the
GIF effect was larger when the semantic generation task was characterized by a high level of interference caused by the studied, competing

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Other
items (strong versus weak category-item association strength), i.e., GIF
was interference-level dependent. Analysis of ERPs recorded during the
semantic generation task revealed a sustained, more positive-going
modulation in the high- compared to the low-interference condition at
anterior frontal sites. Further analyses showed that this frontal positivity
was predictive of individual differences in the amount of GIF observed
in the final memory test. These results extend previous research by
showing a relationship between frontal ERPs during selective retrieval
and later forgetting when contrasting conditions within the same
retrieval task, and are consistent with an inhibitory-control account of
generation-induced forgetting.

I77

BEHAVIORAL AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF OBJECT, SPATIAL, AND
TEMPORAL MEMORY Ruth M. Johnson1, Stephanie J. Babb1; 1University of
Houston-Downtown — This study characterized the cortical mechanisms
for processing episodic memory using behavioral criteria of what
(object), where (spatial arrangement), and when (temporal order). In
separate behavioral and functional experiments, participants were
shown a total of 80 unique visual scenes of the interiors of furnished
homes across four blocks of 20 trials each. After viewing 20 visual scenes
for 4 seconds each, participants were randomly given 5 trials of each of
the four conditions (What, Where, When, and Control). Participants’
accuracy and reaction time was examined with respect to memory for
what, where, and when. Behavioral data showed that performance was
highest and reaction time was fastest for the What condition. Twelve
subjects participated in a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
experiment which was identical to the behavioral paradigm. Activations
in both the medial temporal lobe and the frontal lobe were found across
the different components of the memory task. Our results support theories consistent with involvement of the frontal and medial temporal
regions in episodic memory retrieval and the hippocampal complex in
recall of spatial memory. Further research should be able to distinguish
previously unknown subcomponents of this extended network of brain
areas by their differential activation across the three components of episodic memory (what, where, and when).

Perception & Action: Other
I78

JOINT ACTION IN A NEARLY NATURAL SITUATION. AN INVESTIGATION
WITH FUNCTIONAL NEAR-INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY (FNIRS) Johanna
Egetemeir1, Prisca Stenneken1, Andreas J. Fallgatter2, Martin J. Herrmann2;

1Bielefeld University, 2University of Würzburg — Many

everyday situations
require humans to execute actions together with a partner. Imagine carrying a big table, playing soccer or assembling furniture. Which brain
mechanisms underlie the engagement in such joint actions? And how
can you investigate this question in a nearly natural joint action situation
with the interaction partners sitting next to each other? fNIRS measures
hemodynamic change (deoxygenated, oxygenated, total hemoglobin)
with 10-Hz temporal resolution. This method is quiet, portable and tolerates movement. It therefore allows the measurement of brain activity in
nearly natural situations. Subjects had to execute object-related grasping
and displacing movements, namely setting a table. They either executed
the task alone (solo action), together with a partner (joint action) or
observed the partner executing the action (action observation). Brain
activation was measured with a 52-channel NIRS system (Hitachi ETG4000). Compared to the solo action, the joint action task elicited a stronger activation in regions of the inferior parietal cortex and frontal cortex.
Our results are compatible with previous findings on joint action which
suggest involvement of the human mirror system in joint action. This
study also demonstrates that fNIRS allows the investigation of brain activation in nearly natural joint action situations. We use these insights in
an ongoing fNIRS study investigating the brain activation of two subjects in parallel while they are involved in a joint action task. We expect

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session I
this new methodological approach to shed light on the temporal aspects
of joint action.

I79

CRITICALITY IN VISUAL PERCEPTION AS REVEALED BY REVERSIBLE
FIGURES Daniel S. Kislyuk1; 1Helsinki University of Technology, Finland —
Neural network is termed to be in the critical state when it balances close
to phase transition between sporadic activations of individual neurons
and massive avalanches of activity. Modeling studies demonstrated that
in critical state information storage and sensitivity to sensory stimuli are
optimal. Characteristic to criticality is the power law distribution of
observables. While criticality was found in oscillations in neural slices
and MEG in behavior the evidence is scarce. In this study participants
were presented sequentially with Necker cube (Aks & Sprott, 2004) and
face-vase reversible figures. Participants fixated on a black dot placed in
the center of a figure. Cued with a sound participants reported, by pressing one of the buttons, which version of the figure they were perceiving.
Times between the perception flips were calculated and their distribution had a classic power-law shape. To prove that power-law was the
best fitting distribution the algorithm of Clauset, Shalizi & Newman
(2009) was used. Distribution parameters (exponent and cut-off value)
were estimated from the data, then the power-law’s goodness-of-fit was
calculated, and finally power-law was compared in its explanatory
power with alternative distributions via a likelihood ratio test. For both
reversible figures power law appeared to be the best fit. This suggests
that the systems underlying the visual perception not only of depth, but
also of object identification, might be in the state of criticality. During
regular perception critical state of the visual processing systems might
secure fast reaction to incoming stimuli, especially those of low intensity.

I80

OBSERVING THE "UNKNOWN" HYPER-ACTIVATES THE ONLOOKER’S
MOTOR SYSTEM Mirta Fiorio1, Wei Zhang2, Paola Cesari1, Maria Carla

Bresciani1, Giampaolo Rodi1, Mattia Gambarin1, Michele Tinazzi1; 1University
of Verona, 2Tianjin Medical University and Hospital — In everyday life we
may encounter actions schemes difficult to understand because they
clearly deviate from typical expected kinematics, as in instances of
actions performed by someone affected by a movement disorder. These
non-fluent movements appear as puzzling to naïve eyes, whereas they
are recognised and understood by patients affected by the same disease,
as well as by clinicians, who are trained to detect abnormal signs. How
does the lack of knowledge about observed actions modulate the
onlooker’s motor system? Three groups of subjects were recruited, with
different visual expertise on a particular kind of action, i.e. writer’s
cramp, a dystonic movement. Group 1 (Naïf): 8 subjects without expertise and previous exposure to the view of dystonic writing. Group 2
(Neurologists): 8 qualified neurologists working in the movement disorder divisions and dealing with dystonic patients. Group 3 (Patients): 8
patients affected by writer’s cramp. Single-pulse TMS was applied over
the left M1 and motor evoked potentials (MEPs) were recorded from the
FDI, AMD and FCR muscles, while subjects observed the following stimuli: 1) static hand; 2) healthy writing; 3) dystonic writing; 4) grasping.
Naïves had higher FDI activation during observation of the dystonic
writing compared to the healthy writing. Neurologists and patients did
not show different corticospinal activation between the two writing conditions. Observing something unknown and never seen before might
hyper-activate the onlooker’s motor system. Visual expertise can modulate the motor cortex excitability during observation of pathological
actions.

I81

FACE REPRESENTATION AND LEARNING: AN ERP STUDY Iris

James W. Tanaka1; 1University of Victoria — In

Gordon1,

two
experiments,
we
employed event-related potentials (ERPs) to investigate the acquisition
of memory representations for familiarized faces. In Experiment 1, participants were required to monitor for a target “Joe” face amongst a
series of distractor “Other” faces. At the half-way point, participants

277

Poster Session I
switched targets from the Joe face to a previous distractor “Bob” face.
The ERP analysis focused on the posterior N250 component, indexing
face familiarity, and the P300 component indexing context updating and
response decision. Results showed that there was an enhanced N250 to
the Joe face during the Joe/Other task, and to Bob during the Bob/Other
task. Critically, an enhanced N250 to Joe was maintained during the
Bob/Other phase even though Joe was no longer target. The P300 component also showed an enhanced activation to target faces, though the
P300 to the Joe face during the Bob/Other task equaled that of the Bob
face with both faces differing significantly from the Other face. In Experiment 2, we examined whether the increased N250 and P300 to Joe was
due to simple naming effects. Participants underwent the same procedure as in Experiment 1 except this time they were introduced to both
Joe and Bob faces and names at the beginning of the experiment. Results
were similar to those of Experiment 1. These findings suggests that the
N250 and P300 are not affected by name labeling, exposure or task-relevancy alone, but that a combination of these factors contribute to the
acquisition of enduring face representations.

I82

RELATION OF QUANTITY DISCRIMINATION TO MATHEMATICAL ABILITY
AT THE BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL LEVELS Clancy Blair1, Fredrik Tunvall1,
Alexandra Ursache1, Hilary Knipe1; 1New York University — The neural basis

for the ability to discriminate quantity has been investigated extensively.
The relation of quantity discrimination to proficiency in basic mathematics, however, is less well known. Twenty-two young adults discriminated visually presented (250msec) quantities at 1:2, 3:4, and 5:6 ratio
limits while cerebral blood flow was measured using near infrared spectroscopy. Results indicated that accuracy across all quantity discrimination trials correlated positively with the number series, r=.46, p<.05, but
not the quantitative concepts subtest of the Woodcock-Johnson Tests of
Achievement-III. This correlation was attributable to performance on the
5:6 ratio limit trials, r=.49, p<.05. The neural response to quantity discrimination across all trials for 12 participants indicated increased oxygenated hemoglobin in left parietal and rostral frontal cortex that was
best described by a quadratic term for time, R2=.78 and R =.80. Increase
in oxygenated hemoglobin in these areas was greater than that observed
in occipital cortex, paired t=7.98 and 9.91, p< .0001. Findings indicate
that the ability to rapidly discriminate quantity is an aspect of proficiency in mathematical reasoning (number series) but not math knowledge (quantitative concepts). These findings indicate the need for further
research to examine possible behavioral and neural associations between
quantity discrimination abilities and working memory abilities that in
combination contribute to mathematical reasoning ability.

I83

SHARED AFFECTIVE MOTION EXPERIENCE (SAME): A NEW MODEL OF
EMOTIONAL MUSIC PERCEPTION Istvan Molnar-Szakacs1, Katie Overy2;
1UCLA, 2University of Edinburgh — Based

in the motor system, music shares
combinatorial rules with action and language. Music can have profoundly moving effects on our imaginations, emotions and memories,
but how such complex, abstract patterns of sound can communicate
affective information remains unknown. We propose that the human
mirror neuron system (MNS) may play a central role in this phenomenon, by allowing individuals to understand the meaning and intention
of a communicative motor act, by evoking a representation of an
observed action in their own brain. By linking perceptions and actions,
the human MNS may provide a domain-general neural mechanism for
processing rules of hierarchical combinations fundamental to language,
action, and music, which in turn can communicate meaning and human
affect. Considering this evidence, we have developed the Shared Affective Motion Experience (SAME) model of music perception, proposing
that musical sound is perceived not only in terms of the auditory signal,
but also in terms of the temporally synchronous, highly intentional, hierarchically organized sequences of expressive motor acts behind the signal. Features of this motion information are processed by the MNS,
while the limbic system allows incoming information to be evaluated in

278

Perception & Action: Other
relation to one’s own autonomic and emotional state, leading to a complex affective response to music. Within the framework of the SAME
model, we propose that music’s potential to create shared, affective
experiences - by jointly attending through imitation, synchronization,
and shared experience - may be the key aspects of musical experience
required for therapeutic and educational intervention activities.

I84

BOLD SIGNALS ASSOCIATED WITH THE PROCESSING OF GLOBAL AND
LOCAL LANDMARKS IN HUMAN WAYFINDING BEHAVIOR Erik Chang1,

Chin-Teng Lin2, Jen-Chuen Hsieh3, Tzu-Chen Yeh3, Teng-Yi Huang2, Chou-Ming
Cheng3, Wen-Jing Lin1, Li-Wei Ko2, Ovid Tzeng4, Daisy Hung1; 1National Central
University, Taiwan, 2National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan, 3Taipei Veterans
General Hospital, Taiwan, 4Academia Sinica, Taiwan — The ability to recognize and use landmarks is crucial for efficient wayfinding, yet how different types of landmarks are processed in the brain remains unclear. In
the current study, we investigated the BOLD activities associated with
two different types of landmarks while the participants were finding
their ways between various combinations of starting and goal locations
in a virtual maze environment. The landmarks examined were: 1) a global-landmark condition with huge architectures that surrounded the virtual maze and were visible from all locations, and 2) a local-landmark
condition with cartoon pictures of common objects that were posted on
the walls along the paths inside the maze and were only visible from certain locations. Participants were trained to be familiar with the layout of
the maze and the goal locations before entering the 3T Bruker MRI scanner. BOLD signals were collected while the participants were performing
the wayfinding task, and the results were analyzed with a random-effect
General Linear Model in Brainvoyager®. Statistical contrasts revealed
that navigation in the environment with global landmarks elicited higher
activation in the left supramarginal gyrus, whereas navigation in the
environment with local landmarks resulted in higher activation in the
right temporal area. These results indicated that the processing of the
global landmarks relied more on the left parietal region that computed
the conversion between egocentric and allocentric coordinates, whereas
the processing of the local landmarks relied more on the right temporal
region that identify specific combination between icons and geometric
structures.

I85

EXTRASTRIATE CORTEX AND MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE REGIONS CARE
SIMILARLY ABOUT CATEGORY, BUT DIFFERENTIALLY ABOUT FEATURAL
AMBIGUITY Matthew Mundy1, Paul Downing2, Kim Graham1; 1School of

Psychology, Cardiff University, 2School of Psychology, Bangor University —
Recent studies have highlighted differential patterns of activation in
medial temporal lobe (MTL) regions for distinct classes of stimuli. While
posterior hippocampus shows greater activation for scene discriminations (Lee et al., 2008), perirhinal cortex shows more activation during
face and object discriminations (Barense et al., 2009). Similarly, extrastriate cortex is thought to contain a number of class-preferential regions
(e.g. places - parahippocampal place area (PPA), faces - fusiform face
area (FFA), and objects - lateral occipital cortex (LOC), Downing et al.,
2006). It is unclear how these different areas interact to support processing of different stimulus types. For example, do regions that respond
preferentially to faces (perirhinal cortex, FFA) show similar or different
levels of activation? How are these patterns modulated by visual complexity or feature overlap? To address these questions, participants passively viewed images from four visual categories in a blocked fMRI
design. Each category was presented at two levels of ambiguity (e.g.,
objects: fish (high ambiguity), mammals (low ambiguity)). There was
evidence of a similar degree of categorical selectivity across MTL and
extrastriate regions, consistent with previous studies. Extending these
findings, it was found that while MTL regions (perirhinal cortex for
objects and faces, and posterior hippocampus for scenes) showed more
activity during passive viewing of featurally ambiguous blocks, extrastriate areas showed the opposite pattern. These findings are consistent

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Other

Poster Session I

with theoretical accounts that stress the importance of hierarchical processing in the ventral visual stream, and a contribution from MTL
regions to perception and memory for complex conjunctive representations.

I86

AESTHETIC PERCEPTION AND APPRECIATION FOLLOWING RIGHT
HEMISPHERE DAMAGE Bianca Bromberger1, Rebecca Sternshein1, Page

Widick1, William Smith II1, Anjan Chatterjee1; 1University of Pennsylvania —

Looking at art is likely to be affected by brain damage. However, little
about the neuropsychology of art perception is known. We hypothesized
that perception of different attributes of art are likely to be disrupted by
damage to different regions of the brain. Seventeen participants with
right hemisphere damage were given the Assessment of Art Attributes
Battery, a tool we designed to quantify descriptive characteristics of
visual art. Each participant rated 24 paintings on 6 formal characteristics
(depth, color temperature, color saturation, balance, stroke, and simplicity), 6 conceptual characteristics (depictive accuracy, abstractness, emotion, symbolism, realism, and animacy), as well as their preference for
and interest in the paintings. Their ratings were compared with 60
young normal participants and scores were obtained for each braindamaged participant for each attribute based on correlations with the
normal group averages. These correlation scores were subjected to
voxel-lesion-symptom mapping analyses. Using a false discovery rate of
0.05, we found that damage to areas within different parts of the frontal
parietal and temporal cortices produced deviation in judgments of all six
conceptual aspects of art. Of the formal attributes, only depictive accuracy and color temperature judgments were affected by dorsolateral prefrontal damage. Despite their deviations in assessing perceptual
attributes of artwork, no areas of brain damage were associated with correlation deviations in judgments of preference or interestingness of these
artworks.

I87

SPACE AND TIME IN PERCEPTUAL CAUSALITY Anjan

Chatterjee1,

Benjamin Straube2; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2University Marburg — Infer-

ring causality is a fundamental feature of human cognition that allows
us to theorize about and predict future states of the world. Michotte suggested that humans automatically perceive causality based on certain
perceptual features of events. However, individual differences in judgments of perceptual causality cast doubt on Michotte’s view. To gain
insights in the neural basis of individual difference in the perception of
causality, our participants judged causal relationships in animations of a
blue ball colliding with a red ball (a launching event) while fMRI-data
were acquired. Parametric violations of spatial continuity and temporal
contiguity were incorporated in these stimuli. We did not find consistent
brain activation differences between trials judged as caused and those
judged as non-caused, making it unlikely that humans have universal
neural correlates of perceptual causality in the brain. However, participants were slower to respond to and showed greater neural activity for
violations of causality, suggesting that humans do have a bias to expect
causal relationships when moving objects appear to interact. Our participants demonstrated considerable individual differences in the sensitivity
to spatial and temporal characteristics in perceiving causality. These
qualitative differences in sensitivity to time or space in perceiving causality were instantiated in individual differences in activation of the left
basal ganglia or right parietal lobe, respectively. Thus, the perception
that the movement of one object causes the movement of another is triggered by elemental spatial and temporal sensitivities, which themselves
are instantiated in specific distinct neural networks.

I88

THETA SYNCHRONIZES AS MU DESYNCHRONIZES DURING
SENSORIMOTOR BEHAVIOR Leanna Cruikshank1, Jeremy B. Caplan1,
Anthony Singhal1; 1University of Alberta — Many types of behavior rely on

sensory and motor systems coordinating their activity. The neurophysiological mechanism that facilitates this coordination however, remains

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

unclear. Evidence from animal research has suggested that theta oscillations (3-12 Hz rhythmic brain activity) are a neural mechanism underlying sensorimotor integration in rats (Bland, 1986). However, it is not
known whether and how this mechanism might extend to humans. Cortical theta has been reported over frontal-midline areas in the human
EEG, yet research addressing its function has yielded varied results. Furthermore, the mu rhythm (8-12 Hz) is the chief rhythm implicated in
human sensorimotor tasks. It is present during periods of stillness and
decreases with movement. We hypothesized that neocortical theta is
present during sensorimotor integration but has been overlooked due to
the fact that mu and theta rhythms coincide spatially and are adjacent
frequencies. Using a goal directed reaching paradigm, participants were
auditorily cued to reach towards target dots appearing on a touchscreen
while EEG activity was recorded. The highly reported mu rhythm was
present prior to movement and desynchronized, giving way to more
anterior theta oscillations during the movement. These findings are consistent with Bland's (1986) model of theta as a mechanism for sensorimotor integration and suggest that frontal-midline theta may mark
integration more generally, potentially accounting for the broad range of
complex cognitive tasks known to induce this rhythm in the absence of
mu.

I89

THE PATH IS MORE IMPORTANT THAN THE DESTINATION: MOUSEMOVEMENT TRAJECTORIES REVEAL THE TIME-COURSE OF SPATIAL,
NUMERICAL AND RESPONSE CONFLICT Edward Hubbard1, Arnaud

Viarouge1, Jonathan Vitale2, Bruce McCandliss1; 1Educational Cognitive
Neuroscience Lab, Peabody College, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN,
2Teachers College, Columbia University, New York — Although
traditional

reaction time (RT) measures can reveal hidden cognitive processes intermediate between perception and action, they also often collapse across
processes that have both early versus late influences. Conversely,
mouse-tracking permits continuous on-line measurement of the x- and
y-coordinates of a mouse cursor, potentially revealing different temporal
dynamics of multiple cognitive processes that influence a decision. Here
we use mouse tracking to study two well-known spatial interference
effects in combination – the Simon effect and the SNARC effect – to
investigate the time-course of each effect. By combining these effects, we
were able to examine whether spatial codes elicited by target location
lead to early divergence in the mouse trajectory, and whether spatial
codes elicited by numerical magnitude elicit later divergence in mouse
trajectories. In two Experiments, single-digit Arabic numerals were presented in target boxes on either the left or the right of the screen. In
Experiment 1, subjects (n = 20) were instructed to ignore the target location and to click on the left or right target box depending on whether a
digit was odd or even (parity judgment). In Experiment 2, subjects (n =
20) indicated whether the digit was less than or greater than 5 (magnitude judgment). Mouse trajectories were differentially impacted by
Simon and SNARC compatibility, showing that both processes lead to
spatial biases, but with different time courses. The precise temporal
information provided by mouse tracking may additionally be paired
with ERP experiments to identify brain-behavior correlations at a finegrained temporal scale.

I90

COULD THE BRAIN WAVES BE TREATED AS BLOCH WAVES? Kanad
Ray1; 1Icfai University, India — [4] Brainwaves emanating out of electrical
activities by the firing of neurons within the brain could be Bloch waves.
The theoretical possibility of dynamic changes in axon propagation is
intriguing as it provides an additional layer of computing power to the
neuron. A myelinated axon can be modelled as a lossy transmission line
of infinite periodic structure and regarded as a cascade of identical cells.
Each cell is a two-port composed of a parallel admittance Y and two
transmission line segments of length d/2 at each side of the admittance.
The admittance of each cell plays the role of Ranvier node and a model
will be adopted [1,2,3] where Y = G + j?C. Periodic structures are
described by the so called Bloch impedance and could be analyzed in

279

Poster Session I
terms of the forward and backward propagating waves that can exist in
each unit cell. The Bloch wave which can propagate in the periodic structure is made up from forward and backward propagating normal transmission line or wave guide waves that exist between discontinuities. The
transverse electric and magnetic fields of the Bloch wave could be measured by EEG or MEG. 1M.M. Villapecllin et.al. Proc. Of 25th Annual
conference, IEEE, EMBS , mexico, sept 17-21, 2003 2..D.R. McNeal, IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng. Vol. BMI-23, no. 4, P-329-337, 1976 3.M.N. Villapecellin et.al. Proc. iX Med.Conf. Med.Biol.Eng. Comput. IFMBE, Pula,
Croatia, 2001 4.Kanad Ray;MathPsych2009(Amsterdam)

I91

PHANTOM
LIMB
AFTER
STROKE:
AN
UNDERREPORTED
PHENOMENON Daniel Antoniello1, Benzi Kluger, Daniel Sahlein, Kenneth

Heilman; 1Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 2University of Colorado, 3New
York University Medical Center, 4University of Florida — The presence of a

phantom limb resulting from a cerebral lesion has been reported to be a
rare event. No prior study, however, has systematically investigated the
prevalence of this syndrome in a group of post-stroke individuals. Fifty
post-stroke individuals were examined with a structured interview/
questionnaire to establish the presence and perceptual characteristics of
phantom limbs. We document the presence of phantom experiences in
over half of these individuals (n = 27). We provide details of these phantom experiences and further characterize these symptoms in terms of
temporal qualities, posture, kinesthesia, and associated features.
Twenty-two participants reported postural phantoms, which were perceived as illusions of limb position that commonly manifested while
lying in bed at night – a time when visual input is removed from multisensory integration. Fourteen participants reported kinesthetic phantoms, with illusory movements ranging from simple single joint sensations to complex goal-directed phantom movements. A striking
syndrome of near total volitional control of phantom movements was
reported in four participants who had immobile plegic hands. Reduplicative phantom percepts were reported by only one participant. Similarly, phantom pain was present in only one individual - the sole
participant with a pre-stroke limb amputation. The results suggest that
the perturbation of the body schema after stroke results in phantom
experiences more commonly than previously described. We speculate
that subtotal deafferance or defective motor efference after stroke may
manifest intermittently as a phantom limb.

I92

WINDING AND SPRINGING THE CLOCK Elaine Wencil1, Matthew Matell2,
H. Branch Coslett1; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2Villanova University — Recent

fMRI investigations have implicated the supplementary motor area
(SMA) in supra-second timing. However, it remains unknown whether
the SMA plays a primary or supporting role in duration perception. In
the current study we selectively enhanced and reduced SMA excitability
with transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) to determine if modulating SMA firing rates alters the function of the putative “internal
clock”. Participants performed a Temporal Generalization Task in which
a central green circle that varied in duration was presented. Subjects
were instructed that one of the durations to be presented had a standard
length and their job was to learn that length. Seven durations were presented, the standard (4 seconds) and 6 non-standards spaced around the
standard in equal logarithmic steps. To selectively reduce cerebral excitability, 5 participants received cathodal tDCS over FCz; to selectively
enhance cerebral excitability 6 participants received anodal tDCS over
FCz. Participants performed 72 trials of training prior to tDCS and an
additional 72 trials immediately following stimulation. Repeated measure ANOVAs performed on peak amplitude, peak latency, coefficient of
variance and variability (r2) revealed tDCS significantly modulated peak
latency; cathodal stimulation leads to a 310 msec rightward shift and
anodal stimulation leads to a 826 msec leftward shift at testing. These
data show that modulating SMA excitability leads to corresponding
shifts in clock speed. Altering peak latency and not the coefficient of

280

Perception & Action: Other
variance or variability suggests a primary role of SMA in instantiating an
internal clock.

I93

RESPONSE INTERFERENCE BETWEEN FUNCTIONAL AND STRUCTURAL
ACTIONS LINKED TO THE SAME FAMILIAR OBJECT IS INCREASED IN
PATIENTS WITH IDEOMOTOR APRAXIA Steven Jax1, Laurel Buxbaum1;

1
Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute — Viewing objects with the intention to act upon them may activate task-irrelevant motor responses.
Many manufactured objects are associated with two classes of actions:
grasping in accordance with object structure and skillful use consistent
with object function. Further, “conflict” objects, such as calculators, are
associated with different actions for structural and functional responses
(e.g., clench to grasp, poke to use), whereas “non-conflict” objects, such
as drinking glasses, are associated with one action based on both structure and function (clench to grasp and use). We previously demonstrated in healthy participants that use actions were slower in conflict
than non-conflict objects (grasp-on-use interference). In the present
study we report data from two left hemisphere stroke patients with
moderate to severe ideomotor apraxia who exhibited significantly
greater grasp-on-use inference than controls and left hemisphere stroke
patients with mild ideomotor apraxia. The first patient (with a large periventricular white matter lesion) displayed catastrophic grasp-on-use
interference such that she produced grasp-appropriate responses when
using conflict objects. The second patient (with a superior parietal and
frontal lesion) displayed both grasp-on-use interference as well as an
order effect comprising a greater number of use errors with conflict
objects when preceded by a block of grasping the same objects (relative
to a condition without prior grasping). These data further support the
claim that actions to common objects are influenced by competition
between multiple responses, and suggest that errors in apraxia may be
influenced by deficient resolution of competition between appropriate
and inappropriate actions.

I94

EFFECT OF TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION IN A
MULTISENSORY INTEGRATION TASK Olivia Lapenta1, Paulo S. Boggio1;
1

Mackenzie Presbyterian University — The "motor theory of speech perception" suggests that the objects of speech perception are "phonetic gestures", represented in the brain of the observer as a motor command
signal, characterized by phonological articulation. The multisensory
structures probably related to that system involve the superior temporal
sulcus (STS) and the Broca`s area. These regions have mirror neurons
that fire when an individual performs an action, as when he observes a
similar action performed by another individual. The aim of this study
was to investigate if the stimulation of STS bilaterally interferes by
improving or decreasing the performance in a multisensory integration
task relating shapes and non-words according to polarity of the stimulation. For that we proposed a Go-NoGo task composed by 10 images,
each having a corresponding non-word and presented as congruent or
incongruent pairs. Subjects were instructed to press a button when the
stimuli were congruent or when it was incongruent depending on the
Block. During the task, subjects received anodal, cathodal, or sham transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) over the STS. We found an
enhancement of correct responses during anodal tDCS as compared with
sham and diminishment of correct responses during cathodal tDCS as
compared with sham (p=0,02). The effect was independent of gender or
stimuli (congruent or not). We showed that tDCS is able to modulate a
multisensory integration task in a polarity-dependent manner. In addition, our results shows the critical role of STS in this function. Finally,
tDCS appears as an interesting tool in cognitive neuroscience.

I95

EYE BLINK CORRECTION: A TEST ON THE PRESERVATION OF COMMON
ERP COMPONENTS Steven Woltering1, Zhong-Xu Liu1, Narges Bazargani2,

Marc D. Lewis1; 1University of Toronto, 2University College London — Intro-

duction: Eye blinks are one of the most pervasive problems in any EEG

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Other
research as they contaminate the brain signal and can lead to a detrimental loss of trials. To date, the regression-based method is the most widely
and conveniently used technique to correct for blinks. It claims to
remove the distorting effects of the blink and leave the estimated activity
of the brain. However, it's merits are under debate and have mostly been
tested using simulated data, and not on common ERP waveforms. Purpose: The current study tests the Gratton method on five different stimulus-locked ERP components (early sensory as well as later processing)
and offers a brief literature-review comparing regression-based methods
to source-localization and ICA methods. Methods: Dense array EEG
from 32 children playing a go-nogo task was used for this study. A
within subjects design allowed for multivariate regression modeling predicting 'otherwise rejected' (= corrected) data from 'clean' data containing no blinks. Results: Results, overall, indicate that that the ‘corrected’
data could be reliably predicted from clean data containing no blinks.
This effect was found to be significant (p < .05) for most components,
except for the later components, like the P300. Conclusion: The Gratton
method appears to effectively correct blinks. Caution should be taken
when interpreting later components which are more sensitive to distortion. Depending on the research question and time resources, the Gratton method can be a valuable tool compared to other methods.

I96

OROFACIAL REPRESENTATION IN THE PRIMARY SENSORIMOTOR
CORTEX: ANATOMICAL AND FUNCTIONAL EVIDENCE Veronika Zlatkina1,

Jurgen Germann1, Michael Petrides1; 1Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University — In the primary sensorimotor cortex, there is an orderly
arrangement of sensory representations of the different parts of the body
along the central sulcus. The postcentral sulcus, which delimits the postcentral gyrus posteriorly, is believed to form the posterior boundary of
the primary sensorimotor cortex along its entire length. In the anatomical part of the current study, the postcentral gyrus and postcentral sulcus
were examined in serial sections of 40 human MRI brain volumes. In a
large number of hemispheres, we observed a sulcus of variable length
located anterior to the postcentral sulcus on the postcentral gyrus,
namely the transverse postcentral sulcus. The transverse postcentral sulcus has a vertical dorso-ventral orientation and it is often placed in parallel with the postcentral sulcus. In the functional neuroimaging part of the
current study, normal human subjects were asked to move different
parts of their body in order to find representations of the corresponding
bodily regions in the primary sensorimotor cortex. The transverse postcentral sulcus was identified in the MRI brain volumes of several subjects and it formed the posterior boundary of the representations of the
upper face, lips and tongue. No functional activation peaks related to
representation of the face in the primary sensorimotor cortex were
observed posterior to the transverse postcentral sulcus. It is suggested
that the transverse postcentral sulcus belongs to the postcentral sulcal
complex and it plays an important role as a morphological landmark
separating the primary sensorimotor representation of the face from the
posterior parietal cortex.

I97

NEURAL CORRELATES OF VIRTUAL REORIENTATION Jennifer Sutton1,2,

Marc Joanisse2, Nora Newcombe3; 1Brescia University College, 2The University
of Western Ontario, 3Temple University — The spatial reorientation task,
which examines the role of environment shape and visual features when
remembering a location, has been used to identify the underlying cognitive mechanisms of navigation in children, adults and a range of animal
species. Despite broad interest in the this task across disciplines, little is
known about the brain bases of reorientation. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine neural activity in adults during a virtual reality version of the reorientation task. Three environments
were used which varied in the cues provided: a rectangular room with
four identical gray walls (Geometry), a square room with three gray
walls and one red wall (Feature), and a rectangular room with three gray
walls and one red wall (Feature + Geometry). While in the scanner, subjects studied the location of a pylon within the room and, after a short

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session I
break, picked up the pylon from the room’s centre and replaced it in the
studied location. We conducted two analyses that included a Region of
Interest (ROI) analysis focused on structures of the Medial Temporal
Lobe (MTL) and an exploratory whole-brain analysis. Multiple areas
within MTL, including hippocampus and parahippocampal cortex,
showed increased activation when a feature was present compared to
when reorientation was based only on geometric cues. In contrast, reliance on geometric cues was associated with significant activation of a
number of non-MTL structures including prefrontal cortex and inferior
temporal gyrus. These results suggest important differences in the processing of the two types of cue.

I98

A SIMPLE METHOD TO COMMUNICATE WITH A SINGLE CEREBRAL
HEMISPHERE Eric Altschuler1, Ahmed Meleis1; 1New Jersey Medical
School — The ability to be able to easily communicate with a single cerebral hemisphere would be of tremendous theoretical (probe the knowledge and skill sets of each hemisphere), practical (performance training
and game playing) and clinical (non-invasive pre-surgical testing) value.
Currently, to communicate with a single cerebral hemisphere it is necessary to use an invasive procedure—intracarotid administration of
sodium amobarbital—study the exceedingly rare commissurotomy
patient or use an unwieldy and expensive apparatus with a bite bar and
eye tracker. Leung et al. (Vision Sciences Society Annual Meeting 2008
Program page 10) found that when two random dot displays are cycled
at 75 Hz individuals observe that the screen appears a uniform grey.
However, when one moves one’s eyes, saccades, or blinks the screen
then appears just the random dot pattern. With someone thus fixating on
the center of the screen, stimuli can be shown on the left or right (or further top/bottom left/right) of the screen. Such images in the left (right)
visual field will then go to only the right (left) cerebral hemisphere!
Information can be obtained back from the right (left) hemisphere by
having a person press a button, for example, with the left (right) hand.
Individuals can also give verbal responses to displays seen by one cerebral hemisphere. In pilot testing we confirm the known result that there
right hemisphere has a deficit in word reading compared with the left
hemisphere. We have also played video games such as Pong with one
cerebral hemisphere.
I99

A LEABRA-BASED MODEL OF THE INFLUENCES OF THE ANTERIOR
CINGULATE CORTEX AND THE AMYGDALA OVER THE DESCENDING
MODULATORY PATHWAY OF PAIN PERCEPTION Roberto Limongi1, Karla

Ramirez1; 1Venezuelan Institute for Scientific Research — Pain perception is
associated with neural mechanisms that recruit structures from the spinal cord, the rostral ventromedial medulla (RVM), the periaqueductal
gray matter (PAG), and cortical areas. fMRI data show the regulatory
function of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the amygdala on
pain perception. Animal data have been very informative on the dynamics of the neuronal firing patterns acquired via single-cell recording
involving the PAG and the RVM. At a neuronal level, functional connectivity within the PAG-RVM system is modeled via time-varying correlation between two neurons. Top-down influences from the PAG-RVM
system to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord seem to be central in the elucidation of analgesia and hyperalgesia. However, a realistic explanation
of the nociceptive information processing must include the participation
of the ACC and the amygdala over the PAG-RVM system. In this work,
we wanted to assess the influence of the ACC and the amygdala over the
modulatory effect of the PAG-RVM system on nociceptive information
processing in the dorsal horn cells. We present a LEABRA-based model
that includes simulated unidirectional activity from the ACC and the
amygdala over the PAG-RVM system and its modulatory effect in the
dorsal horn. Our model accounts for experimental data simultaneously
obtained in the RVM and the dorsal horn of the spinal cord in rats during nociceptive stimulation. Our simulations lead to conclude that activity of the ACC and the amygdala over the PAG-RVM system might

281

Poster Session I
contribute to its modulatory effect on the nociceptive processing in the
dorsal horn.

I100

COMPRESSED
AND
LINEAR
SCALES
OF
NUMERICAL
REPRESENTATION Arnaud Viarouge1, Edward Hubbard1, Bruce
McCandliss1; 1Educational Cognitive Neuroscience Lab, Peabody College,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN — Non-verbal animals and pre-verbal

infants depend on an intuitive, pre-linguistic representation of numerical
quantities which becomes less precise with increasing magnitude (a
compressed scale). However, literate adults learn that two consecutive
numbers are separated by the same distance on a linear scale (e.g., Siegler and Opfer, 2003). We tested whether the compressed representation
of numbers was still present in adults by asking participants to indicate
whether a random sequence of nine Arabic numerals presented one at a
time on a computer screen contained more small or large numbers. A
staircase procedure adjusted the proportion of small and large numbers
in the series, until it converged on the series of numbers that was judged
as most linear for each subject. Participants exhibited a large bias, reporting that a linear series contained too many large numbers, and that a
geometric series that actually oversampled small numbers evenly sampled the range – a striking “illusion of compression” (for similar results
in the auditory modality, see Banks & Coleman, 1981; Viarouge et al., in
press). These results suggest that the more intuitive compressed representation of numbers is still present even in adults who rely on a linear
representation of numbers in other contexts. We propose that the linear
representation of numbers may depend primarily on linguistic processes, mediated by the left-hemisphere, while the compressed representation of numbers may depend on visuo-spatial processes in the right
hemisphere. We are currently testing this hypothesis using a lateralized
visual presentation version of our distribution judgment task.

I101

DOMAIN SPECIFIC RESPONSE IN MEDIAL TEMPORAL AND
EXTRASTRIATE CORTEX DURING PERCEPTUAL LEARNING OF VISUALLY
SIMILAR STIMULI Kim Graham1, Paul Downing2, Edward Ingamells3,

Dominic Dwyer3, Rob Honey3, Matthew Mundy1; 1Wales Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, School of Psychology, Cardiff University, 2Wales Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology, Bangor University, 3School of
Psychology, Cardiff University — There is increasing evidence that the
medial temporal lobe (MTL) processes stimuli in a domain-specific manner, with neuropsychological and fMRI studies highlighting a posterioranterior dissociation (e.g., posterior hippocampus – scenes, perirhinal
cortex and anterior hippocampus – faces/objects). In this event related
fMRI experiment, participants made repeated same/different judgements to previously seen and initially novel confusable pairs of faces and
complex scenes. Using a series of orthogonal, and independent, functional localisers, clusters of stimulus-selective, novelty-sensitive voxels
were identified in two medial temporal regions (perirhinal cortex and
posterior hippocampus), and two extrastriate regions (fusiform face
area, FFA, and parahippocampal place area, PPA). We asked how activity in these regions was influenced by discrimination accuracy and by
trial repetition (e.g., adaptation). In contrast to FFA and PPA, which only
cared about preferred category, activity in perirhinal cortex and posterior hippocampus predicted discrimination accuracy for faces and
scenes, respectively. Both MTL regions also adapted less rapidly than
extrastriate areas over trial repetition, with difference emerging between
extrastriate and MTL regions after 8 repetitions. These findings show
that domain-specific patterns of responding in the human brain are not
just restricted to extrastriate cortex, and highlight a key role for perirhinal cortex and posterior hippocampus, but not FFA and PPA, in storing
feature ambiguous representations of faces and scenes, respectively.

Perception & Action: Other
I102

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES
OF
EYEWITNESS
IDENTIFICATION Krista B. Friesen1, James W. Tanaka1, D. Stephen

Lindsay1; 1University of Victoria — We used event-related potentials (ERPS)

to investigate the electrophysiology of memory in real-life circumstances
such as eyewitness identification. Research using photographs has
shown that an ERP component occurring at posterior scalp regions
approximately 250 ms after a stimulus is presented (called the N250) is
sensitive to manipulations of stimulus familiarity. Other research has
shown that a centrally located component called the P300 is associated
with the recognition decision. Two experiments were conducted to
assess the role of the N250 and P300 in response to a face initially
encountered in an in-person encoding episode. In Experiment 1 the participant was introduced to a “culprit” and asked to identify subsequent
photos as “yes, culprit” or “not culprit”. We found that both the N250
and P300 were larger for the culprit face than for filler faces. While the
P300 differentiated culprit from filler immediately, the N250 was significantly different between the two conditions only in the second half of
experiment trials. In Experiment 2 the culprit was still among the photos
but was not the target. Participants were asked to accuse a different person (the “scapegoat”) of being the culprit in order to cover for the “real”
culprit. We found that while the N250 and P300 were strongest to the
scapegoat face, they also differentiated the culprit from filler faces. The
results suggest that these components may index recognition of briefly
encountered persons independent of overt responding, providing motivation for the use of real-world encoding events and ERPs to study eyewitness identification accuracy.

I103

FACIAL THERMAL MEASURES OF HEDONIC RESPONSES TO OLFACTORY
AND VISUAL STIMULATIONS Sophie Jarlier1,2,3, Didier Grandjean1,3,

Sylvain Delplanque1, David Sander1,4, Klaus R. Scherer1, Patrik Vuilleumier1,2;
1Swiss Center for Affective Sciences, University of Geneva-CISA, Switzerland,
2
Laboratory for Neurology and Imaging of Cognition, University Medical Center
CMU, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Neuroscience of Emotion and Affective Dynamics
Lab, FPSE, University of Geneva, Switzerland, 4Laboratory for the Study of
Emotion Elicitation and Expression, FPSE, University of Geneva, Switzerland —
This study used thermal imaging of human facial physiological changes
during spontaneous emotions induced by different types of sensory
stimuli. Unlike electromyography, non-invasive thermal imaging of the
face avoids overloaded equipment and tracks dynamic changes in facial
temperature at any distance (>0.4m), with high temporal (<20ms) and
thermal (<20mK = <0.02°C) resolutions. Twenty-one volunteers were
recorded while they were presented with different kind of olfactory and
visual stimuli of different valence (positive vs. negative) as well as neutral stimuli. Breathing was tracked so as to define the onset of inhalation.
We found that the corrugator and fronthead areas in the face showed
increases in temperature when negative odorants (such as caproic acid
or Durian) were presented as compared to neutral or positive ones, but
the same regions also showed temperature increases when positive pictures were presented. These thermal modulations therefore appear to be
linked to the intrinsic nature of sensory stimulation and to interest and/
or attentional modulations triggered by different kind of emotional
events, rather than by valence per se. Temporalis and perinasal areas
were specifically warmed up when positive odorants (such as floral
strawberry or lavender) were presented as compared to neutral ones. In
addition, we found that the choice of the control condition (e.g. no odor
vs. ‘neutral’ odor) may also be a crucial factor to interpret thermo-imaging results.

I104

ACTION RECOGNITION DOES NOT RELY UPON MIRROR NEURONS:
EVIDENCE FROM LEFT HEMISPHERE STROKE Solene Kalenine1, Laurel J.
Buxbaum1, H. Branch Coslett2; 1Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute,

2University of Pennsylvania — Mirror

neurons in the inferior frontal gyrus
(IFG) and inferior parietal lobule (IPL) are held to be crucial for action

282

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Vision
recognition, in part because decisions regarding “correctness” of actions
are associated with IFG lesions (Pazzaglia et al., 2008). We report data
from 43 left hemisphere stroke patients on two action recognition tasks
in which they heard and saw an action word (“hammering”) and
selected from 2 video-clips the one corresponding to the word. In the
spatial recognition task, foils contained errors of body posture or movement amplitude/timing. In the semantic recognition task, foils were
semantically related (sawing). Participants also performed a control task
requiring matching of the same verbs to objects (hammer). Regression
analyses controlling for the comprehension task and lesion volume demonstrated that performance on the spatial recognition task was predicted
by percent damage to the IPL, while performance on the semantic recognition task was predicted by temporal lesions (Brodmann Areas 20/21
and 36/37). A Voxel-Based Lesion-Symptom Mapping analysis confirmed that poor performance on the spatial and semantic recognition
tasks was associated with lesioned voxels in parietal and temporal
regions, respectively. The IPL appears critical for disambiguating spatial
postures and movements, suggesting a possible role of mirror neuron
systems in this circumscribed aspect of gesture recognition. The IFG
does not support action recognition in a verb-action matching task.

Perception & Action: Vision
I105

PERCEPTUAL
INTERFERENCE
AND
INTERHEMISPHERIC
COLLABORATION Urvi Patel1, Emma Mehrabi1, Ryan McGuire1, Stephanie

Ardinger1; 1Christopher Newport University — The present research examined the effects of color-shape congruity on interhemispheric collaboration using Stroop-like fruit and vegetable stimuli (e.g., red apple vs. blue
apple). Observers were presented with three stimuli, two located above
the point of eye fixation (one to each visual field) and the third located
below the point of fixation (to one visual field). Across four different
conditions, observers indicated whether the bottom item matched either
of the top two items when presented with: (1) black-and-white stimuli,
(2) color-shape congruent stimuli, (3) color-shape incongruent stimuli
based on shape, and (4) color-shape incongruent stimuli based on color.
In order to compare the benefits and costs of distributing information
across the two hemispheres, the critical comparison involved trials on
which the two matching stimuli project to the same visual field (withinhemisphere) versus trials on which the two matching stimuli project to
opposite visual fields (across-hemisphere). Introduction of shape congruent color facilitated matching and led to the best performance, followed by incongruent shape matching, incongruent color matching and
finally by black-and-white matching. When presented with shape incongruent color stimuli, color can be ignored during shape matching but
shape cannot be ignored during color matching. Despite differences in
performance, conditions yielded either a within-hemisphere advantage
or no difference between trial types. The results provide further evidence
that the benefits of spreading processing across both hemispheres do not
necessarily increase as the task becomes more demanding due to perceptual interference.

I106

IDENTIFYING HUMAN BRAIN AREAS ACTIVATED BY ATTENTION TO
GLOSSINESS Atsushi Wada1, Yuichi Sakano1, Hiroshi Ando1; 1National
Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Kyoto, Japan — Surface glossiness is one of the object properties, which can be used as a
visual cue for identifying materials of objects in our daily life. Although
psychophysical studies of glossiness perception are getting active
recently, little is known yet about the neural substrates of the glossiness
perception. Here we conducted functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) experiments to analyze the effect of attention to glossiness on the
activities in human visual cortex. The stimulus was a computer-generated display which simulated a 3D object defined by three distinct feature dimensions: glossiness, form and orientation. For the glossiness
dimension, the surface of the object was set to either glossy or matte. For

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Poster Session I
the form and orientation dimensions, the features were set to one of the
two different 3D object forms and one of the two different object orientations, respectively. To let subjects attend selectively to one of the specific
visual feature dimensions, they viewed paired objects presented sequentially, and judged whether the designated feature dimension differed or
not between the two objects. Each experiment block was assigned to one
of the following three conditions: glossiness, form and orientation conditions. In each condition, the corresponding feature dimension was specified just before the start of each block. The results of cortical surfacebased group analysis suggest that attention to glossiness activates the
ventral occipital areas from the hV4 area to the posterior part of the fusiform gyrus.

I107

TEMPORAL INTEGRATION IN VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION Joachim
Forget1,2, Marco Buiatti1, Stanislas Dehaene1; 1INSERM, Cognitive
Neuroimaging Unit, Neurospin Center, France; University of Paris, Orsay,
France; Collège de France, 2Unit of Neurosurgery, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland — When two displays are presented in close temporal succession at the same location, how does the
brain assign them to one versus two conscious percepts? We investigate
this issue using a novel reading paradigm in which the odd and even letters of a string are presented alternatively at a variable rate. The results
reveal a window of temporal integration during reading, with a nonlinear boundary around approximately 80 msec of presentation duration.
Below this limit, the oscillating stimulus is easily fused into a single percept, with all characteristics of normal reading. Above this limit, reading
times are severely slowed and suffer from a word-length effect. ERPs
indicate that, even at the fastest frequency, the oscillating stimulus elicits
synchronous oscillations in posterior visual cortices, while late ERP components sensitive to lexical status vanish above the fusion threshold.
Thus, the fusion/segregation dilemma is not resolved by retinal or subcortical filtering, but at cortical level by at most 300 msec. The results
argue against theories of visual word recognition and letter binding that
rely on temporal synchrony or other fine temporal codes.

I108

STATIC AND DYNAMIC VISUAL PROCESSING IN THE CENTRAL VISUAL
FIELD AFTER LEFT OR RIGHT OCCIPITAL LESION Celine Cavezian1,2,3,

Pamela Laliette1,2, Anne-Claire Viret1,2,3, Celine Perez1,2,3, Isabelle
Gaudry1,2,3, Noa Raz4, Netta Levin4, Tamir Ben-Hur4, Olivier Gout3, Sylvie
Chokron1,2,3; 1Laboratoire de Psychologie et Neurocognition, Grenoble,
France, 2ERT TREAT Vision, Fondation Ophtalmologique Rothschild, Paris,
France, 3Service de Neurologie, Fondation Ophtalmologique Rothschild, Paris,
France, 4Hadassah Hebrew University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel — In homonymous hemianopia (HH), vision quality in the central and ipsilesional
visual fields (VF) is still not well-known. In addition, most of studies
used static stimuli. To better understand visual processing in hemianopia, we investigated how static or dynamic stimuli were processed in the
central VF of hemianopes. In experiment 1, 25 healthy controls, 6 left
HH, and 5 right HH had to detect and categorize static natural scene
images. In experiment 2, 9 healthy controls, 6 left HH, and 7 right HH
(all different from experiment 1) completed a motion detection task and
a denomination task of moving objects (Objects From Motion [OFM]: the
object form shows up from the opposing movement of groups of black
and white dots). Patients performed as well as controls (accuracy) in the
scene and the motion detection tasks. Yet, compared to controls, patients
were slower in the scene categorization task (controls: 533.76±85.38
msec; right HH: 619.16±82.07 msec; left HH: 661.17±90.45 msec), and had
worse performances (accuracy) in the OFM denomination (Percentage of
errors: controls = 41.39±18.24; right HH = 71.28±17.92; left HH =
69.31±17.58). Overall, depending on the cognitive demand, vision in the
central VF is not intact in hemianopia. When the cognitive demand is
low, the occipital lesion did not seem to alter natural scene images and
motion processing. However, when the cognitive demand increases, the

283

Poster Session I
occipital lesion, either right or left, impaired visual processing in the central (supposed preserved) VF especially for moving stimuli.

I109

THE SACCADIC RE-CENTERING BIAS IS ASSOCIATED WITH ACTIVITY
CHANGES IN THE HUMAN SUPERIOR COLLICULUS Ruth
Krebs1,2,

Mircea Schoenfeld2,3, Carsten Boehler1,3, Allen Song4, Marty Woldorff1,5;
Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC, 2Otto-vonGuericke-University, Magdeburg, Germany, 3Leibniz-Institute for Neurobiology,
Magdeburg, Germany, 4Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, Duke University,
Durham, NC, 5Duke University, Durham, NC — This study investigated neu1

ral correlates for the facilitation of saccades towards the primary (or
“default”) position at the center of straight-ahead gaze. Using an endogenously cued saccade paradigm, we found fMRI activity in a network of
saccade-related regions, including areas that exhibited a clear contralateral predominance with respect to saccade direction, namely the SC, IPS,
and FEF. In addition to the retinotopic representation of saccade targets
within the SC shown previously with single cell recordings, we hypothesized that SC activity would be modulated dependent on the orientation
of the saccade vector relative to the primary position, as has been previously shown in animal studies. Such a modulation might reflect that the
effort required to move the eyes to the primary position within gaze
space is smaller than to other coordinates. The present data support the
notion that the SC is sensitive to the orientation of eye movements relative to the primary position, even when saccade direction and amplitude, as well as directional and temporal probabilities, are kept constant.
Importantly, saccades in the current paradigm were not reflexively triggered by a peripheral stimulus but rather involved the interpretation of
an instructional cue conveying information about saccade direction and
timing. Importantly, the cortical eye fields (FEF and IPS) did not show
systematic modulation dependent on the saccade direction relative to the
primary position. This suggests that the facilitation of re-centering saccades may occur at a later processing stage in the SC following the voluntary target selection in higher cognitive areas.

I110

MAGNO- VERSUS PARVOCELLULAR CONTRIBUTIONS TO EMOTIONAL
PERCEPTION Andreas Keil1, Margaret Bradley1; 1University of Florida — A
plethora of studies suggest that affectively arousing stimuli automatically attract attentional resources to facilitate sensory processing. This
presentation focuses on time-varying changes of oscillatory electrocortical activity in lower-tier visual cortex as a function of affective salience
and structural properties of emotional stimuli. In particular, we manipulated the visual stimulus material to predominantly drive either the
magnocellular or the parvocellular portions of the human visual systems, using conditioned stimuli (gabor patches paired/unpaired with
electric shock) and pictures depicting emotional scenes. Steady-state
visual evoked potentials (ssVEPs) were used as a measure that affords
sensitivity to fluctuations of electrocortical activity in lower-tier visual
cortex, at near real-time resolution. To evoke ssVEPs, participants
viewed 4-second trains of flickering stimuli that were brightness modulated at a rate of 15 Hz. Stimuli were either blurred and shown in grayscale (i.e. magno-preferred), or were red-green highpass filtered/high
spatial frequency (i.e. parvo-preferred) exemplars. Results suggest that
enhancement of the time-varying ssVEP amplitude is strongest when
magno-preferred stimuli have motivational relevance for the observer.
Parvo-preferred stimuli showed weak or no modulation in the ssVEP
but showed clear modulation of other parameters of emotional responding, such as the late positive potential, which was also extracted from the
electrocortical data. This dissociation suggests that lower-tier visual cortical activity is modulated predominantly by magnocellular re-entrant
projections that enhance neural activity as a function of emotional relevance for the observer.

284

Perception & Action: Vision
I111

FEELING THE PAIN OF THOSE WHO ARE DIFFERENT FROM US: AN EEG/
ERP STUDY Anat Perry1, Shlomo Bentin1,2, Inbal Ben-Ami Bartal3, Claus

Lamm3,4, Jean Decety3; 1Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel, 2The
Interdisciplinary Center of Neural Computation, Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Israel, 3University of Chicago, 4Laboratory for Social and Neural
Systems Research University of Zurich, Switzerland — We explored how

apparently painful stimuli and the ability to identify with the person on
whom the pain is inflicted modulates the putative EEG suppression over
sensory-motor cortex in the mu/alpha range (8-12Hz). Analyzing ERPs
elicited by the same stimuli we also investigated how early in the perception time-course these factors affect perception. In a 2X2 design, we
presented pictures of hands experiencing either needle pricks or being
touched by a Q-tip. In the “unlike me” condition the hand was assigned
to a patient suffering from a disease in which Q-tips inflicted pain
whereas needle pricks did not. In the “like me” condition the hand was
assigned to a patient who responded to stimulation in the same way as
the participants. Participants were instructed to imagine the feeling of
the person whose hand was shown and to evaluate her affective state.
Pain conditions elicited greater suppression than non-pain conditions.
Moreover, when a stimulus was not painful for the patient but would be
painful for the participant (needle prick in the “unlike me” condition),
the suppression was significant. When there was no pain involved (Q-tip
in the “like me” condition) there was very little suppression. Hence, mu/
alpha suppression can be elicited either by observing a potentially painful situation or by empathy for pain, even if the other person is different
from oneself. ERP differences between conditions were evident as early
as about 140 ms as demonstrated by a modulation of P1 by the same
experimental factors.

I112

THE EARLY TIME COURSE OF HUMAN BODY PERCEPTION David
Pitcher1,2, Brad Duchaine2, Vincent Walsh2, Nancy Kanwisher1;
1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2University College London — Neuroscientists seeking to understand the cognitive mechanisms that underlie
body perception have used functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) to identify spatially distinct category-selective cortical regions in
the human brain. One such region, the extrastriate body area (EBA),
shows a stronger response to bodies than to other object categories and
has been proposed to be the first stage in a cortical network specialized
for body perception. To investigate when the EBA processes body information we exploited the temporal precision of transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS). Ten subjects performed a delayed match to sample
body discrimination task while double pulse TMS (separated by 40ms)
was delivered at different points from stimulus onset. TMS was delivered over each subjects functionally localised EBA and over a vertex control site. Results show that TMS delivered over EBA disrupted the body
discrimination task only when delivered 40 to 80 ms after stimulus onset
but in no other time windows up to 240-280 ms. This early disruption of
body information suggests when visual body information is first represented in human cortex prior to further processing in higher cortical
areas.

I113

REDUCED CONFIGURAL PROCESSING OF OLD FACES IN YOUNG
OBSERVERS: EVIDENCE FROM THE N170 FACE INVERSION EFFECT

Holger Wiese1, Stefan R. Schweinberger1; 1Friedrich Schiller University of
Jena — Humans are often considered to be face experts, which is
assumed to be related to configural processing. Face inversion is
believed to severely disrupt configural processing. A neural correlate of
this face inversion effect is an enhanced amplitude and latency of the
N170 event-related potential component for inverted faces. Because
expertise may vary as a function of perceptual experience with a particular class of faces (such as faces of different age groups), we examined
whether configural processing for same and other age faces differs in
young adult participants. Young and old unfamiliar faces were pre-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Vision

Poster Session I

sented either upright or inverted. To manipulate the availability of agespecifying information (such as detail in skin texture or wrinkles), all
faces were presented unfiltered and with three different degrees of lowpass filtering (cut-off frequencies at 30, 20 or 10 cycles per image, cpi).
Reaction times in a young-old categorization task were significantly
faster for old compared to young faces in all except for the 10 cpi filter
conditions. Strong low-pass filtering increased N170 latency and
reduced P2 amplitude, but not differentially so for old and young faces.
Importantly, the difference in N170 amplitude between upright and
inverted faces was significantly smaller for old compared to young faces.
This finding suggests decreased configural processing for old compared
to young faces, which may be related to a reduced perceptual experience
of young adult participants with old faces.

I114

SEARCHING WITH MEMORY Kelly Shen1, Martin Paré1;

1Queen's

University, Kingston, Canada — Current models of selective attention and
visual search incorporate two processes believed to be crucial in searching for an item in a visual scene: the selection of locations to be attended
and the temporary prevention of re-selecting previously attended locations. In natural situations, the deployment of visual attention is accomplished by sequences of gaze fixations, and the active suppression of
recently visited locations can be examined by analyzing the distribution
of gaze fixations as a function of time and location. We trained monkeys
to perform a visual search task, in which they could freely search for a
target stimulus with a unique conjunction of features. Monkeys made
multiple fixations on distracters before foveating the target (mean: 3.1;
range: 1-14) and their probability of foveating the target with a single fixation was only 0.25. Performance in this difficult task, however, was generally efficient as monkeys rarely re-fixated previously inspected stimuli.
The probability of a re-fixation increased with time and approximated
chance levels after 5-6 fixations, suggesting that foveated information is
retained across fixations but completely degraded within about 1000 ms
of fixation. The visual activity of sensory-motor neurons in superior colliculus was sufficient to guide this behavior: activity associated with previously fixated stimuli was significantly lower than that of stimuli not
yet fixated. These results suggest a neural mechanism for suppressing
the re-fixation of stimuli temporarily maintained in memory. These findings demonstrate how neural representations on the visual salience map
are dynamically updated from fixation to fixation, thus facilitating visual
search.

I115

WHEN THE FACE AREA RESPONDS TO HOUSES: CODING OF
PERCEPTUAL PREDICTION ERROR IN THE VENTRAL VISUAL STREAM
Tobias Egner1, Jim Monti2, Christopher Summerfield3; 1Duke University,
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 3University of Oxford — Visual

object recognition is traditionally viewed as a passive bottom-up flow of
stimulus information along a hierarchy of specialized neuronal feature
detectors with increasingly complex response properties. By contrast,
‘predictive coding’ models posit that each hierarchical level engages in
active top-down prediction of inputs from the next lower level, compares predictions against bottom-up signals, and forwards mismatches
(prediction error) to the next higher level. A central but controversial
tenet of these models is the existence of visual ‘prediction error neurons’
that complement representational (prediction) neurons at each processing stage. Here, we tested a strong, counterintuitive implication of this
proposal, namely, that the feature-specificity in the population response
of specialized ventral visual stream areas will vary with expectations:
when expecting a preferred stimulus, occurrence of that stimulus should
not elicit prediction error, whereas an (unexpected) non-preferred stimulus should. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we
show that neural population responses in the fusiform face area (FFA) to
preferred and non-preferred stimuli (faces vs. houses) vary as a function
of expectation for faces. Remarkably, and in direct support of predictive
coding models, the differential FFA response to face versus house stimuli disappeared under conditions of high face expectation.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

I116

ACQUIRED PROSOPAGNOSIA FOLLOWING RIGHT UNILATERAL BRAIN
DAMAGE: SPECIFIC AND HOLISTIC PROCESSING IMPAIRMENT OF THE
INDIVIDUAL FACE Thomas Busigny1, Sven Joubert2, Olivier Felician3,

Mathieu Ceccaldi3, Bruno Rossion1; 1Universite Catholique de Louvain,
Belgium, 2Universite de Montreal, Canada, 3AP-HM Timone, Marseille,
France — Acquired prosopagnosia – the inability to recognize individual

faces despite preserved low-level visual and intellectual abilities – can
inform normal face recognition theories. We present the extensive investigation of a new case of prosopagnosia, GG (66 years old), who sustained a stroke to the right posterior cerebral artery, damaging the
occipital lobe, lateral fusiform and parahippocampal gyri, unilaterally in
the right hemisphere. GG presents a massive prosopagnosia, being
unable to recognize from their face both famous and familiar people.
Our behavioural testing of GG and age-matched controls aimed at
addressing two major issues: (1) can the impairment be restricted to
faces; (2) what is the nature of the deficit. First, GG failed all experiments
involving face retrograde/anterograde memory and perception. Contrariwise, he was normal at mnesic and perceptual tests with several
other object categories (chairs, boats, cars, birds, and famous places).
Moreover, he showed normal basic visual integrative processes (Navon
effect, 3D figures matching, dots configurations perception). Second, we
tested GG with classical paradigms measuring holistic face processing
(face inversion effect, composite effect, whole-part advantage). Strikingly, GG did not show any of the three effects. Finally, two face matching experiments showed a reduced sensitivity to the eyes region, and a
processing bias to the mouth. Altogether, these observations are in line
with different previous studies of prosopagnosia, indicating that lesions
to different localizations in the right cortical face network can lead to an
inability to extract a holistic representation of the individual face, a fundamental process for normal face recognition.

I117

REVISITING UPRIGHT AND INVERTED FACE RECOGNITION IN 6- TO 12YEAR-OLD CHILDREN AND ADULTS Adelaide de Heering1,2, Bruno
Rossion2, Daphne Maurer1; 1McMaster University, Ontario, Canada.,
2Université Catholique de Louvain, Belgium — Adults are experts at recog-

nizing faces. However there is still controversy about how this ability
develops with age, with some arguing for adultlike processing by 4-6
years of age (Crookes & McKone, 2009) while others maintaining that
this ability undergoes protracted development (Monldoch et al., 2002).
Here we tested 108 6- to 12-year-old children and 36 young adults with a
digitized version of the Benton Face Recognition Test (Benton et al.,
1983), which is known to be a sensitive tool for assessing face recognition
abilities (Busigny & Rossion, in press). Participants had to identify 3
faces among 6 alternatives that matched the target face despite changes
in viewpoint and lightning. The faces were projected upright and
upside-down in separate blocks. Children’s correct response times did
not improve with age, for either upright or inverted faces, but were significantly slower than those of adults for both conditions. This pattern is
consistent with known increases with age in attention and information
processing. Accuracy improved between 6 and 12 and significantly more
for upright than inverted faces, leading to a larger face inversion effect.
Inverted face recognition improved slowly until late childhood whereas
the improvement for upright faces was largest before versus after 8 years
of age, with a further enhancement by young adulthood. Together the
results indicate that during childhood face processing becomes increasingly tuned to upright faces, likely as a result of increasing experience.

I118

ARBITRATING BETWEEN FEEDFORWARD VS. FEEDBACK MODELS OF
CONTOUR INTEGRATION IN V1 Marina Shpaner1,2, Emmajane Forde1,

Sophie Molholm1,2,3, John J. Foxe1,2,3; 1Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric
Research, 2City College of New York, City University of New York, 3Albert
Einstein College of Medicine — Contour integration, the ability to link
visual information across space, is an essential element of object and

285

Poster Session I
scene perception. It is a mechanism by which the visual system groups
simple features at a relatively basic level. The precise neural mechanisms
of contour integration remain unclear. Two competing models can
explain contour integration effects observable in the primary visual cortex. The first posits that contour integration takes place via long-range
horizontal connections within the primary visual cortex: by this account,
contours are completed by simultaneous activation of neurons in V1 and
enhancement of neural response from neighboring collinear cells. The
alternative model posits that downstream collinear V1 neurons converge
on “coincidence detectors” in higher order visual areas to achieve initial
contour integration. In this scenario, observable V1 effects follow feedback from higher order visual areas. This project investigates the timecourse and topography of contour integration in humans using highdensity electrophysiology. A feedforward versus a feedback model of
contour integration in the primary visual cortex was tested. Stimuli of
contours embedded in Gabor noise and stimuli of Gabor noise were presented to sixteen normal volunteers. Analyses revealed no contourrelated effects in the earliest evoked component. In contrast, contour
integration effects were observed in the later N2 component, localized to
the ventral stream visual areas. We conclude that contour integration initially relies on the higher-order ventral stream areas, and that any effects
observed in the primary visual cortex follow this initial stage of processing.

I119

SEX HORMONES DIFFERENTIALLY INFLUENCE MENTAL ROTATION AND
ROTATED OBJECT RECOGNITION DURING THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE

Kevin Wilson1, Margaret Mintus1; 1Gettysburg College — An important question concerning visual object recognition is whether spatial transformation processes such as mental rotation are used to recognize objects that
are rotated into non-upright orientations. Similar viewpoint effects are
often observed behaviorally in mental rotation and rotated object recognition tasks (e.g. longer response times as objects are rotated farther from
upright), suggesting overlap between the two. This possibility has been
challenged, however, by neuroimaging studies showing different patterns of brain activity in each case. While previous neuroimaging studies
have partially differentiated the brain areas involved in mental rotation
and rotated object recognition, no studies to date have looked at whether
both processes are subject to the same sex-steroid influences. More specifically, extensive research suggests that mental rotation performance
differs over the course of the menstrual cycle, with better performance
during the menstrual (when estradiol and progesterone levels are relatively low) relative to the midluteal phase (when estradiol and progesterone levels are relatively high). It is unknown, however, whether
similar effects occur for rotated object recognition. In this study, female
participants performed mental rotation and rotated object recognition
tasks during the menstrual and midluteal phases of their menstrual
cycle. Results showed that menstrual cycle effects on mental rotation
(e.g., better performance during the menstrual relative to the midluteal
phase) did not correlate with performance changes during rotated object
recognition. These findings complement previous neuroimaging studies,
and suggest that mental rotation and rotated object recognition not only
rely on distinct brain areas, but are also differentially influenced by sex
hormones.
I120

VISUAL OBJECT COGNITION PRECEDES AND OVERLAPS WITH MENTAL
ROTATION Lisa Lucia1, Haline Schendan1; 1Tufts University — Eventrelated potential (ERP) studies have separately indicated that (1) object
model selection during cognitive decisions happens during an N3 complex from 200-500 ms, and, (2) as mental rotation increases, parietal negativity (and response time) increases linearly from 400-800 ms. A prior
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study recorded activity
during both visual object categorization and mental rotation in the same
participants, and showed overlapping prefrontal-posterior systems during both tasks. This ERP version of the fMRI study assessed whether
model selection and mental rotation occur serially or in-parallel. Catego-

286

Perception & Action: Vision
rization findings revealed object-sensitive activation before 200 ms (during the P1 and VPP/N170) reflecting figure-ground segregation, and
after 200 ms (during the N3 complex) reflecting object model selection.
Results from the mental rotation task confirmed linear mental rotation
effects on parietal negativity (500-700 ms). In addition, linear effects of
mental rotation were discovered on a frontopolar N350 subcomponent
of the N3 from 200-700 ms and a centrofrontal N390 subcomponent from
400-500 ms; both were more negative with increasing rotation. Overall,
the time course indicates that visual object cognition processes precede
(200–500 ms) but also overlap the initial phase of mental rotation (500–
700 ms) during parietal negativity. Further, FMRI and ERPs together
suggest that linear rotation effects on the frontopolar N350 reflect analysis of the spatial configuration of parts in ventrocaudal intraparietal sulcus for cognitive decisions, whereas those on later parietal negativity
reflect mental imagery in superior parietal lobule.

I121

ATTRIBUTION, RECOGNITION AND OBSERVATION OF HUMAN
MOVEMENTS: THE ROLE OF THE MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM Luciano

Giromini1, Laura Parolin1, Jaime A. Pineda2, Piero Porcelli3, Donald J.
Viglione4; 1University of Milan-Bicocca, Milan, Italy, 2University of California,
San Diego, 3IRCCS De Bellis Hospital, Castellana Grotte, Italy, 4Alliant
International University, San Diego, California — In 1992 Rizzolatti and col-

leagues reported on a unique set of neurons that fired both when a
macaque performed and when it observed an action. Many studies have
investigated whether an analogous system exists in humans. To date the
evidence, although indirect, supports the existence of a Mirror Neuron
System (MNS) that may play a critical role in imitation learning and the
understanding of actions. For the most part, these studies have involved
the observation of unambiguous stimuli. The aim of the current study
was to examine whether MNS is activated by the observation of ambiguous stimuli, that is, stimuli that could be interpreted as movement without any suggestion by the experimenter. Such an attribution process has
been studied within the Rorschach test for almost 100 years with the conclusion that movement attribution is associated with a kinesthetic identification with others, empathy, interest in people, and social competence.
To test the hypothesis, a group of 19 students observed Rorschach inkblot stimuli as well as non-ambiguous drawings resembling the inkblots,
while their EEG was recorded. Suppression of the 8-13 Hz (Mu) frequency EEG band recorded over sensorimotor cortex (scalp locations C3,
Cz and C4) – a presumed index of MNS activity – occurred both for the
non-ambiguously drawn human movements and for the Rorschach
ambiguous stimuli. This finding provides further support for the connection between MNS and both higher level cognitive skill and also
spontaneous activation of movement ideation within individuals.

I122

BEHAVIORAL AND NEUROIMAGING RESPONSES TO FORM-FROMMOTION STIMULI: A FACTORIAL DESIGN MANIPULATING TWO LEVELS OF
LUMINANCE AND MOTION Josh Salmon1, Heath Matheson1, Patricia

McMullen1; 1Dalhousie University — Object form can be derived visually
from many cues including motion and/or luminance differences
between foreground and background. When both cues are present in a
single form, they must be integrated. Form and motion information is
typically processed by the ventral and dorsal visual streams, respectively. The contribution of these two streams to form and motion integration was the focus of this investigation. We first isolated brain regions
sensitive to form and motion information using basic localizers. In the
experimental task, participants decided whether two visual forms
matched. All stimuli (real and non-real objects) were hybrids containing
both form-from-motion (FFM) and form-from-luminance (FFL) information, each with two levels. Behavioral results suggest greater sensitivity
to differences in luminance compared to differences in motion, especially in the case of real objects. BOLD differences corroborated these
findings with the largest BOLD differences between low and high luminance conditions for real objects. For the fMRI data, we considered sites

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Perception & Action: Vision

Poster Session I

of statistical interaction between motion and luminance as potential integration sites, and we compared the activity of these sites to the areas isolated in the motion and form localizers. Preliminary results suggest that
brain regions involved in this task overlapped with areas sensitive to
processing form (i.e. LOC) and motion (i.e. MT/V5). Overall, this suggests a contribution of both ventral and dorsal streams.

I124

VISUAL PERSPECTIVE BIASES THE SPEED OF IMITATION-BASED
MUSICAL LEARNING Sabrina M. Chang1, Julia Kam1, Todd C. Handy1; 1The
University of British Columbia — Our research explores the relationship
between visual perspective and learning. More specifically, we are interested in seeing whether information presented in first-person perspective versus third-person perspective affects the speed with which a
subject will learn a musical concept. Research has shown that third-person representation delays learning but results in better retention due to
the increase in effort, encoding, transformation and understanding of the
action’s spatial configuration. For our first experiment, participants—
who had no prior training in piano—watched four short video clips.
Each video clip showed a different 3-note chord (triad) being played on a
piano keyboard. Each set of videos was shown from either a first-person
perspective (looking over the instructor’s shoulder) or a third-person
perspective (sitting across from the instructor). Upon watching each
video clip the participant attempted to learn and recreate the triad on a
piano keyboard. The participants then completed a problem-solving
exercise that acted as a distracter, after which, he or she was asked to
reproduce the triads. The results showed significant perspective effects
in that participants spent more time learning chords presented in thirdperson perspective while the success rate in recall for both groups was
the same. In a second, control experiment, we reduced the number of
chords to one in order to eliminate possible memory or practice confounds. We found that participants in the third-person condition took
longer to learn the chord while the success rate in recall remained the
same for both groups.

I125

HOW TO MAKE VISUAL ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL DATA A GOOD
PREDICTOR OF HUMAN BINOCULAR INTEGRATION? Laura Lefebvre1,2,
1,2

1,2,3

1

Hugo Théoret , Dave Saint-Amour ; Centre de Recherche, Montréal,
Canada, 2Centre de Recherche en Neuropsychologie et Cognition, Université
de Montréal, Canada, 3Université du Québec à Montréal, Canada — Electrophysiological responses related to binocular interaction in humans are
often difficult to interpret because of the lack of direct correspondence
with perception. In an attempt to establish an electrophysiological
marker of binocular vision, monocular and binocular visual evoked
potentials (VEP) were recorded over the occipital cortex (Oz site) in 12
normal young adults (24.7yr ±4.1) for whom interocular differences in
refraction (anisometropia), a condition known to disrupt binocular integration, was induced with converging lenses. Reversal checkerboards (2
Hz, 2 cycles/degree, 96% of contrast) were presented monocularly and
binocularly according to five dioptre (D) levels: 0, +2, +4, +6 and +8D.
Indexes of binocular integration were calculated from the N75-P100 and
P100-N150 peak-to-peak amplitude using the following formula: binocular response – the sum of monocular responses. The electrophysiological
indexes were then compared with stereoscopic perception as assessed
with the Randot Stereo Test. ANOVAs revealed a significant reduction
of the binocular integration index under anisometropic viewing, in particular at 4D and more for N75-P100 (F (4, 40)= 22.95, p < .05) and P100N150 (F (2.52, 25. 53)= 34. 39, p < .05). The same pattern of impairment as
a function of interocular differences in refraction was found perceptually, i.e., the stereoperception was abolished at 4D or more. More specifically, the electrophysiological index of binocular integration follows
exactly the same function than perceptual integration. This study suggests that appropriate calculation of simple electrophysiological data can
constitute a reliable and useful indicator of perception under different
conditions of binocular vision.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

I126

IDENTIFYING AN EARLIER ONSET OF THE ELECTRICAL BRAIN
RESPONSES UNDERLYING PERCEPETUAL COMPLETION OF OBJECTS
AND NON-OBJECTS Naddley Desire1,2, Anthony Hosein1, Boutheina

Jemel1,3; 1Research Laboratory Neuroscience and Cognitive Electrophysiology,
Hopital Riviere des Prairies, 2Universite de Montreal, Canada, 3Centre de
Recherche Fernand Seguin, Universite de Montreal, Canada — Although
most viewed objects emerging from our surrounding environment are
occluded by one another, perception of their boundaries seldom appear
incomplete. This perceptual completion phenomenon illustrates the
active properties of underlying neuro-cognitive processes and the dissociation between visual percept and physical stimulus. Findings from
some previous event-related potential (ERPs) studies suggest that perceptual completion is indexed by a negative ERP over occipito-temporal
scalp sites, known as Ncl. However, given that the Ncl occurs at a relatively late latency (around 290ms), it is possible that it reflects access to
object memory representation rather than perceptual processes. Our
study addresses this issue by investigating the effect of parametrically
fragmented line drawing object and non-object images (scrambled
objects) on early and mid-latency electrophysiological responses. ERPs
were recorded from 17 participants while they were presented with
seven progressively less fragmented images of the same object or nonobject (ranging from objectively non-identifiable to a complete image).
ERPs were averaged with respect to object and non-object fragmentation
levels. We found that while ERP fragmentation level effects started
around 200ms (N200) for object and non-object stimuli, N200 amplitude
modulations were non-linear for objects and linear for non-objects. As
the amount of information is increased, the amplitude of the N200 to
non-object stimuli gradually decreased. However, N200 amplitude modulation showed a plateau at fragmentation levels associated with higher
object identification rates. Our findings indicate that perceptual closure
has an earlier onset than that previously reported and that different
neuro-cognitive processes underlie perceptual completion of objects and
non-objects.

I127

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY OF CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL VISUAL
FIELDS: VALIDATION OF A METHOD Noémie
Hébert1,2,
Maryse

Lassonde1,2, Dave Saint-Amour1,2; 1Montreal University (CERNEC), 2CHU
Sainte-Justine Research Center — Introduction: The study of the integrity

of the central and peripheral fields seems to be an issue when it comes to
pediatric populations touched by differential visual field impairment.
The perimetry, used to discriminate the different region’s integrity, is
rarely reliable in childhood. Moreover, the ERG and PEV data rarely distinguish both visual fields. Therefore, the study’s goal is to validate a
quick and non-biased way of measuring a patient’s visual fields integrity. Method: We have developed a steady-state VEP paradigm that
allows simultaneous discrimination of both central and peripheral fields.
Similar to Harding et al. (2002), the stimulus consisted of two radial
checkerboards in which the central stimulation (0-5° radius) flickered at
15 reversals/s and the peripheral stimulation (30-60° radius) oscillated at
12 reversals/s. PERGs and VEPss were recorded from surface electrodes
to estimate the integrity of the ganglion cells and the visual cortex,
respectively. Central and peripheral responses were extracted with a
Fourier analysis. In this study, a group of healthy adults, a group of
healthy children and a clinical group of children with either a central or a
peripheral field of vision deficit were tested. Results: The results from
PERGs and VEPss show that both healthy groups have a normal vision.
However, deficits were found in the clinical group that are coherent with
the diagnostic given to each patient. Conclusion: Our method is rapid,
objective and covers a large visual field. It appears promising to study
the integrity of visual fields in different type of clinical populations.

287

A
Aakre, J 257
Abada, SH 149
Abdel Rahman, R 209
AbdulSabur, N 222
Abe, S 169
Abraham, D 207, 210
Achaibou, A 175
Acheson, D 166, 172
Acheson, DJ 170
Achim, A 167
Achim, AM 75
Adames, HY 273
Adamo, M 167
Adams-Moore, J 51
Adcock, A 15, 16
Adcock, RA 105, 181, 269
Ad-Dab’bagh, Y 42
Addis, DR 272, 275
Adelore, T 252
Adler, N 155
Adolphs, R 19, 70, 140, 203, 211
Adrover-Roig, D 260
Agosta, F 95
Ahlfors, S 31
Aichele, SR 155
Aimola Davies, AM 193
Akbar, M 58
Aker, M 194
Akerib, V 107
Alafuzoff, A 78
Al-Aidroos, N 27
Alain, C 223
Alajajian, S 235
Albouy, G 235
Albright, T 201
Alcocer, P 121
Alexandrov, AA 133
Alexis, D 36
Ali, N 235
Allan, K 174
Allen, C 197
Allen, J 73, 94
Allen, N 70
Ally, B 269
Ally, BA 181, 273
Almeida, D 222
Almor, A 21, 22
Alperin, B 94
Altarriba, J 101
Althaus, N 108

288

Altschuler, E 281
Alvarez, M 19
Ambady, N 38, 39
Amiez, C 89
Aminoff, E 200
Amso, D 171, 249
Amunts, K 267
Amyotte, J 45
An, XM 161
Anaki, D 251
Anand, R 76
Anderson, A 71, 100
Anderson, AK 18, 104, 211
Anderson, J 241
Anderson, LM 244
Anderson, N 88
Anderson, ND 67
Anderson, S 29
Anderson, V 27
Andersson, A-M 78
Ando, H 231, 283
Andrea, F 58
Andreatta, M 237
Andrew, B 189
Andrews, J 226
Andrews, M 190
Andrews-Hanna, J 75
Andrews-Hanna, JR 81
Angrilli, A 237
Annaz, D 223
Ansaldo, AI 260
Ansari, D 86
Ansseau, M 235
Antoniello, D 280
Aparicio, M 151
Aparicio, X 45
Apitz, T 48
Appelbaum, L 84, 198
Arasanz, CP 234
Archila, P 133, 150
Ardinger, S 283
Armony, J 42, 84, 107
Armony, JL 43
Aron, A 26, 243
Arsalidou, M 78, 156
Arsenault-Lapierre, G 255
Arthur, K 237
Asano, E 90
Ashby, FG 193
Askren, MK 83
Asplund, C 248
Astheimer, LB 63, 122

Atchley, P 232
Atchley, RA 212
Atkins, A 59
Atkins, AS 274
Atlas, L 210
Atlas, LY 68
Attali, E 55
Aubé, W 43
Audrey-Anne, E 249
Avecilla, G 218
Avenanti, A 111
Averbeck, B 136
Avital, R 257
Ayaz, H 170
Aylward, E 78
Ayotte, P 97
Ayoub, A 54
Aziz-Zadeh, L 35

B
Babb, SJ 277
Bach, D 135
Bach, M 96
Bachrach, A 264
Baciu, M 112, 151, 154, 186
Bäckman, L 76, 148, 170, 172, 179
Badre, D 26, 81, 83
Baess, P 188
Bahlmann, J 221
Bahrami, B 246
Bailey, DM 186
Bailey, JA 189
Baillargeon, A 225
Bainchin, M 237
Baldo, J 72
Baldwin, C 263
Baldwin, M 235
Ball, T 67, 155
Ballard, I 105
Bamikole, I 123
Bamyaci, E 114
Banai, K 224
Band, G 184
Banich, M 239
Banich, MT 75, 81, 87
Banissy, M 163
Banz, B 104
Banz, BC 234
Barac, R 77, 244
Barack, DL 247
Baran, B 25

Barbey, A 34
Barbot, A 260
Barch, DM 240
Barias, A 263, 264
Barnes, KA 80
Baron-Cohen, S 205
Barrett, R 104
Barrick, T 21
Barrow, J 263
Barrow, R 41
Barsalou, L 205, 227
Barsalou, LW 191, 204
Bartolomei, F 99
Bartolomeo, P 28, 92, 93, 95, 96
Barton, M 72
Basak, C 237
Bassok, M 230
Basten, U 82, 106
Bastiaanse, R 114
Bastiaansen, MCM 219
Bastien, C 97
Bastien-Toniazzo, M 99
Batson, DC 19
Battelli, L 95
Batterink, L 216
Bauch, EM 177
Baucom, L 215
Baudewig, J 72
Bauer, A 256
Baum, S 118, 148, 188
Baum, SR 149, 266
Baylis, B 201
Bayliss, A 125
Baym, C 56
Bays, P 97
Bays, PM 234
Bazargani, N 280
Bean, SE 244
Beaton, S 253
Beauchamp, M 25, 27
Beaudry, T 226
Bebko, G 158
Becerra, J 187
Becerril, KE 240
Beck, D 247
Becke, A 166
Bedny, M 21, 22
Beeman, M 21, 203, 208
Behrens, T 87
Beigi, M 88
Beilock, S 133
Bekkering, H 212

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Author Index
Belger, A 233
Belin, P 38, 61, 111, 128, 133
Bélizaire, G 133
Bell, R 239
Bell, T 61
Bellander, M 172
Bellebaum, C 59
Belleville, S 58, 59, 65, 66
Bello, JP 101
Bellugi, U 52
Belyusar, D 96
Ben Sira, L 257
Ben-Ami Bartal, I 284
Benasich, AA 122, 263
Benavides, J 54
Bender, J 186
Ben-Hur, T 283
Benkelfat, C 140
Bennett, C 200, 273
Bennett, IJ 169, 178, 192
Benoit, S 58
Benovoy, M 160
Ben-Simhon, T 168
Benson, J 109
Bentaleb, L 206
Bentall, R 211
Bentin, S 284
Bergman Nutley, S 244
Berkman, E 159
Berman, M 105
Bernard, J 172
Bernheim, BD 140
Bernolet, S 212
Bernstein, H-G 204
Berryhill, M 165
Bertschy, G 80
Besle, J 27
Bessette-Symons, B 204
Bestelmeyer, P 61, 128
Beucke, J-C 243
Beversdorf, D 216
Bhasin, S 241
Bhatara, A 228
Bhatt, E 95
Bi, Y 48
Bialystok, E 77, 241, 244
Bianchi-Demicheli, F 103
Biele, G 76
Bien, H 123
Binney, RJ 220
Birbaumer, N 188
Bird, C 110, 256
Bird, CM 175
Birmingham, E 70
Biswal, B 200
Bjornson, B 264
Black, J 245
Blackburn, M 136
Blackford, T 217
Blagdon, R 187
Blair, C 75, 278
Blakely, R 233
Blanchett, I 211
Blanchette, I 75, 203, 209
Blanco, D 115
Blangero, J 73

Blanke, O 108, 111, 112
Blitzer, D 201
Block, CK 263
Bodnar, M 42
Boehler, C 84, 198, 284
Boehm, SG 270
Boesiger, P 276
Boettiger, C 28, 194
Boeve, B 257
Bögels, S 43, 118
Boggio, P 109
Boggio, PS 280
Boh, B 129
Böhler, CN 231
Boissé, M-F 54
Boiteau, T 22
Boller, A 78
Bompas, A 26, 29
Bond Chapman, S 76
Bondarenko, R 231
Bonner, MF 220
Boodhoo, K 264
Boot, W 237
Booth, J 262
Borghesani, P 78
Borghesani, PR 258
Born, J 52, 54
Borowsky, R 45, 213
Bosnak, R 207
Bossaerts, P 156
Boswell, R 35
Bottari, C 168
Botvinick, M 88, 205
Bouchard, L 132
Boucher, VJ 151
Boudelaa, S 46
Boudewyn, MA 147
Bourdage, CJA 258
Bourgeois, A 92
Bourgeron, T 260
Bourguignon, N 50, 266
Bowen, C 187
Bowles, B 57
Bowyer, S 111
Boyer, P 142
Bozic, M 46, 50
Bradley, ED 268
Bradley, M 284
Bradshaw, J 34
Brambati, SM 58
Brammer, M 134
Brandwein, AB 110
Brang, D 112, 113
Brannon, E 142
Brannon, EM 225
Brass, M 81, 196, 238
Brauer, J 267
Braun, AR 222
Braun, EK 56, 258
Braver, TS 99
Bray, S 166
Brecher, A 217
Breen, M 63
Brehmer, Y 76, 170, 172, 179
Bresciani, MC 277
Brewer, G 54

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Bridwell, DA 155
Brien, C 49
Brier, M 79, 216, 228
Brier, MR 228
Briggs, R 87
Brisson, B 94, 232
Britz, J 250
Broadwell, C 208
Brodeur, M 33
Brodeur, MB 251
Bromberger, B 279
Bromfield, S 25
Brosch, T 161
Brouillard, M 91
Brown, C 203
Brown, EK 256
Brown, K 85
Brown, R 127
Brown, S 190
Brozzoli, C 116
Bruce, C 189
Brumback, C 228
Brumm, K 44
Brunamonti, E 169
Brunet, A 107
Brunet, J 59
Bruno, B 193
Brunye, T 195, 275
Bryce, D 195
Bryde, S 244
Buccigrossi, R 200
Buchler, N 274
Buchler, NG 273
Buchsbaum, M 97
Buchy, L 42
Buckner, R 238
Buckner, RL 23
Budson, A 269
Budson, AE 181, 273
Bueti, D 246
Buhl, VI 163, 214
Buhle, J 157
Buholzer, S 276
Buiatti, M 283
Bullmore, E 205
Bullock, A 101
Bultitude, J 92
Bunce, S 170
Bunge, S 25
Burgess, GC 81
Burgess, N 175, 256
Burianova, H 176
Burneo, J 276
Burton, P 170
Buschkuehl, M 172
Bush, WS 231
Busigny, T 285
Butler, AJ 116, 183
Butler, B 132
Butler, J 116
Butler, JS 109
Buxbaum, L 280
Buxbaum, LJ 282
Buzzell, G 263

C
Cabaral, M 165
Cabeza, R 23, 30, 106, 180, 183,
204, 270, 273, 274
Caharel, S 250
Cahill, E 104
Cai, W 243
Calcagno, V 217
Calder, A 156
Calderon, M 63
Calderón, M 218
Caljouw, C 152
Callan, A 112
Callan, D 112
Calley, CS 163, 196, 214
Cámara, E 241
Camerer, C 137, 138, 140
Camerer, CC 140
Campanella, S 100
Campbell, A 104, 224
Campbell, DW 162
Campbell, K 65
Cannizzaro, M 124
Canterberry, M 238
Caplan, JB 279
Cappa, S 59
Cappe, C 115
Capponi, C 175
Capuana, L 238
Caramazza, A 29, 119
Cardillo, E 154, 215, 218
Cardinali, L 116
Cardoza, J 270
Carey, D 187
Carlson, J 85, 104, 156, 157
Carlson, T 95
Carolan, P 90, 245
Carp, J 227
Carr, VA 180
Carrasco, M 240
Carré, J 35
Carreiras, M 49
Carson, N 272
Carter, C 88, 105
Carter, CS 147
Carter, M 142
Carter, RM 105, 136, 138
Casasanto, D 213
Case, K 87
Case, LK 112, 114
Casey, B 69
Casey, BJ 103
Casp, M 233
Cate, A 254
Catroppa, C 27
Cattaneo, Z 95
Caudle, K 35
Cauffman, EE 75
Cauvet, E 264
Cavanagh, P 92
Cavezian, C 97, 283
Cebenoyan, D 168
Ceccaldi, M 285
Celin, S 259
Celyne, B 249

289

Author Index
Cepeda, N 244
Cerf, M 70, 203
Cerruti, C 229
Cesari, P 277
Chaddock, L 79
Chai, XJ 269
Chakrabarti, B 205
Chakrabarty, T 107
Chamberlin, J 235
Chambers, C 26
Champod, AS 25
Chan, M 232
Chang, E 278
Chang, SM 287
Chang, T-H 84
Chang, Y-C 99
Chang, Y-F 134, 135
Channon, S 104
Chanon, V 27, 28
Chapman, H 71
Chapuis, D 112
Charboneau, G 108
Charest, I 38, 61, 128
Charles, S 115
Charlier, B 151
Charlton, R 20, 21
Charras, P 96
Chartrand, J-P 133
Chatham, C 239
Chatterjee, A 73, 154, 215, 218, 229,
238, 279
Chau, T 244
Chau, VL 181
Chauncey, K 275
Chauret, M 251
Chauvel, P 99
Chavez, R 41
Chavez, RS 20
Cheah, V 61, 112
Cheang, HS 237
Chee, MWL 20
Chen, A 194
Chen, C-Y 134
Chen, J 127
Chen, J-K 168
Chen, L 221
Chen, P 264
Chen, Y 48
Chen, Y-J 99
Cheng, C-M 278
Cheng, S-k 127, 176, 178
Cheng, Y 71
Chengxuan, Q 148
Chertkow, H 59, 255
Chevalier, N 81
Cheyne, D 94
Chiao, J 158
Chiaravalloti, N 200
Chiarello, C 149, 220
Chiba, A 31
Chica, A 27, 28, 92, 94
Chiew, KS 99
Chikazoe, J 196
Chiou, RYC 110
Chiron, C 52
Chiu, Y-S 48

290

Cho, R 88
Choe, M-s 263
Choi, A 216
Choi, J-S 55
Choi, M 120
Chokron, S 97, 283
Chotibut, T 76, 80, 142
Chou, I-C 135, 143
Chou, T-l 262
Choudhury, N 122
Chow, WY 215, 264
Choy, JJ 221
Chrabaszcz, J 229
Christ, S 216
Christakou, A 134
Christie, G 137
Christoff, K 20, 21, 86, 207
Christoffels, IK 152
Chrysikou, EG 58, 114
Chu, B-S 135, 143
Chung, H-K 135, 143
Chung, H-k 143
Churan, J 148
Church, J 80
Chwilla, DJ 43, 118
Ciaramelli, E 176, 270
Ciernia, AT 98
Cieslik, E 184
Cirulli, ET 138
Cisek, P 140
Clark, A 235
Clark, CAC 81
Clark, L 19
Clark, R 83, 215, 218
Claus, E 75
Clayton, N 36
Cleary, AM 178
Cleaver, J 76
Clegg, L 208
Clement, N 56, 256, 258
Clementz, BA 54, 87
Clithero, JA 136, 138
Cloutier, J 36, 38
Coch, D 120, 170
Cochrane, C 193
Cockburn, J 243
Coderre, E 242
Cogan, G 153
Cohen Kadosh, K 224
Cohen Kadosh, R 20, 224
Cohen, A 80
Cohen, J 88
Cohen, M 15, 256
Cohen, MX 241
Cohen, N 52, 53, 56, 99
Cohen, NJ 79
Cohen-Kadosh, K 223
Cohn, M 35
Cojan, Y 80, 233
Cole, W 189
Colin, C 46
Collignon, O 108, 162
Collins, J 214
Collins, P 79, 168
Colzato, L 152
Conde, R 84

Conder, J 201
Conklin, K 242
Connolly, AC 29, 30
Conrad, A 226
Conty, L 34
Conway, MA 180
Cook, E 164
Cools, R 83
Cooper, K 76
Cooperman, C 235
Copeland, L 235
Coppin, G 139, 161
Corballis, P 30, 91, 252
Corley, M 124
Corlier, F 95
Cornax, AJ 198
Cornell, S 46
Cornish, K 64, 65
Corsi-Cabrera, M 84
Coslett, HB 109, 119, 165, 217, 280,
282
Costa, A 21
Costa, P 41
Costanza, P 269
Coull, J 231
Coulson, S 112, 214, 218
Couperus, J 94
Couperus, JW 236
Coupland, N 102
Courtney, S 167
Courtney, SM 165
Cox, J 190
Cox, K 145
Crabbe, F 61, 128
Craig, A 136
Craik, F 241
Crane, J 186
Craver, CF 142
Cristinzio, C 175
Critchley, HD 145
Crockett, M 18, 19
Cross, ES 184
Crosson, B 87, 256
Cruikshank, L 279
Cruz De Souza, L 95
Cummine, J 45, 213
Cunningham, W 33
Cunnington, R 37
Curatolo, M 111
Curio, G 236
Curran, T 110, 169, 178, 239, 271,
272
Curtis, CE 186
Cusack, R 249
Cushman, F 40
Cusimano, M 235
Czerwon, B 161

D
D'Arcy, R 152
D'Esposito, M 83
D'Hondt, F 160, 162
Dabbagh, A 252
Dade, L 78
Daffner, KR 233
Dagher, A 136, 140, 141, 160, 168

Dalla Barba, G 54, 55
Daly, A 189
Dambacher, M 214, 217
Dang Vu, TT 235
Dankner, N 199
Dapretto, M 40, 263
Daselaar, S 29, 183
Dastjerdi, M 250
Datta, H 51, 263, 264
Daum, I 59, 177
Davachi, L 179, 271
Davalos, D 104, 224
Davalos, DB 234
Dave, S-A 249
Davenport, TS 218
David, A-C 107
David, N 253
David, Z 237
Davidow, JY 171
Davidson, R 73
Davies, K 88
Davies, S 209
Davis, G 36
Davis, M 48, 213
Davis, S 29, 30
Davis, T 181
Davranche, K 231
Daw, N 15, 16
Daw, ND 139
Dayan, P 135
De Baene, W 81
de Boysson, C 66
de Bruijn, E 240
de Gelder, B 31, 32
de Guise, D 252
de Guise, É 168
de Heering, A 285
de Lange, FP 42
de Quervain, D 276
De Sanctis, P 148
de Wit, S 135
Deal, CL 185
Deason, RG 181
Debruille, JB 33, 212, 217, 219
Debska-Vielhaber, G 204
Decety, J 71, 160, 284
Dedovic, K 226
Defoort-Dhellemmes, S 160
Degroot, C 85
Degueldre, C 235
Dehaene, S 260, 283
Dehaene-Lambertz, G 52
deHeering, A 252
Deland-Bélanger, A 232
Delaney-Busch, N 208
Deldin, P 105
Delgado, M 137
Delgado, MR 55, 134, 145, 157
Della Rosa, P 59
Delplanque, S 139, 282
DeLuca, J 200
DeMaster, D 255
Demers, L 63
Demers, M 167
Demeter, E 83, 233
Demonet, J-F 66

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Author Index
Deng, Y 262
Denkova, E 33, 102, 107
Denny, BT 41
Denollet, J 31
Derkits, E 168
DeSanctis, P 239
Deschamps, I 118
Desire, N 287
Desmarais, G 252
Desmet, C 196
Despretz, P 160
Desseilles, M 80, 235
DeStasio, K 35
Devitt, J 37
Devue, C 235
Dewailly, E 97
DeWitt, E 141
DeYoung, C 194, 242
Di Lollo, V 97, 232
Diamond, B 237
Diaz-Arrastia, R 202
Dick, F 224
Dickerson, KC 55
Dickie, E 107
Diekelmann, S 52, 54
Dien, J 229, 238
Dikecligil, N 157
Dillon, B 264
Dillon, D 102
Dimigen, O 214, 217
Dimitropoulou, M 49
Ding, G 120
Ding, G-s 262
Dion-Lessard, G 251
Dionne-Dostie, E 251
Ditman, T 151, 216
Dixon, F 172
Dixon, M 86
Dixon, MJ 252
Dixon, RA 102
Dobbins, IG 274
Dobel, C 48, 51, 149, 218
Dobson, C 21
Dodd, M 248
Dodds, C 196
Dodell-Feder, D 71
Doeller, CF 175
Doesburg, S 91
Dohen, M 112, 151
Doidge, A 268
Dolan, R 20, 74, 135, 136, 205
Dolcos, F 33, 102, 107
Dolcos, S 33, 102, 107
Doll, B 137
Doll, BB 81
Donaldson, DI 124, 174, 205, 273,
275
Dongaonkar, B 206
Donner, EJ 78, 149
Donohue, S 68
Donovan, C-L 200
Dorfmuller, G 52
Doricchi, F 94
Dow, M 67, 266
Dowdall, JR 247
Dowell, N 88

Downing, P 278, 282
Dozo, N 125
Drabant, E 162
Drapier, D 32
Drasby, E 84
Driscoll, D 29
Dronkers, N 72, 151
Drury, H 104
Drury, JE 50, 149, 266, 267
Drysdale, AT 171
Duann, J-R 201
Dubé, A 141, 155, 206
Dubois, B 95
DuBrow, S 175
Duchaine, B 284
Duchesne, A 159, 226
Duda, J 218
Dufau, S 45
Duke, D 270, 272
Dumas, G 34
Dumas, J 124, 166, 208
Dunabeitia, JA 49
Dunbar, KN 241
Duncan, E 227
Duncan, J 27, 81
Duncan, K 179, 271
Dunkin, B 166
Dunsmoor, J 103
Dunsmoor, JE 101
Dupuis, K 264
Duret, C 93
Durrant, S 192
Dürrwächter, U 261
Duss, S 276
Dux, P 248
Duyck, W 212
Duzel, E 15, 16, 135, 205
Düzel, E 24
Dvorkin, AY 185
Dwivedi, VD 266
Dwyer, D 282
Dye, CD 262
Dyer, T 73
Dyke, JP 116
Dyson, B 132
Dywan, J 36, 62, 238
Dziobek, I 72
Dzyundzyak, A 141, 195

E
Earleywine, M 101
Eck, D 132
Edden, R 26
Eddy, M 47, 55, 60
Eden, A 48
Edgell, D 264
Edgren, C 166
Efanov, S 226
Egbert, RR 228
Egetemeir, J 277
Eggert, K 265
Egner, T 16, 17, 285
Ehrenkrona, C-H 148
Ehret, G 57
Eich, TS 168

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Eickhoff, S 62
Eickhoff, SB 184
Einhauser, W 254
El Deredy, W 75
El Tamer, S 32
El-Deredy, W 136, 203, 209, 211
Ell, S 84
Ellamil, M 20, 21
Ellemberg, D 225
Elling, L 51
Elliott, R 136
Elman, JA 180
Elward, R 176
Emanuele, B 247
Emberson, L 249
Embleton, KV 220
Emerson, R 27
Emile, L 249
Emrich, SM 27
Endrass, T 197, 199, 235, 243
Engel, A 72
Engert, V 226
Engström, L 148
Enticott, P 34
Ergis, A-M 65
Eric, D 249
Erickson, C 136
Erickson, KI 79, 237, 240
Erin, K 189
Eskenazi, T 187
Esopenko, C 45, 213
Espeseth, T 27, 28
Espino, M 187
Espy, KA 78, 81, 248
Ethier, A-A 97
Ethridge, K 121
Ethridge, LE 87
Eulitz, C 46
Evans, A 42, 59, 69, 146, 201
Evans, AD 244
Evans, C 186
Evans, S 136
Evans-Kavaldjian, H 200
Evstigneeva, MD 133

F
Fabbri, S 29
Fabiani, M 228, 237
Fahrenfort, J 105
Fallah, M 94
Fallgatter, AJ 277
Fang, Y 87
Farb, N 100
Farde, L 76, 170, 179
Fareri, DS 157
Farnè, A 116
Farooqui, A 81
Faseyitan, O 217
Fassbender, C 172
Fauchereau, F 260
Faust, M 202, 237
Favila, SE 180
Fawcett, JM 248
Feder, D 22
Federmeier, K 53, 56, 214

Federmeier, KD 219
Fedorenko, E 22
Fedota, J 195
Fehr, E 40
Feldman Barrett, L 204, 205
Felician, O 285
Fellinger, R 57
Fellous, J-M 15
Fellows, L 86, 141, 243
Fellows, LK 142, 168
Ferber, S 27, 167
Fernandes, M 65
Fernandes, MA 103
Fernandez, T 115, 218
Fernández, T 63, 187
Ferree, T 216, 228
Ferree, TC 196, 228
Ferreira, E 150
Ferrer, E 155
Ferstl, EC 125
Festa, EK 114
Fias, W 196
Fiebach, C 82
Fiebach, CJ 83, 106
Fiebelkorn, I 116
Fiebelkorn, IC 109
Fields, EC 208
Fields, L 226, 227
Fiez, J 145, 191, 192
Figueroa, V 153
Filimon, F 246
Filippi, M 95
Fillmore, P 129, 131
Fiorentino, R 47
Fiorio, M 277
Fischer, J 207
Fisher, K 230
Fishman, I 52
Fitzgerald, KD 101
Fitzgerald, P 34
Fitzroy, A 61
Flax, J 263
Flegal, KE 59, 257, 259
Fleming, S 20, 136
Fletcher, P 36, 135
Floden, D 35
Flor, H 258
Florczak, SM 53, 274
Flores, RA 20
Flor-Henry, S 33
Foerde, K 56, 256, 258
Fombonne, É 228
Fonteneau, E 50
Forbes, C 73
Forde, E 285
Forde, EJ 239
Forget, J 283
Forster, B 67, 92, 93
Fortier-Gauthier, U 94
Foss Haug, KB 194
Fossella, J 194
Foss-Feig, J 164
Foster, NEV 130
Fournier, C 139
Foustanos, I 256
Fox, A 73

291

Author Index
Foxe, J 116, 226, 227, 254
Foxe, JJ 96, 109, 110, 115, 116, 148,
232, 239, 251, 285
Franconeri, S 158, 203
Frank, M 137, 196, 243
Frank, MJ 81, 168
Fratiglioni, L 148
Frauenfelder, U 82
Freeman, J 39
Fregni, F 109
Freunberger, R 57, 66
Frey, H-P 96, 116, 251, 254
Frey, S 67
Freynik, S 229
Fried, I 203
Friederici, A 221
Friederici, AD 261, 266, 267
Friedman, D 174
Friedman, JT 122
Friedman, RB 153, 219
Friesen, CK 98
Friesen, KB 282
Frithsen, A 200
Fritz, S 201
Froelich, L 258
Froud, K 121, 147, 153, 245
Frum, C 103
Fu, G 35
Fuentemilla, L 135, 205
Fugelsang, J 241
Fujioka, T 130
Fujiwara, C 93
Fukuda, H 73, 144
Fung, R 201
Funk, H 246
Fürth, D 172

G
Gabrieli, J 36, 38, 55, 127
Gabrieli, JD 43
Gabrieli, JDE 71, 269
Gagnon, J-F 69
Gagnon, K 167
Galli, G 179
Gallinat, J 189
Gambarin, M 277
Gamond, L 39
Gandhi, P 87
Ganesh, S 42
Ganis, G 89
Ganjavi, H 201
Ganushchak, L 125
Ganzel, B 70
Gao, X 253
Garagnani, M 64, 123
Garavan, H 239
Garcia, P 153
Gardner, C 76
Garnham, A 125
Garrido-Nag, K 62
Garrido-Vásquez, P 71
Garza, J 95
Gaser, C 188
Gaskell, G 48
Gassert, R 112

292

Gaudry, I 97, 283
Gauthier, S 65
Gazzola, V 111
Geda, Y 257
Geddes, M 243
Gee, DG 160
Gee, J 218
Geerligs, L 74
Gehring, W 240, 242
Geiser, E 127
Genesee, F 152
Genova, H 200
Gentsch, A 185
George, E 170
George, N 34, 39
George, T 229
Georgescu, AL 103
Georgescue, T 71
Gerdes, ABM 159
Germann, J 262, 281
Gesselman, A 130
Getz, S 205
Geukes, S 149
Gherri, E 92
Ghetti, S 255
Ghitza, O 153
Giaschi, D 264
Gibson, L 113, 212
Giedd, J 199
Giesbrecht, B 91
Gilbert, AC 151
Gilchrist, I 29
Gil-da-Costa, R 201
Gillath, O 238
Gillmeister, H 67
Gilmore, AW 21
Gilmore, H 70
Gina, M 249
Giordano, B 128
Giovanello, K 275
Giromini, L 286
Girouard, A 275
Gitterman, M 51
Giuliani, N 162
Giuliano, RJ 132, 198
Glaser, E 108
Glass, BD 76, 80
Glass, L 229
Glimcher, P 141
Gluck, M 144
Gluck, MA 145
Gmeindl, L 165
Gobel, EW 191
Godfrey, C 27
Godwin, C 200, 251
Goebel, R 32
Goff, D 151
Goldstein, DB 138
Goldstein, M 207
Golestani, N 82, 119
Golob, E 164
Golob, EJ 62
Gonsalves, B 52, 53, 56
Gonzalez, R 18
Goodrich-Hunsaker, NJ 251
Goolkasian, P 237

Gopinath, K 87
Goral, M 51
Gorbatova, O 236
Gordon, A 273
Gordon, B 228
Gordon, E 25, 26
Gordon, I 277
Gordon-McKeon, S 40
Gorgoraptis, N 234
Gorlick, MA 18, 76
Gorlin, G 151
Gorny, X 204
Goshen-Gottstein, Y 182
Gosselin, F 251
Gosselin, N 117, 154, 168
Gosset, PW 198
Goswami, U 61, 112
Gou, Z 122
Gout, O 97, 283
Goyal, A 87
Grabski, K 154, 186
Gracco, V 118, 188
Grady, C 65, 241, 251
Grady, CL 176
Grafman, J 34, 199
Grafton, S 74, 91, 194
Graham, K 269, 278, 282
Graham, KS 53
Graham, R 98
Graham, S 75, 242
Grahn, J 126
Grainger, J 44, 45, 46, 47, 217
Grandjean, D 32, 163, 282
Granger, R 56, 132, 225
Grant, PE 263
Gratton, G 228, 237
Gray, J 194, 242
Grazioplene, R 20, 41
Green, A 73, 194
Green, C 172
Green, D 172
Green, J 91, 97
Green, L 142
Green, S 102
Green, T 163
Green, TA 196, 214
Greenberg, T 156
Greene, J 40
Gregersen, S 232
Greiner, R 159
Grethe, J 200
Greve, A 268
Grigorenka, E 194
Grigorenko, E 242
Grimault, S 94, 164, 201
Grimholt, RM 194
Grimshaw, G 212
Grimshaw, GM 98
Grinnan, JW 163, 214
Grishina, G 236
Groppe, DM 120
Grosbras, M-H 253
Grose-Fifer, J 228, 259
Grosjean, M 187
Gross, J 162, 211
Gross, RG 78

Grossi, G 120
Grossman, M 78, 83, 215, 218, 220,
260
Grouiller, F 119
Gruber, T 249
Gruender, G 159
Gruetzmann, R 243
Gründer, G 157
Grützmann, R 199
Grzybkowska, A 92
Guedj, E 99
Guerin, S 200
Guerreschi, M 105
Guger, C 246
Gugler, MF 236
Guillem, F 108
Guimond, S 164, 201
Guitart-Masip, M 135
Gullick, MM 245
Güllmar, D 40
Gunawadena, D 215
Gunawardena, D 218, 260
Gundelfinger, E 204
Gunter, T 123
Gunter, TC 122, 123
Guntupalli, JS 199
Guo, T 264
Gussenhoven, C 43
Gutsell, J 17
Guy, J 64, 65

H
Haarmann, H 229
Habib, R 179
Hacquard, V 121
Hadjikhani, N 31
Haemmerer, D 76
Hager, O 102
Hagmann, P 82
Hagoort, P 213
Hah, S 170
Haimson, B 91
Hairston, WD 110
Haist, F 44, 224
Hakala, T 78
Halász, V 37
Halchenko, Y 130, 202
Haley, RW 196
Hall, J 205
Hall, JL 18
Halpern, AR 130
Hämäläinen, M 31
Hamann, S 158, 183
Hamilton, A 37, 70, 111, 187, 223
Hamilton, AC 170
Hamilton, D 181
Hampton Wray, A 262
Han, JE 255
Han, Y 263
Han, Y-J 176
Han, Z 48
Hanck, J 64, 65
Handy, T 90, 93, 190
Handy, TC 96, 144, 198, 287
Hanke, M 130, 202
Hanna, G 240

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Author Index
Hänsel, A 111
Hanson, S 130
Hare, T 69, 137, 138
Harlow, IM 275
Harlow, J 98
Harman James, K 21, 22
Harmony, T 63, 115, 187
Harms, V 97
Harper, DN 98
Harris, A 140
Harris, I 254
Harris, JA 247
Harris, L 40
Harris, LT 204
Harrison, NA 145
Harsay, HA 241
Hart Jr., J 76, 196, 228
Hart, C 18
Hart, J 87, 163, 202, 214, 216, 228
Hart, SJ 233
Hartley, T 256
Hartmueller, T 51
Hartsuiker, R 238
Hasegawa, T 100
Haselgrove, C 200
Hasenkamp, W 227
Hasher, L 65
Hashimoto, RI 251
Hassabis, D 140
Hatri, A 72
Hatt, NV 251
Haufe, S 236
Hauk, O 48, 220
Hauner, KKY 100
Hauser, M 19
Hauswald, A 268
Hawco, C 186
Hawkins, E 22
Haxby, 30
Haxby, J 130
Haxby, JV 199
Hayama, HR 271
Hayes, SM 273, 274
Hayman-Abello, B 276
Haynes, B 88
Haynes, J-D 137
Heatherton, T 35
Heatherton, TF 36
Hébert, N 287
Hebrank, A 227
Hecht, D 144
Hedden, T 238
Hedenius, M 262
Heekeren, H 14
Heekeren, HR 64, 72, 134, 246
Hegenloh, M 75
Heikkilä, H 78
Heilman, K 280
Heim, S 27
Hein, G 18, 19
Heindel, WC 114
Heinrich, SP 96
Heinze, H-J 90, 204
Heinzle, J 137
Helge, H 58
Helie, S 193

Heller, L 110
Hellerstedt, R 276
Hello, B 141
Helwig, CC 71
Henik, A 99, 206, 234
Henke, K 276
Henkell, H 139
Hennessey, J 275
Hennigan, K 32
Hennig-Fast, K 75
Henri-Bhargava, A 142
Henrion, M 159
Henson, RNA 270
Heppleston, AC 217
Herdman, A 117
Herholz, SC 129
Herlitz, A 179
Hernandez, A 133, 150
Hernandez, L 172
Herrmann, C 130
Herrmann, MJ 277
Herrnberger, B 57
Herron, T 254
Hertz-Pannier, L 52
Hervais-Adelman, A 82, 119
Hervé, P-Y 127
Herzmann, G 271
Hess, U 33
Hester, R 240
Hestvik, A 125, 268
Hetrick, W 186
Hey, K 68
Heydrich, L 108
Heyselaar, E 25
Hibbing, J 248
Hickok, G 29, 109, 129, 131, 133,
220
Higgins, K 216
Hilgetag, C 28
Hilimire, M 91
Hill, H 112
Hillis, GAJ 169
Hillman, CH 79
Hinson, J 139
Hinson, R 237
Hiraki, K 42
Hirose, S 196
Hirotani, M 154
Hirschfeld, G 216
Hochman, E 242
Hoel, AM 194
Hoel, E 94
Hoenig, K 57, 58
Hoffman, KL 181
Hoffman, Y 183
Hofstetter, C 175
Hohlfeld, A 161
Holcomb, P 21, 39, 45, 46, 47, 217
Holcomb, PJ 44, 45, 233
Holländer, A 188
Hollinger, A 127
Holroyd, C 243
Holt, D 208
Holt, K 65
Honey, R 282
Hong, C 240

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Hong, D 166
Honore, J 160
Honoré, J 162
Hoogenboom, N 233
Hoogendoorn, CJ 204
Hoover, S 259
Hopf, J-M 90, 166, 198, 231
Hopfinger, J 93
Hopkins, J 39
Hoppstaedter, M 258
Horton, J 252
Hosack, G 37
Hoscheidt, S 182
Hosein, A 287
Hosey, C 40
Hotte-Bernard, J 98
Houde, J 185
Houssa, M 250, 251
Howard Jr., JH 192
Howard, DV 178, 190, 192
Howard, JH 190
Howard, Jr., JH 178
Howe, J 79
Hranek, C 130
Hsieh, I-H 129, 131
Hsieh, J-C 278
Hsieh, L 111, 203
Hsieh, S 82
Hsu, C-f 223
Hsu, L-C 253
Hsu, L-I 135
Hsu, N 185
Hsu, NS 23, 245
Hsu, Y-F 53
Huang, L 97
Huang, M 112
Huang, S-L 99
Huang, T 120
Huang, T-Y 278
Huang, W-M 242
Hubbard, E 279, 282
Hubbard, EM 112
Huber, CG 176
Huber, O 75
Hudon, C 59
Huettel, S 105, 136, 142
Huettel, SA 20, 136, 138
Hugdahl, K 64
Hugeville, L 34
Hughes, B 157
Hughes, G 189
Huijbers, W 29, 183
Hull, J 132
Hully, M 52
Humphreys, K 166, 244
Hung, A-Y 71
Hung, D 278
Hung, DL 110, 176, 178
Hung, Y 68
Hurley, R 214
Husain, M 97, 234
Hussey, EP 181
Huster, RJ 149
Hutcherson, C 211
Hutchins, S 127, 154
Hutchinson, JB 175, 274

Hutchison, J 169
Hutton, C 29
Huys, Q 135
Hwang, H 152
Hwang, K 77
Hwang, S-O 118
Hyde, K 146
Hyönä, J 247

I
Iacoboni, M 40, 263
Iacono, WG 87
Idsardi, W 118, 119, 121
Idsardi, WJ 109
Inagaki, T 159
Indefrey, P 120
Ingamells, E 282
Inkster, D 252
Inman, CS 183
Inzlicht, M 16, 17
Iodice, K 236
Ionta, S 112
Ischebeck, M 235
Isenberg, AL 133
Ishai, A 249
Israni, E 162
Itagaki, S 42
Iuculano, T 20
Ivanoff, J 187
Ivnik, R 257
Izzetoglu, K 170

J
Jack, C 257
Jackson, P 75
Jacob, R 275
Jacobs, A 217
Jacobs, J 24
Jacobs, TL 155
Jacobsen, T 63
Jacobson, J 97
Jacoson, S 97
Jacques, C 249, 252
Jaeggi, S 172
Jahanshahi, M 26, 88, 191
Jajal, N 228
Jakicic, JM 240
James, GA 183
James, KH 116, 225
James, M 53
James, T 26
Janata, P 173
Jäncke, L 127
Jang, JH 55
Jannati, A 97
Jansen, A 73
Jantzen, K 190
Jantzen, KJ 51
Jantzen, M 51
Janusonis, S 194
Janzen, G 174
Jarlier, S 282
Jasinska, AJ 101
Jax, S 280

293

Author Index
Jaywant, A 260
Jbabdi, S 87
Jefferies, E 219
Jeffrey, K 189
Jeffrey-Wilensky, J 103
Jelowicka, A 50
Jemel, B 151, 237, 250, 251, 253,
287
Jennische, M 262
Jentzsch, I 197
Jeong, H 41
Jepma, M 138
Jetha, M 164
Jezewski, S 140
Jha, A 16, 17
Jia, G 265
Jiang, L 144
Jiang, Q 111
Jiao, C 210
Jimenez, J 141
Jiménez, J 155, 206
Jimura, K 196
Jin, Y 28
Jing, W 60
Jingling, L 84, 242
Joanisse, M 149, 222, 281
Joanisse, MF 191
Joassin, F 100
Johansen-Berg, H 87, 192
Johansson, M 271, 276
Johns, CL 214
Johnson Jr., R 139, 174
Johnson, A 194
Johnson, J 166, 172
Johnson, JS 170
Johnson, K 258
Johnson, MH 224
Johnson, MR 193
Johnson, RM 277
Johnson, S 237
Johnston, K 25, 169
Johnston, NE 68
Jolicoeur, P 65, 94, 129, 164, 201,
232, 237, 259
Jonas, R 145
Jonassen, R 194
Jones, A 93
Jones, B 64
Jones, CL 145
Jones, JA 186
Jones, RM 103
Jonides, J 105, 168, 172
Joober, R 42
Jordan, H 36, 94
Joseph, J 249
Josephs, O 29
Joubert, S 58, 59, 285
Jowkar-Baniani, G 241
Jubault, T 69
Juhasz, C 90
Jung, MH 55
Jung, R 41
Jung, RE 20
Junghoefer, M 48
Junghöfer, M 218
Junker, J 209
Just, M 23

294

Juster, R-P 68

K
Kable, J 143
Kable, JW 144, 145
Kadhim, LA-R 212
Kahana, M 24
Kahnt, T 134, 137
Kais, L 72
Kaiser, J 117
Kaiser, R 81
Kalenine, S 282
Kalin, N 73
Kallai, AY 191, 192
Kam, J 93, 287
Kan, K 235
Kanai, R 20
Kang, D-H 55
Kang, X 254
Kang, Y 242
Kanter Bartz, E 76
Kanwisher, N 22, 284
Kao, C-H 134, 135, 143
Kapogiannis, D 41
Kaps, M 62
Karama, S 201
Karcher, N 209
Karhson, DS 62
Karlsson, P 76, 170, 179
Karlsson, S 76, 148, 170, 172, 179
Karmiloff-Smith, A 223
Karns, C 67
Kasparian, K 266
Katayama, J 171
Kate, F 239
Kathmann, N 155, 186, 189, 197,
199, 235, 243
Kaufman, S 193
Kaufmann, C 155, 197, 199, 243
Kaufmann, L 244
Kaur, H 22
Kawa, K 270, 272
Kawasaki, M 106
Kawashima, R 41
Kay, J 58
Keebler, M 76
Keil, A 27, 162, 284
Keitel, C 63
Keith, W 189
Kelland Friesen, C 98
Keller, T 23
Kelley, W 35
Kenealy, L 164
Kennard, C 193
Kennedy, D 200
Kensinger, E 177, 209
Kensinger, EA 177
Kent, J 186, 209
Kere, J 166, 244
Keri, S 145
Kessels, R 174
Kessler, K 233
Kessler-Scheil, S 243
Keuper, K 51
Keysers, C 72, 74

Khamis-Dakwar, R 121
Kharitonova, M 169
Khng, KH 242
Kiefer, M 57, 58, 232
Kieffaber, P 65
Kiehl, KA 160
Kiesel, A 197
Kiff, J 52
Killikelly, C 194
Kim, A 221, 239
Kim, BK 144
Kim, J-K 113
Kim, JS 79
Kim, MJ 160
Kimberg, D 217
Kimppa, L 47
Kimura, H 196
Kimura, K 100
Kincses, WE 236
King, AV 258
King, BG 155
King, D 200
King, J 256
King, JA 175
Kiran, S 122, 213
Kircher, T 73
Kirschner, A 129
Kirschner, S 72
Kisley, M 104
Kislyuk, DS 133, 277
Kissler, J 62, 106, 218, 268
Kitajo, K 129
Kiyonaga, A 17
Klarhöfer, M 67, 155
Kleber, B 188
Klein, C 270
Klein, R 96
Kleinbeck, S 68
Kleiner, M 71
Klepousniotou, E 44, 161
Kliegl, R 214, 217
Kliemann, D 72
Klimesch, W 57, 66
Klingberg, T 166, 244
Kloft, L 189
Kloosterman, NA 246
Klosinski, G 261
Kloth, N 40, 113
Kluger, B 280
Knierim, I 143
Knight, JB 54
Knipe, H 278
Knoblich, G 184, 187
Knopman, D 257
Knowlton, B 193
Knutson, B 156
Ko, L-W 278
Koban, L 35
Kober, H 18, 41, 157
Koch, B 177
Koen, BJ 150
Koessler, S 106
Köhler, S 57, 276
Kohls, G 159
Köhne, S 199
Koji, S 103

Kokal, I 72
Kolinsky, R 46
Kolk, HHJ 120
Kondos, L 165
Konishi, S 196
Konkel, A 79
Kontu, E 78
Kool, W 205
Kopell, N 15
Kopp, B 79
Kopp, F 223
Korn, C 74
Kornysheva, K 128
Kostopoulos, E 152
Kotz, S 154, 212
Kotz, SA 63, 71, 153, 265
Krach, S 157, 159
Kraemer, DJM 23, 125, 245
Kragel, J 30, 270, 273
Kragel, P 102, 103
Krägeloh-Mann, I 105
Krajbich, I 143
Krakowski, A 226, 227
Kramer, AF 79
Kramer, BJ 171
Krämer, U 204
Kranjec, A 154, 215, 218
Krauel, K 24
Krause, CM 78
Krausz, G 246
Kraut, M 216, 228
Kraut, MA 163, 196, 214, 228
Kray, J 197
Krebs, R 198, 284
Kresh, S 265
Kret, M 31
Kriegeskorte, N 128
Krigolson, O 190
Krigolson, OE 144, 198
Kring, A 147
Kristjánsson, Á 96
Kritikos, A 125, 163
Kromas, M 255
Kross, E 18, 105
Krotish, D 201
Krott, A 125
Krpan, K 88
Krug, M 105
Krüger, S 105
Kuefner, D 252
Kuehn, S 238
Kuenzel, J 75
Kühn, AB 173
Kühn, S 81
Kuisma, J 247
Kujala, T 47
Kukina, O 174
Kulhmann, N 213
Kumar, N 272
Kumaran, D 140
Kundu, B 170
Kung, CC 43
Kung, S 110
Kuo, Y-c 127
Kuperberg, G 60, 151, 208, 216,
217, 222, 265

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Author Index
Kutas, M 120
Kutz, A 166, 208
Kuzmanovic, B 103
Kwan, D 142, 272
Kwon, JS 55

L
La Corte, V 54
LaBar, K 102, 103, 181
LaBar, KS 101
Labonte-LeMoyne, E 225
Lacey, EH 153
Lachat, F 34
Lackner, C 62
Laeng, B 28
Lafontaine, H 46
Lahat, A 71
Lahiri, A 46
Laka, I 49, 268
Lakatos, P 115
Lake, J 205
Lakis, N 141, 155, 206
Lala, N 55
Laliette, P 283
Lalonde, P 141
Lalor, E 251
Lamalle, L 154, 186
LaMarche, J 45
Lambon Ralph, M 219
Lambon Ralph, MA 220
Lamm, C 284
LaMontagne, P 179
Landrø, NI 194
Lange, K 126
Languay, R 255
Lanteaume, L 99
Lapenta, O 280
Lappe, C 129
Large, E 130
LaRosa, C 240
Larson, C 72
Larson, E 185
Lasaponara, S 94
Lassonde, M 108, 162, 185, 287
Latinus, M 38, 128
Lau, E 222
Lau, H 14
Lauren, S 189
Lauten, P 201
Lavaur, J-M 45
Laverman, M 213
Lavidor, M 144
Lavigne, K 245
Lavoie, M 108, 141, 155, 206
Law, S-P 48
Lawrie, SM 205
Lawson, WB 234
Le Bas, J-F 154, 186
Leavitt, V 200
Lebrecht, S 83
Lebrun, M-A 130
Ledoux, K 124
Lee, ACH 53
Lee, DH 104
Lee, JR 178

Lee, K 35, 242
Lee, VK 55, 157
Lee, Y 251
Lee, Y-S 132
Lefebvre, C 164, 201
Lefebvre, L 287
Lega, B 23, 24
Lehericy, S 95
Lehet, M 215
Lehtonen, M 47
Leland, D 95
Lemaréchal, J-D 39
Leminen, A 47
Leminen, M 47
Lenggenhager, B 111, 112
Lenkic, PJ 167
Lennert, T 90
Leonard, CM 149
Leonard, G 127, 186
Leotti, LA 134
Lepage, C 42
Lepage, J-F 74, 185
Lepage, M 42, 251, 255
Lepore, F 98, 108, 162
Lerch, J 262
Letowski, T 110
Leung, A 274
Levin, N 283
Levine, B 272
Levitin, D 228
Levons, S 237
Levy, B 60
Levy, BJ 85
Levy, DA 56, 181
Levy, I 87
Lewis, J 103, 201
Lewis, LB 222
Lewis, MD 77, 280
Lewis, P 192
Lewis, S 37
Lewis-Peacock, JA 171
Leybaert, J 151
Leyton, M 140
Li, C 101
Li, J 102, 137, 257
Li, P 49, 147, 265
Li, S-C 64, 76
Li, W 104
Li, Y 210
Li, YH 42, 161
Liang, JC 175
Liban, K 193
Libby, VG 103
Libertus, K 225
Libertus, ME 225
Lichtenstein-Vidne, L 206, 234
Lidji, P 126
Liebenthal, E 148
Lieberman, H 195
Lieberman, M 159
Liew, S-L 35
Lighthall, NR 18
Lim, K 79
Limongi, R 281
Lin, A 211
Lin, C-H 193

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Lin, C-T 278
Lin, C-Y 134, 253, 272
Lin, K-Y 135
Lin, W-J 278
Lin, Y 78
Lin, Y-C 84
Lindberg, O 148
Linden, DEJ 270
Lindenberger, U 64, 66, 76, 223
Lindsay, DS 282
Lingnau, A 29
Linke, A 249
Lippe, S 52
Lipton, M 60
Littlewort, G 31
Liu, F 264
Liu, I-C 178
Liu, J 60
Liu, P 106
Liu, T 201
Liu, X 207, 210
Liu, Y 265
Liu, Z-X 77, 280
Liu-Ambrose, T 90
Livingston, T 130
Livneh, N 257
Lobmaier, J 157
LoBue, V 72
Loevenbruck, H 112, 151
Lombardi, L 250, 251
Long, D 172
Long, DL 214
Long, NM 81
Lopez, B 200
Lopez, D 47
López-Alanís, P 218
Lopez-Paniagua, D 178
Lord, C 257
Lorenzetti, V 70
Losin, E 40
Lott, SN 153
Lotze, M 188
Loucks, RA 160
Loui, P 101
Love, BC 181
Love, T 29, 44
Lovén, J 179
Lowder, MW 180
Lu, C 120
Lu, H 76
Lu, M-K 84
Lucas, HD 53, 270
Lucena, N 189
Lucia, L 286
Luciana, M 79, 168
Luck, D 255
Luck, S 147
Ludlow, A 64
Ludwig, N 199
Lue, SD 226
Luechinger, R 276
Luk, G 241
Luna, B 77
Lundgren, EM 274
Luo, Y 66
Lupianez, J 94

Lupiáñez, J 96
Lupien, S 68, 255, 257
Lupien, SJ 24
Lustig, C 83, 233, 257
Lustig, CA 259
Lv, S 60
Lyche, P 194

M
Ma, D 35
Macaluso, E 94, 246
Macci, E 94
MacDonald, P 201
MacDuffie, K 269
MacGregor, LJ 124
Maciejewski, MJ 169
MacInnes, J 105
Mackiewicz, KL 75
MacLean, KA 155
Maclean, S 129
Macoir, J 59
Madden, D 30
Madden, DJ 178, 192
Maddox, C 245
Maddox, CD 109
Maddox, D 220
Maddox, WT 76, 80, 84, 142
Madhyastha, T 78, 258
Maguire, E 140
Maguire, M 79, 216, 228
Maguire, MJ 196, 228
Maher, S 57
Mahoney, C 195
Maier, ME 197
Maillet, D 23, 25, 255
Main, K 252
Mäkelä, J 47
Makuuchi, M 221
Malapani, C 168
Malhotra, P 93, 256
Malla, A 42, 148
Maller, JJ 193
Malmaud, J 137
Malone, M 149
Malone, SM 87
Mancini-Marië, A 141, 155, 206
Mandell, DJ 77
Mandic, M 272
Mangun, GR 147
Mankel, K 265
Mann, H 207
Männel, C 261
Manouilidou, C 125
Mantell, J 190
Maquet, P 235
Mar, R 21, 23
Marcelino, L 200, 251
Marchand, Y 152
Marco-Pallarés, J 241
Marcotte, K 260
Mareschal, D 108
Maril, A 56, 179, 182, 183, 257
Marin, M-F 23, 24
Markes, O 276
Markus, H 21

295

Author Index
Marois, R 248
Mars, R 87, 240
Marsh, L 70, 223
Marsh, RL 54
Marshall, A 20, 41
Marslen-Wilson, W 46, 49, 50, 213
Martel, M-O 33
Martens, U 232
Martin, A 199
Martin, C 276
Martin, R 170, 197
Martinerie, J 34
Martinez-Trujillo, J 165
Martinez-Trujillo, JC 90, 97
Martinu, K 85, 127
Masataka, N 161
Mason, L 211
Massimini, M 172
Matell, M 280
Mather, M 18, 107
Matheson, H 286
Mathis, J 276
Matsson, H 166, 244
Mattes, K 19
Mattingley, J 37
Maurage, P 61
Maurer, D 113, 115, 223, 253, 285
Mavros, P 36
Mavros, PL 71
Mazuz, Y 270
McAdams, S 128
McAndrews, M 35
McAndrews, MP 176, 271
McCaig, G 207
McCaig, RG 86
McCandliss, B 279, 282
McCauley, S 125
McCormick, C 35, 176
McDonald, C 195
McDonald, J 91, 97
McDonough, L 205
McDowell, K 110
McGregor, K 189, 256
McGuire, J 88
McGuire, R 283
McIntosh, A 269
McKeen, NA 162
McKeever, J 269
McLaughlin, PM 67
McLaughlin, S 212
McLean, S 248
McLennan, Y 200, 251
McMahon, AR 247
McMahon, M-A 233
McMillan, C 78, 83, 215, 218, 260
McMullen, P 286
McNab, F 166
McNally-Gagnon, A 130
McNealy, K 263
McNorgan, C 191
McRae, K 57, 191, 222
McTeague, LM 162
Meagher, T 36, 38
Mecklinger, A 174, 197, 271
Medina, J 109
Medvedev, AV 219

296

Meeren, H 31
Mehalick, M 139
Mehrabi, E 283
Mehta, A 27
Meindl, T 75
Meleis, A 281
Mellem, MS 219
Menard, L 148
Mende-Siedlecki, P 18, 157
Mendoza, D 165
Mendrek, A 108, 141, 155, 206
Mercier, M 116, 148
Meschino, L 236
Mesulam, M 214
Mesulam, MM 274
Metzak, P 177, 227, 245, 274, 276
Meuli, R 82
Meyer, AM 221
Meyer, AS 125
Meyer, JR 136, 138
Meyer, L 266
Meyer, M 127
Meyer, P 258
Michel, C 82, 119
Mickleborough, MJS 96
Mickley Steinmetz, KR 177
Midgley, K 39
Midgley, KJ 44, 45
Midjley, KJ 46
Mies, A 214
Miezin, F 80
Migliaccio, R 93, 95
Mignault Goulet, G 130
Mignault, G 131
Milesi, V 163
Miller, DL 240
Miller, L 113
Miller, M 172, 194, 200
Millet, B 32
Mills, A 115
Mills, D 52
Mills, T 82
Minati, L 145
Mineka, S 100
Mintus, M 286
Miranka, W 58
Mirous, H 208
Mirsattari, S 276
Mischel, W 18
Mitchell, D 249
Mitra, P 120
Mitsunaga, L 147
Miyake, A 81
Miyashita, Y 196
Mobbs, D 156
Modirrousta, M 162, 243
Moeng, E 185
Moffett, K 87
Moguel-Gonzalez, M 115
Mohamed, TN 247
Mohamed, W 64
Mohammed, S 233
Mohr, B 64
Mok, LW 83
Molenberghs, P 37

Molholm, S 109, 110, 115, 116, 148,
251, 285
Molicki, S 40
Moll, C 188
Möllers, D 189
Mollison, MV 272
Molnar, M 148
Molnar-Szakacs, I 278
Molzow, I 54
Monahan, P 118, 119
Monchi, O 69, 85
Mondloch, C 31, 35
Mondloch, CJ 248
Monetta, L 58
Monica, O 115
Montag, C 82
Montagrin, A 107
Monteiro, K 91
Monti, J 285
Montojo, C 167
Montreuil, T 251
Moo, LR 119, 254
Moore, A 31, 87
Mor, N 99
Morais, J 46
Moran, J 36, 38, 43, 111
Moreau, P 129, 130, 131
Morein-Zamir, S 196
Moreno, A 260
Moreno, S 77, 244
Morgan, B 78
Morie, K 239
Morningstar, M 126
Morris, R 21
Morrison, RG 53
Morse, S 27
Mortimer, J 219
Morton, JB 240
Moscovitch, M 56, 176, 251, 269,
270, 271, 272
Moser-Mercer, B 82, 119
Motes, MA 85, 169, 228
Mottron, L 146
Mouthon, M 112
Movellan, J 31
Muckle, G 97
Mueller, J 221
Mueller, JL 261
Mueller, MM 249
Mueller, V 76
Muetzel, R 79, 168
Muftuler, LT 129, 131, 133
Muhlberger, A 237
Mujica-Parodi, L 156, 157
Müller, C 57
Müller, K 75
Müller, N 166
Müller-Spahn, F 67, 155
Mullette-Gillman, OA 138
Mullin, C 94
Mulvenna, CM 229
Mumby, DG 258
Mumenthaler, C 32
Munakata, Y 87, 169, 239
Mundler, O 99
Mundy, M 278, 282

Munoz-Torres, Z 84
Munro, GES 36
Münte, T 204
Münte, TF 241
Murphy, E 164
Murphy, EF 181
Murray, C 225
Murray, D 40
Murray, M 82, 115
Murtha, SJE 67
Murty, V 103, 105, 181, 269
Musacchia, G 115
Muselle, A 235
Muthukumaraswamy, S 29
Mutschler, I 67, 155
Myerson, J 142

N
N'Diaye, K 143
Naber, M 254
Naci, L 249
Nadel, L 182, 206, 270, 272
Nagamatsu, L 90
Nagano, A 140
Nagarajan, S 185
Nagasawa, T 90
Naidich, T 207
Nanetti, L 74
Naparstek, S 234
Narayanan, A 216
Navarro Cebrian, A 173
Navarro, C 58
Nawa, NE 231
Nazarian, B 231
Nee, D 105, 168
Needham, A 225
Negash, S 257
Neider, M 237
Nelson, C 36
Nelson, JD 246
Nelson, JM 81
Nelson, S 80
Nemzeyano, A 226, 227
Nessler, D 174
Nestor, A 110
Neta, M 158
Neumann, J 201
Neumann, MF 247
Neumeister, A 194
Nevalainen, P 47
Neville, H 45, 61, 67, 147, 216
Neville, HJ 266
Newcombe, N 281
Newhouse, P 124, 166, 208
Newman, A 45
Newman, AJ 152, 248
Newman, S 186
Newport, R 187
Ng, R 52
Nga, L 18
Ngan, E 276
Nguyen, V 165
Nickels, S 59
Nicol, J 266
Niebergall, R 97

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Author Index
Nieuwenhuis, S 138, 241
Nikelski, J 59
Niki, K 107
Nikulin, V 44
Nilsson, S 276
Nishida, M 90
Nislin, M 78
Niu, Y 257
Niznikiewicz, MA 134, 157
Nomura, I 144
Noonan, S 224
Nopoulos, P 226
North, S 190
Nosworthy, N 86
Nouwens, S 190
Novick, J 229
Nozaradan, S 117
Nyberg, L 76, 170
Nyhus, E 178

O
O'Driscoll, G 148
O'Hare, A 238
O'Rorke, M 31
O'Rourke, H 152
O'Young, D 36, 43
O’Young, D 38
Oakes, T 73
Obadia, M 97
Oberauer, K 171
Oberecker, R 261
Obermeier, C 122, 123
Obeso, I 25, 26
Obler, L 51
Obleser, J 129, 266
Obrig, H 51
Ocejo, R 218
Ochsner, K 18, 32, 157, 158
Ochsner, KN 41, 69
Odell, C 190
Oei, TPS 37
Ofen, N 269
Okada, N 86
Okano, K 45, 60, 151
Oler, J 73
Oliver, RT 23
Olson, I 165, 270
Omura, K 86
Onoda, K 169
Öörni, A 247
Opitz, B 59
Oppliger, D 276
Örndahl, E 148
Orr, J 242
Ortigue, S 103
Ortiz-Mantilla, S 263
Ortmann, M 218
Ossher, L 259
Osterhout, L 47, 230, 266
Ott, T 246
Otten, LJ 177, 179
Ouellet, R 75
Overy, K 278
Owens, E 150
Owlia, A 36

Öztekin, I 25, 26

P
Pacheco, J 80
Pacheco, JL 142
Pacini, S 185
Pack, C 148
Packer, D 33
Paczynski, M 265
Pageau, M 98, 252
Pagliaccio, D 83
Pagnoni, G 183
Painter, D 125, 163
Paivio, A 222
Pajtas, PE 119
Pakulak, E 266
Paller, K 24, 214
Paller, KA 53, 54, 100, 270, 274
Pallier, C 264
Palmer, A 56
Palmer, C 126, 127
Palmero-Soler, E 252
Pang, EW 82, 149
Panisset, M 136
Pankratz, S 257
Pantev, C 129
Papassotiropoulos, A 67, 276
Parasuraman, R 195
Parch, J 270
Pare, M 169
Paré, M 25, 285
Park, D 227
Park, J 227
Park, JL 174
Park, NW 193
Park, S 137
Park, SQ 134
Parker, GJM 220
Parkinson, C 20
Parkinson, J 184
Parks, N 29, 30, 91
Parolin, L 286
Parrott, W 164
Parrott, WN 244
Partanen, M 264
Parton, A 88
Parvizi, J 250
Pascual Leone, A 95
Pascual-Leone, A 22
Passarotti, A 239
Passow, S 64
Patel, U 283
Pattamadilok, C 46
Patton, JL 185
Paul, B 224
Pauli, P 159, 237
Paulmann, S 34, 71
Paulsen, D 142, 147
Paulus, F 157
Paus, T 127
Pavani, F 116
Pavlova, M 105
Pavuluri, M 239
Payne, J 54, 177
Payne, JW 20

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Pearrow, MJ 71
Pecher, D 214
Pehunen, V 78
Peigneux, P 151
Pell, M 161
Pell, MD 34, 71, 260
Pelletier, M 255
Pelloux, B 105
Peltier, S 105
Penelope, T 26
Peng, D 120
Peng, D-l 262
Penhune, V 127, 189
Penhune, VB 183, 192
Pennartz, C 29, 183
Peretz, I 43, 117, 126, 127, 129, 130,
131, 133, 154, 164
Perez, C 97, 283
Pergola, G 177
Perkins, S 239
Perna, A 140
Pernet, C 38
Peron, J 32
Péron, J 163
Perrett, D 157
Perrone, M 151
Perrson, J 16, 17
Perry, A 284
Pesaran, B 15
Peschke, C 28
Peters, F 65
Petersen, R 257
Petersen, S 44, 80
Petrides, M 25, 89, 150, 168, 281
Peyrard-Janvid, M 166, 244
Pfaff, A 166, 208
Pfeifer, J 159
Pfordresher, P 190
Phan, S 256
Phelps, E 40, 137
Phelps, EA 204
Philiastides, M 76
Philiastides, MG 246
Philip, J 33
Phillips, C 215, 235, 264
Phillips, N 118, 264
Phillips, NA 266
Phillips-Silver, J 117
Picard, C 167
Piccini, P 191
Pichardo, FM 178
Pichat, C 112, 151
Piché, O 117
Pichon, S 206
Pichora-Fuller, K 264
Pierre, A 249
Pierre, P 99
Pierre, R 33
Piguet, C 80, 233
Pihko, E 131
Pike, B 257
Pike, GB 161
Pilgrim, LK 219
Pineda, JA 286
Pinel, P 260
Piñón, AC 63

Pitcher, D 284
Pitkanen, I 47
Pitts, M 250
Pitula, C 168
Pizzagalli, D 102
Planet, N 121
Plassmann, H 211
Platt, M 142
Platt, ML 136, 138
Ploran, E 141
Plusquellec, P 97
Pobric, G 219
Poeppel, D 27, 109, 153, 222
Poissant, H 228
Poldrack, R 13
Polimeni, JO 162
Poline, J-B 260
Polk, T 227
Polka, L 148
Pollak, S 69
Pontifex, MB 79
Ponting, A 191, 192
Poore, J 159
Poppenk, J 269
Porat, Y 29
Porcelli, AJ 145
Porcelli, P 286
Porter, J 79, 168
Postle, B 172
Postle, BR 166, 170, 171, 173
Pourtois, G 35
Power, J 80
Prabhakaran, R 125
Pradat-Diehl, P 93
Prakash, RS 79, 237
Prat, C 21, 23
Pratt, J 27
Pratt, N 80
Prehogan, I 226, 227
Prelock, P 124
Preston, AR 175, 181, 275
Preuschoff, K 19
Preuss, N 200
Prevost, M 212, 217
Prieto, B 218
Primo, S 252
Prince, S 102, 103
Prinz, W 184, 188
Procyk, E 89
Protzner, AB 176
Pruce, B 186
Pruessner, J 159, 235, 255, 257
Pruessner, JC 226
Ptito, A 69, 168, 186
Puhtimäki, T 78
Pulst-Korenberg, J 143
Pulvermueller, F 58
Pulvermuller, F 44, 48, 52, 64, 123
Pun, C 167
Purdy, JD 147

Q
Qin, Y 60
Qu, R 66
Quarton, A 104

297

Author Index
Quinones, I 128
Quintin, E-M 228

R
Rabin, JS 18, 19
Raboyeau, G 260
Race, E 60
Rademacher, L 157, 159
Radlinska, B 161
Ragland, JD 147
Ragusa, E 91
Raine, LB 79
Rainey, C 181
Rajah, MN 25
Rajah, N 255
Rajendra, J 183
Rakitin, BC 223
Ramachandran, VS 112, 113, 114
Ramaiya, M 185
Ramaswamy, R 88
Ramirez, K 281
Ramsey, R 37
Randall, B 43, 50
Randazzo, M 121
Ranganath, C 147
Rangel, A 137, 138, 140, 143, 211
Ranto, S 78
Rao, NK 85
Rapin, L 227
Rasch, B 276
Rastelli, F 93
Rauschecker, AM 250
Ravindran, A 71
Ray, K 279
Raymond, J 163
Raz, N 283
Realpe-Bonilla, T 122
Rebecca, S 22
Reber, PJ 191
Reber, T 276
Rector, N 71
Redcay, E 36, 38, 71
Reeck, CC 138
Reed, C 95
Reed, RK 115
Rees, G 29, 246
Reggev, N 56, 179, 257
Reichenbach, JR 40
Reilly, M 83
Reinen, JM 210
Reinhard, J 261
Reinke, K 104
Reiser, M 75
Reiss, A 166
Reiss, JP 162
Reissner, C 204
Rellecke, J 209
Remy, KA 69
Renneberg, B 243
Renoult, L 217, 219
Repovs, G 240
Resnick, S 41
Reunanen, M 78
Reuter, B 189
Reuter, M 82

298

Reuter-Lorenz, P 17
Reuter-Lorenz, PA 59
Reynolds, A 201
Reynolds, MG 236
Rhone, AE 109
Rhook, H 34
Ricardo-Garcell, J 63
Rich, JB 67
Richards, AL 258
Richardson, B 190
Richter, P 71
Richter, S 204
Ridderinkhof, KR 105, 199, 241
Ridderinkhof, R 135, 240
Rieckmann, A 76, 170, 179
Rieger, S 175
Ries, A 93
Riesel, A 197, 199, 243
Rieskamp, J 134
Riggall, AC 173
Riggins, T 165
Rigoulot, S 160, 162
Riley, J 121
Rimmele, J 63
Rinehart, N 34
Rissman, J 273
Ritchey, M 204
Ritchey, ME 274
Rivera, S 200
Rivera, SM 251
Robbins, T 19, 196
Robert, W 239
Roberts, D 263
Roberts, R 257
Robertson, C 205
Robertson, D 113
Robitaille, N 232, 254
Roca-Stappung, M 115, 187
Rodi, G 277
Rodrigues, A 259
Rodríguez, MdC 218
Rodríguez-Fornells, A 51, 204, 241
Roeder, J 193
Roesler, CP 122
Rogalsky, C 29
Rogers, J 73, 213
Rogers, TT 221
Roland, W 58
Romero, S 199
Roncaglia, P 153
Rong, F 109
Rootwelt, H 28
Rosanova, M 172
Rosburg, T 271
Rosenbaum, RS 19, 142, 181, 272
Rosenberg, EL 155
Rosenfeld, J 27
Rosenthal, CR 193
Ross, B 130, 223
Ross, LA 115
Rossi, S 51
Rossignol, M 99, 100
Rossion, B 250, 252, 285
Roth, C 276
Rothermel, R 90
Rothermich, K 153, 212, 265

Rothwell, J 26
Rotshtein, P 187
Rouger, J 61
Rovet, J 182, 262
Rowe, R 101
Roy, AK 204
Roy, E 235
Roy, EA 252
Roy, M 33
Roy, M-A 75
Roy, RN 96
Roy, S 193
Royle, P 50
Rozek, D 104
Ruberry, EJ 103
Rubia, K 134
Rubin, D 156
Rubin, R 52
Ruch, S 276
Rudoy, J 23, 24
Rueschemeyer, S-A 212
Rugg, MD 180, 271
Rusak, B 187
Rushmore, R 28
Rushworth, M 87
Russell, C 93, 256
Russo, N 110, 251
Rusted, J 88
Ruvolo, P 31
Ruzic, L 75
Ryals, AJ 178
Ryan, JD 181
Ryan, L 182, 270, 272
Ryant, N 215
Rypma, B 85, 169

S
Saberi, K 109, 129, 131, 133
Sabhapathy, S 233
Sabourin, L 49
Sackett, GP 77
Sadeh, T 182
Sævarsson, S 96
Safadi, Z 234
Saffer, BY 144
Sägesser, E 127
Sahakian, B 196
Sahdra, BK 155
Sahlein, D 280
Saint-Amour, D 97, 98, 115, 252,
287
Saj, A 95
Sajaniemi, N 78
Sakaki, M 107
Sakano, Y 283
Saklayen, S 216
Salillas, E 152
Salim, R 209
Salimpoor, VN 160
Salinas, J 226
Sallet, J 87, 89
Salmon, J 286
Salona, P 26
Salvatore, C 99
Samri, D 95
Samson, A 75

Samson, F 146
Sanchez, DJ 191
Sandberg, C 213
Sander, D 32, 107, 139, 161, 282
Sander, M 66
Sander, MC 66
Sanders, LD 61, 63, 121, 122, 123,
124, 231
Sandoval, TI 169
Sandra, J 249
Sanfey, A 207
Sannelli, C 236
Sannemann, C 47
Santesso, D 141, 195
Santesso, DL 62
Santos, N 103
Sarazin, M 95
Sareen, J 162
Särkämö, T 131
Saron, CD 155
Sarter, M 83, 233
Sarty, G 213
Sarty, GE 45
Sassa, Y 41
Satel, J 96
Sato, M 151, 154, 186, 188
Sauter, D 163
Savazzi, S 247
Savill, N 120
Sawada, R 161
Saxe, R 71
Scalf, P 247
Schacht, A 209
Schacter, DL 21, 23
Schaich Borg, J 74
Schaie, KW 258
Scharinger, M 119
Scharnowski, F 29
Schel, MA 69
Schellenberg, G 244
Schendan, H 57, 286
Scherer, K 161
Scherer, KR 282
Schevon, C 27
Schiffer, A-M 128
Schilbach, L 103, 184
Schiller, N 126
Schiller, NO 22
Schilz, J 120
Schipke, CS 261
Schipul, S 23
Schlaggar, B 44, 80
Schlaug, G 101, 229
Schlichting, ML 23
Schmader, T 73
Schmer-Galunder, S 208
Schmidt, G 218
Schmidt, GL 215
Schmidt, K 177
Schmidt, LA 164
Schmidt, M 130
Schmidt-Kassow, M 153, 265
Schmitd, C 235
Schneider, B 223
Schneiderman, M 165
Schnyer, DM 80

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Author Index
Schoenbaum, G 144
Schoenfeld, M 284
Schoenfeld, MA 90, 231
Schoenholtz, N 244
Scholz, J 192
Schönwiesner, M 132
Schooler, J 85
Schott, B 24, 204
Schrauf, M 236
Schriefers, H 43, 118
Schroeder, C 27
Schroeder, J 258
Schroeder, S 76
Schroeter, M 201
Schröger, E 63
Schubert, R 236
Schubotz, RI 128, 173, 188
Schuermann, B 243
Schuit, D 126
Schultheiss, OC 18
Schultz, W 138
Schumacher, E 252
Schumacher, EH 182
Schunn, CD 191, 192
Schuster, J 212
Schütz-Bosbach, S 184, 185, 253
Schwarb, H 182
Schwartz, J-L 154, 186
Schwartz, M 217
Schwartz, R 62
Schwartz, RG 265
Schwartz, S 161, 235
Schwartz, T 148
Schwartz, TH 116
Schwartze, M 63, 265
Schwarz, J 71
Schwarz, M 177
Schweinberger, S 113
Schweinberger, SR 38, 40, 247, 284
Schweitzer, J 172
Schweizer, T 235
Schweizer, TA 234
Scott, S 163
Scott, SK 82
Seaman, S 111, 203
Sebanz, N 184
Sebastian, R 122
Segal, Z 100
Segalowitz, S 141, 195
Segalowitz, SJ 36, 62, 164, 248
Seger, C 140
Seger, CA 178
Seguin, JA 98
Seidenbecher, C 24, 204
Seifert, M 190
Seifritz, E 67, 155
Selimbeyoglu, A 250
Sellers, E 246
Senecal, N 145
Sequeira, H 160, 162
Serences, J 14
Sergerie, K 42
Serra, M 54
Severens, E 212, 238
Seymour, B 156
Seymour, TL 182

Shafer, A 91
Shafer, V 51, 62, 263, 264
Shafer, VL 265
Shafto, M 43
Shah, NJ 184
Shapiro, H 200
Shapiro, HM 251
Shapiro, KA 119
Sharot, T 74
Shaver, PR 155
Shean, G 209
Sheffield, T 78, 81
Shehzad, Z 242
Sheldon, S 56
Shelledy, W 73
Shelton, S 73
Shen, EY 124
Shen, K 285
Sheng, T 35
Sheu, Y-S 167
Shewokis, P 170
Shi, K 66
Shiell, M 111
Shiller, D 188
Shimada, S 39
Shimamura, AP 180
Shin, NY 55
Shine, JP 53
Shinkareva, S 215
Shirdel, F 140
Shire, E 238
Shohamy, D 15, 16, 56, 139, 256,
258
Shook, D 164
Short, L 31
Shpaner, M 285
Shtyrov, Y 44, 49, 52
Shu, H 147, 265
Shurick, AA 204
Sidney, S 238
Signoff, E 267
Silani, G 19
Silverman, M 207
Silvers, JA 69
Silvetti, M 94
Sim, E-J 57, 58
Simioni, AC 142
Simmons, WK 205
Simola, J 247
Simon, D 155
Simon, EJ 139
Simon, J 190
Simon, TJ 165, 200, 251
Simpson, J 205
Sindi, S 257
Singer, T 19
Singh, K 26, 29
Singhal, A 279
Sinke, CBA 32
Sinnott-Armstrong, W 20, 74
Sitek, K 185
Skavhaug, I-M 273
Skelly, LR 160
Skene, JHP 136, 138
Skipper, J 21, 22
Skocic, J 182

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Slotnick, SD 254
Smaliy, A 229
Smallwood, J 85
Smilek, D 235, 236
Smith II, W 279
Smith, A 140
Smith, C 194
Smith, D 136
Smith, DV 136, 138
Smith, EE 168, 208
Smith, G 257
Smith, J 67
Smith, K 248
Smith, ML 68
Smith, S 229
Smith, SM 229
Smolinsky, JG 273
Sneve, M 28
Snyder, A 109, 226, 227
Snyder, AC 96, 232
Snyder, HR 87
Snyder, JJ 238
Soderlund, H 272
Söderqvist, S 166, 244
Sokolov, A 105
Sokolov, AN 261
Solman, G 236
Soltesz, F 61, 112, 195
Somerville, L 69
Somerville, LH 103
Sommer, W 209, 214, 217
Song, A 284
Sonnadara, R 131
Sonty, N 210
Sood, S 90
Soskey, L 44
Soskic, S 20
Soto, D 93
Spaan, M 241
Spalek, K 276
Spalek, T 232
Spector, F 115
Speer, M 91
Spence, J 87
Spencer, R 23, 25
Spencer, S 256
Spezio, M 19
Spicer, J 208
Spiering, B 140
Spilka, M 183
Spinath, B 82
Spitzer, M 57
Spreckelmeyer, K 159
Spreckelmeyer, KN 157
Spreng, RN 20, 21
Sprengelmeyer, R 157
Sprute, L 226
Sripada, C 18
Srivastava, S 200
St. Jacques, PL 180
Stadler, W 184
Stahl, J 38
Staines, WR 234
Staples, N 199
Staresina, B 179
Staresina, BP 271

Starling, R 91
Steckley, R 124
Steele, CJ 183, 192
Steif, A 207
Stein, M 164
Steinberg, L 75
Steinhauer, K 50, 148, 149, 152,
266, 267
Steinhauser, M 197
Steinmayr, R 82
Stelzel, C 82, 83, 106
Stemmer, B 136
Stenneken, P 277
Stephan, T 239
Stephanie, P 189
Steppacher, I 62
Stern, E 239
Stern, J 104
Stern, Y 223
Sternshein, R 279
Sterpenich, V 80, 235
Stetler, D 238
Steuer, E 72
Stevens, C 61, 147
Stevens, J 189, 209
Stevens, M 26
Stevens, WD 23
Stewart-Bartlett, M 31
Stickgold, R 54
Stiglmayr, C 243
Stiles, J 224
Stiles, TC 194
Stip, E 108, 155
St-Laurent, M 271
St-Louis-Deschenes, M 225
Stokes, J 270, 273
Stollstorff, M 26, 190, 244
Stoppel, C 90
Stoppel, CM 231
Stoyan, K 28
Strafella, A 85
Strain, JF 202
Strang, N 69
Strange, W 62
Straube, B 73, 279
Strecker, K 71
Strijkers, K 21
Strom, M 95
Strozyk, J 197
Strumpf, H 90, 166, 231
Stump, J 143
Stuss, D 88
Su, K-P 242
Su, L 50
Suen, K 102, 107
Sugiura, M 41
Sullivan, M 33
Summerfield, C 14, 285
Summerfield, J 140
Sumner, P 25, 26, 29
Sun, X 233
Sunday, M 201
Sung, K 33, 102
Susskind, JM 18, 104
Sussman, E 63, 150
Sutherland, ME 127

299

Author Index
Sutin, A 41
Sutterer, D 166
Sutton, J 281
Suzuki, M 180
Svensson, LA 148
Swaab, T 21, 51
Swaab, TY 124, 147, 214
Swain, A 208, 222
Swain, S 22
Swanton, D 144
Sweeney, J 239
Swick, D 80
Swift-Gallant, A 149
Symons, L 190
Szlachta, Z 50
Szucs, D 61, 112, 194, 195
Szücs, D 53

T
Tai, Y 191
Takahashi, T 88
Tallon-Baudry, C 39, 93, 143
Talmi, D 205
Tamarit, L 163
Tan, LH 49
Tanaka, JW 277, 282
Tang, D 141
Tangermann, M 236
Tanner, D 266
Tarbi, E 233
Taren, AA 138
Tark, K-J 186
Tarr, M 110
Tassone, F 200, 251
Tata, M 137
Tata, MS 247
Tayeb, H 59
Taylor, B 263
Taylor, H 195
Taylor, JR 270
Taylor, M 156
Taylor, MJ 68, 78, 82
Taylor, S 83
Taylor, SF 101
Tays, W 238
te Beek, E 138
Temple, E 70, 225, 226, 245
Templeton, L 136
Tervaniemi, M 131
Terwilliger, R 77
Tessel, C 264
Tessera, E 159
Tettamanti, M 59
Teufel, C 36
Thakral, PP 254
Théoret, H 74, 185, 287
Thierry, G 118, 120
Thioux, M 74
Thomas, A 75
Thomas, B 18, 19
Thomas, C 20
Thomas, D 58
Thomas, E 120
Thomas, KM 178
Thomas, L 102

300

Thomas, N 169
Thompson, C 214
Thompson, CK 221
Thompson, R 81
Thompson-Schill, S 221
Thompson-Schill, SL 23, 58, 114,
125, 245
Thorell, LB 244
Thorne, N 129
Thothathiri, M 221
Tibon, R 56
Tidoni, E 111
Tien, Y-M 253
Tillman, G 163
Tillman, GD 196, 214
Tilsen, S 185
Timmer, K 21, 22
Tinawi, S 168
Tinazzi, M 277
Tipper, C 91
Titone, D 148, 152
Tjokro, T 220
Toba, MN 92, 93, 95
Todd, RM 211
Todisco, AE 68
Tofts, P 88
Toiviainen, P 117
Toma, AS 96
Tomaszczyk, J 65
Tomblin, JB 262
Tombu, M 248
Tonge, B 34
Tonus, K 131
Topkins, B 120
Tottenham, N 42, 70
Towler, SD 149
Trainor, L 130, 131, 132
Trams, M 267
Tran Ngoc, M-A 132
Tranel, D 19
Trappenberg, T 96
Trauer, S 249
Trauzettel-Klosinski, S 261
Travers, D 32
Trejo-Martínez, D 84
Trembach, A 236
Tremblay, A 45, 262
Tremblay, M-C 121
Tremblay, P 118
Tremblay, S 74, 185
Tremel, J 141
Tripp, A 190
Troiani, V 260
Troprès, I 154, 186
Trost, WJ 163
Trueswell, J 221
Trueswell, JC 125
Trumpp, N 58
Tsai, C-H 84, 253
Tsai, JC-C 184
Tsai, L-C 48
Tsuchida, A 86, 243
Tsukiura, T 106
Tucker, J 35
Tucker, M 54
Tunvall, F 278

Turkeltaub, P 119
Turken, A 151
Tyler, L 43
Tzeng, O 278
Tzeng, OJ-L 110, 176, 178

U
Ueda, H 129
Ueda, K 73, 144
Uh, J 76
Ullman, M 45
Ullman, MT 262, 267
Uncapher, M 175
Uncapher, MR 274
Unger, E 64
Unger, K 197
Ursache, A 75, 278
Uusitalo, L 247

V
Vachon, F 164, 201, 259
Vachon-Presseau, E 33
Vaden, K 133
Vaidya, C 26, 164
Vaidya, CJ 178, 190, 192, 244
Vakili, V 246
Valasek, C 109
Valchev, N 111
Valero, A 28
Valero-Cabre, A 27, 28
Valiquette, L 255
Vallée, N 154, 186
van 't Wout, M 207
van Ast, V 208
Van Bavel, J 33
van Bochove, M 184
van Campen, AD 199
Van Dam, N 101
van Dam, W 212
van de Meerendonk, N 120
Van den Stock, J 32
van den Wildenberg, WPM 199
van Doormaal, A 174
Van Essen, D 13
van Gerven, J 138
Van Herwegen, J 223
Van Heuven, V 126
van Heuven, W 242
van Schie, HT 42
van Thriel, C 68
van Winden, F 105
Vandewalle, G 108
Vanman, E 37, 159
VanPatter, M 79
Veit, R 188
Velanova, K 77
Veldsman, M 249
Vendemia, J 136
Venezia, J 109, 220
Venkatraman, V 20, 136, 138
Verbanck, P 100
Verbruggen, F 25, 26
Vergara-Martínez, M 51
Vérin, M 32

Vettel, J 110
Viarouge, A 279, 282
Vida, M 223
Vidal, F 231
Vidal, J 82
Vidal, N 264
Viglione, DJ 286
Vilain, C 154, 186
Vincent, P 132
Viret, A-C 283
Vitale, J 279
Vitko, E 236
Vocat, R 35, 95
Vogel, A 44, 80
Vogel, I 125
Vogel, S 244
Vogeley, K 103, 184
Vogel-Farley, V 36
Vogt, B 253
Voitcu, R 28
Vollmer, J 186
von Cramon, DY 173, 188
Von Holzen, K 35
von Känel, R 111
Vonk, W 118
Voss, J 24, 53
Voss, JL 54
Voss, MW 79, 237
Voss, P 108
Vuilleumier, P 35, 80, 95, 163, 175,
206, 233, 282
Vuong, L 197
Vytal, K 158

W
Wada, A 283
Wade, TJ 62
Wadeson, HK 98
Wagenmakers, E-J 138
Wager, T 13, 157, 207, 210
Wager, TD 41, 68, 208, 210
Wagner, A 60, 175, 273
Wagner, AD 85, 175, 180, 274
Wagner, DD 36
Wagner, K 200
Wagner, U 52
Wahlund, L-O 148
Wakefield, EM 225
Wakusawa, K 41
Waldorp, LJ 152
Walenski, M 44
Walker, G 217
Wallace, BA 155
Wallace, G 199
Wallace, MG 162
Wallman, J 96
Walsh, M 167
Walsh, V 20, 144, 163, 246, 284
Walter, MA 121
Wamsley, E 54
Wang, C 222
Wang, F 149
Wang, J 71, 215
Wang, L 177, 276
Wang, P 257

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Author Index
Wang, S 216
Wang, W 66
Wang, X 219
Wang, Y 187
Wang, Z 96
Ward, J 145, 163
Ward, L 91, 129
Waring, J 209
Warren, J 163
Wartenburger, I 64
Wascher, E 68
Waszak, F 189
Watanabe, T 196
Watkins, K 127
Watson, H 269
Watson, R 128
Waxer, M 86, 240
Weber, J 18, 32
Weber-Fox, CX 262
Weeda, W 241
Weekes, NY 209
Wegbreit, E 203
Weigand, S 257
Weinbrenner, JED 123
Weinstein, AM 240
Weintraub, S 214, 274
Weiskopf, N 29
Weissflog, MJ 36
Weisz, N 129
Welcome, S 149, 222
Welcome, SE 149
Wencil, E 165, 280
Weng, X 174
Werheid, K 161
Werkle-Bergner, M 57, 66
Wessa, M 258
Wessel, K 79
Westbay, LC 190
Westerberg, C 24
Westerberg, CE 274
Westerberg, H 172
Westerhausen, R 64
Westerlund, M 152
Whalen, P 158
Whalen, PJ 160
Wharton, S 40
Wheatley, T 20
Wheeler, M 141, 267
White, E 152
White, J 79
White, JJ 228
White, N 248
Whitebread, D 195
Whitford, V 148
Whiting, C 49
Whitman, J 177, 227, 245
Whitmore, A 64
Whitney, P 139
Whittington, R 210
Whittle, S 70
Wicha, NYY 132, 152, 198
Widick, P 279
Wiebe, S 248
Wiebe, SA 78, 81
Wieckhorst, B 67, 155
Wiecki, T 196

Wielgosz, J 210
Wieneke, C 214
Wiers, R 135
Wiese, H 38, 40, 161, 284
Wieser, M 237
Wieser, MJ 159, 162
Wiesmann, M 249
Wig, G 80
Wigboldus, DHJ 42
Wilckens, K 267
Wilding, E 176, 268, 269
Wilding, EL 273
Wilhelm, FH 67, 155
Wilhelm, I 52, 54
Wilkins, D 72
Wilkins, H 208
Wilkinson, L 26, 88, 191
Willems, B 170
Willems, R 213
Willis, S 78
Willis, SL 258
Willms, JL 119
Willoughby, A 80
Willoughby, K 182, 262
Wilsch, A 267
Wilson, J 60, 158
Wilson, K 29, 167, 286
Wilson, KR 152
Wilson, S 263
Wilson-Mendenhall, C 204, 205,
227
Wimmer, GE 139
Wing, EA 274
Wingfield, C 50
Wingo, JM 53
Winters, M 83
Wirth, N 27
Witteman, J 126
Witzke, W 62
Wlotko, EW 219
Woldorff, M 27, 84, 198, 284
Woldorff, MG 68, 225, 247
Wolk, D 267
Wollard, JL 75
Wollbrink, A 149
Woltering, S 280
Womack, KB 202
Wong, G 102
Wong, L 165
Wood, S 136
Woodruff, CC 39
Woods, D 254
Woods, E 44, 133
Woods, J 92
Woodward, T 177, 227, 245, 274,
276
Woolgar, A 27
Worthy, D 142
Wozniak, L 152
Wright, P 43
Wu, A 193
Wu, BCY 270
Wu, CC 156
Wu, DH 110
Wu, L 203
Wu, M 82
Wu, T 31

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Wu, Y 118
Wurm, MF 188
Wüstenberg, T 24
Wyart, V 143
Wyczesany, M 92, 117
Wylie, G 200

X
Xi, J 147
Xiang, M 222
Xiong, M 210
Xu, H 267

Y
Yam, A 52
Yamaguchi, S 169
Yamazaki, K 171
Yan, J 184
Yang, J 49, 174
Yang, T-H 143
Yarkoni, T 13, 210
Yasen, A 147
Yee, E 58
Yeh, T-C 278
Yen, N-S 134, 135, 143
Yifat, R 224
Ylinen, S 47
Yoo, J 55
Yoo, J-Y 207
You, W 120
Young, M-B 104
Young, R 111, 203
Yu, R 156
Yu, X 48
Yu, Y 263, 264
Yücel, M 70
Yum, YN 46
Yurgil, K 164
Yvert, G 151

Zhang, Q 265
Zhang, W 277
Zhang, X 120
Zhang, Y 147, 148
Zheng, X 164, 248
Zhong, N 60
Zhou, H 60
Zhou, R 37, 106, 210
Zhou, T 257
Zhu, J 139, 179
Ziad, S 206
Zilioli, M 84
Zilles, K 267
Zimmerman, E 199
Zion Golumbic, E 27
Zipursky, A 70
Zivadinov, R 190
Zlatar, Z 189, 256
Zlatkina, V 281
Zobel, B 63
Zollman, F 185
Zottoli, T 259
Zottoli, TM 228
Zschenderlein, K 243
Zucker, HR 59
Zuckerman, M 56, 179
Zvinakis, A 72
Zweynert, S 23, 24
Zwitserlood, P 48, 51, 123, 149, 216

Z
Zaidel, E 161
Zaki, J 32
Zandstra, EH 75
Zandstra, L 209
Zane, E 265
Zanesco, AP 155
Zangenehpour, S 111
Zatorre, R 111, 127, 128
Zatorre, RJ 113, 130, 160, 164
Zauberman, G 144
Zawiszewski, A 268
Zee, PC 274
Zeelenberg, R 214
Zeidan, F 202, 237
Zeithamova, D 275
Zelazo, PD 71
Zelonis, S 229
Zentner, M 163
Zerouali, Y 250, 253
Zevin, J 22, 150
Zhang, J 37, 212
Zhang, L 147
Zhang, M 210

301

302

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2010 Annual Meeting

Symposia

Registration

Exhibits & Posters

Slides

Floor Plans

303

The MIT Press

Visit our booth for a 30% discount

The Cognitive Neurosciences
Fourth Edition
edited by Michael S. Gazzaniga
“The Cognitive Neurosciences IV is a magnificent accomplishment. It covers topics from ions to consciousness,
from reflexes to social psychology. It is authoritative
and encyclopedic, but also lively and unafraid of
controversy. Michael Gazzaniga, The MIT Press, and
the community of cognitive neuroscientists are to be
congratulated for assembling this landmark of early
twenty-first-century science.” — Steven Pinker, Harvard
University, and author of The Language Instinct, How the
Mind Works, and The Stuff of Thought
1216 pp., 437 illus., 32 page color insert, $175 cloth

A Hole in the Head
More Tales in the History of Neuroscience
Charles G. Gross
“Charles Gross is a pioneering neuroscientist with a
deep sense of history and a gift for lucid, vivid storytelling. His new book, A Hole in the Head is enthralling,
fast-paced, and as exciting as any detective story.”
— Oliver Sacks, author of The Man Who Mistook His
Wife for a Hat
Visit our website to hear a podcast featuring this author
336 pp., 59 illus., $35 cloth

Dendritic Spines
Rafael Yuste
A leading neurobiologist explores the fundamental
function of dendritic spines in neural circuits by
analyzing different aspects of their biology, including
structure, development, motility, and plasticity.
264 pp., 12 color illus., 82 b&w illus., $40 cloth

Brain Signal Analysis
Advances in Neuroelectric
and Neuromagnetic Methods
edited by Todd C. Handy
Recent developments in the tools and techniques
of data acquisition and analysis in cognitive electrophysiology.
264 pp., 12 color illus., 56 b&w illus., $55 cloth

The Genetics of Cognitive
Neuroscience
edited by Terry E. Goldberg
and Daniel R. Weinberger
A primer on understanding the influence of specific
genetic variants on cognition, affective regulation,
personality, and central nervous system disorders.
Issues in Clinical and Cognitive Neuropsychology series
280 pp., 13 illus., $55 cloth

Radical Embodied Cognitive
Science
Anthony Chemero
“Shall we be present, or shall we re-present? Chemero
argues for the former view in a volume that is smart,
accessible, and engaging. The book provides an
excellent summary of the central conceptual issues
in cognitive science, focusing on the role of the
ecological approach to perception and action in the
development of embodied cognitive science. It is rambunctious, opinionated, and heterodox. It is also fun to
read.” — Thomas A. Stoffregen, School of Kinesiology,
University of Minnesota
A Bradford Book • 272 pp., 19 illus., $30 cloth

The Cognitive Neuroscience
of Mind
A Tribute to Michael S. Gazzaniga
edited by Patricia A. Reuter-Lorenz,
Kathleen Baynes, George R. Mangun,
and Elizabeth A. Phelps
Leaders in the cognitive neurosciences address a
variety of topics in the field and reflect on Michael
Gazzaniga’s pioneering work and enduring influence.
256 pp., 25 illus., $35 cloth

Computation, Cognition,
and Pylyshyn
edited by Don Dedrick and Lana Trick
“Classical cognitive science has found itself in something of a pickle; a pickle that’s so deep (if I may mix
a metaphor) that most of its practitioners haven’t so
much as noticed that they are in it. What’s so good
about Pylyshyn—in particular what’s so good about
Pylyshyn’s recent work—is that maybe, just possibly
maybe, it shows us the way out of the pickle we’re in.”
— from the introduction by Jerry Fodor
360 pp., 44 illus., $36 paper

Cognitive Biology
Evolutionary and Developmental Perspectives
on Mind, Brain, and Behavior
edited by Luca Tommasi, Mary A. Peterson,
and Lynn Nadel
“Modern progress in science depends critically on interdisciplinary endeavor, and psychology has had its
share of alliances. We’ve had psycholinguistics, cognitive neuroscience, cognitive archeology, evolutionary
psychology, not to mention the offspring spawned
by the incursion of neuroimaging: neuroaesthetics,
neuroeconomics, neuroethics… even neuromarketing. None quite captures the breadth of inquiry
needed to fathom the mind. This excellent volume
brings together a diverse range of expertise, neatly
captured by the volume’s title.” — Michael Corballis,
University of Auckland
Vienna Series in Theoretical Biology • 384 pp., 80 illus., $50 cloth

The Anatomy of Bias
How Neural Circuits Weigh the Options
Jan Lauwereyns
“Jan Lauwereyns brings together concepts that are
generally treated as disparate, and traces the historical evolution of their relation to one another and to
current research. The significance of this contribution will be partly as a stimulus to new ideas, as well
as its achievement in situating current ideas about
decision firmly in their historical intellectual milieu.
Anatomy of Bias is the kind of book that will change
people’s thinking—and lives.” — R. H. S. Carpenter,
Cambridge University
288 pp., 32 illus., $30 cloth

Psychology
Pythagoras to Present
John C. Malone
“Malone’s Psychology offers particularly fresh thinking. Although Psychology is not intended to be a
textbook, Malone’s award-winning pedagogy and
clear writing style make this book accessible even to
undergraduate psychology students.” — Daryl Bem,
Cornell University
568 pp., 46 illus., $40 cloth

Mental Reality
second edition
Galen Strawson
with a new appendix
An argument against neobehaviorism and for
“naturalized Cartesianism,” which couples a wholly
materialist approach to the mind with a fully realist
attitude to the phenomena of conscious experience.
Representation and Mind series • A Bradford Book
400 pp., $32 paper

What Is Addiction?
edited by Don Ross, Harold Kincaid,
David Spurrett, and Peter Collins
Leading addiction researchers survey the latest findings in addiction science, countering the simplistic
cultural stereotypes of the addict.
467 pp., 26 illus., $40 paper

Naturalizing Intention in Action
edited by Franck Grammont, Dorothée Legrand,
and Pierre Livet
An interdisciplinary integration of theoretical and
empirical approaches to the question of intentional
action.
352 pp., 12 illus., $35 cloth

Foundational Issues in Human
Brain Mapping
edited by Stephen José Hanson and Martin Bunzl
Neuroimagers and philosophers of mind explore
critical issues and controversies that have arisen from
the use of brain mapping in cognitive neuroscience
and cognitive science.
A Bradford Book • 344 pp., 31 illus., $38 paper

forthcoming

Effortless Attention
A New Perspective in the Cognitive Science
of Attention and Action
edited by Brian Bruya
“The chapters in Bruya’s book represent an extraordinary breadth and diversity of approaches to the
study of control of thought, word, and deed. This
book should be on the shelf of every serious student
of how the mind works.” — Randall W. Engle, Editor,
Current Directions in Psychological Science, Georgia
Institute of Technology
A Bradford Book • 424 pp., 33 illus., $40 paper

Cognitive Pragmatics
The Mental Processes of Communication
Bruno G. Bara
translated by John Douthwaite
An argument that communication is a cooperative
activity between agents, who together consciously
and intentionally construct the meaning of their
interaction.
296 pp., 48 illus., $38 cloth

The Two Halves of the Brain
Information Processing in the Cerebral Hemispheres
edited by Kenneth Hugdahl
and René Westerhausen
State-of-the-art research on brain asymmetry,
explained from molecular to clinical levels.
688 pp., 9 color illus., 85 b&w illus., $75 cloth

To order call 800-405-1619 • http://mitpress.mit.edu • Visit our e-books store: http://mitpress-ebooks.mit.edu

B w. w. norton & company
independent and employee-owned

Cognitive
Neuroscience

NEW! Available Now

Third Edition

Exploring the Science
of the Mind

michael s. gazzaniga
richard b. ivry
george r. mangun

Updates to the Third Edition:
■	

Innovative new social neuroscience chapter

Reorganized and rewritten to be even more
	 student friendly
■	

■	

Over 400 new research citations

Psychological
Science
Third Edition

Cognition
Fourth Edition

daniel reisberg

Cognition is the complete package for your cognition
course. Each new copy of the fourth edition text includes
the brand-new workbook and access to the ZAPS online
labs for free. Together, text, workbook, and media engage
students in the scientific process and emphasize the
relevance of cognitive psychology. It’s the most dynamic
learning package on the market, and an outstanding value
for your students.

Learning
and Memory

howard eichenbaum

michael s. gazzaniga
todd heatherton
diane halpern

A dynamic student-centered textbook that
brings together the science of psychology and
the science of learning.
Michael Gazzaniga, Todd Heatherton, and
new coauthor Diane Halpern present the latest
developments in psychology in an engaging,
visually stimulating format. The text enhances
student understanding and stimulates active
learning with Halpern’s unique science-of-learning
pedagogical system; relevant, real-world examples;
and an art program tailored especially to visual
learners. Instructors and students will benefit from
the most integrated media package available for
an introductory course.

“The first modern synthesis of behavior, theories of
learning and memory, cognitive neuroscience,
neuroanatomy, cellular neuroscience, neuropsych testing
of patients, and MRI imaging results designed for
the undergraduate market.”
—tony wright
University of Texas Medical School, Houston

(800)233-4830 wwnorton.com
■

