Cognitive Neuroscience Society
Annual Meeting Program 2007
A supplement of the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience

ISSN 1096-8857
© CNS
Cognitive Neuroscience Society
c/o Center for Mind and Brain
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
www.cogneurosociety.org

Cognitive Neuroscience Society 2007 Committees
Governing Board
Carol Colby, Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh
Marta Kutas, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego
Helen Neville, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Michael I. Posner, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D., University of California, Santa Barbara (ex officio)
George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California, Davis (ex officio)
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan (ex officio)

Program Committee 2007 Meeting
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan, Chair
Cathy Price, Ph.D., University College of London
Liz Phelps, Ph.D., New York University
Anthony Wagner, Ph.D., Stanford University
Peter Hagoort, Ph.D.,University of Nijmegen

Poster Committee 2007 Meeting
Chris Kelland Friesen, Ph.D., North Dakota State University, Chair
Luiz Pessoa, Ph.D., Brown University
Kevin D. Wilson, Ph.D., Gettysburg College
Reiko Graham, Ph.D., Texas State University
Jonathan Fugelsang, Ph.D., University of Waterloo
Chris Westbury, Ph.D., University of Alberta
Stephanie Ortigue, Ph.D., University of California, Santa Barbara

Young Investigator Award Committee 2007
Karl Friston, Ph.D.,University College London, Chair
Marlene Behrmann, Ph.D., Carnegie Mellon
Steve Petersen, Ph.D., Washington University

Founding Committee (1994)
Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D., University of California, Santa Barbara
George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California, Davis
Steve Pinker, Ph.D., MIT
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Art Shimamura, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley

Society Staff
Cathy Harding, Executive Director

TM Events Meeting Staff
Tara Miller, Event Director
Renee Smith, Registration Manager
Alison McFerrin, Volunteer Manager
Linda Hacker, On-Site Manager
Shauney Wilson, Submissions Manager
Joan Carole, Exhibits Manager
Jeff Wilson, Program Cover & Website Design
Cover Photo © Jeff Greenberg

Table of Contents
Exhibitors

iv

Schedule

1

George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive
Neuroscience

3

Young Investigator Award in Cognitive
Neuroscience

3

Symposia

4

Graduate Students Present

19

Poster Abstracts

23

Session A

25

Session B

57

Session C

91

Session D

125

Session E

157

Session F

191

Session G

225

Session H

259

Index

293

iii

Exhibitors

4-D Neuroimaging
ANT -Advanced Neuro Technology
Avotec, Inc.
BIOPAC Systems, Inc.
Blackwell Publishing
Cambridge University Press
Cedrus Corporation
Compumedics NeuroScan
Cortech Solutions, LLC
Electrical Geodesics, Inc.
Elsevier
NIRx Medical Technologies
NordicNeuroLab
Oxford University Press
Psychology Press
Psychology Software Tools, Inc.
SensoMotoric Instruments
Sinauer Associates, Inc.
Source Signal Imaging, Inc.
The MIT Press
Worth Publishers

iv

Schedule of Events

S a t u rd ay, Ma y 5
12:00-5:00 pm

Exhibitor Check-In, Empire Ballroom

3:00-8:45 pm

On-site Registration & Pre-Reg Check In, Met. Ballroom Foyer

5:00-9:00 pm

Exhibits on Display, Empire Ballroom

5:30-6:30 pm

Opening Session:
13th Annual George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience
and Announcement of the Young Investigator Awards,
Metropolitan Ballroom

6:30-7:30 pm

Welcome Reception, Empire Ballroom

6:30-8:30 pm

Poster Session A, Empire Ballroom

Sunday, May 6
7:30 am-7:45 pm

On-site Registration & Pre-Reg Check In, Met. Ballroom Foyer

8:00-8:30 am

Coffee Service, Empire Ballroom

8:00-10:00 am

Poster Session B, Empire Ballroom

8:00 am-4:30 pm

Exhibits on Display, Empire Ballroom

10:00 am-12:00 pm

Symposium Session 1, Metropolitan Ballroom West
Symposium Session 2, Metropolitan Ballroom East

12:00-1:00 pm

Lunch Break

1:00-3:00 pm

Poster Session C, Empire Ballroom

2:30-3:00 pm

Coffee Service, Empire Ballroom

3:00-5:00 pm

Symposium Session 3, Metropolitan Ballroom West
Symposium Session 4, Metropolitan Ballroom East

5:30-7:30 pm

Poster Session D, Empire Ballroom

M on d ay, Ma y 7
8:00 am-7:45 pm

On-site Registration & Pre-Reg Check-In, Met. Ballroom Foyer

8:00-8:30 am

Coffee Service, Empire Ballroom

8:00-10:00 am

Poster Session E, Empire Ballroom

8:00 am-4:30 pm

Exhibits on Display, Empire Ballroom

10:00 am-12:00 pm

Symposium Session 5, Metropolitan Ballroom West
Symposium Session 6, Metropolitan Ballroom East
1

M o n d ay, Ma y 7 (cont . )
12:00-1:00 pm

Lunch Break

1:00-3:00 pm

Poster Session F, Empire Ballroom

2:30-3:00 pm

Coffee Service, Empire Ballroom

3:00-5:00 pm

Graduate Students Present Session, Metropolitan Ballroom West
Symposium Session 7, Metropolitan Ballroom East

5:30-7:30 pm

Poster Session G, Empire Ballroom

Tuesd ay, Ma y 8
8:00 am-12:00 pm

On-site Registration & Pre-Reg Check-In, Met. Ballroom Foyer

8:00-8:30 am

Coffee Service, Empire Ballroom

8:00-10:00 am

Poster Session H, Empire Ballroom

8:00-11:30 am

Exhibits on Display, Empire Ballroom

10:00 am-12:00 pm

Symposium Session 8, Metropolitan Ballroom West
Symposium Session 9, Metropolitan Ballroom East

Mark your calendars now...
the 15th Annual Cognitive Neuroscience
Society Meeting will be held at the
Hyatt Regency San Francisco
April 12-15, 2008

2

George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive
Neuroscience

Saturday, May 5, 2007
5:30-6:30 pm, Metropolitan Ballroom
Award Winner:
Joaquin M. Fuster, University of California, Los Angeles
Introduction:
Mark D'Esposito, University of California, Berkeley
The George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience was established in 1995 by the Cognitive Neuroscience Society and the James S. McDonnell Foundation to honor the career contributions of George A.
Miller to cognitive neuroscience. The first 10 years of the prize were funded by generous support from
the James S. McDonnell Foundation.
The prize is awarded to the nominee whose career is characterized by distinguished and sustained
scholarship and research at the cutting-edge of cognitive neuroscience. Extraordinary innovation and
high impact on international scientific thinking should be a hallmark of the recipient's work.
Each year a call for nominations for the George A. Miller Prize is made to the membership of the society.
The recipient is selected by a committee with the approval of the society. The prize winner attends the
annual meeting of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society and delivers the George A. Miller Lecture.

Young Investigator Award in Cognitive Neuroscience 2007
2007 Winners of the Young Investigator Award:
Silvia A. Bunge, University of California
Steven Laureys, University of Liège
The Young Investigator Awards in Cognitive Neuroscience recognizes outstanding contributions by scientists early in their careers. Two awardees are named each year by the Award Committee, and are honored at the Annual meeting of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society. Each award includes $500 to be used
by the awardees toward travel costs to the meeting, or for any other purpose.

Welcome Reception to Follow,6:30-7:30 pm

3

CNS Symposia

session one

Social Cognition and Body Motion
Sunday, May 6, 2007
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Metropolitan Ballroom West
Chair
Marina Pavlova, PhD, University of Tübingen
Speakers
Marina Pavlova, University of Tübingen
Kevin Pelphrey, Duke University
Julie Grèzes, LPPA CNRS, College de France
Philip Servos, Wilfrid Laurier University
Summary: Perception of intentions and dispositions of others is an essential ingredient of adaptive dailylife behaviors. Visual information revealed in dynamic events allows for veridical estimation of social
properties of agents involved in these events. The tremendous advance in brain imaging offers new
research perspectives in social perception and cognition. Brain imaging data and neuropsychological
studies point to the existence of distributed networks that reveal social attributes through body dynamics.
The symposium will provide a forum for discussion of new concepts and interrelations between visual
perception of human body motions, social cognition, and underlying them brain mechanisms. We will
present recent brain imaging and developmental findings obtained in normal population and in
individuals impaired in social perception (e.g., with autistic spectrum disorders). This symposium is
intended to give new impulses for research in the emerging areas of social and developmental
neuroscience.

A B S T R A C T S
SOCIAL PERCEPTION, BIOLOGICAL MOTION AND BRAIN CONNECTIVITY: BRAIN IMAGING AND
DEVELOPMENT Marina Pavlova, University of Tübingen — Bodily movements help to improve our social
communication by means of non-verbal information about social properties (intentions, emotions and dispositions). Observers can discriminate between deceptive and true intentions conveyed by body dynamics,
and true information is precisely detected despite deceptive endeavours. However, the perceived dynamics of static images also enables emotional attribution (Pavlova et al, 2005 Perception). Brain imaging data
in humans, single-cell recording in the macaque monkey, and neuropsychological studies point to the
existence of distributed networks that subserve revealing of social attributes through body dynamics. The
right superior temporal sulcus, a “social brain” region, is repeatedly reported to be a substantial part of this
network. Our recent MEG findings (Pavlova et al., 2004, 2006, Cereb Cortex) also support this view shedding light on the temporal brain dynamics. By using clinical models of abnormal development, namely,
patients with early periventricular lesions (Pavlova et al, 2006 Ann Neurol, Pavlova et al., 2006 Neuropsychologia) and autistic spectrum disorders, I will argue that the structural and functional brain connectivity
is of immense importance for proper functioning of the networks underlying visual social perception and
cognition.
BRAIN MECHANISMS FOR PERCEIVING THE ACTIONS AND INTENTIONS OF OTHERS: LESSONS FROM
AUTISM AND TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT Kevin Pelphrey, Duke University — Social perception, the ability to
evaluate the actions and intentions of others on the basis of biological motion cues (e.g., eye gaze, body
posture, and facial expressions), constitutes an advanced perceptual skill set necessary for social success.
Specialized brain systems may have evolved that are critical for different aspects of social perception. Sev-

4

CNS Symposia

Sunday, May 6, 2007

eral candidate regions thought to comprise the social brain have been identified, including the fusiform
face area for face perception, the posterior superior temporal sulcus for the perception of biological motion
and the visual analysis of others' actions and intentions, and the amygdala and ventral frontal regions for
the perception of emotional expressions. My laboratory has been investigating the properties of these brain
regions using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in typically developing children and adults as
well as in children and adults with autism. I will describe our recent studies in three parts. (1) I will focus
first upon functional neuroimaging studies of social perception in typically developing adults. (2) I will
discuss a recent study that investigated the neural basis of eye gaze processing deficits in people with
autism. (3) I will describe functional neuroimaging studies of the neurobiological basis of social perception
development in children.
SOCIAL PERCEPTION: UNDERSTANDING OTHER PEOPLE’S INTENTIONS AND EMOTIONS THROUGH
THEIR ACTIONS Julie Grèzes, LPPA CNRS, College de France — Our ability to generate and recognize the
actions performed by others is the core of our social life. Each individual builds up from the observation of
other's behaviour his/her own theory of the thoughts/intentions of others. Ie will review neuroimaging
studies that explore the neural basis of everyday human competence to perceive emotion, beliefs and
deceit through the observation of the other people's non-verbal behaviour. An automatic motor simulation
process of perceived nonverbal behaviours may constitute the basis of a primitive and implicit form of
understanding of other people’s mental states, and therefore is one of the main components of mind-reading abilities. However, first, there are inter-individual differences in the efficiency of this process; and second, the literature suggests that mind-reading abilities cannot be reduced to motor simulation. Rather, it
entails a broader network of processes that may involve studying the coupling between the representations
of other people’s actions, intentions and affective states, on which individual differences and contextual
effects have impact.
VISUAL PROCESSING OF SPEECH BIOLOGICAL MOTION Philip Servos, Wilfrid Laurier University —
Speech perception can involve visual as well as auditory information processing. Much of this visually
intelligible phonetic information is dynamic in nature. Visual displays consisting of speech biological
motion stimuli enable subjects to identify more words when the auditory speech is embedded in noise relative to their performance in an auditory-only condition. In contrast, such subjects report fewer words relative to the auditory-only condition when incongruent point-light displays are paired with the auditory
signal. In this experiment we used fMRI to investigate whether congruent and incongruent audiovisual
speech would modulate cortical responses when subjects performed audiovisual speech integration tasks
in which the visual stream consisted only of biological motion stimuli. As in previous work, we observed
activity within the left superior temporal gyrus (STG) during silent speech biological motion perception.
However, sound also modulated STG activation during speech biological motion. Intriguingly, congruent
speech and biological motion led to smaller signal gains in STG relative to when these stimuli were
incongruent. Sound also strongly modulated speech biological motion responses in the inferior frontal
gyrus. In this region, an opposite pattern was observed - congruent speech and biological motion led to
greater signal gains relative to when these stimuli were incongruent.

session two

Numerical Understanding in the Brain:
Developmental, and Neural Perspectives

Comparative,

Sunday, May 6, 2007
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Metropolitan Ballroom East
Chairs
Vincent Walsh and Roi Cohen Kadosh, University College London
Speakers
Andreas Nieder, University of Tuebingen
Elizabeth M. Brannon, Duke University
Roi Cohen Kadosh, Ben-Gurion University
Manuela Piazza, INSERM Cognitive Neuroscience Unit, Orsay, France and Center for
Mind Brain Sciences, Rovereto, Italy
5

Sunday, May 6, 2007

CNS Symposia

Summary: The last decade has seen rapid and impressive growth in the cognitive neuroscience of
numerical abilities and their precursors in the infant and non-human primate brain. This understanding is
based on findings from several different fields that form the core of cognitive neuroscience, such as
neuropsychology, neuroimaging, single-cell neurophysiology, child development and comparative
studies. The Numerical Understanding Symposium will reflect the depth and breadth of this progress and
highlight recent research that has shed light on the neuronal substrates of numerical understanding in
infant, adult and non-human primate brains. Nieder will describe findings from single-cell
neurophysiology on quantity-coding neurons for spatial and temporal enumeration processes. Brannon
will provide behavioral evidence from infants and neurobiological data from rhesus monkeys
demonstrating that adult humans share with non-human animals a system for representing number in a
language-independent format which emerges early in development. Cohen Kadosh will present imaging
data that examines specialized and shared mechanisms for magnitude processing, and the possible
necessity of the right parietal lobe in magnitude processing and developmental dyscalculia. Finally,
Dehaene will present behavioral experiments and neuroimaging results that examine how our ability to
represent numbers is changed by the acquisition of number symbols.
A B S T R A C T S
QUANTITY-CODING NEURONS IN THE PRIMATE ASSOCIATION CORTEX Andreas Nieder, University of
Tuebingen — Evolution has endowed our brains and those of many animal species with simple numerical
abilities. Numerical quantity, however, can be derived from different stimulus configurations, and by distinct mechanisms. In multiple-item displays, the number of elements can be assessed ‘at one glance' by parallel processing mechanisms operating across spatial arrangements. In contrast, items presented
sequentially need to be added one by one. We explored the neuronal underpinning of these enumeration
processes by recording single-cell activity in the depth of the intra-parietal sulcus of two monkeys trained
to discriminate numerical quantity in visual displays. The results show that numerical quantity in an ongoing spatial or temporal enumeration process is represented by separate populations of neurons; cells
responding to the number of sequential items were not tuned to numerosity in multiple-item displays, and
vice versa. However, once the enumeration process was completed and the monkeys had to store information in mind, individual neurons represented the cardinality of a set, irrespective of whether it had been
cued in a spatial layout or across time. Theses data suggest distinct processing stages for intermediate and
final results of enumeration processes in the primate parietal cortex.
FROM LOOKING-TIME MEASURES TO SINGLE-UNIT RECORDING IN THE MONKEY BRAIN: WHAT
HUMAN BABIES AND MONKEYS TELL US ABOUT THE NATURE OF MATHEMATICAL THINKING Elizabeth
M. Brannon, Duke University — In my talk I will describe behavioral and neurobiological data that demonstrates that adult humans share with nonhuman animals a system for representing number as languageindependent mental magnitudes and that this system emerges early in development. In the first series of
experiments I will illustrate how human infants represent and compare numerosities using a ratio-dependent system. In the second series of experiments I will describe behavioral data that indicates that rhesus
monkeys represent number independently of the sensory modality in which number is experienced and
perform calculations such as ordering and addition on their numerical representations. Finally I will
describe a population of single neurons in the lateral intraparietal area (LIP) of the macaque brain that
respond monotonically to the number of elements, from 2-32, within their receptive fields. Half of the
number selective neurons respond maximally to large values and decrease firing rate as number decreases
and half do the reverse. These LIP neurons may serve as an accumulation stage in numerical processing
and may provide inputs to the populations of neurons, described by Nieder and colleagues, in parietal and
prefrontal cortex that are sensitive to cardinal numerical value.
SHARED AND SPECIALIZED NEURONAL SUBSTRATES FOR MAGNITUDE PROCESSING Roi Cohen Kadosh,
Ben-Gurion University — Are human beings equipped with a special mechanism of numerical processing or
a general mechanism for magnitude, independent of their content? Knowledge about the specificity of
numerical processing is of importance in regard to evolution and the development of numerical understanding but it also has important clinical implications. For example, it is essential in devising adequate
rehabilitation and treatment plans for individuals suffering from developmental and acquired dyscalculia.
I will describe the use of conflict situations as a powerful method for exploring differential processing in
general and of magnitudes in particular. I will present converging evidence, from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and event-related potentials (ERP), suggesting that both shared and distinct magnitude mechanisms exist. Which mechanism is employed depends on the task requirements and more
specifically, on the cognitive load created by the task. I will present findings from transcranial magnetic

6

CNS Symposia

Sunday, May 6, 2007

stimulation (TMS) in which TMS-induced dyscalculia demonstrates the crucial role of the right parietal
lobe in dyscalculia, as well as in magnitude processing in general.
HUMAN NUMBER SENSE AND THE ACQUISITION OF NUMBER SYMBOLS Manuela Piazza , INSERM Unit
562 — Humans possess a non-verbal system of number sense, which provides a mental representation of
approximate quantities. Most but not all cultures also acquire number words and digits, which support
exact representation of small and large numbers. I shall present behavioral experiments (some of which
were conducted in the Munduruku, an Amazon people with a reduced number lexicon) and neuroimaging
results that probe how our ability to represent numbers is changed by the acquisition of number symbols.
The results bear upon how the brain solves the ‘grounding problem’ for numbers

se s s i o n t h r e e

Context-sensitive Neural Dynamics and Cognitive Control:
New Insights from Information Theory
Sunday, May 6, 2007
3:00 pm - 5:00 pm
Metropolitan Ballroom West
Chair
Francisco Barcelo, Institut Universitari d'Investigacio en Ciencies de la Salut (IUNICS)
and Universitat de les Illes Balears (Mallorca, Spain)
Speakers
Etienne Koechlin, Inserm U742, Ecole Normale Supérieure
Angela J. Yu, Princeton University
Sven Bestmann, University College London
Francisco Barcelo, University of California at Berkeley
Summary: Context shapes sensation, cognition and behavior but the neural bases of these modulations
are not well understood yet. Cognitive neuroscientists have gradually begun to embrace new
computational methods to describe, explain and predict large-scale neural interactions between exogenous
and endogenous sources of contextual information throughout a multiplicity of hierarchical
representations in the brain. The emerging picture leads to an increasingly general and biologically
plausible framework for integrating mind-brain relationships from research fields as apparently distinct as
visual perception, motor learning and decision-making. This symposium presents four complementary
views of current research into the neural mechanisms of contextual processing, going from the
computational modeling of neuromodulatory systems to brain imaging of normal cognition and lesion
studies in humans.

A B S T R A C T S
A THEORY OF COGNITIVE CONTROL IN THE LATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX Etienne Koechlin, Inserm
U742, Département des Etudes Cognitives, Ecole Normale Supérieure — The lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC)
subserves cognitive control, i.e. the ability to select actions according to the context in which the agent is
acting. In this talk, I will describe a theory describing the overall architecture of human lateral prefrontal
functions underlying cognitive control and based on recent neuroimaging results. We develop an information-theoretic approach to cognitive control that explains how cognitive control works as a unitary function though operating through multiple, interacting functional components implemented in distinct LPFC
regions. We show that the LPFC implements three major temporal dimensions of control, namely the synchronic, diachronic and polychronic dimension, from posterior to polar LPFC regions. Furthermore, we
show that within the synchronic dimension, the posterior LPFC regions, i.e. Broca’s area and its right
homologue, form a modular control system operating according to the hierarchical structure of action
plans. Thus, the theory especially suggests a basic segregation between two embedded prefrontal executive systems involved in the hierarchical and temporal organization of action and thought.

7

Sunday, May 6, 2007

CNS Symposia

UNCERTAINTY, NEUROMODULATION, AND ATTENTION Angela J. Yu, Center for the Study of Brain, Mind,
and Behavior, Princeton University — Uncertainty in various forms plagues our interactions with the environment. In a Bayesian statistical framework, optimal inference and prediction, based on unreliable observations in changing contexts, require the representation and manipulation of different forms of
uncertainty.We propose that the neuromodulators acetylcholine and norepinephrine play a major role in
the brain's implementation of these uncertainty computations. Acetylcholine signals expected uncertainty,
coming from known unreliability of predictive cues within a context. Norepinephrine signals unexpected
uncertainty, as when unsignaled context switches produce strongly unexpected observations. These uncertainty signals interact to enable optimal inference and learning in noisy and changeable environments. This
formulation is consistent with a wealth of physiological, pharmacological, and behavioral data implicating
acetylcholine and norepinephrine in specific aspects of a range of cognitive processes. Moreover, the
model suggests a novel class of attentional cueing tasks that involve both neuromodulators, and shows
how their interactions may be part-antagonistic, part-synergistic.
USING INFORMATION THEORY TO MODEL DECISION IMPLEMENTATION IN THE MOTOR SYSTEM BASED
ON CONTEXTUAL SENSORY INFORMATION Sven Bestmann , Functional Imaging Laboratory, Institute of
Neurology, University College London — Information theory (IT) provides an objective quantitative basis to
model the predictability of uncertain events. IT measures of contextual uncertainty (or predictability) have
recently been used to show parahippocampal response to the probabilistic context of sensory information
during implicit learning. Here, measures of uncertainty predicted regional responses in these learning
related brain regions. Moreover, recent studies have revealed regionally-specific correlates of decisionmaking based on uncertainty of sensory inputs. Less is known about how sensory context, and decisionmaking, shape activity in the motor system to optimize action, the essence of behaviour and ultimate purpose of any learning and perceptual inference. We varied stimulus-response contingencies in a motor preparation paradigm whilst measuring corticospinal excitability and cortical activity with transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) and magnetoencephalography (MEG), to investigate the cortical signatures of
behavioural optimization, or “decision implementation” in the context of uncertainty. We show that IT
measures of sensory context predict activity of motor structures, suggesting behavioural optimization
according to the predictability of the forthcoming motor act. Critically, IT provides an objective quantitative model whose predictions can be compared with competing models (explanations) of neuronal
responses using classical and Bayesian model comparison.
AN INFORMATION THEORETIC APPROACH TO CONTEXT CODING AND ENTROPY CONTROL IN THE
HUMAN PREFRONTAL CORTEX Francisco Barcelo, Robert T. Knight, University of California at Berkeley —
Context shapes human perception, thoughts and actions, but little is known about the neural mechanisms
of these modulations. Here we addressed the role of lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) in the updating and
online maintenance of context from an information theoretic perspective, following predictions from an
integrative model of PFC function (Miller & Cohen, 2001). Ten patients with lateral PFC lesions and ten
controls responded to visual targets within a background of repetitive and novel distracters in two different task contexts. In a predictable context, targets were always preceded by a novel distracter, whereas this
temporal contingency was removed in an unpredictable context condition. Behavioral and electrophysiological evidence revealed a complex pattern of deficits in the selection and suppression of familiar versus
novel information, mostly apparent at the visual field contralateral to PFC damage. A stereotyped
sequence of transient brain responses was bilaterally disrupted also during updating to novel neural representations in working memory. We conclude that damage to a common superordinate PFC representation
of task-set information may cause a cascade of deficits in the control of response entropy, suggesting that
both intra- and interhemispheric PFC-dependent modulations are critical for the flexible and efficient control of goal-directed behavior in humans.

8

CNS Symposia

session four

Sunday, May 6, 2007

Projecting the Past Into the Future: The Cognitive Neuroscience
of Prospective Thought
Sunday, May 6, 2007
3:00 pm - 5:00 pm
Metropolitan Ballroom East
Chair
Malia F. Mason, Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, MGH
Speakers
Daniel L. Schacter, Harvard University
Kathleen McDermott, Washington University, St. Louis
Randy L. Buckner, Howard Hughes Medical Center
Moshe Bar, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital
Summary: Humans spend a significant amount of time simulating possible future events, yet the bulk of
cognitive neuroscience research has focused on how humans re-experience past happenings. Such an
oversight is surprising as future-oriented thought makes it possible for humans to anticipate events,
formulate strategies based on previous experiences, and override momentary needs in pursuit of longerterm goals. In this symposium we present findings that suggest the brain evolved sophisticated
mechanisms for envisioning the future. Schacter’s work suggests that to deal effectively with the future
people utilize the psychological and neural processes involved in remembering the past. Based on her
recent findings, McDermott suggests that the ability to envision future events involves the simulation of
behavior and the reinstatement of visuo-spatial contexts. Bar presents a framework linking perception,
memory and predictions and argues that that the mind is constantly anticipating “what’s next” based on
analogies with past experiences. Finally, Buckner will present data suggesting that one fundamental
function of the brain is simulating alternative strategies and perspectives. As a package, these findings
suggest that one core component of human cognition is anticipating possible future scenarios based on
memories of past events.

A B S T R A C T S
REMEMBERING THE PAST AND IMAGINING THE FUTURE: THE CONSTRUCTIVE EPISODIC SIMULATION
HYPOTHESIS
Daniel L. Schacter, Donna Rose Addis; Harvard University — Although studies of episodic memory have
focused on remembering the past, an important function of episodic memory is to allow individuals to
simulate or imagine future scenarios. We present fMRI evidence concerning the neural regions that mediate the construction and elaboration of past and future events. Participants were cued to construct a past
or future event; once participants had the event in mind, they elaborated on it. Though there were some
neural differences related to the construction of past and future events, elaboration of these events was
characterized by striking overlap in regions comprising the autobiographical memory retrieval network.
We link these and related data to observations indicating that episodic memory is a constructive process
that is prone to distortion. According to our constructive episodic simulation hypothesis, simulation of
future episodes requires a system that can draw on the past in a manner that flexibly extracts and re-combines elements of previous experiences, sometimes producing memory distortions that reflect the operation of adaptive processes.
ENVISIONING THE FUTURE THROUGH SIMULATION AND REINSTATEMENT OF CONTEXT Kathleen
McDermott, Karl Szpunar, Washington University, St. Louis — The ability to envision specific future episodes
is a ubiquitous mental phenomenon that has seldom been discussed in the neuroscientific literature. We
consider design issues arising when trying to investigate this capacity and present data on the topic.
While undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), subjects were instructed to use event
cues (e.g., birthday) as a starting point for envisioning personal future event, for recollecting a past event,
or for imagining an event involving a familiar individual. Two sets of consistent activity patterns
emerged. We conclude that previous research on simulation of behavior and reinstatement of visuo-spa-

9

Monday, May 7, 2007

CNS Symposia

tial context may help to tentatively inform our findings, although definitive statements regarding this
under-explored area await future research.
A SHARED BASIS FOR ENVISIONING THE FUTURE, REMEMBERING THE PAST, AND CONCEIVING THE
VIEWPOINT OF OTHERS Randy L. Buckner, Howard Hughes Medical Center — When thinking about the
future or the upcoming actions of another person, we mentally project ourself into that alternative situation. Accumulating data suggest that envisioning the future (prospection), remembering the past, conceiving the viewpoint of others (theory of mind), and possibly navigation reflect the workings of the same core
brain network. These abilities emerge in development at a similar age and share a common functional anatomy that includes frontal and medial temporal systems traditionally associated with planning and episodic memory. All require us to use past experiences to simulate an alternative perspective. Recent
imaging data further suggest that activity increases during passive states and lapses in attention (the
default mode) are likely associated with the same core anatomy, raising the possibility that we spend much
of our time considering the future and conceiving alternative perspectives. This bias toward a processing
mode that shifts our perception from the present to simulated perspectives has far-reaching cognitive and
physiological consequences.
PREDICTIVE BRAINS, INTUITIVE MINDS Moshe Bar, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General
Hospital — Rather than passively “waiting” to be activated by sensations, I propose that the human brain is
an active organ constantly busy generating predictions that approximate the immediate, directly relevant,
future. Building on previous work, this proposal posits that rudimentary information is first extracted rapidly from a perceptual input, and then used to derive analogies, linking the input with the most similar
representations in memory. The linked stored representations in turn selectively activate the associations
that are relevant in the specific context, which provides focused, testable predictions. These predictions
facilitate perception and cognition by pre-sensitizing representations all the way downstream to primary
cortices. Predictions that involve more complex information, such as those required in social interactions,
are a product of additional simulations that operate in parallel on segments of the input. We perceive the
predictions as “intuitions” with varying levels of awareness and specificity. I will propose candidate neural underpinnings, potential computational constraints and links to known behavioral manifestations.
Such an associations-based predictive framework can explain a wide range of phenomena, ranging from
recognition to first impressions to creativity, and from the brain's “default mode” to a host of mental disorders.

session five

The Neuroeconomics of Simple Choice
Monday, May 7, 2007
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Metropolitan Ballroom West
Chair
Antonio Rangel, California Institute of Technology
Speakers
Joseph W. Kable, NYU
Read Montague, Baylor College of Medicine
John O'Doherty, California Institute of Technology
Antonio Rangel, California Institute of Technology
Summary: Central to most theories of decision-making is the notion that choosers behave as if different
outcomes have different subjective desirabilities. In economics, this notion is formalized in revealed
preference theory, where choices are used to infer the 'utilities' of different outcomes. In a roughly similar
way, most alternatives to revealed preference theory (from prospect theory to actor-critic models) posit a
stage at which all the characteristics of an outcome (such as magnitude, probability, delay, etc) are
combined into a single measure of the desirability of that outcome. This symposium summarizes the
recent evidence from the nascent field of neuroeconomics suggesting that the neural mechanisms for
making simple choices include representations of the subjective desirability of outcomes in a way that

10

CNS Symposia

Monday, May 7, 2007

closely parallels economic notions of utility or preference. Support for this hypothesis, in a variety of
different paradigms, is the finding that neural activity in different parts of the nervous system is
monotonically related to the subjective utility of different outcomes—in other words, neural activity
matches the behavioral as well as the subjective preferences of the animal.

A B S T R A C T S
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF INTERTEMPORAL CHOICE Joseph W. Kable, Paul W. Glimcher; NYU — Many
everyday decisions involve a choice between outcomes occurring at different times. This intertemporal
aspect of choices is important because the subjective value of a potential reward generally declines as the
delay to that reward lengthens—a phenomenon known as temporal discounting. We have used detailed
behavioral methods in conjunction with measurements of neural activity from functional brain imaging to
characterize the mechanisms involved in simple economic choices between monetary gains occurring at
different times. Behaviorally, we have found large individual differences in how sharply the subjective
value of monetary gains declines with delay. Neurally, we have found that activity in a number of brain
regions—including the ventral striatum, medial prefrontal and posterior cingulate cortex—tracks the subjective value of the available gains during choice, in a manner that matches the idiosyncratic preferences
for delay of each subject. We have found that this match is precise at all measured delays, not just at either
short or long delays. These findings suggest that the ventral striatum and other reward-related regions
may represent the subjective desirability of different rewards during choice in a common neural currency
that takes into account the time a reward will occur.
EXPERIENTIAL AND FICTIVE LEARNING SIGNALS DURING SIMPLE DECISION TASKS Read
Montague,
Baylor College of Medicine — Neuroimaging experiments have recently exploited reinforcement learning
models to track the natural experiential error signals incurred during simple instrumental conditioning
tasks. From a computational perspective, these error signals are ideally suited to guide reward-maximizing choices; however, this expectation should be true only for simple reward-harvesting tasks. In more
complex environments, many other factors intrude on this simple interpretation. Two particularly vexing
cases include environments where rewards are non-stationary as a function of time or choice history and
environments where simple 'model-free' reinforcement learning models are inadequate to capture the complexities apparently required by the underlying representations. Here, we present a series of decisionmaking experiments where reward structures are non-stationary as a function of subjects' choices. These
experiments illustrate how both experiential and fictive error signals appear during more naturalistic
reward-harvesting experiments in human subjects. The results show that both experience and counterfactual experience engage similar, but distinguishable neural responses, yet they open up several unsolved
problems related to habit-learning and goal-directed learning.
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING MECHANISMS IN THE HUMAN BRAIN: INSIGHTS FROM MODEL-BASED
FMRI John O'Doherty, Caltech — It is axiomatic that most animals including humans have a propensity to
seek out rewards and avoid punishments. Central to the organization of such behavior is the ability to represent the value of rewarding and punishing stimuli, establish predictions of when and where such
rewards and punishments will occur and use those predictions to form the basis of decisions that guide
behavior. Interest in the computational and neural underpinnings of such learning processes has surged in
recent years. This interest can be attributed in large part to the observation that the phasic activity of
dopamine neurons bears a remarkable similarity to prediction error learning signals derived from a family
of abstract computational models collectively known as reinforcement learning (RL). In RL, prediction
error signals are used to update predictions of future reward for different actions. These values are then
compared in order to implement action selection. In this presentation I will outline evidence from functional neuroimaging studies in humans for the existence of RL related signals in the human brain during
both reward and punishment learning. Although standard RL models can account for a wide range of
human and animal choice behavior, these models do have important limitations. One such limitation is a
failure to account for higher order structure in a decision problem. In the latter part of the talk I will present
behavioral and neural evidence for the existence of an additional computational mechanism in the brain
that guides action selection under circumstances where higher order structure exists such as an interdependency between actions. This system appears to use knowledge of the abstract structure of the decision task
in order to make choices and may exist co-operatively or competitively alongside standard RL. This latter
system may underlie the human capacity for abstract strategizing and complex social exchange.

11

Monday, May 7, 2007

CNS Symposia

NEURAL MECHANISMS OF SIMPLE CHOICE Antonio Rangel, Caltech — Almost all models of decisionmaking assume that choices are made in two stages: first a decision value (DV) is computed for each alternative, then the DVs are compared to generate a choice. We study the neural mechanisms underlying the
first set of computations in simple choice situations. These types of choices are defined by the following
characteristics: individuals choose between two highly familiar items, the chosen object is consumed
immediately, there is no uncertainty about the costs and benefits generated by the items, and the individual faces no self-control problem regarding their consumption. In this talk we will present results from a
series of fMRI experiments that combine tools from experimental economics and cognitive neuroscience to
identify brain areas whose activity tracks measured DV. One of the main difficulties in finding neural correlates of DVs is that one needs a trial-by-trial measure of DVs. A key innovation of these experiments is
the use of incentive compatible Becker-DeGroot auctions to reliably measure DVs on each trial.

session six

The Role of Parietal Cortex in Memory Retrieval
Monday, May 7, 2007
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Metropolitan Ballroom East
Chair
Alumit Ishai, University of Zurich, Switzerland
Speakers
Randy L Buckner, Harvard University, Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Alumit Ishai, University of Zurich, Switzerland
Roberto Cabeza, Duke University
Michael Rugg, UC Irvine
Summary: Early functional brain imaging studies of episodic memory focused predominantly on medial
temporal lobe and prefrontal structures, whereas posterior parietal cortex was implicated in many tasks
that required space-based attention, mental imagery, and motor intention. The precuneus, posterior
cingulate, intraparietal sulcus and inferior parietal lobule were therefore considered part of the parietofrontal ‘attentional’ network. Recent studies of episodic retrieval, however, have shown that parietal
regions are activated in various memory-related processes, such as the old/new and remember/know
effects. In this symposium, we will present converging empirical evidence from fMRI and ERP studies for
the role of parietal cortex in remembering. Specifically, we are going to examine whether recent data
support the attention to internal representations, mnemonic accumulator, and output buffer hypotheses,
which have been recently proposed to account for the contribution of parietal cortex in memory retrieval.
Finally, we will suggest new models of functional dissociation within multiple parietal regions, which
mediate distinct memory-related processes.

A B S T R A C T S
EVIDENCE FOR A MEDIAL TEMPORAL ¬ PARIETAL MEMORY NETWORK Randy L Buckner, Harvard
University, Howard Hughes Medical Institute — Posterior parietal cortex has been traditionally associated
with sensory-motor integration and spatial attention. Recent evidence suggests that specific parietal areas
participate in memory function. These parietal areas are functionally correlated with the hippocampal formation, dissociable from nearby parietal areas linked to visual-perceptual pathways, and sensitive to
manipulations that augment recollective experience. These findings raise the intriguing possibility that
there exists a previously underappreciated medial temporal ¬ parietal memory network. I will discuss the
implications of this possibility including its importance to understanding Alzheimer¹s disease and how
such a network may be similar and different from previously studied parietal networks.
RECOGNITION MEMORY IS MODULATED BY VISUAL SIMILARITY Alumit Ishai, University of Zurich,
Switzerland — Recognition memory of newly learned pictures is mediated by activation within a distributed cortical network that includes visual, parietal and prefrontal regions. In a series of event-related fMRI
studies, naïve, European subjects memorized unfamiliar art paintings or unfamiliar Asian faces, and four

12

CNS Symposia

Monday, May 7, 2007

days later performed recognition memory tasks in the MR scanner. Old pictures were recognized faster
and more accurately than new items, and elicited stronger activation in visual, parietal and prefrontal
regions. Modulation by visual similarity was observed in several parietal regions: in the intraparietal sulcus and superior parietal lobule, activation evoked by new pictures decreased with decreased visual similarity to old pictures, whereas in the precuneus new pictures that were visually different from the old ones
evoked stronger activation than new items that visually resembled the old pictures. These results suggest
that the classification of new pictures as a ‘match’ or a ‘mismatch’, based on their visual similarity to old
pictures, is processed in parietal cortex, and support the ‘mnemonic accumulator’ hypothesis, according to
which recognition memory decisions are based on the integration of sensory signals.
ROLE OF LATERAL PARIETAL AND POSTERIOR MIDLINE REGIONS IN EPISODIC MEMORY RETRIEVAL
Roberto Cabeza, Center for Cognitive Neuroscience Duke University — Lateral parietal and posterior midline
(posterior cingulate and precuneus) regions are among the most frequently activated regions in functional
neuroimaging studies of episodic memory retrieval. Yet, the contribution of these regions to episodic
retrieval is still unclear. In this talk three findings that shed light on this issue will be presented. First, episodic retrieval is specifically associated with posterior parietal cortex (pPc) and the posterior cingulate cortex (pCc), whereas other parietal and midline regions are shared with working memory and attention
tasks. Second, rostral pPc and ventral pCc are associated with recollection, whereas caudal pPc and dorsal
pCc are associated with familiarity. Finally, recollection-related pPc and pCc regions show greater activity
for hits than for misses during retrieval but they show greater activity for subsequent misses than for subsequent hits during encoding. This last finding links directly the role in these default mode regions to episodic retrieval. These results suggest that the contributions of pPc and pCc to episodic retrieval are related
to attention to internal representations, with this attention enhancing retrieval success and recollection.
LATERAL PARIETAL CORTEX: A ROLE IN THE REPRESENTATION OF RECOLLECTED INFORMATION?
Michael Rugg, UC Irvine — From the earliest neuroimaging studies of memory onwards lateral parietal cortex, especially on the left, has been found to be active during successful memory retrieval. More recently,
event-related fMRI, together with behavioral procedures that permit recognized test items to be segregated
according to whether recognition was accompanied by retrieval of episodic information (recollection),
have allowed retrieval-related parietal activity to be investigated in detail. It is now clear that the lateral
parietal region contains at least two functionally dissociable regions. One, in the vicinity of the intra-parietal sulcus, demonstrates enhanced activity for recognized items regardless of the basis for the recognition
decision. Other, more inferior regions respond selectively to items recognized on the basis of recollection.
Evidence will be presented from fMRI and a complementary ERP study that the activity of these recollection-sensitive regions varies in magnitude with the amount of episodic information that is recollected. It
will be argued that these findings are consistent with the proposal that inferior lateral parietal cortex plays
a role in representing recollected information, and may act as an 'episodic buffer'.

session seven

Cognitive Regulation of Pain and Affect in the Human Brain
Monday, May 7, 2007
3:00 pm - 5:00 pm
Metropolitan Ballroom East
Chair
Tor D. Wager, Columbia University
Speakers
Luiz Pessoa, Indiana University
Sonia Bishop, Cambridge University
Christian Buechel, University of Hamburg
Tor Wager, Columbia University
Summary: How we think about a situation is perhaps the single most critical factor in determining our
emotional response. Though appraisal theorists have long recognized this fact, researchers have only
recently begun exploring the neural mechanisms underlying the cognitive generation and regulation of

13

Monday, May 7, 2007

CNS Symposia

affect. Recent conceptual and methodological advances now permit the development of mechanistic,
brain-based models of how attention, memory retrieval, and working memory can be deployed to both
enhance and diminish affect. The speakers in this symposium present data on how pain and affect are
represented in the brain and elaborate models of how cognitive processes, including expectancies and
attention, modulate these representations. The speakers employ a variety of neuroscience techniques—
including fMRI, ERP, and opioid-binding PET—and advanced analysis tools to develop and test
mechanistic models, including classifier systems, multivariate connectivity analyses, and structural
equation models. A common thread that emerges from the application of these methods is that specific
regions in the prefrontal cortex and rostral anterior cingulate are critical for maintaining expectations about
affective experience and other contextual information. Attention- and expectancy-related activity in these
regions is associated with reduced brain responses in the amygdala and in pain pathways.

A B S T R A C T S
DYNAMIC EMOTION PERCEPTION: NEUROIMAGING STUDIES OF VISUAL ATTENTION, AWARENESS,
AND PERCEPTUAL DECISION MAKING Luiz Pessoa, Indiana University — The processing of emotionladen information is often described as "automatic", namely, independent of attention and even visual
awareness. In a series of studies we have sought to carefully test this idea with both behavioral and fMRI
methods. Our findings do not favor the "automaticity" assumption and, instead, reveal that both attention
and task relevance (whether a stimulus was a target or a distractor) strongly modulate responses evoked
by emotional faces. In more recent studies we have investigated the neural correlates of near-threshold
emotional perception. Unlike previous studies, we did not find evidence for differential responses to
masked fearful faces. In addition, responses were reliably driven by the subject's percept, and less so by the
physical stimulus per se - even in the amygdala. Finally, I will present recent results on the neural correlates of perceptual decision making while subjects performed difficult detection and discrimination tasks.
Collectively, these studies show that while emotional stimuli may comprise a privileged stimulus category,
their processing is highly dynamic and depends on the interplay of a host of factors that sculpt the associated neural responses, including task context, attention, awareness, and perceptual interpretation.
MODULATION BY ANXIETY OF THE BOTTOM-UP AND TOP-DOWN MECHANISMS IMPLICATED IN
ATTENTIONAL CONTROL OVER THREAT DISTRACTORS Sonia Bishop, Cambridge University — Recent neuroimaging studies addressing the attentional moduation of the amygdala response to threat have produced discrepant results. In addition to reflecting differences in the paradigms used, variability in findings
may be accounted for by differences in participant characteristics such as anxiety. A biased competition
model suggests that attentional capture by threat distractors may be determined by the strength of a 'bottom-up' amygdala-centered threat detection signal relative to recruitment of 'top-down' prefrontal control
mechanisms to support the processing of task-related stimuli. In a series of studies we explored the modulatory effects of anxiety upon the amygdala and prefrontal response to threat distractors. Our results indicate that state anxiety modulates the amygdala response to task-irrelevant threat stimuli, with high state
anxious participants showing an elevated amygdala response to fearful face distractors. Furthermore, this
is only observed under low perceptual load, suggesting that state anxiety may act upon an amygdaladriven threat detection system, but that entry to such a system is subject to perceptual capacity limitations.
In addition, trait anxiety levels modulate recruitment of prefrontal and anterior cingulate control-related
regions, with low trait anxious participants showing greater activation of these regions in response to
threat-distractors, particularly under conditions of low perceptual load where these distractors are able to
compete for post-perceptual processing resources.
HOW PAIN MODULATES COGNITION Christian Buechel, University of Hamburg — This presentation will
focus on the interplay between cognition and pain processing. Initial studies have concentrated on how
attention-demanding tasks are able to change pain perception. We were interested in the reverse process,
namely how pain processing, and processing of negative emotional stimuli, can affect visual processing.
The behavioral effects of decreased visual processing were paralleled by BOLD signal changes in the lateral
occipital complex, irrespective of the nature of the distracting task (e.g. pain, negative emotions, working
memory). However, using analyses of connectivity we could show that the source of modulation for each
effect is distinct. We identified the rostral anterior cingulate as a potential modulator in the context of pain,
the amygdala in the context of negative emotional stimuli and the inferior parietal cortex in case of working memory. These studies show that affective (pain and emotion) and cognitive (working memory) load
seem to act on similar cortical regions, but that the origin of the modulatory signal is domain specific.

14

CNS Symposia

Tuesday, May 8, 2007

EXPECTANCY MODULATION OF PAIN AFFECT: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE AND OPIOID
MECHANISMS Tor Wager, Columbia University — Pain is an ideal model system for studying affect
because the intensity of noxious input can be quantified, because pain pathways are well-characterized,
and because pain is highly modifiable by attention and expectancy. Previously, we found that placebo
expectancies engage a frontal cortex-periaquaductal gray (PAG) network and reduce pain-related brain
activity in peri-limbic regions. (PAG is centrally involved in opioid production and brain regulation of
pain.) In this presentation, I discuss two studies that examine the temporal and neurochemical bases of
expectancy-induced pain control. First, I explore the relative contribution of fast, automatic processes to
placebo analgesia using laser-evoked ERPs. The results suggest that there may be both fast anti-nociceptive and slower affect-based mechanisms for cognitive regulation of pain. A second study examines the
role of opioid systems in expectancy-mediated analgesia using [11-C] carfentinil PET. Opioid activity in
PAG, cingulate, and a network of interconnected frontal and limbic regions increased with placebo and
was correlated with changes in reported pain. Multivariate analyses revealed that placebo expectancy
increased functional integration of prefrontal and limbic opioid systems in general and connectivity
between rostral cingulate and PAG specifically. These findings are related to an emerging model of brain
systems involved in the cognitive regulation of affect.

se s s i o n e i g h t

Between Life and Death: Implications of Cognitive
Neuroscience for the Mental, Moral and Legal Status of
Severely Brain-damaged Patients
Tuesday, May 8, 2007
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Metropolitan Ballroom West
Chair
Martha J. Farah, University of Pennsylvania
Speakers
Martha J. Farah, University of Pennsylvania
Jon B. Eisenberg, J.D., Horvitz & Levy LLP
Lionel Naccache, INSERM Unit 562, France
Steven Laureys, Liege University, Belgium
Summary: We think of life and death as categorical concepts, but half a century of formal attempts to
define death (in terms of respiration, heartbeat, whole-brain function and neocortical function) have forced
us to confront the fundamentally graded nature of personhood and personal (as opposed to biological) life
and death. In the same period, improvements in medicine have increased the number of people who
persist in a state that is neither obviously alive nor obviously dead, the so-called “persistent vegetative
state.” The premise of this symposium is that some of the important moral and legal questions about such
patients are, at root, empirical questions for cognitive neuroscience. Understanding the neural bases of
cognition and awareness in normal and severely damaged brains has direct implications for assessing the
mental life of such patients. Recent imaging work has suggested that severely brain-damaged patients
who show little or no behavioral evidence of cognition may nevertheless manifest evidence of substantial
perceptual and mnemonic processing of stimuli in their patterns of brain activation. The symposium will
review current work in this area, in the broader context of the philosophical and legal issues.

A B S T R A C T S
SCIENTIFIC, EPISTEMOLOGICAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES IN THE STUDY OF MENTAL LIFE AFTER SEVERE
BRAIN DAMAGE Martha J. Farah, University of Pennsylvania — I will provide an overview, emphasizing
the distinction between empirical and conceptual issues and the ways in which basic cognitive neuroscience studies of normal subjects and patient studies are mutually informative. Scientific questions to be
addressed include: What neural systems must remain functioning for consciousness? How does cognition,
in the sense of information-processing, differ from conscious cognition? Epistemological questions

15

Tuesday, May 8, 2007

CNS Symposia

include: How can we know whether someone is conscious? Ethical questions include: What implications
does evidence of information processing and of consciousness have for the treatment of such patients?
LEGAL AND BIOETHICAL FRAMEWORKS PERTAINING TO LIFE, DEATH, AND PLACES IN BETWEEN Jon
B. Eisenberg, J.D.,Horvitz & Levy LLP — The history of bioethical and legal treatment of issues regarding
life, death and personhood will be reviewed, along with the cultural and political context of current law.
The actual and potential role of brain studies in deciding the many difficult ethical questions in this area
will be discussed. The speaker will draw on his own first-hand experiences as one of the attorneys in the
Terri Schiavo case and as the surrogate decision-maker for one of his close relatives. (In addition to his
work for Michael Schiavo, this speaker has participated in other right-to-die litigation as counsel for a
nation-wide group of bioethicists and has argued frequently in a large variety of cases before the California
Supreme Court, the California Court of Appeal, and the United States Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.)
IN SEARCH OF THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS Lionel Naccache, INSERM Unit 562,
France — Starting in the 1970s with the study of blindsight, cognitive neuroscience has attempted to understand the neural bases of conscious awareness. Patient-based research has more recently been joined by
functional neuroimaging, and although many questions remain unanswered, certain generalizations are
emerging concerning the role of particular brain circuits and states in consciousness. Both the successful
generalizations, as well as limitations on our understanding of consciousness and the brain, will be
reviewed and integrated in a theoretical "global conscious workspace" model. Illustrative evidence from
the speaker’s own lab and others will be presented.
IMAGING THE SEVERELY DAMAGED BRAIN Steven Laureys, Cyclotron Research Centre, Liege University,
Belgium — Brain-dead patients have a predictable lack of brain response to stimulation in the scanner.
However, patients who are behaviorally nonresponsive and in what is termed a persistent vegetative state
(PVS), also known as “cortical brain death” because of the presumed lack of cortical function, may show
systematic brain responses to meaningful stimuli, such as the activation of the fusiform face area by faces.
Imaging studies of patients in PVS and related states will be reviewed as they indicate cognition and/or
consciousness, including the speaker’s September 2006 Science report of a nonresponsive patient whose
brain activity indicated that she was following instructions to imagine playing tennis or walking around
her home, and the relation of imaging to behavioral evidence of conscious awareness will be discussed.

session nine

Implications of Cognitive Neuroscience for Education
Tuesday, May 8, 2007
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Metropolitan Ballroom East
Chair
Torkel Klingberg, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden
Speakers
Adele Diamond, University of British Columbia
Usha Goswami, University of Cambridge
Torkel Klingberg, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden
Bruce D. McCandliss, Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology
Summary: Advances in cognitive neuroscience have implications for education from preschool on up.
The four presentations in this symposium will illustrate how basic research in neuroscience can be
beneficially applied to helping children improve cognitive skills critical for success in school and in life.
Two of the presenters (McCandliss and Goswami) will focus on evidence-based approaches to improving
children’s language skills which produce behavioral improvements and accompanying neural changes.
The other two presenters (Diamond and Klingberg) will focus on evidence-based approaches to improving
children’s executive function skills again with clear behavioral outcomes and evidence on the neural
system affected. These presentations will demonstrate how thoughtful design can incorporate factors that
measure positive outcomes in classrooms.

16

CNS Symposia

Tuesday, May 8, 2007

A B S T R A C T S
TEACHING COGNITIVE CONTROL & EMOTIONAL SELF-REGULATION TO PRESCHOOLERS AND
ASSESSING ITS BENEFITS Adele Diamond, University of British Columbia — “Self-regulation” and “executive functions” (EF) include core skills such as self-control and cognitive flexibility that are critical for cognitive and social development, and for success in school and in life. Evidence will be presented
demonstrating that these skills can be taught and improved by training children as young as 3-5 years of
age. Evidence will be presented that the “Tools of the Mind” (Bodrova & Leong, 1996, 2001, 2006) preschool curriculum (a) improves inhibitory control and cognitive flexibility (e.g., task switching) on measures shown to depend, even in young children, on frontal regions (lateral prefrontal cortex, pre-SMA,
anterior cingulate, and premotor cortex) as well as on interconnected posterior regions, and (b) generalizes
that improvement to contexts different from any encountered previously. Evidence will also be presented
that children’s scores on cognitive-neuroscience-based EF measures correlated with independently
obtained measures of academic achievement; the more a measure taxed EF, the more highly it correlated
with academic measures. Tools of the Mind is successful where others have failed because it embeds EF
training in all aspects of children’s school day, rather than as a separate module, and it focuses on early
development versus trying to fight established negative feedback loops or remediating later deficits.
RHYTHM, READING AND DYSLEXIA; GETTING THE BEAT Usha Goswami, University of Cambridge — In this
talk, I will provide a brief theoretical overview at the cognitive level of reading acquisition and developmental dyslexia across languages. Children’s awareness of the sound structure of spoken language (“phonological awareness”) is a strong predictor of reading development, and develops at three linguistic levels.
These are the levels of the syllable, the rhyme and the phoneme. I will show that syllabic representation is
basic to many languages, and that children’s ability to recognise syllables and rhymes precedes learning a
particular spelling system. Individual differences predict reading development, and children with dyslexia
do not develop age-appropriate skills. These children have characteristic and persistent problems in other
tasks reliant on the phonological system, such as short-term memory and speeded naming, as well as in literacy. I will argue that dyslexic children in all languages have an underlying auditory deficit that impairs
their acquisition of syllabic structures. I will show how EEG can be used to explore individual differences
in auditory processing and how neural responses differ in children with and without developmental dyslexia. I will argue that neuroscience enables a prospective neural “marker” for risk for dyslexia that can be
used before reading commences and that applies across languages.
COMPUTERIZED TRAINING OF WORKING MEMORY Torkel Klingberg, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden — Working memory is the ability to retain and work with information during a short period of
time. This ability is necessary for a wide range of cognitive functions, such as planning, controlling attention and problem solving. It is also important for academic activities such as mathematical problem solving
and reading comprehension. The amount of information that can be retained in working memory – the socalled working memory capacity – increases throughout childhood and adolescence and this development
is an important part of general cognitive development. Deficits in working memory can sometimes be seen
after head injuries, after preterm birth, and is common in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). We have developed and tested a computerized method for training working memory. In
two studies (Klingberg et al. 2002, Klingberg et al., 2005) children between 7-12 years with ADHD were
randomly assigned to use either the treatment computer program for training working memory or a comparison program. Children using the training program improved their working memory significantly.
Moreover, this effect seemed to spread to other abilities, such as problem solving and attentiveness in
everyday life. School-based trials have also shown that training of working memory improves performance on mathematics and reading comprehension. In a separate study (Olsen et al, 2004) we investigated
how working memory training affects brain activity. We measured brain activity with functional MRI in
healthy adults while they performed a working memory task, before and after training. We found that
task-related activity increased in frontal and parietal regions as an effect of training. This possibly indicates
training-induced plasticity in the neural systems underlying working memory.
THE DEVELOPMENTAL STUDY OF BRAIN CIRCUITRY SUPPORTING VISUAL WORD PERCEPTION:
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES AND EXPERIENCE DEPENDENT PLASTICITY. Bruce D. McCandliss, Sackler
Institute for Developmental Psychobiology — Reading is supported by a form of perceptual expertise that has
been linked to response properties in left ventral temporal regions. The origins of such cognitive and neural effects and the factors that shape their emergence are informed by three lines of investigations that
touch on the development of such responses over the typical course of education, structural-anatomical
factors that account for the vast range of individual differences, and training experiments that isolate edu-

17

Tuesday, May 8, 2007

CNS Symposia

cational factors that influence the emergence of these physiological effects. Visual word form perceptual
expertise in adults is linked to a left lateralized N170 response that is not present in pre-readers, and is slow
to emerge over the course of schooling. Individual differences the degree of left lateralization of the N170
correlates with reading ability in children demonstrating typically reading ability, poor reading skills, and
dyslexia. DTI studies reveal a similar set of relationships between reading ability and fractional anisotropy
within a left temporal white matter tract structure, suggesting a potential pre-cursor influence on the
development of reading ability. Finally, training studies contrasting the impact of two educational practices on ERP and fMRI responses in left ventral temporal regions provide evidence that the nature in which
educational practices focus attention during learning can influence the development of neural and cognitive responses to visual words.

18

Graduate Students Present

Monday, May 7, 2007
3:00 - 5:00 pm, Metropolitan Ballroom West

The Graduate Students Present is a forum enabling students to present their research to
the general audience in ten-minute intervals. Nine abstracts were chosen in a blind
review, from nearly 300 abstracts submitted. Each recipient is awarded a $500-travel
award.
The session will be moderated by Chris Kelland Friesen, North Dakota Sate University.
Questions will be at the discretion of each individual speaker.

Speakers:
Lori Astheimer, University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Suzanne Dikker and Hugh Rabagliati, New York University
Mbemba Jabbi, BCN NeuroImaging Center, Groningen
Sharna Jamadar, University of Newcastle, Australia
Marieke Jepma, Leiden University, The Netherlands
Lorina Naci, University of Cambridge
Marius Peelen, University Medical Center, Geneva and University of Geneva,
Switzerland
Melanie Stollstorff, Georgetown University
Dagmar Zeithamova, University of Texas at Austin

19

Graduate Students Present Abstracts

ERP INDICES OF TEMPORALLY SELECTIVE ATTENTION DURING
SPEECH PERCEPTION Lori Astheimer, Lisa Sanders; University of
Massachusetts Amherst — Temporally selective auditory attention allows
listeners to attend to sounds that occur at specific instants in time, which is
critical given the sequential nature of complex auditory stimuli. We examined whether people use temporally selective attention during speech processing to preferentially attend to time windows when unpredictable and
therefore informative sounds occur. Based on previous behavioral and
electrophysiological studies of differential processing of word-initial syllables, we hypothesized that listeners selectively attend to the times at which
word onsets with low cloze probabilities occur. We recorded EEG from
native English, right-handed participants as they listened to a 2.5 hour narrative embedded with attention probes (50 ms beeps) occurring at one of 8
time conditions: word onset, 50, 100, or 300 ms before and after word
onset, or a random control time. EEG was segmented into 600 ms epochs
according to time condition and cloze probability so that typical auditory
onset components emerged. The relative amplitude of auditory onset
components (P1, N1, and P2) elicited by the probes was measured to index
temporally selective attention during speech perception; larger amplitude
was interpreted as greater allocation of attention. Results indicate that
probes played at word onsets elicit a larger negativity (N1) than probes
played at other time intervals. This effect is most pronounced over left
hemisphere electrodes. These findings indicate that listeners do use rapidly modulated temporally selective attention to preferentially attend to
word onsets, offering a putative mechanism by which we process the rapidly changing acoustic information in speech.
SENSITIVITY TO SYNTAX IN VISUAL CORTEX: AN MEG
STUDY Suzanne Dikker, Hugh Rabagliati, Liina Pylkkänen; New York
University — Language is among the most complex of human cognitive
systems, yet its processing is extremely automated and fast. Electroencephalography (EEG) studies have demonstrated that syntactic operations
can take effect as early as 130-150ms post-stimulus onset, at which point
the presence of an unpredicted word category elicits an early left anterior
negativity (ELAN). We employed magnetoencephalography (using a 148channel whole-head neuromagnetometer) to investigate the neural generators of this effect in word-by-word reading. Subjects read sentences including either an expected or unexpected target word. In two conditions, the
target contained overt category-marking morphology- prepositions (‘Joe's
ABOUT stories Africa’) and participles (‘The discovery was in the
REPORTED’). As a test of whether overt category-marking morphology is
a prerequisite for early effects of structural prediction, a third condition
contained a bare stem ('the discovery was REPORT'). Surprisingly, we
found that expectedness modulates activity already at ~100ms, in visual
cortex (visual M100). This early effect was limited to prepositions and participles though, showing that it is not a result of just any mismatch
between prediction and visual input. Rather, the visual cortex seems to
identify only a limited set of closed class morphemes, which can be compared against the predicted input. In addition to the visual M100 effect, all
conditions elicited later, temporally dissociated, increased activity in left
anterior and temporal sources, consistent with the previous ERP literature.

20

The finding that the visual cortex monitors syntactic properties of linguistic input may provide a crucial key for understanding how language processing can be so remarkably fast.
NEURAL CORRELATES OF IMAGINING, EXPERIENCING AND
OBSERVING GUSTATORY DISGUST AND PLEASURE Mbemba
Jabbi, Jojanneke Bastiaansen, Christian Keysers; BCN NeuroImaging center
Groningen — Theory: There is a growing research interest in the neural
correlates of human social behaviour. Simulation, the capacity to transform the feeling states of others onto ones own, synonymous to emotional
contagion (Keysers and Gazzola 2006), is often perceived as involving a
somatic route (Adolphs et al. 2000; Gallese et al. 2004; Adolphs 2006). On
the other hand, theory of mind, synonymous to mentalizing, is often perceived as involving a cognitive route to social emotional perception (Saxe
and Powell 2006; for reviews see Frith and Frith 1999; Saxe 2006; Amodio
and Frith 2006). Methods: To examine the neural correlates of first person
mentalizing, own expereince and social perception of appetitive and aversive emotional experience, we applied an induction paradigm using gustatory stimuli. Participants were exposed to the following emotional
inductions during fMRI: (1) scripts that induces the imagination of strong
pleasant, disgusting and neutral gustatory experiences, (2) pleasant, disgusting and neutral gustatory beverages and (3) dynamic facial expressions of pleased, disgusted and neutral gustatory experience. Results: We
found a common neural substarte involved in the imagination, experience
and social perception of disgust and to a lesser extent pleasure in the
insula/frontal oppercular cortex. Additionally, prefrontal areas, especially
the medial prefrontal cortex, were more involved in the imagination of
gustatory experience while the posterior insula and caudate nucleus were
biased towards the processing of ones own gustatory experience. Parts of
the cingulate cortex and prefrontal areas were more recruited during the
social observation of gustatory experience. Conclusion: Together, this
results suggest a common neural substrate that is involved in cognitive
and affective aspects of social emotional processing. This areas include
those initially though to represent processes relevant for simulation. In
sum, our results suggest that simulation may to some extent be complementary to mentalizing.
ERP AND FMRI CORRELATES OF ANTICIPATORY TASK SET
RECONFIGURATION Sharna Jamadar, Frini Karayanidis1, Ross Fulham,
Matthew Hughes, Rebecca Nicholson, Pat Michie; University of Newcastle,
Australia, Hunter Medical Research Institute, Australia — Task
switching
involves rapid alternation between simple tasks and results in larger reaction time for switch than repeat trials. In cued-tasks paradigms, this RT
switch cost is reduced when the cue-stimulus interval (CSI) is sufficient to
allow preparation in anticipation of a switch trial. A differential ERP positivity for switch as compared to repeat trials within the CSI has previously
been associated with anticipatory task-set reconfiguration. The present
study investigated fMRI correlates of this effect. Participants (n=24)
switched between letter and digit classification tasks using color cues and
no cue repetition at a CSI of 700ms. ERP and event-related fMRI data were
collected in highly practiced participants. Anticipatory task-set reconfigu-

Graduate Students Present Abstracts

ration was associated with increased differential switch positivity in cuelocked ERP waveforms, as expected. Differential switch-repeat activation
was found in the precuneus, superior parietal lobule and precentral
gyrus (all p<.01). Behavioral switch cost was correlated with increased
activation in the superior and middle frontal gyri, inferior parietal lobule
and postcentral gyrus (all p<.001). Mean amplitude of the ERP differential switch positivity was correlated with activation in the precuneus and
postcentral gyrus (all p<.001). Anticipatory task-set reconfiguration was
associated with increased positivity in switch relative to repeat ERP
waveforms and activation of a network of parietal regions. Activation in
some of these regions was correlated with the behavioural switch cost
and ERP switch positivity.
THE SIZE OF NUMBER-INDUCED ATTENTION SHIFTS
PREDICTS ACTIVATION IN THE POSTERIOR PARIETAL AND
INFERIOR FRONTAL CORTEX Marieke Jepma1,2, Silke Göbel3, 1Leiden
University, The Netherlands, 2York Neuroimaging Center (YNiC), York, UK,
3University of York, England, — Endogenous and exogenous orienting of
attention has been investigated extensively. Recent behavioural studies
have shown that numerical cues induce shifts in spatial attention with
smaller numbers cueing for the left side of space and larger numbers for
the right side of space, congruently with the numbers’ relative position
on a putative mental number line (Fischer et al., 2003). We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to identify brain activation
during this task, as well as during an endogenous and an exogenous spatial cueing task. In the whole-brain analysis, activation reflecting numberinduced orienting (number-cued versus number-neutral blocks) was
found in the left inferior parietal lobule and in both inferior frontal gyri.
This activation was significant for participants (N=6) who showed the
behavioural number cueing effect but not for participants who did not
show the number cueing effect (N=5). Furthermore in a region of interest
analysis including all participants (N =11) there was a significant correlation (r = 0.67, p < 0.03) between signal change in the left posterior parietal
cortex/inferior frontal gyri and the strength of the behavioural effect. The
behavioural results suggest that number-induced orienting is similar to
endogenous orienting. Our findings suggest a role for the left inferior
parietal lobule in orienting attention in external space as well as along an
internal number line.
RECURRENT BOTTOM-UP AND TOP-DOWN INTERACTIONS
DURING MULTISENSORY OBJECT PROCESSING Lorina
Naci,
Emmanuel Stamatakis, Lorraine K Tyler; University of Cambridge, — This
research asks how the brain combines low-level features processed in
remote sensory cortices to create meaningful multisensory object representations. Models of visual object processing typically assume a feedforward system in which increasingly complex visual features are processed
in the hierarchically organized ventral object processing stream. The integration of multisensory inputs into meaningful object representations
additionally involves frontal and antero-medial temporal cortex (Taylor
et al., 2006). Here we test the feedforward hypothesis, contrasting it with
an alternate hypothesis in which object processing is viewed as an interactive, iterative feedforward and feedback process (Bar et al., 2006). To
determine how the key regions involved in the meaningful multisensory
integration interact with each other over time, we carried out an EEG
study. Subjects performed a one-back same/different audio-visual identity task on auditory, visual, and audio-visual stimuli. We used coherence
analysis to investigate any large-scale cortical interactions during multisensory processing that would be expressed as synchronized oscillations
between our regions of interests. We found a recurrent pattern of induced
coherence in the &#952; range (4-7 Hz) between (a) frontal and anterotemporal regions and (b) antero-temporal and occipital regions at 150-500
ms, suggesting frontal facilitation of antero-temporal activity, and anterotemporal facilitation of subsequent processing in the visual regions. The
theta rhythm has been associated with mnemonic processing and long-

Monday, May 7, 3:00 - 5:00 PM

range synchronization between distant cortical regions (von Stein & Sarnthein 2000). Our results suggest that the integration of multisensory
inputs into meaningful object representations involves the recurrent
interaction of top-down and bottom-up processes.
EMOTIONAL MODULATION OF BODY-SELECTIVE VISUAL
AREAS Marius Peelen1,2, Anthony Atkinson3, Frederic Andersson1, Patrik
Vuilleumier1,2; 1University Medical Center, Geneva, 2University of Geneva,
Switzerland, 3University of Durham — Much brain research on human
emotion perception has focused on facial expressions. However, it is
increasingly appreciated that body postures may also convey important
cues for emotion communication. Using fMRI in 18 healthy subjects, we
show that dynamic displays of bodies with various emotional expressions, versus neutral bodies, produce significant activation in two distinct
regions of visual cortex with body-selective responses, including the
extrastriate body area (EBA) and the recently discovered fusiform body
area (FBA). Furthermore, multi-voxel pattern analysis showed that the
strength of this emotional modulation was related, on a voxel-by-voxel
basis, to the degree of body selectivity, while there was no relation with
the degree of selectivity for faces. Across subjects, amygdala responses to
emotional bodies correlated with the modulation of body-selective areas.
Taken together, these results suggest that emotional cues from body
expressions produce topographically selective influences on categoryspecific populations of neurons in extrastriate visual cortex, and these
increases may implicate discrete modulatory projections from the
amygdala.
EFFECT OF DOPAMINE TRANSPORTER GENOTYPE AND
METHYLPHENIDATE ON WORKING MEMORY IN CHILDHOOD
ADHD: A PHARMACOLOGICAL FMRI STUDY Melanie Stollstorff1,
Jennifer Foss-Feig1, Edwin Cook2, Laura Kenealy3, Mark Stein2, Chandan
Vaidya1; 1Georgetown University, 2University of Illinois at Chicago,
3Children's National Medical Center — Children
with ADHD exhibit
impaired working memory due to functional abnormalities in prefrontal,
parietal and striatal regions. Improvements in working memory mediated by methylphenidate (MPH) enhance synaptic dopamine by blocking
reuptake by the dopamine transporter (DAT). Polymorphism of the DAT
gene (DAT1) influences synaptic dopamine and susceptibility to ADHD
such that homozygosity of the 10-repeat-allele (10/10) is more common
in ADHD and relates to higher striatal DAT density (and therefore, less
synaptic dopamine). We examined whether DAT1 modulates the neural
basis of working memory and efficacy of MPH for ADHD. fMRI was
performed during N-back performance (2-back vs 1-back) in ADHD (on
and off MPH) and control children who were heterozygous (9/10) or
homozygous (10/10) for the 10-repeat-allele. Behaviorally, accuracy was
higher in the 9/10 group overall and improved more in the 10/10 than 9/
10 ADHD children following administration of MPH. In 9/10 Controls,
DLPFC, anterior cingulate, striatum, insula and motor cortex were activated. These areas were also activated in 10/10 Controls, but to a lesser
extent. 9/10 ADHD group showed weak activation in those areas, but
MPH normalized activation levels to that of Controls. In 10/10 ADHD,
activation at the group level was weak due to high variability among children. Specifically, children with MPH-induced performance improvement showed activation in those regions. Regional recruitment was
atypical in 10/10 ADHD children both on and off-MPH. Thus, DAT1
modulates engagement of the neural network subserving working memory as well as regional involvement mediating efficacy of MPH in
ADHD.

21

Monday, May 7, 3:00 - 5:00 PM

CATEGORY LEARNING SYSTEMS: COMBINING BEHAVIOR,
COMPUTATIONAL MODELING AND FMRI Dagmar Zeithamova1, J.
Vincent Filoteo2,3, Alan Simmons2, W. Todd Maddox1, Martin Paulus2,3;
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2University of California, San Diego, 3VA San
Diego Healthcare system — Traditionally, the fMRI BOLD signal recorded
during a cognitive task, such as category learning, is correlated with performance in the task, such as accuracy. However, the same categorization
accuracy profile can be achieved using qualitatively different learning
strategies that can change over time and that are mediated by different
neural circuits. Here we report results from a novel approach that combines computational modeling of each participant's category learning
data with their BOLD signal recorded during the category learning task.
Fifteen participants performed an information-integration category learning task in the scanner. Their behavioral data were fit individually by a
trial-by-trial computational model with a hypothesis-testing subcomponent and a procedural learning subcomponent (based on the COVIS
model; Ashby et al, 1998). Separately, brain regions involved in the category learning task were identified using whole brain thresholded voxelby-voxel analysis. Individual BOLD signals in several identified regions
correlated with individual model parameters. Additionally, brain activation patterns differed between participants that relied mainly on the
hypothesis-testing subcomponent and individuals that relied mainly on
the procedural subcomponent. These observations could not have been
made without application of the trial-by-trial model. The results suggest
that combining fMRI research with computational modeling of behavioral data within a single study is a promising method that can increase
our understanding of the cognitive and neural meaning of parameters in
existing models of cognition and may help explain individual variability
in brain activation often observed despite equivalent performance.

22

Graduate Students Present Abstracts

Poster Abstracts

Poster
Session

Date & Time

Set-up Begins

Session Begins

Session Ends

Take-down
Complete

A

Saturday 5/5/07

5:00 pm

6:30 pm

8:30 pm

9:00 pm

B

Sunday 5/6/07

*7:30 am

8:00 am

10:00 am

11:30 am

C

Sunday 5/6/07

11:30 am

1:00 pm

3:00 pm

3:30 pm

D

Sunday 5/6/07

3:30 pm

5:30 pm

7:30 pm

7:45 pm

E

Monday 5/7/07

*7:30 am

8:00 am

10:00 am

11:30 am

F

Monday 5/7/07

11:30 am

1:00 pm

3:00 pm

3:30 pm

G

Monday 5/7/07

3:30 pm

5:30 pm

7:30 pm

7:45 pm

H

Tuesday 5/8/07

*7:30 am

8:00 am

10:00 am

11:30 am

* Please note that only scheduled poster presenters may enter the exhibit hall during the early
morning set-up time. All other attendees may only enter when the exhibit hall opens at 8:00
am.
The presenting author must be present at least one full hour during the assigned session and
the other authors should be present during the remaining time. You may post your materials
on the board assigned to you at any time after the "Set-up Begins" time (listed above), but
before the beginning of the assigned poster session. You must remove your poster promptly no
later than the time listed above in "Take-down Complete." Any posters left up after the "Takedown Complete" time may be discarded. Do not leave personal items in the poster room.
On Saturday, the doors to the poster room close and lock at 9:00 pm. On Sunday-Monday the
doors close and lock at 7:45 pm. On Tuesday, the doors close and lock at 11:30 am. No attendee
or exhibitor will be allowed to enter the exhibit hall once the doors are locked.

23

24

Poster Session A
Attentional Processes: Auditory
A1
ERP MEASURES OF AUDITORY SELECTIVE ATTENTION IN
CHILDREN WITH AD/HD Hilary
Gomes1, Martin Duff1, Virginia
Wolfson1, Walter Ritter2, Jeffrey Halperin3; 1City College of New York, 2Nathan
S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, 3Queen College — Recent models of
attention in typically developing and attentionally challenged children
have focused on speed and efficiency of attention allocation and the ability
to inhibit processing of irrelevant stimuli. Our study examines the eventrelated potentials (ERP) elicited from children with attention deficit/
hyperactivity disorder (AD/HD) and typically developing children during an auditory selective attention task. These tasks generally require the
participant to attend to one of two stimulus streams which are presented
concurrently and to respond to target stimuli in the attended stream. An
electrophysiological correlate of attentional selection measured in these
tasks is the Nd. Nd is the electrically negative difference that results from
subtracting the ERP waveform elicited by the standards when they are
unattended from those elicited by the same standards when they are
attended. Seven AD/HD (5 boys) and eight typically developing children
(4 boys) participated. The groups did not differ in age (M = 10 y, 4 m; SD =
18 m) or IQ (M = 102; SD = 12). Channels were defined by frequency (1
KHz, 2 KHz) and ear while targets were of lower intensity in one channel
and shorter duration in the other. Preliminary analyses suggest that a
robust Nd was elicited from the AD/HD children in the condition with the
intensity target, but not in the condition with the duration target. These
findings suggest that children with AD/HD are poorer at allocating their
attention when focusing on the duration of stimuli than when attending to
the intensity.
A2
BENEFITS OF OPTOKINETIC STIMULATION IN PATIENTS WITH
AUDITORY AND VISUAL NEGLECT: TRANSIENT AND
PERMANENT EFFECTS Georg Kerkhoff1,2, Christian Groh-Bordin1, Ingo
Keller3, Vera Ritter2, Frank Artinger4, Wolfram Ziegler2; 1Saarland University,
Saarbruecken, Germany, 2Clinical Neuropsychology Research Group, MunichBogenhausen, Germany, 3Neurological Clinic Bad Aibling, Germany,
4University of Applied Sciences, Karlsruhe, Germany — Unilateral
neglect
after right cerebral stroke involves visual and auditory impairments in orientation and exploration of contralesional stimuli. Several treatments –
mostly focussing on visual neglect - have been proposed: prism adaptation, pharmacological treatments and optokinetic stimulation (OKS).
Recently, we showed that repetitive OKS with active tracking of the moving targets ameliorates visual neglect considerably(1). In two further studies we tested the possible benefit of OKS on auditory neglect. Study 1:
Twenty patients with auditory (and visual) neglect following a single,
righthemispheric stroke were randomly allocated to an experimental
(n=10) and a control group (n=10). Both groups showed a comparable
right-sided shift of their auditory subjective median plane (ASMP) indicative of auditory neglect. 20 minutes of leftward OKS led to a complete, but
transient recovery of their ASMP to normal values. This improvement persisted up to 30 minutes after the cessation of OKS stimulation, indicating a
clear after-effect. No immediate or after-effect was seen in the control
group. Study 2: Two small samples of neglect patients (N=3 each)
received either conventional visual scanning training or OKS training (20
sessions, respectively). Auditory neglect was significantly reduced after
OKS training, but not after conventional scanning training. In conclusion,
repetitive OKS with active tracking eye movements to the neglected

hemispace provides an effective, easy-to-apply, and well-tolerated treatment for patients with multimodal neglect.
A3
WHEN ABSTRACT KNOWLEDGE MEETS PERCEPTUAL GROUPS
IN METRICAL STRUCTURE - BEHAVIORAL AND ERP EVIDENCE
FROM MUSICIANS AND NON-MUSICIANS Shu-Jen Kung1, Denise
H. Wu2, Daisy L. Hung1,2, Ovid J.L., Tzeng1,3; 1Institute of Neuroscience,
National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
National Central University, Taiwan, 3Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica,
Taiwan — People easily extract the embedded metrical structure from a
rhythmic pattern, as they tap with music at strong metrical positions
effortlessly. Both perceptual grouping and abstract metrical knowledge
are hypothesized to contribute to this ability. To independently demonstrate the bottom-up and top-down influence on perceiving metrical
sequences, we manipulated the location of the strong metrical position in a
perceptual group. Both musicians and non-musicians were examined in a
click detection task to further investigate whether musical training modulates these effects. Both behavioral and ERP data showed independent
influences from abstract knowledge and perceptual grouping on people’s
ability to detect an auditory signal. Musicians located the click more accurately and showed larger MMN amplitude when the click coincided with a
metrically strong than weak tone, regardless of its location in a perceptual
group. This effect in non-musicians, however, was less pronounced and
only appeared at the beginning tone in a group. As for the effect of perceptual grouping, both groups of participants located the click more accurately and demonstrated larger MMN amplitude at the beginning of a
perceptual group regardless of its metrical position, while only musicians
located the click more accurately at the end of a perceptual group when it
was on a metrically strong tone. In sum, these results suggest that both
perceptual grouping and abstract knowledge are adopted by both musicians and non-musicians, while metrical representation is more salient to
musicians. Furthermore, musical training not only enhances abstract metrical knowledge but also heightens the sensitivity of perceptual grouping.
A4
LEFT-LATERALIZED MODULATIONS OF INFERIOR FRONTAL
REGIONS AND VISUAL WORD FORM AREA WHEN ATTENDING
TO LANGUAGE IN CHIMERIC WORD-TONE STIMULI Yuliya
Yoncheva, Jason Zevin, Urs Maurer, Bruce McCandliss; Weill Medical College
of Cornell University — To investigate the impact of attention on processing
of complex auditory stimuli we created chimeric stimuli - tone triplets
imbedded in auditory words - and contrasted BOLD responses to them in
two tasks: rhyme judgment and tone-matching. Both tasks induced extensive activations along the superior temporal gyrus (STG), with stronger
activity in the left hemisphere. Examining top-down task modulation for
rhyme versus tone judgments showed no influence on STG activation, yet
did reveal a left-lateralized network including left inferior frontal gyrus
(opercular and orbital IFG) and the fusiform visual word form area
(VWFA). This pattern of activity is consistent with findings of left opercular regions engaging in phonological processing and the involvement of
left fusiform gyrus in orthographic processes, known to be influential in
auditory rhyme judgments based on behavioral evidence. Region of interest analyses were conducted relative to baseline rest conditions for each
active region and its right homologue. Left opercular and orbital IFG
regions showed increased activation only during the rhyming task,
whereas increases in right IFG were present for both tasks. The task effects
in visual regions, on the other hand, were dominated by deactivations:
right VWFA was deactivated in both tasks, while left VWFA was deacti-

25

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

vated only in the tone-matching task. Results suggest that top-down
selective attention toward linguistic information may operate by modulating left frontal regions. Furthermore, our results imply a role for topdown selective deactivation of visual regions, which plays out differently
while focusing on linguistic versus non-linguistic information in complex
auditory stimuli.
A5
EXTRACTION OF ABSTRACT REGULARITIES FROM DYNAMIC
AUDITORY STIMULUS SEQUENCES Alexandra
Bendixen, Erich
Schröger; University of Leipzig — Abstract stimulus features are encoded
in sensory memory, as shown by the electrophysiological consequences
of deviations from abstract regularities (Mismatch Negativity, MMN).
Previous studies applied the same abstract regularity over long periods
of time. In order to investigate whether abstract regularity extraction also
occurs in more naturalistic situations where regularities constantly build
up and vanish, we applied a new experimental protocol with dynamic
auditory stimulus sequences. Continuous streams of tones were presented which comprised regularities consisting in ascending or descending frequency relations, respectively. Regularity-conforming tone
sequences of different lengths (3 to 10 consecutive tones with identical
frequency relations) were terminated by deviations in the direction of the
frequency change. Subsequent frequency repetitions and alternations
made the beginning of the new abstract regularity unpredictable. Independently of the frequency dimension, tone duration varied randomly
(200 vs. 400 ms). In successive conditions, subjects performed (a) a choice
reaction task to tone duration and (b) a simple reaction task to detected
regularity violations. We found that during the duration discrimination
task, regularity violations were non-intentionally detected (MMN), elicited an involuntary attention switch (P3a) and attentional re-orientation
to the task-relevant stimulus dimension (re-orienting negativity, RON),
and influenced behavioral performance in the primary task (reaction
time, error rates). During the detection task, the expected sequence of
event-related potentials was elicited (MMN/N2b, P3a, P3b); behavioral
performance varied according to the length of the regularity-conforming
sequence. Results suggest that abstract regularities are extracted from
short tone sequences and are utilized for the prediction of forthcoming
stimuli.
A6
SEQUENTIAL TONE DISCRIMINATION WITH IMPLICIT
PRESENTATION RULE: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL (ERP)
AND EVENT-RELATED OPTICAL SIGNAL (EROS) STUDY ChunYu Tse, Kathy Low, Jason Agran, Guadalupe Arroyo, Monica Fabiani,
Gabriele Gratton; Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign — This experiment investigated brain responses in sequential
tone discrimination by using event-related potentials (ERPs) and eventrelated optical signals (EROS). Participants, naïve to the implicit presentation rule, responded to high (H) or low (L) frequency tones by pressing
buttons. In half of the odd-numbered trials (odd-alternate), the presented
tone differed from that of the previous trial, while in the other half (oddrepeat), the tone was the same as that of the previous trial. The odd-alternate and odd-repeat conditions were presented randomly in the oddnumbered trials. In all even-numbered trials, the tone presented differed
from that of the previous trial, and thus were potentially 100% predictable. Because there were no cues to indicate whether the trial was odd or
even, the usefulness of the even trial predictability was contingent on
some internal representation of the sequence. Effects of overall probability (repeat = 25%; alternate = 75%) and trial pair predictability were
present in the behavioral data. ERP results showed increased negativity
at 200ms (MMN) for the repeat compared to alternate trials, with no difference in early negativity for the odd-alternate versus even-alternate trials. These alternate trials, however, produced differential effects on later
positivities (P300) that were dependent on the predictability embedded
in the sequential structure. These results indicate that deviance detection
and specific evaluation of trial predictability were both operational dur-

26

Attentional Processes: Other

ing stimulus evaluation and that these representations were temporally
dissociated. EROS results will address the spatiotemporal dynamics of
the neural substrates involved in these two levels of stimulus representation.
A7
EVENT RELATED POTENTIAL EVIDENCE OF RAPIDLY
MODULATED TEMPORALLY SELECTIVE ATTENTION Lisa
Sanders, Lori Astheimer; University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Spatially
selective attention allows individuals to preferentially process subsets of
stimuli when more information than can be processed in detail is presented simultaneously at different locations. Temporally selective attention may play an important role in perception when too much
information is presented rapidly in time. The current study was
designed to determine the extent to which temporally selective attention
modulates auditory perception by employing a paradigm parallel to that
of many spatial attention studies. Participants were instructed to attend
to sounds that occurred at one of three time intervals: short (500 ms),
middle (1000 ms) or long (1500 ms), following the onset of a fixation
point. Participants responded with a button press when a deviant (20%)
target sound was presented at the attended time only. Analysis of ERP
waveforms revealed that following the fixation point onset, a negativity
distributed over anterior and medial electrode sites increased in amplitude until the attended time. Temporally selective attention modulated
early auditory onset components such that the negativity peaking around
110 ms (N1) was larger in amplitude for standard sounds presented at
attended compared to unattended times. The N1 attention effect was
observed for sounds played at all three cue-target intervals. Furthermore, deviants presented at attended times elicited larger amplitude P3s.
These results indicate that temporally selective attention can operate
within time windows as small as 500 ms. Additionally, temporally selective attention modulates auditory perception at an early stage of processing similar to what has been shown for spatially selective attention.

Attentional Processes: Other
A8
WHAT HAPPENS IN BETWEEN? MODULATIONS OF CORTICAL
RHYTHMS IN THE INTER-STIMULUS-INTERVAL OF A SPATIAL
CUEING TASK Maja Trenner1, Markus Bauer2, Rüdiger Wenzel1,
Manfred Fahle3, Arno Villringer1; 1Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Germany,2Max-Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany,
3Abt. Humanbiologie, Universität Bremen, Germany — In crossmodal spatial
cueing (Posner, M., 1980), the position of a task-irrelevant cue stimulus
influences the processing of a succeeding target stimulus from a different
modality presented either at the same position as the cue or at a different
position. We conducted an EEG study and examined frequency-domain
effects associated with spatial attention preceding the target. Subjects
underwent periods both of (I.) vibro-tactile (cue) + visual (target) stimulation in a spatial cueing condition and of (II.) vibro-tactile stimulation as a
control. Vibro-tactile 60 Hz stimuli were randomly delivered to the index
fingers. Bright squares served as targets. Subjects had to decide whether
a target appeared in the upper or lower half of the screen. Time-frequency analysis revealed modulations, which were specific to the cueing
condition. First, the central beta rebound (18-25 Hz) induced by the somatosensory stimulus was more clearly lateralized (stronger contralaterally). Second, a parieto-occipital alpha suppression (7-13 Hz) occurred
and was stronger contralaterally to the attended side. Third, a prefrontal
gamma increase (25-35 Hz) was observed and was related to faster mean
reaction times. The post stimulus beta rebound has been described (Salenius, S. et al., 1997). Alpha modulations have been demonstrated in
visual spatial cueing (Worden, M. et al., 2000). An induced gamma-band
activity has been related to top-down-driven cognitive processing (e.g.
Tallon-Baudry, C. et al., 1998). We conclude that crossmodally induced

Attentional Processes: Other

shifts of spatial attention not only modulate the response to a stimulus
but also the ongoing rhythms before stimulus onset.
A9
DISRUPTION OF AUDITORY AND VISUAL ATTENTION IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA Susan Wood1, Geoffrey Potts1, Laura Martin1, Delia
Kothmann1, Jennie Hall2, Jocelyn Ulanday2; 1Rice University, 2Michael
Debakey VAMC — Disruption of attention is a hallmark symptom of
schizophrenia, and event-related potentials have been instrumental in
studying this cognitive deficit, particularly the well-described reduction
of the P300 component in auditory tasks. Some studies have found sparing of the P300 in visual attention, despite reduction of an earlier attention-sensitive N2 or related component (e.g. N2b), suggesting that
auditory attention may be differentially disrupted in schizophrenia and
that the N2b may be a more sensitive index of attention disruption. Previous studies used a variety of stimulus presentations and experimental
designs in different patient groups. The current study compared visual
and auditory attention using both unimodal and bimodal stimulus presentation in the same participants to examine the impact of schizophrenia
on attention at both the early N2b and later P300 stages. Twelve patients
with schizophrenia and twelve control participants were compared using
unimodal auditory and visual oddball tasks as well as attend auditory
and attend visual audio-visual bimodal presentation tasks. Both N2b and
P300 showed attention effects, being larger to targets than non-targets in
all tasks. The N2b was reduced in the patient group in all tasks except the
bimodal attend visual task, while the P300 was spared in the patients in
all tasks. Early auditory and visual attention, as indexed by the N2b, are
impaired in patients with schizophrenia, with auditory attention more
susceptible to disruption, even when later attention, indexed by the P300,
is intact. This P300 sparing may be due to effortful compensation by the
patients for earlier attention deficits.
A 10
JUDGMENT OF TEMPORAL ORDER AND RELATIVE SIZE IN
VISUAL EXTINCTION Alessia
Folegatti1, Elaine Wencil2, Anjan
Chatterjee2; 1University of Turin, Italy, 2University of Pennsylvania — Patients
with right brain damage can show a lateralized deficit of spatial attention. Recent studies claim that temporal processing can also be disrupted
in these patients raising the possibility that spatial and temporal information is integrated and coded by the same brain area. Consistent with this
view, the Theory of Magnitude suggest that space, time and size could be
all coded by a common magnitude estimator, presumably located in the
parietal cortex. According to this theory, brain damage in this regions
should impair all three dimensions. To test this hypothesis, a temporal
order and a relative size judgment task were used. Two patients suffering
from left neglect and extinction were asked to judge the temporal order
and the relative size of two stimuli presented either in the two hemifields
or within the same hemifield. The results showed that time and size
judgement may be dissociated in right brain damaged patients, not supporting the aforementioned theory. Moreover, patients with left extinction judged ipsilesional stimuli as occurring before contralesional ones,
showing a strong effect of space representation on time perception. More
importantly the time order judgement is worse in the left hemifield and
may be amelioreted by greater separation in space. These findings provide further evidence that right temporal-parietal damage produces a
processing refractory period for stimuli in contralesional space that
extends in both space and time. Right temporal-parietal cortex may be
crucial in integrating the spatial and temporal representation of stimuli,
but might not generalize to magnitudes of size.
A 11
PHONOLOGICAL RELATEDNESS INFLUENCES TOP-DOWN
PICTURE PROCESSING IN VISUAL CORTEX Mart Bles, Francesco
Gentile, Bernadette Jansma; Maastricht University — In everyday life, we
face the difficult task of selecting stimuli that are important to us from a
myriad of stimuli. Most attention research focuses on visual properties of
objects we see, and the effects they have on stimulus selection. However,

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

objects do not solely consist of visual properties: they also have names
and meanings, which may influence the selection process. In this fMRI
study, subjects viewed blocks of two simultaneously presented pictures
which were either phonologically related (e.g. cat-cap) or unrelated (e.g.
cat-pill). One of the pictures had to be ignored while performing one of
three tasks on the other picture. Two phonological tasks required subjects
to indicate whether the name of the attended picture started or ended
with a certain target letter (onset and offset task, respectively). The third
task was a categorization task where subjects indicated whether the
attended picture belonged to a target category (e.g. fruit, furniture). In a
control condition, both pictures had to be ignored while performing an
attentionally demanding task at the fixation point. Phonologically related
picture pairs lead to lower BOLD-signal changes in lower visual areas
and LOC than unrelated picture pairs. Strongest effects were observed
when subjects performed the onset judgment task. These results indicate
that top-down attentional modulation of visual cortex can be driven not
only by visual stimulus characteristics and task demands, but also by
higher-order properties like phonology.
A 12
RESTING STATE NETWORKS IN ADHD AND CONTROLS
Lucina Q. Uddin1, A.M. Clare Kelly1, Bharat Biswal2, Michael P. Milham1, F.
Xavier Castellanos1; 1The Phyllis Green and Randolph Cowen Institute for
Pediatric Neuroscience, NYU Child Study Center, New York, 2University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, NJ — Structural and functional imaging studies suggest that Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) may be associated with alterations in functional
connectivity. Recently developed methods for analysis of resting state
data have provided a new way to characterize spontaneous neural activity and its effect on behavior. Independent component analyses suggest
the existence of at least 5 functionally significant networks identifiable in
resting fMRI data (De Luca, 2006), only two of which have been examined in ADHD to date. Here we further examine ADHD-related differences in functional connectivity within five previously identified resting
state networks (RSNs), as well as interactions between them. We
obtained 237 EPI whole-brain images (TR = 2000 ms; TE = 30ms; Flip
angle = 90, 39 slices) while subjects relaxed with eyes open in the scanner.
Data was preprocessed using FEAT, part of FSL (www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk).
Image processing consisted of slice timing correction, motion correction,
spatial smoothing, and temporal bandpass filtering. We seeded each previously identified RSN (De Luca, 2006) using an ROI mask, and used
each mask to extract an average timeseries for each RSN for each subject.
Multiple regression analyses were then carried out using FEAT, including the 5 RSN seed timeseries regressors. Group-level analyses were carried out using FLAME. Preliminary data suggests a possible compromise
between lateral prefrontal and default mode networks in ADHD compared to control subjects. Additional data collected from ADHD subjects
will allow further characterization of these differences.
A 13
GOING AWOL IN THE BRAIN: MIND-WANDERING REDUCES
THE CORTICAL PROCESSING OF THE TASK ENVIRONMENT.
Jonathan Smallwood1, Jonathan Schooler2, Emily Beech2, Todd Handy2;
1
University of Aberdeen, 2University of British Columbia — Attention to the
outside world waxes and wanes, producing reliable oscillations between
periods of comparatively high and low externally-oriented attention.
This latter state in particular - where attention is disengaged or decoupled from the constraints of the task - we describe as "mind wandering"
(Smallwood and Schooler, 2006). Recent psychological, and, theoretical
models of cognitive neuroscience converge on the assumption that when
ongoing thought is unconstrained by the task environment it competes
with processing of external task relevant information in working memory, although to date a complete demonstration has evaded scientists
because of a lack of a direct marker for internal experience. Here we
show that periods when the mind has wandered from the constraints of
the task are associated with reduced cortical analysis of the task environ-

27

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

ment. We present the first combined behavioral and subjective evidence
that the amplitude of the p3 event related potential was reduced during
mind-wandering. Our data thus converge on the conclusion that not
only does our attention to the outside world vary in intensity over time,
but that when ongoing thought is not constrained by the task environment cognitive analysis afforded to events in the extrapersonal environment is reduced.
A 14
FUNCTIONAL GRADIENTS FOR MOTOR AND COGNITIVE
PREDICTION IN THE HUMAN BRAIN Uta Wolfensteller, Ricarda I.
Schubotz, D. Yves von Cramon; Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences — Previous findings suggest posterior-anterior functional gradients for motor and cognitive processes from premotor to prefrontal areas rather than an abrupt change. Here, we were interested in
the general cerebral overlap and distinctiveness of cognitive and motor
tasks that share a predictive component. We employed serial prediction
tasks requiring the prediction of stimulus patterns (cognitive prediction)
and motor imagery tasks requiring the prediction of own movements
(motor prediction). In principal, one could expect three patterns: (a) Comparable activation in both tasks; (b) Preference for one task; and (c) Selectivity for one task. Conjunction analyses and direct contrasts of the fMRI
data revealed both comparable and task-selective activity in the medial
frontal cortex. More specifically, motor prediction selectively engaged the
supplementary motor area. Anteriorly adjacent parts of the pre-supplementary area and the rostral cingulate zone were comparably engaged by
cognitive and motor prediction, i.e. activity did not differ between the
two task types. In contrast, a more anterior part of the frontomedian cortex was selectively engaged by cognitive prediction. Together, the
present findings fit nicely with previous data showing functional gradients from more motor-related to more cognitive processes in medial frontal areas – including a transition area located in between which subserves
both types of processes.
A 15
TOO STRESSED TO LISTEN: AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
MEASURE OF MULTI-TASKING WHILE DRIVING Jonathan Page,
Kasee Page; Minnesota State University — One effect of stress on the attentional system is a narrowing of focus. Depending on the task and the circumstances, this can be advantageous or disadvantageous. A specific
disadvantageous example is when a police-officer is pursuing a suspect
in a car. In this case, the narrowing of attention can have serious or even
fatal consequences. Using students and instructors from London’s police
driving school at Hendon, we tested the effect of stress on an officer’s
ability to listen while driving by measuring the P300 recognition
response to auditory distracters. Brain activity was measured to standard (p = 0.85) and target (p = 0.15) audio tones while participants drove
a predetermined route of figure-eights on the training skid pan. Participants were instructed to covertly count the number of target tones in six
successive trials. Using heart rate, behavioral, and self-report measures,
students were found to be experiencing performance-related anxiety during this task. This was due in part to an evaluative instructor being in the
vehicle. The result was poor student performance in attending to the distracter, which is objective evidence for visual tunneling. However,
instructors—who were not experiencing performance stress—were able
to successfully shift their attention between negotiating the skid pan
course (driving) and counting the target tones (listening). Moreover,
instructors most familiar with the driving course were the most successful at this task. This suggests that stress does affect attention while driving, and further implies that practice/training facilitates the ability to
multi-task while driving.

28

Attentional Processes: Other

A 16
P3A AND P3B SUPPRESSION 30 YEARS POST-CONCUSSION: A
DOUBLE COHORT STUDY. Louis De Beaumont, David Boutin, Martin
Theriault, Dave Ellemeberg, Maryse Lassonde; Centre de recherche en
neuropsychologie expérimentale et cognition, Université de Montréal — Background: A recent study showed that retired professional football players
with three or more concussions had a fivefold prevalence of MCI diagnosis compared with retirees without a history of concussion (Guskiewicz
et al. 2005). In parallel, recent ERP studies disclosed persistent P3 amplitude suppression in active University football players who sustained
their last concussion years prior to testing despite normal performance on
neuropsychological measures (De Beaumont et al. submitted). Objectives:
To assess the effects of aging with a remote history of sports concussion
on neuropsychological tests and on an oddball paradigm used to elicit
both P3a and P3b waveforms. Participants: 20 former University football/hockey players between the ages of 50-65 with a history of concussion were matched according to age, education and socioeconomic status
with former teammates with no history of neurological insults. Participants were screened for the following exclusion criteria: Currently taking
medications, history substance abuse, psychiatric illness, learning disability, neurological history, and TBI unrelated to contact sports. Results: We
found that former athletes with a history of concussion showed significant P3a and P3b suppression coupled with lower scores on memory and
attention-mediated neuropsychological tests. In addition, Pearson correlations suggested that electrophysiological and neuropsychological differences observed between those with a prior concussion history and
controls were exacerbated with age. Discussion: Residual P3 suppression observed in young/active University football players is still
observed more than 30 years later and the process of aging not only exacerbate this P3 size difference, but it is associated with the early manifestation of clinical symptoms related to memory and attention.
A 17
TIME AND MUSIC: ATTENTION TO EITHER DURATION OR
PITCH ACTIVATES SIMILAR CORTICAL STRUCTURES Elaine
Wencil, Eugene Narmour, John Detre, Anjan Chatterjee; University of
Pennsylvania — Neuropsychological data have suggested that different
subcomponents of music perception, such as rhythm and pitch, can be
independently disrupted following brain injury. However, a paucity of
research examining the neural representations of musical components
(i.e., neural structures supporting pitch and duration) remains. We previously demonstrated that the inferior parietal cortex mediates attention
to brief durations. It remains unknown whether the inferior parietal
regions activated during interval timing tasks subserve a general selective attention function or are specific to temporal attention. In the current
study we identified neural regions that support attention to musical
intervals and probed these regions to determine if attention to pitch is
anatomically distinct from attention to duration. Eleven subjects performed an auditory discrimination 1-back task to identical sequences of
complex tones that varied in duration and pitch during fMRI acquisition.
Subjects were trained to attend to either the duration or final pitch of the
current tone and then compare it to the previous tone. Behavioral measures suggest equivalent levels of difficulty for the two conditions (RT:
t=0.18; p=0.86, Accuracy: t= 0.19; p=0.86). Attention to duration revealed
bilateral superior temporal, cerebellum, superior frontal, SMA, right
frontal operculum, inferior parietal and middle frontal activations. Similarly, attention to pitch revealed bilateral superior temporal, cerebellum,
frontal operculum and SMA activations. Critically, bilateral superior
temporal and inferior parietal cortex showed greater activation when
attention to duration was directly compared to attention to pitch. Attention to durations might rely on parts of a general auditory attentional system that controls attention to pitch.

Attentional Processes: Other

A 18
INCREASING ATTENTION TO RESOLVE RESPONSE CONFLICT
RESULTS IN ENHANCED ACTIVITY IN MOTOR REGIONS
UNDERLYING THE CORRECT RESPONSE Daniel
Weissman1,
Lindsay Warner2, Marty
Woldorff2; 1University of Michigan, 2Duke
University — Current models posit that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) and the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) participate in a brain
network that underlies attentional control. One important aspect of
attentional control is resolving response conflict, which occurs when
identifying an irrelevant stimulus activates a response that differs from
the response that should be made to a relevant stimulus. Using fMRI, we
investigated whether increasing attention to resolve response conflict
results in enhanced activity in motor regions underlying the correct
response. Participants identified a visual letter while ignoring a simultaneous auditory letter that was mapped either to the same hand as the
visual letter (no response conflict; congruent trials) or to the opposite
hand (response conflict; incongruent trials). We observed significant conflict-related activity (i.e., greater activity for incongruent versus congruent trials) in the ACC, consistent with this region’s posited role in
detecting response conflict. Additionally, conflict-related activity in the
ACC became greater as response time increased, suggesting higher conflict for trials in which participants took longer to respond. In line with
our hypothesis, relatively long response times (i.e., high amounts of conflict) were associated with greater conflict-related activity in the primary
motor cortex contralateral, but not ipsilateral, to the responding hand.
Moreover, we observed similar patterns in bilateral regions of the
DLPFC, suggesting these regions may have been driving the effects in
primary motor regions. These findings indicate that the contributions
made to resolving conflict by the DLPFC and the ACC include increasing
attention to motor processes underlying the correct response.
A 19
TIMING VARIABILITY AND ACCURACY AS MEASURES OF
ATTENTION AND LONG-TERM MEMORY CAPACITY IN OLDER
ADULTS Cynthia
Gooch, Yaakov Stern, Brian
Rakitin; Columbia
University — Effective interval timing relies on a variety of cognitive faculties, such as attention, working memory, and long-term memory.
Recent data has indicated that not only are basic timing mechanisms
affected by aging, but that combining timing with other cognitive tasks
magnifies these changes. The data from the current experiment further
examines this issue by comparing simple time production (matching a
response’s latency to a target time interval) with a “choice timing” task
that adds a spatial discrimination component to a time production task.
This latter task requires subjects to determine not only when to emit a
response, but also which response to make. Difficulty of this concurrent
response choice task was manipulated by making the stimulus spatially
compatible with the response, or spatially incompatible. This study
therefore examined the effect of increasing attentional demands of a concurrent response choice task on temporal production ability. Time production accuracy was affected equally in both age groups, although older
participants’ responses became more variable with increasing nontemporal task complexity. Furthermore, testing occurred over the course of
three consecutive days in order to compare the retention of memories for
time intervals. Results indicated that simple time productions by young
participants increase in duration over the two-day retention interval. In
contrast, older participants’ simple time productions shorten substantially over testing. One implication is that variability in timing behavior
may be more sensitive to differences in attentional capacity between
older and younger adults, while timing accuracy is a better measure of
long-term memory changes.
A 20
ANTERIOR
CINGULATE
ACTIVATION
DURING
TASK
SWITCHING: DIPOLE SOURCE MODELING OF THE N2B/P3A
COMPLEX WITH FMRI ACTIVATIONS Adam Craig, Laura Jelsone,
Yuliya Komarova, Scott Meek, Veena Nair, Michelle Phillips, Carmen

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

Sanchez, Deepa Vijayakumar, Jennifer Vendemia; University of South
Carolina — College-aged students (N=18) attended two experimental session in which they performed a task with directed deceptions during a
sentence verification task. The task consisted of a sentence with autobiographical information, such as, “My name is Pat Buzan” followed by a
fixation prompt, and then the word “TRUE” or “FALSE”. During one
session their ERPs to the second stimulus were recording using a 128electrodesic net (Electrical Geodesics, Inc.). During a second session their
BOLD activations were recorded. Structural T1 and T2 scans were segmented into white matter, gray matter, cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF), and
nasal cavities using MR-Viewer (Source Signal Imaging, Inc.). The segmented regions were used to create realistic head models for each participant. Data from the fMRI activations were used to seed dipole models of
the event-related potential between 220-300ms. These seeds were further
constrained to anatomical regions within the anterior cingulate based on
previous findings related to fMRI and ERP studies of deception in a two
stimulus task (for review see Vendemia et al., 2006). Evidence for the differential impact of exogenous and endogenous attention systems during
deceptive responding is discussed.
A 21
PATCHING OF COGNITIVE DEFICITS: NICOTINE PATCH
ENHANCES NOVELTY DETECTION AND LONG-TERM MEMORY
IN ABSTINENT HABITUAL SMOKERS Brett Froeliger, David G.
Gilbert, Amber Dillon, Chelsea Vanderpool; Greg Asgaard; Southern Illinois
University Carbondale — In tobacco-deprived habitual smokers, nicotine
improves performance on a variety of cognitive tasks requiring sustained
attention and vigilance, as well as working memory tasks such as the NBack. However, relatively little research has assessed the effects of nicotine and smoking deprivation on long-term memory and reaction times
to emotionally novel situations. Nicotine administration has been
reported to modulate activity in brain regions playing a role in attention
processes (e.g., the anterior cingulate gyrus) as well as regions involved
with memory (parahippocampal gyrus). In habitual smokers, nicotine
abstinence has been shown to result in sustained overall slowing of EEG
and decrements of sustained attention. The present study investigated
the beneficial cognitive effects that nicotine patch replacement therapy
may have on novelty detection and delayed recognition memory in habitual smokers. Smokers (n = 43) participated in 2 experimental sessions in
a double-blind, counterbalanced, within-subjects design. After subjects
were biochemically verified for overnight smoking deprivation (12+hr),
active 14mg nicotine patches were applied to participants during one of
two sessions. Placebo patches were applied during the other session.
Approximately five-hours after patch application, reaction times to target
identification in an emotional oddball task were assessed and found to be
significantly faster in the nicotine condition (667ms) as compared to the
placebo condition (695 ms). In the memory task, corrected recognition
was significantly better in the nicotine condition (M=.45) as compared to
placebo (M=.38). These findings suggest that the nicotine patch, relative
to placebo patch, can reduce attention and memory deficits associated
with quitting smoking.
A 22
EXPERT MEDITATORS SHOW ENHANCED VIGILANCE,
ALERTING AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Jason
Buhle1, Hedy
Kober1, Alex Millner2, Amir Raz1, Kevin N. Ochsner1, Tom McCarry2, BJ Casey2;
1
Columbia University, 2Weill Medical College, Cornell University — Recent studies suggest attention may be trained as a skill. While a large body of literature suggests that expertise in domains like chess or music requires
5,000 to 10,000 hours of practice, most previous studies examined
changes in attention following far less training. We report performance
on different attention tasks by 32 Buddhist meditators, who engage in
attentional training for up to 10 hours per day. Fourteen meditators with
over 5,000 hours of training showed improved alerting, vigilance, and
conflict resolution compared to age- and gender-matched controls, while
18 meditators with less training showed only improved conflict resolu-

29

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

tion. These studies indicate that attention can be modulated by meditation training; while some attentional components require the 5,000 hours
of training typical for expertise across domains, others may require less.
A 23
PREPARATORY MODULATION OF VISUAL CORTEX DURING
AUDITORY
PERCEPTUAL
DISCRIMINATION
IN
CONGENITALLY BLIND HUMANS. Alexander
Stevens, Matthew
Snodgrass, Kurt Weaver, Alexander Stevens; Oregon Health & Science
University — Congenitally blind (CB) individuals show enhancement of a
variety of auditory perceptual abilities. Furthermore, they show task
dpednent activity in psterior areas that appears to depend on allocation
of attention. Evidence for modulation of visual cortex in sighted subjects
has now been demonstrated repeatedly using fMRI. We hypothesize that
brain networks involved in top-down modulation of early visual cortex
are likely to remain intact in CB individuals, while the cortical fields on
which they act undergo functional reorganization. If such is the case, then
CB individuals should show anticipatory effects in visual cortex during
auditory perceptual tasks. We demonstrated this using an event-related
fMRI design by presenting subjects with trials of an auditory backward
masking task. Each trial was preceded by a warning cue before an each
trial. On a subset of trials, the trial cue was presented with no trial following. If changes in the BOLD signal occurs to a trial cue alone, this can be
attributed to either a preparatory change due to expectation of a trial. We
also included a “no trial” cue, indicating no trial would occur to rule out
general arousal effects. Backward masking trials elicited robust BOLD
responses in calcarine sulcus as did trial cues alone. Following no-trial
cues, the calcarine sulcus responded with a transient increase followed by
a negative undershoot. The EB but not SC subjects showed similar modulatory effects in auditory cortices. However, prefrontal cortical areas
involved in attentional control showed similar preparatory effects in both
blind and sighted subjects.
A 24
ANTICIPATION AND NOCICEPTIVE PROCESSING IN THE
HUMAN CEREBELLUM Merle Fairhurst, Chantal Berna, Irene Tracey;
University of Oxford — Neuroimaging studies have shown brain activity
both previous to and during the application of noxious stimuli. To further our understanding of the circuitry involved in anticipation of pain,
we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI) to characterize
previously described cerebellar activity. Methods:Twelve healthy volunteers received a visual cue followed by a thermal noxious stimulus, which
they then rated. The paradigm consisted of four conditions where cue
and stimulus were either matched or unmatched: i) left hand cued and
stimulated; ii) left hand cued – right hand stimulated; iii) right hand cued
and stimulated; iv) right hand cued – left hand stimulated. Results:Psychophysical data showed a significant reduction (p < 0.05, two-tailed) in
perceived pain intensity in matched vs. unmatched right hand conditions
and a similar trend on the left. Imaging data using regression analysis
revealed correlated cerebellar activity during anticipation in Crus I and
deep nuclei as well as brainstem activation in the periaqueductal grey
(PAG) and ventral tegmental area (VTA). Using a subtraction analysis
(right hand matched vs. unmatched), cerebellar activity, was observed in
the lateral anterior hemisphere (Crus I) and the deep cerebellar nuclei,
specifically in the fastigial nucleus. Conclusions: From the data we suggest that decreased levels of pain perception in the unmatched conditions
may be attributable to brainstem and cerebellar attentional mechanisms.
During anticipation, cerebellar activity includes previously described
hemispheric activity including Crus I, implicated in attentional shifting,
as well as activation in the deep cerebellar nuclei, specifically the fastigial
nucleus, which has been implicated in cognitive/affective processing.

30

Attentional Processes: Visual

Attentional Processes: Visual
A 25
THE EFFECTS OF AGE, SEX AND TASK DEMANDS ON VISUAL
SELECTIVE ATTENTION Paula M. McLaughlin1,2, Donald T. Stuss2,
Carolyn Szostak3, Malcolm A. Binns2, Steven P. Tipper4; 1York University,
2
Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre for Geriatric Care, 3University of
British Columbia, Okanagan, 4University of Wales — Visual selective attention was investigated as a function of age, sex and task demands. A
“select what, respond where” paradigm was used to measure interference, negative priming and inhibition of return effects across three conditions that varied in cognitive demand. Sixty-five adults (35 females, 30
males) between the ages of 24 and 86 were tested. The results indicate
that selective attention is dependent on age, sex and task demands. The
female participants displayed a consistent vulnerability to task demands,
while showing no age-related changes in selective attention. In contrast,
the male participants displayed an age-related deficit in selective attention, and were minimally influenced by cognitive demand. As the task
became more complex, the females displayed an increase in interference
and negative priming scores and a decrease in inhibition of return effects.
In general, the female participants displayed larger negative priming
scores, and showed greater interference effects on the most demanding
condition. The males also revealed an increase in interference with the
increase in task demands; however, negative priming and inhibition of
return scores were not affected by task complexity. A general age-related
increase in interference and inhibition of return scores was found for the
male participants, suggesting that age-related changes in selective attention are dependent on sex and the specific measure of attention. The
present results have not been previously reported in literature, and their
theoretical implications on selective attention and cognitive aging are discussed.
A 26
MAPPING SPATIAL ATTENTION WITH A TOJ TASK IN
PATIENTS WITH SPATIAL NEGLECT Elena
Natale1, Anna Dal
1
1
2
Molin , Carlo A. Marzi , Bianca de Haan , Hans Otto Karnath2; 1University
of Verona, 2Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University of
Tübingen — Evidence has been reported that in neglect patients the spatial attention bias, as witnessed by manual and saccadic performance in
speeded light detection tasks, specifically affects an off-centred sector of
the ipsilesional space. Typically, accuracy and speed of neglect patients’
responses progressively increase from the periphery of the contralesional
to an off-centred sector of the ipsilesional field. To study whether or not a
similar spatial distortion may also apply to mechanisms of attention
selection in time, we analysed the performance of neglect patients on a
temporal order judgement (TOJ) task. A couple of asynchronous stimuli
was randomly displayed to a location within either the left or the right
visual hemifield and patients were asked to judge which stimulus
appeared first by a forced choice between a left or right precedence. In
healthy and brain-damaged control subjects, we found the point of subjective simultaneity (onset asynchrony where the two judgements are
equally distributed) close to the objective simultaneity. Neglect patients
showed a comparable performance to that of control subjects when stimuli were presented in the ipsilesional field, whereas they needed the left
stimulus to lead by several milliseconds in order to perceive simultaneity
in the contralesional field. In conclusion, in neglect patients we found a
similar bias of spatial attention in temporal judgements as in speed of
stimulus detection and this strongly argues for a common basis of disorders of conscious visual processing in space and in time.
A 27
WHEN MOVING FACES ACTIVATE THE HOUSE AREA: AN FMRI
STUDY OF OBJECT FILE RETRIEVAL. André
Keizer1, Lorenza
Colzato1, Wouter Teeuwisse2, Serge Rombouts1, Bernhard Hommel1; 1Leiden
University, 2LUMC — The primate brain is assumed to integrate the features of perceived objects into object files--pointers to the neural codes of

Attentional Processes: Visual

these features. Object files are assumed to outlive the event they represent and, if reactivated upon object reviewing, to reactivate all the features they point to in a pattern-completion process. Our results show
compelling evidence for this mechanism in humans: we demonstrate that
encountering a moving visual object automatically reactivates the neural
codes of the object that previously moved in the same direction.
A 28
PROBABILISTIC SEARCH: A NEW THEORY OF VISUAL
SEARCH Lingyun Zhang, Gary Cottrell; UCSD — Visual search has
been extensively researched in recent decades. Numerous psychological
experiments have provided abundant data. It is well accepted that bottom up saliency attracts attention and that knowledge of the target affects
the search. A number of theories and models have been developed to
address how these two factors interact and computational implementations of saliency maps have shown some agreement with human data.
However, so far, no research has asked the fundamental question: “what
is the goal of the computation?” In this paper, we begin to address this
question. We will start from an intuitive assumption concerning the goal
of the visual system, and develop a Bayesian probabilistic framework
that describes the calculation the system should perform. We propose a
model of bottom-up saliency, why it made its way into the visual system
over evolution and how top-down information is used in visual search.
The observation that feature targets “pop out” but conjunction targets do
not falls out naturally, as a result of optimization by the visual system.
Within this probabilistic framework, we account for “parallel search”,
“serial search” and the continuum in between, without the assumption of
two separate processes. The classical putative mechanisms of “parallel
processing” and “serial processing” are two sides of one probabilistic
coin, and there is a continuum between the two. Our model also qualitatively accounts for a large body of phenomena in visual search, such as
“search asymmetry” and the quite recent observation of “rare items are
often missed”, without fitting any parameters.
A 29
INHIBITION OF RETURN AT ENDOGENOUSLY ATTENDED
LOCATIONS: AN ERP STUDY. Ana Chica, Juan Lupiáñez; University
of Granada — Inhibition of Return (IOR) refers to slower reaction times to
respond to targets appearing at a previously cued as compared with
uncued, new locations. Since the effect was first reported (Posner &
Cohen, 1984) and named (Posner, Rafal, Choate, & Vaughan, 1985), most
researchers in the field assume that IOR reflects the inhibition of the
return of attention to a previously attended location. This hypothesis
have been challenged by a growing number of studies showing that IOR
is observed even when endogenous attention remains at the cued location, and thus no return of attention is necessary (Berger, Henik, & Rafal,
2005; Chica & Lupiáñez, 2004; Chica, Lupiáñez, & Bartolomeo, 2006). In
the present study, we investigate event-related potential (ERP) modulations associated with IOR while participants endogenously oriented
attention either to the same or the opposite location of the exogenous cue.
The results revealed that P1 and N1 were diminished for cued versus
uncued trials (IOR), with independence of endogenous attention being
oriented to the cued location or being disengaged from the cued location
and reoriented to the opposite location. These results will be discussed in
terms of exogenous and endogenous attention as two independent systems in the brain.
A 30
FEATURE-BASED
VISUAL
ATTENTION
AND
BIASED
COMPETITION IN THE HUMAN BRAIN Matthias Mueller, Soeren
Anderesen, Sandra Fuchs; University of Leipzig — In a series of studies we
investigated neural mechanisms of feature-based attention and biased
competition in the human brain by recording the steady state visual
evoked potential (SSVEP). The SSVEP is the continuous brain response to
a flickering stimulus and allows one to investigate neural dynamics of the
allocation of attentional resources in multi-element stimulus displays.
Importantly, the SSVEP not only allows one to investigate the cortical

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

mechanisms of amplification and suppression but also the temporal
dynamics thereof. By presenting coloured stimuli that flickered in different frequencies, we were able to demonstrate a key prediction of the feature similarity gain model, which is the amplification of the to-beattended feature of a certain feature dimension throughout the visual
field. Shifting attention from one feature to another within the same feature dimension was related to different temporal dynamics of amplification and suppression compared to shifting attention in space.
Furthermore, we were able to demonstrate biased competition as a function of spatial distance between two coloured stimuli by investigating the
time course of SSVEP amplitude as a function of spatial separation when
one stimulus moved continuously away or towards a stationary stimulus.
A 31
ATTENTIONAL MODULATION OF EARLY AND LATE STAGES
OF VISUAL WORD PROCESSING Maria
Ruz, Anna C. Nobre;
University of Oxford — Research on attention has extensively explored the
effects of focusing attention on spatial locations or spatially-laden perceptual objects or their features. Electrophysiological research in this field
has shown that attention enhances the selected representations at early
stages of processing. Much less is known however about the temporal
dynamics of attentional deployment to abstract categories such as the different levels of linguistic representations. The present experiment
explored the effects of cueing attention to the orthographic, phonological
or semantic dimensions of visually presented words. On every trial, a cue
instructed participants to make a decision about the consonant-vowel
pattern, the syllabic structure or the meaning of upcoming words while
their brain activity was measured by means of a high-density EEG
recording system. Behavioral results showed that task difficulty and performance were matched across tasks. Analyses of the early ERP components showed that focusing attention on different linguistic attributes of
words modulates the bilateral P1 and also the amplitude of the posterior
N2 component over the left hemisphere. These early effects occurred in
the absence of change in the spatial distribution of the electric fields over
the scalp across tasks. Attention to specific linguistic attributes also modulated the amplitude of later, language-related potentials, such as the
N350 and the N400. In contrast to earlier modulations, these were accompanied by topographical change, implying a differential engagement of
brain regions across tasks. These results suggest that attention can differentially affect the processing of different types of linguistic representations depending on the task at hand.
A 32
THE EFFECT OF EXPECTANCY ON INHIBITION OF RETURN:
DETECTION VS. DISCRIMINATION PARADIGMS Shai
Gabay,
Avishai Henik; Ben Gurion University of the Negev — In exogenous attention experiments with a non-predictive cue, there is an early facilitation
(valid trials faster to process than invalid ones) that is replaced by inhibition (valid trials slower than invalid trials). The latter is termed inhibition
of return (IOR). Whereas the cue is non-predictive with respect to the
location of the target, it is commonly predictive with respect to when it
will appear. In most experiments there are an equal number of trials for
each cue-target interval (stimulus onset asynchrony, SOA), and as time
passes from the appearance of the cue, the probability of target presentation increases. It was suggested that this temporal information influences
IOR. In this research temporal cue predictability was manipulated by
using three SOA distributions. In the non-aging distribution, the cue was
non-predictive of target appearance, and in the accelerated distribution,
the cue was more predictive than in the commonly-used aging distribution. A detection paradigm revealed that IOR was not modulated by temporal information, regardless of the amount of attention allocated to the
cue. In addition, a sequential inhibitory effect was found, which was
modulated by temporal information. In a discrimination paradigm it was
found that the time course of the IOR was modulated by expectancy and
that in the case of no temporal predictability, there was no IOR. This

31

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

research demonstrates a dissociation between detection and discrimination tasks in their susceptibility to temporal predictability.
A 33
MODULATION OF WORKING-MEMORY RETRIEVAL BY SPATIAL
ORIENTING Anna C. Nobre, Ivan C. Griffin, Anling Rao; University of
Oxford, UK — We investigated whether orienting attention to a spatial
location within an array maintained in working memory could facilitate
retrieval functions. Participants viewed arrays of one, two or four differently coloured crosses, followed by a spatially informative or neutral
retro-cue (1500-2500 ms after the array), and later by a probe stimulus
(500-1000 ms after the retro-cue). The task was to decide whether the
probe stimulus had been present in the array. In “spatial” trials, the retrocue indicated the critical spatial location within the remembered array
with 100% validity. In “neutral” trials, the retro-cue provided no spatial
information. Behavioural results showed that spatially informative retrocues improved both accuracy and response times for making decisions
based upon retrieval from working memory. In addition, spatial retrocues attenuated performance decrements in accuracy and response times
related to increasing working-memory load. Event-related potentials
recorded during retrieval of the probe item showed effects of workingmemory load over a frontal-central potential peaking around 220ms
(P220) and a broadly distributed central potential peaking around 320ms
(N320). Spatial orienting significantly diminished load effects in the
ERPs. The mean amplitude of the N320 increased linearly with increasing
working-memory load in trials with neutral retro-cues. However, this
potential was greatly diminished and showed significantly less loadrelated modulation when spatial retro-cues facilitated working-memory
retrieval. The findings provide the first evidence that the facilitatory
effects of spatial orienting in the working memory domain are at least
partially mediated by modulating working-memory retrieval.
A 34
COMPETING FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS AND INTRASUBJECT VARIABILITY A.M. Clare Kelly, Lucina Q. Uddin, F. Xavier
Castellanos, Michael P. Milham; The Phyllis Green and Randolph Cowen Institute
for Pediatric Neuroscience, NYU Child Study Center, New York — Competitive
relationships between brain networks observable during resting states
may represent a fundamental functional characteristic of the brain, influencing goal-directed behavior. It has been proposed that an antagonistic
relationship exists between the medial wall-based “default mode network”, commonly implicated in stimulus-independent, self-referential
functions, and a “task-positive” network that comprises brain regions
implicated in goal-directed cognitive tasks (Greicius, 2003). Here we
scanned 26 healthy controls (TR = 2000ms; TE = 30ms; flip angle =90, 40
slices) while they performed a slow event-related version of the Eriksen
flanker task. We found a relationship between the strength of the negative correlation between the default mode and task-positive networks
and behavioral variability on the flanker task, measured by either RT
standard deviation (SD) or coefficient of variation (CV; SD divided by
mean). The stronger the anticorrelation between spontaneous activity in
the default mode network and the task-positive attentional network, the
more consistent the behavioral performance. This effect appears to
depend on attentional demands; behavioral variability on higher demand
(incongruent) trials showed a stronger relationship with the anticorrelation than on low demand (congruent) trials. Intraindividual variability
may be an endophenotype for Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD), thus this method may prove useful in characterizing abnormalities present in this and other clinical disorders. Comparison of this control group to participants with ADHD awaits acquisition of additional
data.
A 35
VISUOSPATIAL
NEGLECT
IN
CHILDREN
FOLLOWING
STROKE Sabrina Smith1,2, Gray Vargas2, Anjan Chatterjee1; 1University
of Pennsylvania, 2Children's Hospital of Philadelphia — Introduction: Spatial neglect is more common and severe following right hemisphere

32

Attentional Processes: Visual

injury in adults. However, little is known about the nature and anatomic
correlates of spatial neglect in children. Objectives: To determine if spatial neglect occurs in children following perinatal or childhood stroke,
and to characterize the relationships between lesion location, age at time
of injury and the presence of neglect. Methods: Children (2-18 years) with
perinatal or childhood stroke were eligible. Neglect was assessed using 5
tasks: line bisection, cancellation, pre-attentive visual search, attentive
visual search and visual extinction. Results: 18 subjects (2y 0m-17y 8m)
participated. Neglect was present on at least one task in 67% of subjects
(8/17 line bisection, 4/17 cancellation, 3/18 pre-attentive visual search,
6/17 attentive visual search and 3/17 visual extinction). In addition, there
was a trend toward slower response to contralesional targets during
attentive search (paired t-test, p=0.061). Neglect was seen after perinatal
(6/9 subjects) and childhood (6/9 subjects) stroke, and following injury
to either left (8/12 subjects) or right (4/6 subjects) hemisphere. Of subjects with neglect, 4 were tested within 1 month of stroke, and 8 were
tested at least 6 months after stroke (10 months – 9 years 8 months). Conclusions: Mild spatial neglect often follows stroke in children and can be
detected years after stroke in some cases. Neglect occurs following injury
to either hemisphere, sustained perinatally or later in childhood. The
right hemisphere dominance for visuospatial attention seen in adults
may not yet be consolidated in pediatric populations.
A 36
EMOTIONAL WORD PROCESSING IN ATTENTION NETWORKS
INVESTIGATED WITH ERPS Philipp Kanske, Sonja A. Kotz; Max
Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences — A
processing
advantage for emotional words when compared to neutral words has
been found with different tasks, with different materials and in different
populations. This may result from an interaction of emotional and attentional processes. Emotional stimuli automatically attract attention (see
data from visual search, attentional blink, orienting and emotional Stroop
tasks). However, the question remains how exactly emotion and attention
interact? Posner & Petersen (1990) proposed a model of attention involving alerting, orienting and executive attention which can be studied with
the Attention Network Test (ANT, Fan et al., 2002). Here we presented
emotional words in a task similar to the ANT. To investigate interactions
of emotion with alerting and orienting, emotional words were presented
as cues in a cue-target design either predicting the spatial position of the
target, or being non informative, but alerting. To test for a possible interaction of emotion and executive attention the "Ericson flanker task" was
adapted. Emotional and neutral words were presented at fixation flanked
by the same word above and below the target word. Participants had to
judge the color of the target word which was either congruent or incongruent with the flanker words. Effects of attention and emotion were
found in the ERP, such as a congruency effect that was modulated by
emotional word status in the N2. We discuss the results in regard to the
theoretical implications of the attentional networks.
A 37
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF VISUAL BIASED COMPETITION IN
HUMAN EEG Sandra Fuchs, Matthias Müller; Institut für Allgemeine
Psychologie, Universität Leipzig — The biased competition model (Desimone & Duncan, 1995) hypothesises the mutually suppressive interaction
of objects in the visual field. This suppressive interaction is predicted to
be greatest when stimuli share the same receptive field of a neuron.
Attending to one of the stimuli releases that stimulus from suppression.
The present studies used frequency-coded steady-state visual evoked
potentials (SSVEPs) to test this prediction in multi-element displays in
human EEG. In a first experiment, subjects were instructed to perform a
target detection task at fixation while a flickering coloured picture stream
was either moving away or towards an additionally presented stationary
picture stream. Both streams flickered at different rates. We looked at the
time course of the SSVEP amplitude as a function of eccentricity. The
SSVEP amplitude for the stationary picture stream increased (outward
motion) and decreased (inward motion) at the time point, when the dis-

Attentional Processes: Visual

tance between stimuli reached roughly 4 degrees of visual angle. Thus,
enabling us to pinpoint the exact distance of beginning and ending sensory suppression between stimuli. In a second experiment, we included
an additional condition in which participants attended to the stationary
picture stream while a second stream was moving away. For the attended
stationary picture stream sensory suppression was cancelled out in case
of close picture stream separation. The results support the idea of suppressive interactions between competing stimuli and their release of suppression when attended and are in line with findings from intracranial
recordings in monkeys and recent fMRI findings in humans.
A 38
PARIETAL STIMULATION DESTABILIZES SPATIAL UPDATING
ACROSS SACCADIC EYE MOVEMENTS Jason Mattingley1, Adam
Morris2, Chris Chambers3; 1University of Queensland, 2University of
Melbourne, 3University College London — Mechanisms of spatial updating
are required to maintain accurate representations of visual space across
eye movements. Neurophysiological evidence suggests that spatial
updating is subserved by spatially-tuned neurons within the intraparietal
sulcus (IPS), which integrate the locations of visual stimuli on the retina
with signals from the eye muscles that indicate the position of the eyes
within the orbits. Here we examined the role of the IPS in spatial updating in human observers. We used transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) to transiently disrupt cortical activity while human subjects performed double-step saccades. Participants made successive saccades to
targets such that the retinal location of the second target had to be
updated using information about the first saccade. We stimulated three
right hemisphere sites: anterior and posterior IPS (IPSa and IPSp), and
primary somatosensory cortex. TMS was delivered at the onset or offset
of the first saccade. Accuracy of the second (remapped) saccade was
affected only for TMS over IPSp, and only for trials in which the first saccade was directed contralaterally. Specifically, we observed a significant
rightward rotation in second-saccade trajectories and an increase in gain
regardless of the timing of TMS, consistent with an over-estimation of the
eye displacement caused by the first saccade. In addition, TMS applied at
the offset of the first saccade increased variable error of the second saccade. Our findings suggest that the human IPSp integrates visual and saccade-related information to calculate metrics for spatial updating, and
implements this coordinate transformation at the completion of the saccade.
A 39
FASTER, MORE INTENSE! THE RELATION BETWEEN
ATTENTION-INDUCED
EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL
AMPLITUDES, AND SPEED OF RESPONDING Durk
Talsma,
Manon Mulckhuyse, Jan Theeuwes; Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam — Recent
studies have provided evidence for a neurobiological model of attention,
in which a fronto-parietal network of brain areas is responsible for orienting, shifting, and maintaining the focus of attention. These control areas
are hypothesized to send biasing signals to perceptual brain areas, which
have the effect that the sensitivity of perceptual areas responding to the
attended (i.e. relevant) stimulus features are increased, whereas the sensitivity of perceptual areas responsive to irrelevant stimulus features are
attenuated. Such a model would predict that a direct relation between the
strength of attentional orienting and; a) an enhancement of sensory
responses in visual cortex to attended stimuli, and b) a decrease in
response time. Here we examined this prediction by relating the amplitude attention-shift related ERP components to reaction-times. This was
done using Posner’s symbolic cueing paradigm. A cue predicted the location of an imperative stimulus (60% valid, 20% non-informative, and 20%
invalid) to which participants were required to make a speeded twochoice response. Validly cued trials were sorted according to reaction
time. ERPs differed systematically as a function of response time. All validly cued trials showed a shift-related positivity in the cue-target interval,
but this effect was attenuated on the slowest trials, indicating a reduction
of attentional effectiveness. Imperative stimuli elicited P1 and N1 compo-

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

nents, of which the N1 varied as a function of reaction time. Faster
responses corresponded with a larger N1 amplitude, suggesting a direct
correspondence between the efficiency of stimulus processing and the
sensitivity of visual cortex..
A 40
MECHANISMS CONTRIBUTING TO AGE-RELATED DECLINE IN
WORKING MEMORY Hyemi Chong1,2 Jenna Riis1,2, Scott McGinnis1,2,
David Wolk3, Phillip Holcomb4, Kirk Daffner1,2; 1Harvard Medical School,
2Brigham and Women's Hospital, 3University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
4
Tufts University — Studies have suggested that the behavioral cost (reaction time (RT) and accuracy) of increasing working memory (WM) load is
greater in old than young individuals. Event-related potential (ERP)
studies using the n-back task, which requires frequent updating of WM,
may help elucidate the mechanisms underlying age-related decline in
WM performance, with P3 amplitude serving to index the amount of processing resources allocated to updating WM. While ERPs were recorded,
old and young subjects completed a visual n-back paradigm with 3 levels
of difficulty (0-back, 1-back, 2-back). Preliminary analyses indicate that
the magnitude of the increase in RT and decrease in hit rate between the
1-back and 2-back conditions was greater for old than young subjects.
The overall P3 amplitude was substantially larger for old than young
subjects under the 0-back and 1-back conditions, but of similar magnitude under the 2-back condition. Subjects produced the following patterns for P3 amplitude—young: 0-back = 1-back << 2-back; old: 0-back <
1-back = 2-back. The results suggest that old subjects perform the 0-back
and 1-back tasks less efficiently, appropriating more resources than
young subjects. Old subjects increase resource allocation needed for the
1-back task, with only a mild decline in performance, but appear to
approach the upper limit of their capacity at that level. Under the 2-back
task, the mismatch between limited resources and task demands produces a large decrement in performance not observed in young subjects,
who successfully appropriate additional resources to manage the 2-back
task.
A 41
DISRUPTION
OF
REMAPPING OF IOR
AFTER TMS
STIMULATION OF THE PARIETAL CORTEX Martijn
van
Koningsbruggen1, Shai Gabay2, Avishai Henik2, Robert Rafal1; 1University of
Wales, Bangor, 2Ben-Gurion University of the Negev — Converging
evidence suggests that a corollary discharge signal, generated in the superior colliculi, is used to update the visual scene following eye movements.
Inhibition of return (IOR), a tag that biases against detecting new signals
at a recently stimulated location, is also updated with every eye movement. Patients with unilateral lesions in the intraparietal cortex are
impaired in the remapping of IOR in both visual fields. In 14 healthy participants we applied TMS over the right parietal cortex 3cm posterior and
lateral to the vertex, and at a vertex control site. Two pulses at 110% were
applied 150ms after the onset of an eye movement that was made after a
visual cue. Next, subjects responded, by means of a simple key-press, to
onset of a target that appeared either at a previous cued or uncued location. We found that rTMS over the right parietal cortex, but not vertex,
resulted in a remapping deficit similar to the one found in patients, i.e. a
remapping deficit in both visual fields. In a second experiment we demonstrated that rTMS had no effect on IOR when re-mapping of the visual
was not required. MRI was obtained in 5 participants to confirm stimulations site. The location corresponded to the region of maximal overlap in
the patient study: the anterior intraparietal sulcus near its junction with
the post-central sulcus. We are now mapping the IPS to determine the
specificity of the location required for spatial remapping and testing for
hemispheric asymmetries.
A 42
ANXIETY MODULATES AN ATTENTIONAL BLINK TO FEARFUL
AND NEUTRAL FACES Polly Peers, Andrew Lawrence, Andy Calder;
MRC Cognition & Brain Science Unit, Cambridge — Selective
attention
involves the differential processing of different stimuli, and has wide-

33

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

spread psychological and neural consequences. Attentional mechanisms
act to prioritise information on the basis of both “bottom-up” stimulus
saliency and “top down”, behavioural relevance. Another source of bias
may come from the influence of emotion states, for example fear and anxiety. The attentional blink (AB) paradigm is thought to measure the time
course of attention to a particular target. Participants are required to
report the identities of 2 targets presented within a stream of distractors.
Performance on the 2nd target (T2) is markedly impaired if it appears
within 500ms of the 1st (T1). Here we use neutral and fearful T1 faces and
examined the differential effects of emotion expressions on attention to
the 2nd neutral target (T2), in both a behavioural study and a version of
the task adapted for fMRI. Behaviourally we found the usual recovery of
T2 performance as the SOA between T1 & T2 increased, but no effect of
T1 expression or interaction. Dividing the sample into low and high anxiety groups, however, revealed an interaction between anxiety and T1
expression on T2 performance, with low anxious individuals showing a
smaller blink following a fearful T1 and high anxious individuals showing the reverse effect. These data are consistent with the notion that the
competitive advantage for threat-related stimuli can be modulated by
emotion state. The neural basis of differential attentional effects of processing neutral and fearful stimuli is examined.
A 43
SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF VISUAL ATTENTION ACROSS
CUED AND UNCUED LOCATIONS: AN ERP STUDY William
Bush, Lisa Sanders, Kyle Cave; University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Behavioral and event-related potential (ERP) studies have shown that visual
attention can be spread across multiple locations in a flexible manner.
However the results of these studies do not all support the same model of
how attention is distributed. This experiment tested whether the typical
attention-related amplification of visually evoked potentials is evenly
distributed across locations or graded such that attention effects decrease
as distance from the central cued location increases. Using a sustained
attention ERP paradigm, we examined the spatial distribution of attention across one, three, and five adjacent cued locations within an array of
12 locations equidistant from a central fixation point. The paradigm also
afforded a comparison of ERPs elicited by visual stimuli at uncued locations to address hypotheses concerning the sharpness of attentional
boundaries. Selective attention modulated the amplitude of the posteriorly distributed P1 and N1 components. Within a set of cued locations,
differences in the attention effects on visually evoked components contralateral to stimulus presentation suggest selective attention is applied in
a graded manner under these conditions. Additionally, the response to
stimuli at uncued locations adjacent to the cued area is larger in amplitude than that evoked by visual onsets in the same uncued location when
the cued area is further away. We also found evidence that the amount of
attentional resources allocated to a central location is not decreased when
attention is spread over 1, 3, or 5 locations. Results will be discussed in
terms of competing models of visual spatial attention.
A 44
THREAT-EVOKED ANXIETY MODULATES ATTENTIONAL
RESOURCE DISTRIBUTION Heleen
Slagter, Iseult Beets, Tom
Johnstone, Alexander Shackman, Carien Van Reekum, Richard Davidson;
University of Wisconsin — The brain has difficulty processing two temporally close meaningful events, as is evidenced by the “attentional blink”
(AB) deficit: If two targets are presented within 500 ms and among distracters in a rapid sequence, correct identification of the first target (T1)
hinders identification of the second target (T2). This deficit is thought to
result from competition between the two targets for limited attentional
resources. To gain a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying
resource distribution, in two experiments, a threat-of-mild-electric-shock
procedure was used to manipulate the emotional relevance of T1 and T2.
In both experiments, participants performed an AB task while safe from
getting shocked and under two shock conditions, ThreatT1 and ThreatT2,
in which T1 and T2, respectively, were associated with delivery of a

34

Memory: False Memory

shock. We hypothesized that more attentional resources would be
devoted to the target paired with the shock, resulting in a bigger blink in
ThreatT1 compared to ThreatT2. Results from the first psychophysiological experiment (n=16) showed that the threat-of-shock manipulation
induced anxiety (amplified corrugator electromyography under threat)
and affected attentional resource allocation: A bigger AB was observed in
ThreatT1 compared to ThreatT2. In addition, results from a second functional magnetic resonance imaging experiment investigating the neural
mechanisms underlying effects of threat-evoked anxiety on attentional
resource distribution, suggested greater activation in a network of frontoparietal brain areas in T2 seen vs. T2 not-seen trials under safety conditions. Results from further analyses examining effects of threat-evoked
anxiety on brain activation patterns will be presented.
A 45
FLEXING SELECTIVE ATTENTION: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES OF SHIFTING BETWEEN EARLY AND LATE
SELECTIVE ATTENTION Jane Couperus; Hampshire College — Behavioral and electrophysiological studies suggest that the level of perceptual
load can shift attentional selection between early and late stages of visual
processing (Lavie et al., 2004, Vogel et al., 2004). However, only behavioral work has shown the ability to move flexibly between early and late
selection within a single task. The present investigation extends this
work to show flexibility in the locus of selective attention within a single
task using electrophysiological methods. A modified spatial oddball task
at high perceptual load was presented under two conditions, 1) when
early attentional selection was possible due to a predictive spatial cue,
and 2) when only late selection was possible due to the simultaneous presentation of the spatial cue and target. Behavioral results replicate previous findings showing selective attention can shift between early and late
stages of processing as a function of task demands. ERP results paralleled behavioral findings showing greater P1 and P300 amplitude in the
predictive cue condition. However, no P1 differences were found in the
simultaneous cue condition while the P300 amplitude differences
remained.

Memory: False Memory
A 46
FALSE RECOGNITION IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE AND IN
NORMAL AGING Francesca De Anna1,2, Serge Kinkinghneum1, Eve
Attali1, Bruno Dubois1,2, Gianfranco Dalla Barba1, 1INSERM U610, 2Hôpital
Pitié-Sâlpetrière, Paris, France — False recognition in Alzheimer’s disease
(AD) patients has been explored experimentally using the Deese/Roediger-McDermott (DRM) paradigm, in which subjects are presented with
semantically associated words that converge on a critical non-presented
item. The aim of this study is to investigate the mechanisms underlying
the production of false recognitions in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and in
normal aging. Three groups of subjects participated in the study: 14 very
mild impaired AD patients, 13 elderly age and education matched controls, and 10 young normal controls. In order to study false recognition,
we used the DRM paradigm. Subjects studied six lists of 12 words,
adapted for the French population from the original DRM paradigm.
Immediately following the study phase, subjects were given a recognition
memory task, in which subjects were presented with a list of 48 words
which included studied words, critical lure, and unrelated words. The
results showed that patients produced significantly less false recognitions
of the critical lure (52%) than elderly normal controls (71%), and less, but
not significantly, than young normal controls (63,5%). About correct
detections, the AD patients performed worse (53%) than both elderly
(69%) and young normal controls (74%). These results show that AD
patients produced less false recognition that both elderly and young normal control, suggesting that a semantic memory deficit, that our AD
patients have, is likely to decreases the probability of producing false recognition of semantically associated lures.

Memory: False Memory

A 47
PRODUCTION OF INTRUSIONS IN PATIENTS WITH
ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE:EFFECTS OF DIVIDED ATTENTION ON
ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL PROCESSES. Eve Attali, Francesca
De Anna, Bruno Dubois, Gianfranco Dalla Barba; INSERM U610 — Alzheimer’s disease patients (AD) do not only show a memory deficit, but also
suffer from memory distortions like intrusions. Several authors showed
that divided attention at encoding, but not at retrieval, significantly
reduce memory performance. This study investigates the effects of
divided attention at encoding and at retrieval on episodic memory in AD
and its possible differential role in the production of intrusions. Methods:
Twenty AD patients and 20 normal controls (NC) participated in the
study. They were instructed to remember three different types of stories
(unknown stories, well known fairy tales, and modified fairy tales) under
three conditions: -1: free encoding/ free recall -2: divided attention at
encoding/ free recall -3: free encoding/ divided attention at recall.
Results: -Group effect: AD patients produced fewer correct responses but
more intrusions than NC. Condition effect: divided attention at encoding
was associated with both a decrease of memory performance and an
increase of intrusions whereas divided attention at retrieval had little
effect on both the accuracy of the recall and the number of intrusions.
Type of story effect: the well known fairy tales were the best recalled and
the modified fairy tales generated the most intrusions. Conclusion: The
greater number of intrusions when divided attention was provided at
encoding than at retrieval suggests that encoding processes might be
strongly involved in the generation of intrusions. The type of intrusions
demonstrates that the firmly established semantic information interferes
with the recall of the episodic representation of the modified version.
A 48
IMPULSIVE- AND PREMEDITATED- VIOLENT OFFENDERS
DISPLAY
DIFFERENT
PATTERNS
OF
ATTENTIONAL
DISENGAGEMENT FROM NEGATIVE FACIAL EXPRESSIONS
Chiao-Yun Chen1,2, Chi-Hung Juan1,3, Daisy Hung1, 1National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National
Central University, Jhongli, Taiwan, 4Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
University College London, United Kingdom, 5Institute of Linguistics,
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan — Angry faces contain potentially provoking information, thus anger-prone individuals may tend to allocate their
attention to angry faces longer than normal people. Using behavioral and
ERP measures, this study adopted a Posner’s orienting task to determine
whether negative stimuli draw visual attention, or whether the violent
offenders are incapable to disengage from threatening stimuli efficiently
once such stimuli have been attended to. A face cue was presented in one
of the peripheral boxes followed by a target. The cue correctly predicted
the target location in 75% of the trials. In the remaining trials, the target
appeared in the location opposite to the cue. The behavioral results
showed that impulsive-violent offenders took longer to localize a target
in invalid trials in which the angry faces were served as cues. This pattern
of results did not appear in invalid trials with sad, fearful, happy or neutral faces cues. The ERP data also showed that the centrofrontal N2 for
impulsive-violent offenders was absent in the angry-invalid condition.
As for premeditated-violent offenders, the behavioral data indicated that
premeditated-violent offenders could easily disengage from the wrong
cued location with a sad face. Compared with the control group, the premeditated-violent group showed an earlier N2 latency in sad invalid condition. The data obtained here suggest that such a task is likely to reflect
different underlying mechanisms between impulsive and premeditated
violence.
A 49
THE IMPACT OF INTENTIONAL DECEPTIONS ON THE
MISINFORMATION EFFECT Scott Meek, Michelle Phillips, Adam Kirk,
Jennifer Vendemia; University of South Carolina — The influence of memory encoding on deceptive responses was measured across two experi-

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

ments that investigated reaction times (RTs) and event-related potentials
(ERPs) with 120 college-aged participants. Previous studies of deception
required manipulations of information that was considered familiar
knowledge for participants. The current study created participant
responses that were dependent on information presented through a misinformation paradigm. In this paradigm post-event information interferes with the encoding and storage of original events. These effects are
then examined during the retrieval phase. Participants were balanced
across truthful and deceptive groups and asked to respond to questions
related to the information presented. Data from the first study indicated
when responding to misinformation participants had significantly longer
reaction times (M = 870.98, SE = 42.22) than when responding to truthful
information (M = 734.52, SE = 26.75, F (1, 68) = 10.52, p = .002). HD-ERPs
were recorded in the response phase of the second experiment using a
high-density geodesic sensory net (Electrical Geodesics, Inc), and then
analyzed with principal components. The appearance of a late occurring
negative (N4) waveform, commonly related to response congruity, indicates the desired memory encoding effects. Additionally, evidence from
both studies supports the role of workload in deception. The findings are
used to support the relationship between memory processing, executive
functions, and the act of deception.
A 50
REMEDIATING FALSE MEMORY ERRORS WITH CORRECTIVE
FEEDBACK: AN ERP STUDY Jennifer
Mangels, Brian Maniscalco,
Taylor Joerger; Columbia University — Many studies find that presentation
of semantic associates elicits high-confidence false alarms (HCFAs) to
non-presented, but highly-related lures (Desse-Roediger-McDermott
[DRM] paradigm). Although this effect has proven difficult to eliminate
or even reduce, we recently demonstrated that corrective feedback was
effective in correcting erroneous responses to general knowledge questions, particularly when answers were initially endorsed with high compared to low confidence (“hypercorrection effect”). Extending this
finding to the DRM paradigm, we examined whether HCFAs to related
lures could similarly exhibit hypercorrection when immediate feedback
was provided. Thirty subjects studied 28 DRM lists, then took a recognition test (first test) in which they made old/new decisions (with confidence ratings) to targets, highly-related lures, and unrelated lures. ERPs
were measured to immediate feedback that awarded points based on
accuracy (+/-) and confidence (1-4) of retrieval. Subjects then took a surprise retest for old and new items presented at first test, providing an
opportunity to correct initial errors. Highly-related lures elicited higherconfidence FAs compared to unrelated lures. Feedback to HCFAs, which
resulted in greater point penalties, elicited a larger frontal P3 compared
to LCFAs. Replicating the hypercorrection effect, HCFAs also were more
likely to be corrected at retest than LCFAs. However, a strong orienting
response to the negative feedback was not necessarily beneficial to error
correction, as individuals demonstrating a larger hypercorrection effect
had smaller frontal P2 and P3s overall. The ability of error feedback to
update response associations appears to be a non-monotonic function of
the neural orienting response.
A 51
NEGATIVITY-INDUCED RECOGNITION BIAS FOR EMOTIONAL
FACES IS PRESERVED IN ELDER ADULTS: EVIDENCE FROM
EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIALS. Katja Werheid, Sandro Knorr,
Maria Gruno, Norbert Kathmann; Humboldt University at Berlin — Recent cognitive research has evidenced that negative emotion can induce a recognition bias in terms of enhanced true and false recognition. Assuming that
biased recognition may result from superior encoding paired with a tendency to consider studied as well as non-studied emotional items as
familiar, we investigated if this phenomenon is subject to age-related
change. Event-related potentials and recognition performance were
investigated in young and elder adults (n=16, mean age 25 vs. 67 years)
who performed an old/new classification task for neutral and angry
faces. Half of the faces had been previously studied, the remaining faces

35

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

were lures. The analysis of event-related potentials focused on the late
parietal positivity between 400 and 700 ms after stimulus presentation,
which is known to be enhanced by emotional content as well as by successful recollection in terms of a ‘parietal old-new effect’. Young adults
were better at discriminating studied faces from lures and showed a
larger parietal old-new effect than elder adults. However, both groups
showed enhanced true and false recognition for negative compared to
neutral faces, thereby confirming previous findings of a negativityinduced recognition bias. Correspondingly, negative compared to neutral
faces elicited larger parietal old-new effects and larger amplitude differences between correctly and erroneously classified lures in both groups.
In sum, both behavioural and electrophysiological data support the view
that the negativity-induced recognition bias is preserved in elder adulthood and relies both on superior encoding and biased responding during
retrieval.
A 52
OLDER ADULTS CANNOT LEARN TO AVOID MAKING HIGHCONFIDENCE MEMORY ERRORS Sameer
Bawa, Chad Dodson;
University of Virginia — The current study shows that whereas younger
adults can learn to avoid making high-confidence memory errors, older
adults cannot. Participants viewed a series of word pairs. On a subsequent memory test, we presented participants with the first word of each
pair and asked them to generate the second, and we also asked them to
rate their confidence in the accuracy of each response. Following the
memory test, we showed participants a graph depicting the correspondence between their confidence ratings and their actual memory performance (i.e., confidence-accuracy calibration) and trained them on how to
interpret the graph. After training, participants viewed another series of
word pairs. Just as before, we presented participants with the first word
of each pair and asked them to generate the second, and we also collected
confidence ratings for each response. Our findings indicated that both
younger and older adults showed improved confidence-accuracy calibration from the first test to the second test as a result of training. However,
whereas younger adults showed a reduction in high-confidence memory
errors from the first test to the second test, older adults did not. We take
these findings to suggest that 1) older adults are prone to committing
high-confidence memory errors, and even after training these errors
account for aging related differences in memory performance and that 2)
there is a “realism” to high-confidence memory errors for which decision-making biases alone cannot account.

Memory: Memory Disorders
A 53
ROLE OF THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBES IN RELATIONAL
MEMORY: NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FROM A CUED
RECOGNITION PARADIGM Irene Kan1, Kelly Giovanello1,2,3, Mieke
Verfaellie1; 1Boston VA Healthcare System, 2Harvard University, 3Athinoula
A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, MGH/MIT/HMS — In
this
study, we examined the role of the hippocampus in relational memory by
comparing item recognition performance in amnesic patients with medial
temporal lobe (MTL) damage and their matched controls. Specifically,
we investigated the contribution of associative memory to item recognition using a cued recognition paradigm. Control subjects studied cue-target pairs once, whereas amnesic patients studied cue-target pairs six
times. Following study, subjects made recognition judgments about targets that were presented either alone (no cue), with the originally presented cue (same cue), or with a cue that had been presented with a
different target (recombined cue). Controls had higher recognition scores
in the same cue than in the recombined cue condition, indicating that
they benefited from the associative information provided by the same
cue. By contrast, amnesic patients did not. This was true even for a subgroup of patients whose item recognition was matched to that of the con-

36

Memory: Memory Disorders

trols. These data provide further support for the idea that the
hippocampus plays a critical role in relational memory, even when associative information need not be retrieved intentionally.
A 54
IMPAIRMENT OF SOURCE MEMORY IN PATIENTS WITH
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER: EQUIVALENT CURRENT
DIPOLE ANALYSIS Young youn Kim1, Myung-Sun Kim2, Hwee Wee1,
So Young Yoo1, Jun Soo Kwon1; 1Seoul National University College of
Medicine, 2Sungshin Women’s University — We
investigated
cortical
source localization of old/new effects in source memory task in patients
with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) by employing the equivalent
current dipole (ECD) model with 64 channels EEG and a realistic head
model. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded while 14 OCD
patients and 14 age-, sex-, handness-, and educational level-matched
healthy control subjects performed recognition tasks for spoken words
(items) or for the voice of the speaker in spoken words (sources). In the
item memory task, both the controls and OCD patients showed more
positivity to correctly recognized old words than to correctly judged new
words at 300-700 ms and faster response time to the old words than to the
new words. In the source memory task, the controls showed ERP old/
new effect at 400-600 ms, while the OCD patients did not. OCD patients
showed significantly lower source accuracy and prolonged response
times to the old words with accurate voice judgments compared to the
controls. For both groups, ERP generators elicited by source correct and
correct rejection conditions were determined to be located in the frontal
lobe. The right ECD powers of ERP generators elicited by the source correct conditions of the OCD patients were significantly higher than those
of the controls. The OCD patients showed significantly altered hemispheric asymmetry of ECD power during source memory retrieval. These
results indicate that OCD patients have preserved item memory, but
impaired source memory.
A 55
EXPLORING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ALZHEIMER’S
DISEASE, DELUSIONS, COGNITIVE DECLINE AND SEMANTIC
MEMORY. David O'Connor1,2, Susan Rossell2; 1University of Melbourne,
2Mental Health Research Institute — Delusions in Alzheimer’s disease
(AD) are a common symptom that can have a debilitating effect on the
lives of sufferers and their carers. The authors reviewed studies published between 1992 and 2005 that reported on the prevalence and phenomenology of delusions in AD, as well as any relationship with
cognitive decline. Empirical investigations and reviews were included in
our research but were dependent upon quantitative data on the above
factors being available. Data from a meta-analysis shows the overall
prevalence for delusions in AD is 36%. There is, however, a broad range
of reported prevalence rates across studies, from 9% to 70%. Variations in
prevalence rates are due to methodological differences, such as inconsistent consideration of neuroleptics use, participants being included at various stages of AD and failure to consider other neuropsychiatric
symptoms. One study addressed factors that lead to inconsistent findings, and subsequently reported that 34% of a sample of AD patients
were found to experience delusions, and that these patients were at a
higher risk of functional and cognitive decline. The phenomenology of
AD delusions has not been adequately addressed; neither has whether
AD delusions relate to specific cognitive deficits particularly semantic
memory. Our review confirms that delusions in AD are common and are
related to greater rates of cognitive decline. In future research, the
authors will characterise the relationship between AD, delusions and
cognitive decline. Using a variety of tasks, including priming, specific
emphasis will be placed on semantic memory. Previous methodological
issues will also be addressed.

Memory: Memory Disorders

A 56
DOES AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL EXPERIENCE ENHANCE OBJECT
NAMING AND USE? NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FROM
SEMANTIC DEMENTIA AND ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Evangelia G.
Chrysikou1, Tania Giovannetti2, Denene M. Wambach2, Abigail C. Lyon2,
Murray Grossman1, Katy Cross1, David J. Libon3,4; 1University of
Pennsylvania, 2Temple University, 3University of Medicine & Dentistry in
New Jersey, 4School of Osteopathic Medicine — Earlier studies have reported
a familiar objects advantage for naming and use in semantic dementia
(Bozeat et al., 2002a; Funnell, 1995a, 2001; Snowden et al., 1994, 1996);
however, previous research has not examined performance on a variety
of tasks that would address the boundaries of patients’ preserved semantic knowledge for familiar items. The aim of the present research was to
address whether autobiographical experience, as organized in scripts,
provides support for semantic memory and can be generalized across
instances of the same object category, or, alternatively, repeated exposure
to an object primarily enhances one’s sensorimotor skills regarding its
use, which do not depend on semantic knowledge and which are generally confined to personally familiar objects. Four semantic dementia and
three Alzheimer’s disease patients were assessed on tasks of semantic,
procedural, and episodic memory for familiar objects and for perceptually similar and different object analogs. The tasks included: naming, gesture, personal object decision, object use judgment, and script generation.
Results revealed a double dissociation between SD and AD patients for
semantic and episodic memory tasks. Although SD patients naming ability was impaired, they showed significant preservation of semantic memory that generalized to perceptually similar and perceptually different
object exemplars. The findings support a dynamic semantic memory system that interacts with procedural and autobiographical knowledge for
object identification and use. These results may have important implications for various rehabilitation interventions for semantic dementia,
which would prolong the patients’ independence in activities of daily living until the late stages of the disease.
A 57
MEMORY FUNCTION DURING WADA TESTING USING SODIUM
AMYTAL VERSUS BREVITAL IN EPILEPSY SURGERY PATIENTS
Fani Andelman, Svetlana Kipervasser, Miri Neufeld, Irith Reider-Groswasser,
Itzhak Fried; Sourasky Medical Center, — Purpose:
The
intracarotid
amobarbital procedure (IAP) is the standard method for lateralization of
memory function, used to predict the risk of post-operative amnesia in
epilepsy surgery patients (Milner et al, 1962). Because of recent shortage
of amobarbital supply sodium methohexital, or brevital, has been used in
some centers as an anesthetic agent (Buchtel et al 2002; Grote and Meador, 2005). The purpose of this study was to compare the neuropsychological effects of Wada testing using IAP versus intracarotid brevital
procedure (IBP). Methods: 32 patients who underwent the IAP were compared with 20 patients who underwent IBP. Results of the Wada ipsilateral and contralateral memory scores in these patients were analyzed and
compared. Results: No significant difference was found between Wada
contralateral memory scores (first injection) using the IAP (M=81.17%) or
IBP (M=84.91%). However, significant differences in memory scores of
the hemisphere ipsilateral to the epileptogenic focus (second injection)
were observed between IAP (M=30.74%) versus IBP (M=55.26%)
(p=0.01). The relationship between ipsilateral Wada memory scores and
the post-operative standard neuropsychological memory test scores was
higher for the IAP than for IBP patients for most memory measures (e.g.,
RAVLT_5, p=0.02). Conclusion: These results suggest that although both
procedures, IAP and IBP, seem to predict post-surgical amnesia, they
raise the question of which of these tests more accurately reflects the
extent of lateralized memory dysfunction. In conclusion, the narcotic
drug used during the Wada procedure may be a significant factor in prediction of post-operative memory changes, crucial in cases of "reversed
memory asymmetry".

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

A 58
CHANGES IN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL
NETWORK FOLLOWING REMOVAL OF FUNCTIONALLY
ACTIVE REGIONS IN THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE Mary Pat
McAndrews1,2, Donna Rose Addis1,2,3, Morris Moscovitch4,2, Monica Shah1;
1
Toronto Western Research Institute, University Health Network, 2University
of Toronto, 3Harvard University, 4Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest
Hospital, Toronto — Neuroimaging and lesion evidence show the hippocampus is a key structure in the network supporting autobiographical
memory (AM) retrieval. We were interested in how damage to, and
removal of, this critical node alters the engagement and connectivity of
the AM network. Participants included 11 left temporal lobe epilepsy
(LTLE) patients and 14 age-matched controls. An event-related fMRI paradigm was used; participants retrieved AMs to personalized cues and
completed semantic retrieval tasks. AM-related activity in the hippocampus and across the AM network was significantly reduced in LTLE
patients relative to controls. Furthermore, the strength of effective connections involving the left hippocampus was also reduced, but those
between left parahippocampal/retrosplenial cortex and left medial prefrontal cortex (LMPFC) were increased. Using a case-study approach,
three LTLE patients were re-scanned approximately one year after surgical removal of the left hippocampus, and AM-related activity from presurgical and post-surgical scans was compared. Two of the three patients
engaged residual left hippocampal tissue pre-surgically; removal of this
functionally-active tissue resulted in increased activity in LMPFC but not
in the undamaged right hippocampus. Furthermore, there was evidence
of significant increases in correlations between left retrosplenial and
LMPFC regions. The third patient did not engage residual left hippocampal tissue pre-surgically, engaging only the right hippocampus; post-surgically, there were no changes in hippocampal or LMPFC activity. In
summary, removal of functionally-active tissue in the left hippocampus
has significant consequences for the engagement and connectivity of the
AM network, over and above those changes associated with left hippocampal damage in LTLE.
A 59
DIFFERENTIAL BRAIN AREAS ARE INVOLVED IN ASSOCIATIVE
LEARNING IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE AND ELDERLY
CONTROLS Jorien van Paasschen, Linda Clare, David Linden, Robert
Woods, Michael Rugg; University of Wales, Bangor — Memory
impairments observed in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) are thought to be distinctly
different from age-related memory decline in nondemented aging. It has
been suggested that AD patients make use of alternative networks during
a memory task to compensate for loss of function in medial temporal lobe
regions. We explored differences in brain activation pattern in encoding
and retrieval processes during an associative learning task, using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Using a blocked design, 7
people with AD and 11 nondemented older adults (older controls) were
scanned while performing a face-name association task. During encoding, nondemented older adults demonstrated higher activation than AD
patients in bilateral frontal regions, right parietal lobe, and bilateral fusiform gyrus. During retrieval, higher activations were found in older
adults in bilateral middle frontal gyrus, left parietal lobule, fusiform
gyrus and extrastriate cortex. Notably, AD patients did not demonstrate
memory-related activation in left middle frontal areas or in left parietal
lobule. Compared to the older controls, AD patients showed increased
activity during encoding in the left precuneus, which was not observed in
the older control group. During retrieval AD patients recruited the left
posterior cingulate, whereas this area did not seem to be involved in
memory processes in the older control group. In line with previous findings, we suggest that AD patients show a different pattern of brain areas
recruited during associative memory processes. The recruitment of areas
not involved in memory in older adults may indicate that certain regions
play a compensatory role in AD.

37

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

A 60
RESPONSE BIAS IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE: EXAMINING
PICTURES VERSUS WORDS Ellen Beth, Brandon A. Ally, Jill D.
Waring, Andrew E. Budson; Edith Nourse Rogers Memorial Veterans Hospital,
Bedford, MA — Response bias is an important aspect of memory performance in Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) patients, as they show an abnormally
liberal response bias compared to healthy older adults. In a previous
study we found that despite changes in discrimination produced by varying the study and test list length, response bias remained remarkably stable in both patients with AD and older adult controls. We concluded that
memorial response bias is not affected by changes in discrimination or
study-test length. In the present experiment we investigated whether
changing study and test stimuli from words to pictures would alter
response bias in patients with AD. If so, it would suggest that these individuals demonstrate different memorial biases for different classes of
materials. If not, it may be that recognition response bias is stable for an
individual. Here we measured memory and frontal lobe function with
standard neuropsychological tests as well as recognition memory accuracy and response bias for pictures versus words in an experimental paradigm given to patients with mild AD. We found that the patients
showed a similar response bias for pictures and words—despite their
higher level of discrimination for pictures. Response bias did not correlate with standard measures of frontal function, but a more liberal bias
was related to worse performance on standard neuropsychological tests
of recognition memory. This correlation suggests that response bias for
an individual patient is associated with the severity of his or her memory
deficit and that it is unaffected by changes in stimulus modality and discrimination.
A 61
RECOLLECTION AND FAMILIARITY IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE:
AN EVALUATION OF RECOGNITION MEMORY USING
RECEIVER OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS ANALYSES. Carl A.
Gold, Brandon A. Ally, Andrew E. Budson; Edith Nourse Rogers Memorial
Veterans Hospital, Bedford MA, Boston University Alzheimer’s Disease
Research Center, Boston University, Boston MA; Brigham & Women’s
Hospital, Boston MA — Several studies of recognition memory in the
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) population have reported diminished veridical
recognition and elevated false recognition compared to healthy older
adults. Dual-process models of recognition memory posit that recognition decisions may be based on recollection or familiarity, one or both of
which may be impaired in AD. In an effort to characterize the recognition
memory deficits observed in AD in terms of recollection and familiarity,
we followed the procedures of Yonelinas, Kroll, Dobbins, Lazzara, and
Knight (1998) with AD patients and healthy older adult controls. Subjects
studied unrelated words under deep and shallow encoding conditions.
At test, subjects rated their memory for studied and unstudied items on a
six-point confidence scale. Hit rate and false alarm rate data were used to
form confidence-based receiver operating characteristics (ROCs). Examination of the ROCs of healthy older adults revealed robust recollection
for deeply encoded items and familiarity for shallowly encoded items.
The ROCs of AD patients were symmetrical for both deeply encoded and
shallowly encoded items, suggesting the presence of familiarity, but the
absence of recollection. The ROC of AD patients for deeply encoded
items was similar to the ROC for healthy older adults for shallowly
encoded items, suggesting the use of familiarity-based decisions. The
ROC of AD patients for shallowly encoded items depicted a nearly complete failure of memory. Our findings suggest that AD-related deficits in
recognition memory may be due to an absence of recollection, but a relative sparing of familiarity.

38

Memory: Memory Systems

Memory: Memory Systems
A 62
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND THE AGING BRAIN Agnes
Floel1,
Claus Willemer1, Karsten Kruger2, Caterina Breitenstein1, Frank Mooren2,
Stefan Knecht1; 1University Of Muenster, Germany, 2University Of Giessen,
Germany — Introduction: Human epidemiological and animal studies
have suggested beneficial effects of exercise on brain health and function,
particularly in aging populations. Methods: In an ongoing interventional
study examining the effects of regular physical activity on cognition and
learning abilities (finished in 12/06), baseline testing and analysis have
been completed so far.. 54 healthy elderly subjects (aged 55-78, mean 68;
BMI 24-39, mean = 28, education 8-20 years, mean = 11, RR syst. 90-166
mmHg, mean = 126; 34 female,) were assessed for level of physical activity and training status (questionnaire, lactate threshold, VO2max),
peripheral neurotrophin/neurotransmitters levels, cerebral gray and
white matter density, neuropsychological testing, and performance on
verbal and motor learning tasks. Results: Multiple regression analysis
revealed that frequent physical activity positively predicted success in
associative verbal learning and category fluency, after controlling for
possible confounders (age, sex, BMI, blood pressure, and education).
Physical activity or aerobic fitness did not significantly predict long-term
memory or cognitive speed and flexibility in this cohort. Discussion:
Associative verbal learning and category fluency crucially depend on
hippocampal and prefrontal cortical structures. Better performance on
those tasks in elderly individuals that exercise regularly is well in line
with data showing that hippocampal and prefrontal structures are particularly sensitive to age-related decline, and may thus benefit most from
interventions like regular aerobic exercise that increase neurotransmitter/neurotrophin levels as well as neurogenesis. Analysis of neurotrophin /neurotransmitter levels, cerebral gray and white matter density,
and the interventional part of the study are ongoing.
A 63
DISSOCIABLE FRONTALLY MEDIATED EPISODIC RETRIEVAL
PROCESSES REVEALED BY EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS
Carina Fraser, Jane Herron, Ed Wilding; Cardiff University — Event-related
potentials (ERPs) were acquired during the test phases of two source
memory experiments in order to investigate the sensitivity of ERPs to
pre-frontally mediated memory retrieval processing operations. In both
experiments, an equal number of studied words were shown in red and
in green. The test list comprised words previously shown at study (old)
and unstudied words (new). Only half of the old words were shown in
the same colour at study and test. Experiment 1 required a single threeway old same colour/old different colour/new judgment at test, while
Experiment 2 required an initial old/new judgment, followed by a same/
different judgment. The accuracy of old/new and same/different judgments was very similar across experiments, while there were differences
between the neural activity associated with correct source judgments and
correct new judgments (ERP old/new effects). From 700 ms post-stimulus onwards, the ERP old/new effects over frontal scalp were right-lateralised to a greater degree in Experiment 2 than in Experiment 1,
suggesting that not entirely the same regions of prefrontal cortex (PFC)
were associated with correct source judgments in the two cases. In addition, the neural activity distinguishing correct versus incorrect source
judgments was not equivalent in the two experiments. These findings are
one of the first demonstrations that ERPs acquired during source
retrieval tasks index functionally distinct retrieval processing operations
that are likely to be supported by distinct regions of pre-frontal cortex.
A 64
CONSOLIDATION AND RETENTION IN PROCEDURAL-BASED
CATEGORIZATION W. Todd Maddox1, J. Vincent Filoteo2, Darrell A.
Worthy1; 1The University of Texas at Austin, 2UC San Diego/VASDHS — Information-integration (II) category acquisition is thought to be mediated by
a procedural-based categorization system in the striatum. To our knowl-

Memory: Memory Systems

edge no work has addressed consolidation and retention processes
within this system. The motor learning literature suggests that some procedures lead to good acquisition but poor retention, whereas others lead
to poor acquisition but good retention. II categorization might share
some characteristics of motor learning given their joint reliance on the
striatum. Maddox, Filoteo et al (2003, 2005) showed that continuous II
categories (composed of contiguous stimulus clusters) lead to better
acquisition then discontinuous II categories (composed of distinct stimulus clusters). We argued that the neural architecture of the striatum, in
which distinct cortical regions project to distinct sub-regions of the striatum, might account for this finding. This finding, along with the motor
learning literature, led to the hypothesis that continuous categories lead
to good acquisition but poor retention, whereas discontinuous categories
lead to poor acquisition but good retention. Participants completed 600trials of acquisition training in a 4-category continuous or discontinuous
II task. On each trial they saw a single line (with some length and orientation) and classified it into one of four categories. One-week later, participants returned to the laboratory and completed a second 600-trial
retention session. The results suggested good acquisition and poor retention for the continuous categories, but poor acquisition and good retention for the discontinuous categories. One potential explanation of this
interesting dissociation is that cholinergic striatal interneurons are vital
for developing a good long-term representation.
A 65
FMRI EVIDENCE FOR SELECTIVE EFFECTS OF NEGATIVE
EMOTION ON MEMORY FOR DETAIL Elizabeth Kensinger1,2, Rachel
Garoff-Eaton3,2, Daniel Schacter3,2; 1Boston College, 2Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging, 3Harvard University — Although some types of details
are better remembered for negatively emotional items than for nonemotional ones, emotion does not enhance memory for all types of details. In
the present fMRI study, we examined the encoding processes that lead a
person to remember the exact visual details of an object (an ability that is
enhanced for negatively emotional objects) and those that correspond
with accurate memory for which of two decisions were made about an
object (an ability not enhanced for negatively emotional objects). Results
revealed that activity in the right amygdala corresponded with enhanced
memory for a negative item’s visual details but not with enhanced memory for the decision made about an item. Furthermore, activity in an
affective-attentional network including the orbitofrontal cortex, striatum,
and anterior cingulate gyrus corresponded with enhanced memory for
the visual details of a negative item but was negatively correlated with
memory for the decision made about an item. These results emphasize
that amygdala engagement does not ensure successful encoding of all
details of a negative item’s presentation. The results further suggest that
some of the focal effects of emotion on memory for detail arise from
encoding factors: When individuals are more affectively focused on a
negative item, they appear to remember intrinsic item attributes (such as
the visual details of an item) but not details extrinsic to the item (such as
the decision made about an item).
A 66
AN ERP STUDY OF IDIOSYNCRATIC AND RULE-GOVERNED
ASPECTS OF MUSIC AND LANGUAGE Robbin Miranda, Michael
Ullman; Georgetown University — The neurocognition of idiosyncratic and
rule-governed knowledge in both music and language was examined
with an event-related potential (ERP) study of violations. In music, violations of idiosyncratic knowledge were in-key pitch deviants (in familiar
melodies) that followed musical rules but deviated from the actual melodies; rule violations were out-of-key pitch deviants that violated rules of
tonal harmony (in both familiar and unfamiliar melodies). In the language condition, in which auditory sentences were presented, idiosyncratic violations were semantically anomalous nouns, whereas rule
violations involved either subject-verb agreement violations or phrase
structure violations. We hypothesized that idiosyncratic violations in
both music and language would elicit N400 components previously

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

found for semantic violations in language, whereas rule violations in
both domains would elicit anterior negativities previously found for
grammatical violations in language and tonal violations in music. Moreover, based on our previous research of sex differences in language, we
expected females to show larger N400s than males to idiosyncratic violations in both domains. Rule violations in both music and language elicited anterior negativities followed by P600s, whereas idiosyncratic
violations in language elicited N400s. Idiosyncratic violations in familiar
melodies elicited anterior negativities and P600s, similar to those elicited
by rule violations in music. However, both types of violations in familiar
but not unfamiliar melodies also elicited a posterior negativity that may
be related to the N400. Differences between males and females, and
between musicians and non-musicians, will also be discussed.
A 67
THE BUILDING BLOCKS OF “DEFAULT” BRAIN ACTIVITY
Moshe Bar1, Elissa Aminoff2,1, Malia Mason1; 1Martinos Center for Biomedical
Imaging at MGH, Harvard Medical School, 2Harvard University — It is clear
that the brain is highly active independent of a task. What is remarkable
about the activity that corresponds to such a resting, default, state (Gusnard & Raichle 2001) is that the same network of regions is active across
participants, despite the fact that they are not engaged in an explicit task
during these periods. This suggests that the activity observed in these
regions reflects a set of cognitive operations spontaneously employed
when people are mentally unconstrained, rather than simply reflect a
random noise. Perhaps the most dominant account for the spontaneous
activity is that it arises when people engage in thought that is unrelated
to the external environment, and that this activity attenuates during
attentionally demanding tasks. We argue that this account is incomplete.
Specifically, because the tasks in which this default activity was observed
did not recruit the same cognitive processes that are engaged spontaneously, the differences during task performance were seen as a relative
deactivations. However, when the task itself relies on the same cognitive
elements that mediate spontaneous activity, which we propose is the continuous processing of associations, activity in the default network should
be significant also during task. This proposal stems from the striking
overlap observed between the default network regions and regions that
are consistently activated in tasks that recruit extensive associative processing (Bar & Aminoff 2003, Bar 2004, Aminoff et al. 2006). This overlap
is proposed here to reflect the extent to which associations provide the
principle basis of spontaneous thought.
A 68
SUPPRESSING RETRIEVAL OF AN UNWANTED MEMORY ALSO
DISRUPTS NEW EPISODIC ENCODING FOR EVENTS CLOSE IN
TIME Justin Hulbert, Ean Huddleston, Michael Anderson; University of
Oregon — Often, people confront reminders to experiences that they
would prefer not to think about and attempt control these unwanted
remindings by suppressing retrieval, a process shown to have lasting
consequences for that memory's later accessibility (Anderson & Green,
2001). In the Think/No-Think (TNT) procedure used to empirically study
such memory control, subjects typically learn a set of word pairs. In the
subsequent TNT phase, participants are presented a subset of the cue
words and, for each, are either instructed either to think of the associated
word (Think condition) or to prevent it from coming to mind (No-Think
condition). Subsequent cued-recall is worse for previously avoided
responses than for baseline items, which were initially learned but did
not participate in the TNT phase. In the current study, we examined
whether, in addition to the persistent inhibition of the targeted memory,
unrelated episodic experiences inserted between periods of Not-Thinking
would also be harder to retrieve later on. Participants made size or animacy judgments for novel words presented between TNT trials. Later,
we assessed recollection and familiarity for these incidentally encoded
items in a surprise recognition test. Recollection, as measured by source
memory, was selectively impaired for items encoded prior to No-Think
trials, compared to items encoded prior to Think trials. Importantly, the

39

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

magnitude of the source deficit correlated with the degree of TNTinduced memory suppression. These findings indicate that suppressing
episodic retrieval also interrupts memory consolidation for episodic
memories encoded immediately prior to the epoch of retrieval suppression.
A 69
CONTROLLING
RETRIEVAL
PROCESSING
IN
MEMORY
RETRIEVAL TASKS: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL DATA. Nicole
Bridson, Edward Wilding; Cardiff University, Wales, UK — Event-related
potentials (ERPs) were acquired in the test phases of memory tasks where
three classes of word were presented visually: (i) words encountered in a
study phase (studied words), (ii) words presented at test for the first time
(new words), and (iii) new words repeated after a lag of 7-9 intervening
words (repeated test words). In both experiments, participants
responded on one key to studied words (targets) and on another to
repeated test words (non-targets) and to new words. Study and test lists
were shorter in Experiment 2 than in Experiment 1, and the likelihood of
a correct target response was higher in Experiment 2. In both experiments, the focus for the ERP analyses was the left-parietal ERP old/new
effect, which is assumed to index recollection – recovery of qualitative
details about an event. There were reliable left-parietal ERP old/new
effects for targets and non-targets in Experiment 1, but for targets only in
Experiment 2. These findings are consistent with previous suggestions
that, when the likelihood of recollecting information about targets is
high, participants use the success or failure of an attempt to recollect target information as the basis for distinguishing between targets and all
other classes of test words. The findings in these two experiments are
important, because they generalise those obtained in previous work to a
different paradigm. They also emphasise that a reasonable degree of control over recollection of information associated with non-targets can be
exerted event when non-targets are likely to be associated with strong
memory traces.
A 70
DISSOCIABLE FRONTALLY MEDIATED EPISODIC RETRIEVAL
PROCESSES REVEALED BY EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS
Carina Fraser, Jane Herron, Edward Wilding; Cardiff University — Eventrelated potentials (ERPs) were acquired during two memory experiments
in order to investigate the sensitivity of ERPs to retrieval processing operations supported by the pre-frontal cortex (PFC). While informal inspection across studies suggests that ERPs index distinct retrieval processing
operations that are likely supported by PFC, there is little statistical evidence for this. In both experiments, an equal number of study words
were shown in red and in green. Test lists comprised studied (old) and
unstudied (new) words. Only half of the old words were shown in the
same colour at study and test. Experiment 1 required a single three-way
old same colour/old different /new judgment at test. Experiment 2
required an old/new judgment followed by a same/different judgment.
The accuracy of old/new and same/different judgments was similar
across experiments, while there were differences between the neural
activity associated with test words attracting correct colour and correct
new judgments (ERP old/new effects). From 700 ms post-stimulus
onwards, these ERP old/new effects over frontal scalp were right-lateralised to a greater degree in Experiment 2 than in Experiment 1, suggesting that not entirely the same regions of prefrontal cortex (PFC) were
associated with correct source judgments in the two cases. In addition,
the neural activity distinguishing correct versus incorrect source judgments was not equivalent in the two experiments. These findings are one
of the first demonstrations that ERPs acquired during source retrieval
tasks index functionally distinct retrieval processing operations that are
likely to be supported by distinct regions of PFC.

40

Memory: Memory Systems

A 71
DIFFERENCES IN PREFRONTAL INVOLVEMENT DURING
TEMPORAL CONTEXT AND SPATIAL SOURCE MEMORY David
Crane, M. Natasha Rajah; McGill University — Functional
neuroimaging
and neuropsychological studies have consistently found that the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is involved during the retrieval of past personal experiences. Recently neuroimaging studies have reported differential patterns
of PFC activity during the retrieval of perceptual and spatial source information versus the retrieval of temporal context information, in comparison to item recognition. However, only two studies have directly
compared spatial source and temporal memory retrieval. While these
studies showed differential activation in PFC, the structure of spatial versus temporal retrieval tasks and the instructions employed were not parallel. Thus, the differential PFC activity observed between these two
retrieval tasks may not reflect inherent differences in the processes
involved for source versus temporal recollection. They may instead
reflect the difference in the retrieval task demands, resulting in a differential recruitment of PFC-mediated executive control processes. In the current study we equate the structure and complexity of the encoding tasks
and retrieval questions so that equivalent executive control processes are
recruited. Healthy adult subjects participated in an event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study in which they performed temporal context memory and spatial source memory tasks, for
faces. The number of stimuli and responses were parametrically manipulated to control for task difficulty and strategic organization. Behavioral
results indicate that both temporal and spatial tasks have equivalent
accuracy results, while accuracy varies with task complexity. Preliminary
event-related results identified regional differences in PFC activity
related to stimulus and response number variance that were common
across temporal context and spatial source tasks.
A 72
AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION OF PROCESSES
SUPPORTING RECENCY JUDGMENTS. Kerrie
Grove, Edward
Wilding; Cardiff University — Event-related potentials (ERPs) were
acquired during a continuous recognition memory task, where visually
presented words were repeated after 5, 15 or 25 intervening words. For
each word old/new recognition memory judgments were made. Old
judgments also required judgements of recency (JORs), indicating how
far back in the list the old words had been encountered. According to
cognitive accounts, in continuous recognition memory tasks a strengthbased signal that decays over time is the principal basis on which JORs
are made. Two aspects of the ERP data acquired time-locked to the test
words are consistent with this view. First, for words repeated after 5
intervening items, ERPs associated with correct JORs were more positivegoing than those associated with incorrect JORs. Second, for words
repeated after 25 intervening items, the greater relative positivity was
associated with incorrect JORs. The ERP differences obtained were evident primarily at anterior locations from 300-700 msec post-stimulus,
consistent with the view that a graded strength-based process supports
JORs in this task. The distribution of the effects predicting correct and
incorrect JORs bears correspondences with the distribution of ERP activity that, in previous studies, has been linked to the process of familiarity.
These findings therefore provide some support for the view that familiarity is the process that supports JORs under some circumstances. In addition to addressing these conceptual issues, these findings illustrate the
utility of acquiring ERPs alongside behavioural measures as a means of
investigating the bases of numerical JORs.
A 73
NEURAL COMPONENTS OF SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL SOURCE
MEMORY IN HEALTHY YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS Audrey
Duarte, Richard Henson, Kimberly Graham; Cambridge, UK — When people make episodic memory judgments, they may retrieve spatial and temporal details from the previous event. Older adults exhibit impairments
in such judgments but little is known about the effects of aging on neural

Memory: Memory Systems

activity associated with attempts to retrieve contextual information and
successful source recollection. We used event-related fMRI to investigate
the effects of aging on the neural correlates of these processes for both
spatial and temporal contexts. Healthy young and older adults studied
pictures of objects in distinct temporal and spatial contexts and subsequently made source memory judgments. Older adults demonstrated
reduced source accuracy for both spatial and temporal details. Activations associated with attempts to retrieve spatial versus temporal contexts were found in distinct extrastriate, posterior parietal and inferior
frontal regions across groups. Similar effects were also observed in the
left hippocampus and medial orbital frontal gyri for spatial and posterior
frontal cortex for temporal retrieval attempts in young adults only. None
of these regions distinguished successful from unsuccessful source recollection. In contrast, successful spatial and temporal recollection were
associated with activity in hippocampal and middle frontal areas, respectively, across groups. While the right inferior frontal gyrus was more
active for successful temporal recollection in young adults, the inverse
pattern was observed in the elderly. These data suggest that distinct patterns of brain activity support attempts to retrieve versus successful recollection of spatial and temporal contexts. Furthermore, age-related
deficits in recollection for these details may be due to impaired neural
activity associated with both of these processes.
A 74
SIMILAR YES/NO AND FORCED-CHOICE RECOGNITION
MEMORY PERFORMANCE IN PATIENTS WITH LIMITED
HIPPOCAMPAL LESIONS Peter
Bayley1, John Wixted1, Ramona
2
3
1
Hopkins , Larry Squire ; University of California, San Diego, 2Brigham
Young University, 3VA Healthcare System, San Diego — It has been suggested that yes/no recognition is more impaired by hippocampal lesions
than forced-choice recognition. This idea was raised in recent studies in
which patients with mild cognitive impairment and presumed hippocampal dysfunction were given recognition tests with similar targets and
foils. The suggestion was that the yes/no procedure requires recollection,
whereas the forced-choice procedure can be performed by familiarity
alone. We gave the same tests to 15 controls and five patients with damage limited to the hippocampus (forced-choice test: 12 study items, 12 test
items; yes/no test: 12 study items, 60 test items). Patients were impaired
on both the yes/no test (patients, d’=0.88; controls, d’=1.92, p<.05) as
well as on the forced-choice test (patients, d’=1.21; controls, d’=1.90,
p<.05). Further, patients were more impaired on the yes/no test than on
the forced-choice test (.88 vs. 1.21, p=.04). However, as most yes/no tests
consist of N study items and 2N test items, data from the yes/no test
were also analyzed across the first 24 trials (average of 8.5 targets, 15.5
foils). Again, patients were impaired on the yes/no test (patients, d’=1.09;
controls, d’=1.87, p=.02). Yet, the patients now scored similarly on the
yes/no and forced-choice tests (1.09 vs. 1.21, p=.6). We suggest that the
full yes/no test of 60 items is difficult relative to the forced-choice test
due to increased study-test delay and increased interference, not because
of any fundamental difference between yes/no and forced-choice recognition. The results indicate that both kinds of recognition are similarly
dependent on the hippocampus.
A 75
EFFECTS OF TRIAL SEQUENCE ON ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES OF MEMORY-RETRIEVAL OPERATIONS. Jane
Herron, Edward Wilding; Cardiff University — Electrophysiological studies
of recognition memory have identified two old/new effects linked to recollection; the left parietal old/new effect indexes the retrieval of contextual information, whereas the right frontal old/new effect may reflect
post-retrieval monitoring processes. The present experiment examined
the degree to which these two effects were elicited according to a test
item’s position in the trial sequence, and, therefore, the degree to which
participants were able to engage in appropriate task sets (or ‘retrieval orientations’). Participants were cued prior to each test item either to
retrieve item location or to retrieve encoding task. The same cue-type was

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

maintained for four consecutive trials. Event-related potentials (ERPs)
were time-locked to test items, and separated according to accurate old/
new judgements and serial position. Source accuracy was equivalent
across the test sequence. A double dissociation was observed between the
left parietal and right frontal old/new effects; whereas the former
increased in magnitude as the trial sequence progressed, the latter was
significant only on ‘switch’ trials and declined in magnitude over successive trials. Successful recovery of contextual information therefore
appeared to increase across the trial sequence, whereas the right frontal
old/new effect appeared to reflect post-retrieval monitoring processes
that compensated for impoverished reollection. It is proposed that the
recovery of contextual information is influenced by the degree to which
participants have engaged in appropriate retrieval orientations, and that
compensatory monitoring processes indexed by the right frontal effect
are engaged to a greater degree when orientations have not yet been fully
adopted.
A 76
LESIONS AFFECTING THE HIPPOCAMPAL FORMATION YIELD
CONJUNCTIONAL SHORT-TERM MEMORY DEFICITS IN
HUMANS Mischa Braun, Carsten Finke, Florian Ostendorf, ThomasNicolas Lehmann, Karl-Titus Hoffmann, Ute Kopp, Christoph J. Ploner;
Charité Berlin — The medial temporal lobe has long been considered
essential for long-term memory whereas the frontal lobe is generally seen
as the anatomical substrate of short-term memory. This traditional view
is challenged by recent studies suggesting hippocampal involvement in
tasks requiring short-term maintenance of conjunctional information.
However, this inference is mainly based on data from patients with brain
lesions resulting from global cerebral hypoxia. Furthermore, a clear
delay-dependency of these deficits has not been demonstrated. The role
of the hippocampus for short-term memory has therefore not yet been
clarified. To settle this issue, we investigated visual working memory for
features and conjunctions in three patients with post-surgical lesions to
the right hippocampal formation and in ten healthy controls. We used
three delayed-match-to-sample tasks with two delays (900/5000 ms) and
three set sizes (2/4/6 items). Subjects were instructed to remember either
colors, locations or conjunctions of both. In color-only and location-only
conditions, performance of patients did not differ from controls. By contrast, a significant group difference was found in the conjunction condition at 5000 ms delay. This difference was largely independent of set size,
thus suggesting that it cannot be explained by the increased complexity
of the conjunction task compared to single-feature conditions. These findings demonstrate that the hippocampus plays an essential role in the
maintenance of conjunctional information already at delays of a few seconds. Encoding of conjunctions appears to depend on extrahippocampal
brain regions.
A 77
MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE ACTIVATIONS IN RECOGNITION
MEMORY: IS STIMULUS CATEGORY OR RECOLLECTION
VERSUS FAMILIARITY THE CRUCIAL FACTOR? Karen J. Taylor,
Kim S. Graham, Christian Schwarzbauer, Richard N. A. Henson; MRC
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK — We have recently
demonstrated that whilst amnesic patients with broad medial temporal
lobe (MTL) damage are impaired in recognition memory (RM) for faces
and spatial scenes, patients with damage limited to the hippocampus
show a selective preservation of RM for faces. We proposed that it is the
nature of scene versus face stimuli that produced the selective RM deficit
associated with hippocampal damage. An alternative explanation, however, is that RM for scenes relies more heavily on hippocampally-dependent recollective processes, whereas RM for faces can be mediated by
familiarity signals in adjacent cortical regions; i.e. it is the type of memory
process, rather than nature of stimuli, that best explains the division of
labour in the MTL. In order to disentangle these two possibilities, we
conducted an fMRI study involving RM for faces and scenes, that incorporated measures of both subjective and objective levels of recollection

41

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

and familiarity. Preliminary analysis of the encoding phase, contrasting
subsequent “remember” responses with subsequent misses, revealed
bilateral amygdala and parahippocampal activations for faces and scenes
respectively. Notably, the analysis revealed no subsequent memory
effects common to both stimulus categories. At retrieval, a comparison of
“remember” responses with “familiar” responses revealed bilateral
amygdala activation for faces, and notably bilateral mid/posterior hippocampal activation common to both stimulus categories. These results
suggest that consideration of both stimulus category and recollection versus familiarity are essential when investigating the division of labour in
the MTL.
A 78
AN UNEXPECTED SEQUENCE OF EVENTS: MISMATCH
DETECTION IN THE HUMAN HIPPOCAMPUS Dharshan
Kumaran, Eleanor Maguire; Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging — The
ability to identify and react to novelty within the environment is fundamental to survival. Computational models emphasize the potential role
of the hippocampus in novelty detection, its unique anatomical circuitry
making it ideally suited to act as a comparator between past and present
experience. The hippocampus, therefore, is viewed to detect associative
mismatches between what is expected based on retrieval of past experience and current sensory input. However, direct evidence that the human
hippocampus performs such operations is lacking. We explored brain
responses to novel sequences of objects using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), whilst subjects performed an incidental target
detection task. Our results demonstrate that hippocampal activation was
maximal when prior predictions concerning which object would appear
next in a sequence were violated by sensory reality. In so doing, we establish the biological reality of associative match-mismatch computations
within the human hippocampus, a process widely held to play a cardinal
role in novelty detection. Our results also suggest that the hippocampus
may generate predictions about how future events will unfold, and critically detect when these expectancies are violated, even when task
demands do not require it. The present study also offers broader insights
into the nature of essential computations carried out by the hippocampus, which may also underpin its unique contribution to episodic memory.
A 79
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE THAT THE NEURAL
CORRELATES OF RECOLLECTION ELICITED BY FACE AND
NAME RETRIEVAL CUES ARE QUALITATIVELY DISTINCT.
Graham MacKenzie, David Donaldson; University of Stirling — Dual
process models propose that ‘recollection’ and ‘familiarity’ are retrieval processes supporting recognition memory. These amodal retrieval processes
are thought to operate on any type of stimulus. Event-related potential
(ERP) studies using lexical stimuli have identified a left parietal effect
(500 – 700ms) that indexes recollection, and a mid frontal effect (300 –
500ms) often associated with familiarity. Recently, Yovel and Paller
(2004) found that the neural correlates of face retrieval differ from those
typically observed, raising the possibility that recognizing faces recruits a
different neural response from recognizing words. Here, we directly
compared face and name recognition under the same experimental conditions to see if there is any variation in the neural correlates of retrieval
for different stimulus materials. Compound face-name stimuli were studied, and at test either a face or a name was presented alone. Participants
discriminated studied from unstudied stimuli, and made a Remember/
Familiar decision for all ‘old’ stimuli. Names were easier to discriminate
than faces, and were associated with a more conservative response bias.
Recollection was inferred from Remember responses; face recollection
was associated with a right superior frontal effect (500 – 700ms) and
name recollection was associated with a topographically dissociable left
parietal effect (500 – 700ms), demonstrating that faces and names evoke
distinct neural correlates of recollection. We discuss whether the ERP
findings reflect a common retrieval process that is operating on different

42

Memory: Memory Systems

representations or whether there are different retrieval processes for faces
and words – a possibility that would challenge current dual process theories of episodic memory.
A 80
SPEED - A NEUROBIOLOGICAL THEORY OF CATEGORIZATION
AUTOMATICITY John Ennis, Brian Spiering, Greg Ashby; UC, Santa
Barbara — SPEED (Subcortical Pathways Enable Expertise Development)
is a biologically detailed computational model that describes how categorization judgments become automatic in tasks that depend on procedural
learning. The model assumes there are two neural pathways from the
relevant sensory association area to the premotor area that mediates
response selection. The longer and slower pathway is as follows: sensory
association cortex – striatum – globus pallidus – thalamus – premotor
area. A faster, purely cortical pathway projects directly from the sensory
association area to the premotor area. SPEED assumes that the subcortical pathway, although slower, has greater neural plasticity because of a
dopamine mediated learning signal from substantia nigra. In contrast,
the fast cortical-cortical pathway learns via classical Hebbian learning.
Because of its greater plasticity, the subcortical pathway determines early
performance, but over time the cortical-cortical pathway contributes
more and more to the response selection. Eventually the cortical-cortical
pathway dominates the response selection and at this point the responses
are automatic. The model includes differential equations that describe
activation in each of the relevant brain areas as well as a set of difference
equations that describe learning on each trial. A variety of simulations
are described showing that the model accounts for some classic singlecell recording and behavioral results.
A 81
THE DUAL-TASK PARADIGM AS AN ERROR INDUCTION
TECHNIQUE WITH NOVEL NATURALISTIC ACTIONS. David
Gold, Sabrina Lombardi, Erica Barbuto, Norman Park; York University — Routine naturalistic actions (NAs) are familiar multi-step actions involving
the manipulation of objects that must be completed in a serial order to
achieve a goal (e.g., preparing coffee). Other NAs are novel (NNAs) and
consist of unfamiliar multi-step actions such as learning how to build an
arts and crafts style project (e.g., making a pinhole camera). The dual-task
paradigm was used to selectively interfere with attention during the
encoding of NNAs (n = 27). Under single-task conditions, participants
viewed videos demonstrating the construction of NNAs, and then built a
NNA with the same materials. Under dual-task conditions, participants
performed an attention demanding secondary task (lag 1) while viewing
the video (encoding). Results indicated that participants were able to
learn and physically enact NNAs with a high degree of accuracy after a
single viewing. However, under dual-task conditions at encoding, subsequent enactment declined dramatically. Semantic processing may have
been disrupted when attention was divided at encoding while viewing a
NNA because conceptual errors such as tool omissions and object substitutions increased, and the most central actions were more likely to be
committed in error. The dual-task paradigm was demonstrated as a technique to induce NA errors, normally found in neurologically impaired
populations, in undergraduates. Thus, the paradigm can be employed in
future investigations to better understand impaired NA performance
with more experimental control.
A 82
FAST RECOLLECTION IN SEMANTIC TASKS Lillian Park1, Morris
Moscovitch1,2, Mary Pat
McAndrews3; 1Rotman Research Institute,
2University of Toronto, 3Toronto Western Hospital — The premise that recollection is a slow consciously controlled process and familiarity is a fast
automatic one is taken for granted by many scientists. Predictions made
by dual-process theories have born out in experiments demonstrating
that under a deadline procedure any influence by recollection is eliminated. However, current research on recollection and familiarity questions the assumption that recollection is a slow process. Dewhurst,
Holmes, Brandt, and Dean (2006) found that items in a recognition that

Linguistic Processes: Syntax

were later associated with remember responses were recognized more
quickly than for those associated with know. The following studies investigate the role of recollection on semantic tasks, which circumvent certain
weaknesses inherent in recognition tests that look at recollection and
familiarity. The results of the first study replicated the findings of Westmacott and Moscovitch (2003). Participants made quicker judgments
about famous names that were associated with personal memories. In the
second study, participants were required to make judgments under a
deadline condition. According to standard views of recollection and
familiarity processes, the advantage seen for items associated with episodic memory will be impaired. However, results demonstrate that the
episodic advantage is preserved for tasks that do not require strategic
decision-making even under a deadline procedure. Thus recollection
does not appear to be a slow consciously controlled phenomenon, but
one that is rapidly and automatically activated. Preliminary evidence
from a functional neuroimaging study will be presented to determine
whether recollection associated with semantic tests also activates the hippocampus as does recollection associated with episodic memory.
A 83
EFFECTS OF DETAIL AND TEMPORAL DISTANCE OF PAST AND
FUTURE EVENTS ON THE ENGAGEMENT OF A COMMON
NEURAL NETWORK Donna Rose Addis, Daniel L. Schacter; Harvard
University, Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging — Behavioral, lesion and neuroimaging evidence show striking commonalities
between remembering past events and imagining future events. In a
recent event-related fMRI study, we instructed participants to construct a
past or future event in response to a cue. Once an event was in mind, participants made a button press, then generated details (elaboration) and
rated them. We found that the elaboration of past and future events
recruited a common neural network. However, regions within this network may respond differentially to event characteristics, such as temporal distance and the amount of detail generated, depending on whether
the event is in the past or future. To investigate this further, we conducted parametric modulation analyses, with temporal distance and
detail as covariates. The analysis of temporal distance (independent of
detail) revealed that for past events, right parahippocampus exhibited
increasing activity with decreasing temporal distance. In contrast,
numerous regions exhibited increasing activity with increasing temporal
distance of future events, including bilateral hippocampus, which may
reflect increasing novelty and/or more intensive relational processing
when recombining disparate details. Temporal poles also showed
increasing activity, suggesting more remote future events rely on more
conceptual information. The analysis of detail (independent of temporal
distance) showed increasing detail in past events modulated activity in
right precuneus. Increasing detail in future events also modulated precuneus, as well as right frontal and left temporal pole. Notably, bilateral
hippocampus responded most strongly to increasing detail, again highlighting the involvement of this structure in relational processing during
elaboration of future events.
A 84
CHANGES
IN
EFFECTIVE
CONNECTIVITY
DURING
DIFFERENTIAL RETRIEVAL ORIENTATION Melina R. Uncapher1,,
Adam P.R. Smith2, C. Chad Woodruff1, Michael D. Rugg1; 1University of
California Irvine, Irvine, CA, 3University College London, London, UK — The
present study employed fMRI and dynamic models of effective connectivity to address the questions of how specific cortical regions interact to
support maintenance of both retrieval mode different retrieval orientations. Retrieval mode refers to a sustained state associated with intention
to retrieve information from episodic memory, which does not vary as a
function of the nature of the retrieval task. A retrieval orientation is also
conceived of as a sustained cognitive state, albeit one that varies according to demands of the particular retrieval goal. Volunteers studied words
and pictures, and were then scanned during a series of short recognition
memory test blocks with words as test items, in which they were cued to

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

retrieve either studied words or studied pictures. Activity in a network of
regions, including bilateral inferior frontal gyrus and lateral parietal cortex, was modulated by the requirement to retrieve studied information,
regardless of the material to be retrieved (words or pictures). Effective
connectivity between this common ‘retrieval mode’ network and other
cortical regions differed according to the type of material to be remembered. Retrieval of pictures, relative to words, was associated with
increased connection strength between this network and left fusiform
gyrus, and decreased connection strength with right precuneus. By contrast, retrieval of words was associated with the reverse effects: increased
connectivity with right precuneus and decreased connectivity with left
fusiform. The findings speak to the influence of retrieval goal on the
dynamics of cortico-cortico interactions that sustain cognitive states in
service of episodic retrieval.
A 85
A HYPOTHESIS CONCERNING NEUROIMAGING MEASURES OF
REPETITION PRIMING: PERCEPTUAL INDIVIDUATION AS
NOISE-AMPLIFICATION AND ABSTRACTION AS NOISEREDUCTION Sonia Sciama, Ann Dowker; University of Oxford — We
suggest that, in word repetition priming, perceptual individuation is a
process of noise-amplification and abstraction is a process of noise-reduction. This is because perceptual individuation requires distortion of an
ideal typeface. We measured perceptual individuation by assessing the
effect of multiple prime repetition on form-specificity (the effect of
matching lettercase at study and test). Two experiments using a word
identification test demonstrate abstraction for both an ideal and a distorted typeface; multiple prime repetition increased form-independent
priming without any change in form-specificity. Thus form-specificity
measured as a proportion of total priming decreased and this can be
understood as noise-reduction. In a third experiment using different test
conditions the distorted typeface produced perceptual individuation;
multiple prime repetition increased form-specificity without any change
in form-independent priming and this can be understood as noise-amplification. We suggest that these two processes are incompatible so that it is
impossible for multiple prime repetition to increase both form-independent priming and form-specificity under the same conditions. Results
from neuroimaging experiments have linked repetition priming to
response suppression. However, experiments using degraded stimuli
have demonstrated response enhancement. We propose the hypothesis
that response suppression corresponds to abstraction (noise-reduction)
and response enhancement corresponds to perceptual individuation
(noise-amplification). Our finding that perceptual individuation and
abstraction are found under different conditions is consistent with the
given that suppression and enhancement are opposite modulations. The
hypothesis would be strongly supported if distortion produces perceptual individuation in behavioural measures in the same conditions that
produce response enhancement in neuroimaging measures.

Linguistic Processes: Syntax
A 86
SYNTACTIC OR SEMANTIC PROCESSING IN THE ANTERIOR
TEMPORAL
LOBE?
A
SELECTIVE
ATTENTION
FMRI
EXPERIMENT Corianne
Rogalsky, Gregory Hickok; University of
California, Irvine — A number of recent studies have found that portions
of the anterior temporal lobe (ATL) respond preferentially to structured
sentence-level stimuli (in contrast to word-lists, for example). It is
unclear, however, whether the response to sentences reflects syntactic
computations or some form of semantic integration operation. This distinction is difficult to investigate with stimulus manipulations. Thus, the
present study sought to answer this question via a selective attention paradigm in fMRI. In separate runs, subjects monitored for occasional
semantic anomalies or occasional syntactic errors, thus directing their

43

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

attention to semantic integration, or syntactic properties of the sentences.
The hemodynamic response was examined to anomaly/error-free sentences only, to avoid confounds due to error detection. We have found
task-specific activations in both anterior and posterior temporal lobe
areas. In particular, we have found a sentence-specific ATL sub-region
that is more active during the perception of correct sentences in the syntactic task compared to the semantic task. Thus, at least a portion of the
ATL appears to be involved more in syntactic than sentence-level (compositional) semantic processing. In addition, this study suggests that this
selective attention paradigm may be an effective means to investigate the
functional diversity of sentence-processing networks. Research supported by NIH DC03681.

Memory: Memory Systems
A 87
THE NEURAL BASIS OF VIVIDLY EXPERIENCING IMAGINED
AND
REAL
EVENTS:
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL
AND
NEUROIMAGING EVIDENCE Demis Hassabis1, Dharshan Kumaran1,
Seralynne Vann2, Eleanor Maguire1; 1Institute of Neurology, University
College London, London, UK, 2Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK — Amnesic
patients have a well established deficit in remembering their past experiences. Surprisingly, however, the question as to whether such patients
can imagine new experiences has not been formally addressed. We tested
whether a group of amnesic patients with primary damage to the hippocampus bilaterally could construct new imagined experiences in response
to short verbal cues which outlined a range of simple commonplace scenarios. Our results revealed that patients were markedly impaired relative to matched control subjects at imagining new experiences. Moreover,
we identified a possible source for this deficit. The patients' imagined
experiences lacked spatial coherence, consisting instead of fragmented
images in the absence of a holistic representation of the environmental
setting. The hippocampus, therefore, may make a critical contribution to
the creation of new experiences by providing the spatial context into
which the disparate elements of an experience can be bound. Given how
closely imagined experiences match episodic memories, the absence of
this function mediated by the hippocampus, may also fundamentally
affect the ability to vividly re-experience the past. We followed up our
neuropsychological findings with an fMRI study in healthy subjects,
directly comparing imagined events with real episodic memories. Our
neuroimaging data provide converging evidence for a brain network
common to vividly experiencing real and imagined events which
includes the hippocampus. By contrast, we identified other brain regions
that discriminated between events that were imagined, and those that
actually happened.

Memory: Other
A 88
BABY BOOMERS ALL GROWN UP: A RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
PERSONALITY, GENDER, AND COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE IN
LATER YEARS. Alexandra Fiocco, Sonia Lupien; McGill University — With
an aging Baby Boomer generation on the rise, research is attempting to
elucidate the factors that contribute to cognitive aptitude in later years.
With this in mind, the current study wanted to assess the impact of gender and personality factors on cognitive performance in male and female
baby boomers between the ages of 50 and 60 years old. Cognitive tasks
consisted of those that tap into hippocampal and frontal lobe functioning,
including immediate and delayed explicit recall of a story, verbal fluency,
and digit span. In assessing the relationship between personality and
gender, correlation analysis showed that females and males did not differ
on Neuroticism or Conscientiousness, but females were found to report
higher scores on the Extroversion, Openness and Agreeableness scales of

44

Memory: Memory Systems

the NEO. Overall, Analyses of variance showed that both gender and
personality significantly, yet independently, impact cognitive performance. Females performed better than males on almost all administered
cognitive tasks. Neuroticism was found to negatively correlate with
immediate story recall and a similar trend was found for delayed story
recall. Extroversion and Openness were found to positively correlate
with immediate and delay recall of story, and letter as well as category
verbal fluency. Finally, a negative relationship was found between Conscientiousness and digit span and a positive trend was found for Agreeableness and immediate story recall. These findings are in accordance
with the literature suggesting gender differences in cognition throughout
the lifespan and further adds to the literature on personality.
A 89
AN IDEAL NAVIGATOR MODEL OF HUMAN WAYFINDING:
LEARNING ONE’S WAY AROUND A NEW TOWN Jeremy
Manning1, Michael Kahana1, Robert Sekuler2; 1University of Pennsylvania,
2Brandeis University — Searching for a target in an unfamiliar environment requires acquiring, storing, processing, and recalling spatial information. We use datasets from two virtual reality navigation experiments
to design and validate a simple biologically-inspired computational
model of these processes. Subjects in both datasets play taxicab drivers,
picking up and delivering passengers in a series of small virtual towns.
After just a few deliveries, subjects learn to generate minimum distance,
novel paths between passengers and their destinations. Subjects’ rapid
learning and near-ceiling performance inspires the creation of an ideal
navigator model, which makes optimal use of sensory information to
learn navigationally relevant spatial information about the environment
as quickly as possible. We use MAGELLAN, a simple, two-parameter,
ideal navigator model, as a benchmark against which to assess possible
sources of subject error. By systematically degrading the ideal navigator’s
vision and memory, MAGELLAN accounts for human subjects’ mean
performance in both datasets, and correctly predicts the difficulty that
subjects encounter in navigating different environments.
A 90
DIFFERENTIAL RECRUITMENT OF THE HIPPOCAMPUS,
MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND AREA MST DURING PATH
INTEGRATION IN HUMANS Thomas
Wolbers1, Jan M. Wiener2,
Hanspeter Mallot3, Christian Büchel4; 1University of California, Santa
Barbara, 2Collège de France, 3University of Tübingen, 4University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf — Path integration, the ability to sense selfmotion for keeping track of changes in orientation and position, constitutes a fundamental mechanism of spatial navigation and a keystone for
the development of cognitive maps. Whereas animal path integration is
predominantly supported by the head direction, grid and place cell systems, the neural foundations are not well understood in humans. Here
we used fMRI and a virtual rendition of a triangle completion paradigm
to test whether human path integration recruits a cortical system similar
to that of rodents and non-human primates. Participants travelled along
two legs of a triangle before pointing towards the starting location. In
accordance with animal models, stronger right hippocampal activation
predicted more accurate updating of the starting location on a trial-bytrial basis. Moreover, between-subjects fluctuations in response consistency were correlated with bilateral hippocampal and medial prefrontal
activation, and bilateral recruitment of area MST was related to individual path integration capability. Given that these effects were absent in a
perceptual control task, the present study provides the first evidence that
visual path integration relies upon the dynamic interplay of self-motion
processing in human MST, higher-level spatial processes in the hippocampus and spatial working memory in medial prefrontal cortex.
A 91
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL DISSOCIATION OF RECOLLECTION
AND FAMILIARITY DURING ASSOCIATIVE RECOGNITION:

Memory: Other

INVESTIGATING THE EFFECTS OF STIMULUS REPETITION ON
EPISODIC MEMORY. Sinead M. Rhodes, David I. Donaldson; University
of Stirling — Episodic memory depends upon distinct retrieval processes
of familiarity and recollection. Associative recognition tasks have traditionally been viewed as requiring recollection for correct performance,
however recent research suggests familiarity may be evoked when associative-pairs are perceived as a single unit. Here we examined the influence of repeated presentation of stimuli on the engagement of episodic
retrieval processes using an associative recognition task. In a pre-experiment behavioural training session (repetition condition), participants
studied 10 repetitions of word-pairs containing an association (trafficjam) or an unassociated semantic relationship (violin-guitar). In study
phases of the main experiment, participants studied word-pairs from repetition conditions and first presentation (non-repetition) conditions. At
test, participants had to recognize if word-pairs were presented in the
same pairing as study, were rearranged, or new. As expected, recognition
was stronger for repetition than non-repetition conditions; however repetition improved recognition accuracy for both associative and semantic
word-pairs. Neuroimaging data (Event-Related Potentials recorded at
test) also differed depending on repetition condition but varied according
to stimulus properties. Retrieval of all four conditions of word-pairs elicited bilateral frontal (familiarity) and left parietal (recollection) effects.
Comparisons of the magnitude of effects revealed a larger bilateral frontal effect following repetition but only for association word-pairs. In contrast, a larger left parietal effect was observed for both associative and
semantic repetition conditions than for their respective non-repetition
conditions. Our findings suggest repetition a) encourages familiarity but
only for information already perceived to reflect a unit, and b) increases
recollection based responding irrespective of stimulus properties.
A 92
THE ROLE OF FEATURE OVERLAP IN SOURCE MEMORY
ACCURACY AND BRAIN ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY Trudy
Kuo,
Cyma Van Petten, Kate Cody; University of Arizona — Retrieval of feature
conjunctions, as in a source memory test, is believed to depend on control
processes subserved by prefrontal cortex (PFC) based on converging neuropsychological, haemodynamic and electrophysiological evidence. As
source memory is most often studied with two different source attributes,
each repeatedly paired with a large number of items, interference from
the highly familiar source attributes may arise during source recognition
test. This idea has been supported by the consistent observation that
source accuracy suffers when a test item is presented with a source feature different from what was associated with the item at study. Specifically, the highly familiar source feature in this case may promote
endorsement of the item-source conjunction as studied when the correct
response is to reject the pairing. We hypothesized that PFC may be
engaged, in part, to overcome such interference during source recognition. The present study contrasted source memory performance and
brain electrical activity between a condition where each of 16 line drawings on a study list occurred in a different color and another condition
where 16 drawings occurred in only 2 different colors at study. Mapping
condition influenced the accuracy of discriminating old items in the studied colors from old items in different (but also studied) colors. The disadvantage of different-source trials was reduced in the 16-color condition.
The effect of mapping condition on brain electrical activity will be discussed in terms of the role of PFC in source memory versus associative
memory where feature mapping tends to be unique.
A 93
BEHAVIORAL AND ERP APPROACHES OF COMPENSATION IN
EPISODIC MEMORY RETRIEVAL: AGING AND COGNITIVE
SUPPORT EFFECTS Michel Isingrini1,2, Lucie Angel1,2, Séverine Fay1,2,
Badiâa Bouazzaoui1,2, Granjon Lionel3,2, Laurence Taconnat1,2; 1University of
Tours, France, 2UMR CNRS LMDC, 3University of Poitiers, France — Two
experiments, involving manipulation of cognitive retrieval support,
examined compensatory mechanisms in memory using behavioral and

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

electrophysiological approaches. The first experiment aimed at confirming the possibility of a cognitive compensation during aging, expressed
by a reduction of age-related differences in episodic memory when a high
cognitive support is provided at retrieval. Memory performances of 18
young and 18 old subjects were compared using two cognitive support
conditions (low vs. high), operationalized by manipulating the number of
letters of each retrieval cue (3 vs. 4 letters). In the high support condition,
age-related differences were significantly smaller than in the low support
condition. Thus, older subjects benefit much more than young subjects
from the high cognitive support condition, suggesting a possible agerelated cognitive compensation. Using the same procedure, the second
experiment investigated whether the magnitude of the ERP “old/new
cued recall effect”, associated with retrieval operations, was modulated
by the level of cognitive support. ERPs were recorded while participants
(10 young adults) performed the cued recall task in the high and low support conditions. Between 300-500 ms post-stimulus, “old/new cuedrecall” effects were observed for each retrieval condition. They varied in
magnitude being larger in the high support condition, than in the low
support condition, at right frontal and right parietal sites. These findings
confirm that the ERP “old/new effect” can be modulated by the level of
cognitive support provided at retrieval, suggesting that the age-related
cognitive compensation (experiment 1) could be studied, at the brain
level, through the “old/new effect”.
A 94
AGING AND STRATEGIC RETRIEVAL IN A CUED-RECALL TEST:
THE ROLE OF EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS AND FLUID
INTELLIGENCE Laurence Taconnat, Séverine Fay, Lucie Angel, Badiâa
Bouazzaoui, Michel Isingrini; Université François Rabelais — Cued recall in
episodic memory was investigated in relation to low and high cognitive
support at retrieval, executive function level and fluid intelligence level
in 81 healthy adults divided first into two age groups (young and elderly
adults). The first analyses showed that age-related differences were
greater when a low cognitive support was provided to recall the words.
An individual index of loss of performance when the number of cues was
decreased was then calculated. Hierarchical regression analysis revealed
that the executive functions measure (perseverative errors on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test) was a better candidate than the fluid intelligence
measure (Cattell’s Culture fair test) to account for the age-related variance of the size of performance loss. These findings suggest that age differences in implementing strategic retrieval may be mainly due to a
decline in executive functions.
A 95
THE EFFECT OF PERCEPTUAL FLUENCY ON RECOGNITION
AND EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS (ERPS) Vinaya
Raj1, P.
Andrew Leynes1, Charan Ranganath2, April Drumm1, Anne Lewis1, Rebecca
Martin1, Jessica Wong1; 1The College of New Jersey, 2University of California,
Davis — Perceptual fluency, the speed and ease of perceiving a stimulus,
may serve as a basis for feelings of familiarity in recognition memory
judgments. The present experiment manipulated perceptual fluency by
blurring word stimuli. Participants studied 150 words using a shallow
encoding task. The fluency of studied words was reduced by applying a
light filter that blurred the words slightly. At test, participants made
old/new recognition judgments and confidence ratings for 300 words
(150 old, 150 new). Test probes either matched the clarity condition seen
at study (light mask), increased in clarity from study (very light mask), or
decreased in clarity (heavy mask). Participants were unaware of the perceptual manipulation. Memory was more accurate when the fluency
matched the study item (light mask) than when fluency increased or
decreased in clarity. Behavioral data was modeled using traditional Signal Detection Theory measures and ROC curves, which indicate that
changing the fluency caused participants to use a more conservative decision criterion. ERP amplitude measures associated with familiarity
(FN400) indicated that the fluency manipulation did not influence processing of old items, whereas the FN400 elicited by new items varied as a

45

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

function of visual mask. The results are interpreted as evidence that fluency can selectively influence familiarity levels of unstudied information
and that changes in response criterion can account for recognition differences when fluency is manipulated in some contexts.
A 96
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL (ERP) EVIDENCE OF BLOCKED
RETRIEVAL Olga Rass1, P. Andrew Leynes1, Joshua D. Landau2, Tim
Curran3, Vinaya Raj1, Jenna Scisco1; 1The College of New Jersey, 2York College
of Pennsylvania, 3University of Colorado — The Memory Block Effect (MBE)
occurs when orthographically similar words inhibit retrieval in word
fragment completion paradigms. In two studies, event-related potentials
(ERPs) were measured in the MBE paradigm used by Logan and Balota
(2003) to explore the neural correlates of retrieval blocks. In both experiments, exposure to the blocking primes decreased fragment completion
(relative to control fragments). Blocking occurred when the relevant
primes were observed only a few seconds before the fragment (Exp 1) or
when the solutions to all fragments were studied before the fragment
completion test (Exp 2). The ERPs indicate that exposure to blocking
primes prevents an active search of memory, and retrieval fails because
blocking primes are active in memory and unable to be inhibited.
A 97
ON THE REPRESENTATION OF COMPLEX SEQUENCE
KNOWLEDGE BETWEEN MANUAL AND OCULOMOTOR
RESPONSE MODALITIES Clive R. Rosenthal1, Tammy W. C. Ng1,
Masud
Husain2,1, Christopher
Kennard1; 1Imperial College London,
2University College London — Little or no general consensus has been
reached regarding the nature of the representation underlying sequence
knowledge acquired in the serial reaction time task (SRT task). One way
to address this issue is to examine sequence learning for evidence of
reciprocal transfer between different response modalities. Accordingly,
participants were trained on a second-order conditional sequence, using
a 4-choice SRT task implemented under either manual (m, responding to
target stimuli with manual key presses) or saccade-contingent (o,
responding by directing gaze to target stimuli) response conditions. After
14 blocks of trials, half of the participants transferred to the alternate
response modality for three blocks of trials, whereas the other half performed these blocks in the same response modality; there were, therefore,
four modality of learning conditions: m, o, m>o, o>m. Sequence knowledge was assessed by conjoint performance on either manual or saccadecontingent versions of a cued-generation task implemented under the
two instructional conditions of the PD procedure and on a recognition
test. Transfer of sequence knowledge was demonstrated in all modality
of learning conditions, indicating that sequence learning is effector-independent. In the o, o>m, and m conditions, training led to explicit knowledge of the sequence, whereas in the m>o condition, training led to
implicit knowledge. Training in the m>o condition, therefore, did not
yield knowledge that was fully available to the oculomotor response
modality. Implications of these results and differences in the sensitivity
of indirect and direct tests to sequence knowledge acquired under manual and oculomotor response modalities are discussed.

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing
A 98
NEURAL BASIS FOR PERCEPTUAL MAPPING OF MUSICAL
TONES IN ABSOLUTE PITCH POSSESSORS: AN FMRI STUDY
Nobuko Hara1, Kimihiro Nakamura1, Chihiro Kuroki2, Yoshihiro Takayama1,
Seiji Ogawa2; 1Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
2
Hamano Life Science Research Foundation — Introduction: For absolute
pitch (AP) possessors, pitch perception is currently thought to represent a
highly automatic process comparable to the perception of spoken language. To explore this neural basis without the top-down influence, repetition priming paradigm was used with functional magnetic resonance

46

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing

imaging. Methods: Thirty-three students were recruited from Tokyo
National University of Fine Art and Music. AP possessors were screened
by a solfege test. To observe the priming effect, we used two types of
stimulus pairs. One was a repetition of same triad chords (SC) whereas
the other was a pair of triad chords in octaval relation (COR). Experimental task was major/minor discrimination. Imaging data were obtained
using Siemens Allegra 3T scanner with the following scanning parameters; TR=1.5s, TE=30ms, flip angle=80. Statistical analysis was made
using SPM2. Results: The priming effect in reaction time was significant
only for the AP possessors. For SC, direct comparison between subject
groups revealed no significant difference except for supplementary
motor area, while for COR there were significant between-group differences in right superior temporal gyrus (rSTG), left inferior parietal lobe
(lIPL). Discussion: The activity in rSTG is interpreted as reflecting the
specialized ability of AP possessors which is to map the sound signal
onto more abstract feature such as pitch notation, while the activity in
lIPL presumably represents mental recall for visual imagery of musical
scores of the stimulus items. Our results suggest that these brain regions
are responsible for the processing of different musical sounds to same
pitch notation in AP possessors.
A 99
CROSSLANGUAGE
DIFFERENCES
IN
PREATTENTIVE
PROCESSING OF PITCH DIMENSIONS AS REVEALED BY
MULTIDIMENSIONAL SCALING ANALYSIS OF THE MISMATCH
NEGATIVITY Bharath
Chandrasekaran,
Jackson
Gandour,
Ananthanarayan Krishnan; Purdue University — A crosslanguage auditory electrophysiological study was conducted to explore the influence of
language experience on the saliency of dimensions underlying cortical
pitch processing. Chinese and English subjects (n=10 per group) were
presented with Mandarin tones while the MMN (mismatch negativity)
response was elicited using passive oddball paradigms. Stimuli consisted of three tones (T1, high level; T2, high rising; T3, low falling-rising).
There were three oddball conditions (standard/deviant): T1/T2, T1/T3,
T2/T3. In the T1/T2 and T1/T3 conditions, each tonal pair represented a
contrast between a level and a contour tone; the T2/T3 condition, a contrast between two contour tones. A dissimilarity matrix was created
using the MMN mean amplitude measured from the Fz location for each
of these conditions per subject. The resulting twenty matrices were analyzed by the INDSCAL multidimensional scaling model. Two pitch
dimensions were revealed, interpretively labeled 'height' and 'direction'.
The latter was found to be more important for the native Chinese group
relative to the English. Using subject weights on the direction dimension,
a cross-validated discriminant function showed that 17 out of 20 subjects
were correctly classified into their respective language groups. These
findings lead us to conclude that the MMN can serve as an index of pitch
features that are differentially weighted depending on a listener’s experience with lexical tones and their acoustic correlates within a particular
tone space. By applying INDSCAL to MMN data, we now have a tool to
investigate crosslanguage effects on perceptual dimensions of tone at the
level of the cerebral cortex.
A 100
I’VE HEARD IT ALL BEFORE: THE SPATIO-TEMPORAL
DYNAMICS OF REPETITION PRIMING OF SOUNDS OF
OBJECTS Micah Murray1,2, Christian Camen3, Lucas Spierer1, Stephanie
Clarke1; 1Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland,
2
University of Lausanne, Switzerland, 3University of Geneva, Switzerland — Repetition priming is considered an index of the plasticity in (accessing) representations in the brain. Electrical neuroimaging of 64-channel auditory
evoked potentials (AEPs) in humans identified the spatio-temporal brain
mechanisms of repetition priming involving sounds of environmental
objects. Subjects performed an ‘oddball’ target detection task, based on
the semantic category of stimuli (living vs. man-made objects). Comparing responses to initial and repeated presentations of physically identical
sound stimuli, these analyses tested for modulations in 1) individual AEP

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing

waveforms, 2) global response strength, and 3) the topography of the
electric field at the scalp. Repetition priming effects were observed
behaviorally as a speeding of reaction times and electrophysiologically as
a suppression of the strength of responses to repeated sound presentations over the 156-215ms post-stimulus period. There was no evidence of
changes in the topography or latency of the AEP at the scalp, supporting
the hypothesis that repetition priming manifests as a modulation in the
strength of responses in a statistically indistinguishable network of active
brain regions. A distributed linear inverse solution and statistical analysis
thereof localized the priming effect to the left middle temporal gyrus and
superior temporal sulcus (BA22), which have been implicated in associating sounds with their abstract representations and actions. These effects
are subsequent to and occur in different brain regions from what has
been previously identified as the earliest discrimination of auditory
object categories. Repetition priming of sounds of objects may thus reflect
plasticity in associative-semantic, rather than perceptual-discriminative
functions.
A 101
EFFORTFUL COMPREHENSION OF NOISE VOCODED SPEECH
RECRUITS A FRONTO-TEMPORAL NETWORK Alexis
HervaisAdelman1, Ingrid Johnsrude2, Robert Carlyon1, Matt Davis1; 1MRC Cognition
and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, 2Queen’s University, Kingston,
Ontario, Canada — Noise vocoding renders speech hard to understand,
and may recruit the same neural systems as does speech heard in more
natural challenging listening situations. We conducted a neuroimaging
investigation into the neural basis of the comprehension and perceptual
learning of noise vocoded (NV) speech. 15 naïve participants were
scanned using fast sparse whole-brain imaging. During three test sessions (TA=1.3s, TR=2.5s), we examined neural responses to NV words
incomprehensible distorted speech and natural clear speech. Training
sessions (TA=1.3s, TR=3.5s) interleaved between test sessions consisted
of presentations of pairs of NV (D) and clear (C) words, ordered so as to
provide effective perceptual learning (CD pairs). Ineffective orders (CC,
DD, DC) were also included so that activity for effective and ineffective
training could be compared. Behavioural data collected after each of the
test sessions showed significant improvements in listeners’ comprehension of NV words as a consequence of training. No significant differences
between naïve and trained responses to NV speech were observed. Listening to NV speech during test sessions activated left insula, pre-motor,
pre-frontal and inferior parietal regions, and right inferior frontal, motor
and inferior temporal regions, and thalamus bilaterally. The activations
found are consistent with existing results relating to the processing of distorted or degraded speech (e.g. Giraud et al., 2004; Davis & Johnsrude,
2003). Effective training stimuli produced significantly more activity than
ineffective stimuli in left inferior parietal, motor, and frontal areas, and in
bilateral posterior temporal areas. These areas may play a role in guiding
perceptual learning of NV speech.
A 102
PERCEPTUAL
DISCRIMINABILITY
AND
NEURONAL
PROCESSING OF SOUND MOVEMENT IN THE HUMAN BRAIN
Ulrike Zimmer, Emiliano Macaluso; NeuroImagingLaboratory SantaLucia
IRCCS, Rome — Often we have to identify many stationary and moving
sounds simultaneously. For example, crossing a street requires the ability
to discriminate moving cars versus stationary cars waiting at the traffic
light. Our ability to discriminate between different sound-sources
depends on the background noise (e.g. the level of traffic) that will also
influence the spectro-temporal input reaching our ears (binaural sound
coherence = BSC). Aim of the current study was to investigate if the perceptual discriminability of moving versus stationary sounds varies as a
function of BSC; and whether these perceptual changes have a specific
neuronal correlate. During fMRI, we presented sound-pulses either with
changing Interaural-Time-Differences (typically resulting in the perception of sound movement) or with constant ITD (typically perceived as a
train of sounds from a single location). Orthogonally to this, we manipu-

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

lated the level of BSC, varying the perceptual discriminability of the
sound-source location. On each trial and irrespective of BSC-level, the
task of the subject was to discriminate “moving” versus “stationary”
sounds. Behaviourally, we found that sound-movement discriminability
decreased with decreasing BSC. The fMRI analyses highlighted a network of fronto-parietal regions that was more active for high versus low
BSC-sounds. Critically, in the IPS and STG the correlation between brain
activity and perceptual discriminability was present only for “changingITD” sounds. Thus, these areas activated selectively when the soundstimuli contained ITD-changes and BSC was high: i.e. when the subjects
perceived sound-movement. We conclude that IPS and STG play a pivotal role for sound-movement perception, combining BSC and ITD information.
A 103
FUNCTIONAL MRI AND PSYCHOPHYSICAL STUDIES OF
MUSICAL
PITCH
PROCESSING
BY
ABSOLUTE-PITCH
MUSICIANS I-Hui Hsieh, Kourosh Saberi; University of California, Irvine,
CA — Recent theories of absolute-pitch (AP) processing propose an
intrinsic symbolic association between linguistic cues and stored pitch
representations in facilitating the extraction and accurate labeling of pitch
from long-term memory. The current study describes results of psychophysical and fMRI experiments on processing of conflicting linguistic
and pitch cues by AP individuals. In the first set of experiments, AP
musicians identified the pitch of randomly selected mismatched syllablepitch hybrids while attempting to ignore their speech content. Results
showed that mismatched hybrid stimuli cognitively interfered with pitch
identification by AP musicians trained during childhood in the Solfeggio
system (fixed-Do solmization) but not with those trained in the western
labeling system (movable-Do solmization). Interference persisted after
thousands of trials but diminished as the stimulus spectrum was increasingly lowpass filtered to remove its broadband speech features. In fMRI
experiments, Solfege and Western-trained AP musicians either passively
listened to hybrid syllable-pitch stimuli or identified the pitch of hybrids
during fMRI acquisition. Previously, the left dorsolateral frontal cortex
considered to be involved in maintaining conditional associations, and
the right frontal cortex involved in working memory have been implicated in AP processing. Findings from the current fMRI study on contrasting cortical activation patterns in Solfege and Western-trained AP
musicians at these two brain regions are described and combined with
psychophysical findings to evaluate the theory that association of pitch
information with linguistic cues underlies AP ability.
A 104
NON-LINGUISTIC AUDITORY PROCESSING IN ADOLESCENTS
WITH SPECIFIC AND NON-SPECIFIC LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT:
AN ERP STUDY OF TEMPORAL CONSTRAINTS Amanda
Hampton1, Christine Weber-1, Bruce
Tomblin2; 1Purdue University,
2
University of Iowa — It has been hypothesized that deficits in auditory
perception may contribute to the development of specific language
impairment (SLI) (e.g., Bishop & McArthur, 2004; Leonard, 1998; Neville,
et al., 1993; Tallal et al., 1998; Tallal, 2000). The current study investigates
nonlinguistic processing of brief (50 ms) tones to determine how rapid
temporal processing (200 ms versus 1000 ms interstimulus interval (ISI))
may differ for adolescents with and without language impairments. A
standard oddball paradigm was utilized to examine both the early perceptual and later cognitive potentials indexing target detection processes.
We studied 17 typically developing adolescents, 14 to 18 years old, and
those diagnosed with SLI (n=17) and non-specific language impairment
(NLI), who displayed reduced abilities in both verbal and non-verbal
skills (n=10). These diagnoses were consistent from kindergarten
through 8th grade. The normally developing adolescents showed high
levels of accuracy in detecting infrequent target tones, while detection
accuracy was significantly reduced for the SLI and NLI groups. Amplitudes and peak latencies of the early cortical potentials (N100, P200, and
N200) did not distinguish the groups for the short or long ISI conditions.

47

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

However, compared to the typically developing participants, the P300
peak and mean amplitudes were reduced in the SLI and NLI groups for
the short, 200 ms ISI condition. These findings suggest that for adolescents with reduced linguistic abilities, the neural functions underlying
working memory updates during rapid auditory processing are more
sensitive to the temporal relationships between successive stimuli. [Supported by NIDCD P50DC02746]
A 105
ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN AUDITORY ERPS, LANGUAGE AND
COGNITIVE ABILITIES FROM 6- TO 24-MONTHS IN INFANTS
WITH A FAMILY HISTORY OF SLI Naseem
Choudhury, Cecylia
Chojnowska, April Benasich; Rutgers-Newark — Evoked response potentials (EEG/ERPs) to transient auditory signals have been shown to differ
in infants with a family history of specific language impairment (FH+) as
compared to controls without such a history (FH-). FH+ infant’s
responses to fast transient stimuli in an oddball task systematically
diverge from those of FH- controls and are predictive of later language
outcome. Such findings suggest that the ability to decode auditory input
occurring within tens of milliseconds may be a key deficit in individuals
with SLI. However, it is unclear if the observed differences in infant ERP
waveforms are associated with performance on behavioral measures of
language and cognition. Thus, we investigated the relations between ERP
waveforms and behavior in a group of normally-developing FH- children
(N=26) and in FH+ children (N=10). ERPs were recorded at 6, 9, 12, 16
and 24 months to complex tone-pairs with 300 or 70ms ISIs using an oddball paradigm (standard=100-100Hz: deviant=100-300Hz [15%]). Standardized assessments of language and cognition were administered at 16
and 24 months. Preliminary analyses revealed that the amplitude of 6and 9-month ERP components (P-N complex and the mismatch response)
were associated with 16-month language (r’s=.48 - .40) and cognition
(r’s=.34 - .58). Further, 16-month language was associated with 24-month
ERPs (r’s=.30 - .48). The associations were more robust for FH+ infants
as compared to controls and for the 70ms ISI stimuli. These results converge on behavioral data documenting differences in FH+ infants’ auditory processing abilities as early as 3-6 months of age.
A 106
DAILY TRAINING REQUIREMENTS FOR BYPASSING THE
STIMULUS SPECIFICITY OF PERCEPTUAL LEARNING Karen
Banai, Jeanette Ortiz, Jason Oppenheimer, Beverly A. Wright; Northwestern
University — Perceptual learning is often highly specific to the trained
stimuli. In auditory temporal-interval discrimination, studied here, learning is specific to the trained temporal-interval, suggesting that in order to
improve perception of multiple intervals each must be practiced. Our
goals were to determine whether practicing two standard intervals
within each of multiple daily training sessions yields learning on both,
and if so whether the presentation pattern of the standards affects the
amount of improvement. Temporal-interval discrimination of 1-kHz
tones was trained using a 2-alternative forced-choice adaptive protocol
for a total of 720 trials/day for 6 days (standard temporal-intervals: 100
and 350 ms; 360 trials each), in one of three daily regimens: (1) Blocked –
standard changed after 360 trials; (2) Interleaved – standard alternated
every 120 trials; (3) Random – standard randomly determined on each
trial. Only listeners in the Blocked regimen improved significantly on
both intervals from pre- to post-training relative to untrained controls.
Listeners in the other regimens typically improved during training, but
only on one interval, and not significantly when compared to controls.
These data demonstrate that improvement on temporal-interval discrimination on two intervals between which learning normally does not generalize can be induced by training both intervals within each training
session. However, robust learning does not occur if training switches too
frequently between the two intervals. It is possible that with frequent
alternation between intervals, either learning is not initiated or the presentation of one interval interferes with retention or consolidation of
learning initiated during practice on the other interval.

48

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing

A 107
PERCEIVING NEW MUSIC RECRUITS FLEXIBLE NEURAL
MECHANISMS Psyche Loui1, David L. Wessel1, Elaine H. Wu1,2, Robert
T. Knight1,2; 1University of California at Berkeley, 2Helen Wills Neuroscience
Institute — One of the intriguing characteristics of human cognition is its
tendency to form expectancies, which are important for language and
music. To investigate neural activity during the formation and violation
of expectations for sound patterns, we examined human electrophysiology during the perception of a novel system of musical sounds. The new
musical system consists of chord progressions in the Bohlen-Pierce scale
(which is based on 13 logarithmic divisions of a 3:1 frequency ratio)
instead of the Western scale (based on 12 divisions of a 2:1 ratio). Three
types of chord progressions were presented with different probabilities:
Standard (70%), Deviant (20%), and Fadeout (10%). Participants detected
the fadeout chords while their EEG was recorded. ERPs elicited by unexpected chords revealed a frontal Early Anterior Negativity (EAN) at 150210ms (F(1,22) = 5.77, p = 0.02 over site Fz), followed by a prefrontal Late
Negativity (LN) at 400-600ms (F(1,22) = 13.91, p = 0.001 over site Fpz).
These effects increased over the course of the experiment, and were dictated by the relative probability of the chords. In addition, increased low
Gamma-band activity (30-40Hz) was observed for unexpected chords
over frontal sites, consistent with other mismatch studies. Findings in the
new musical system parallel those obtained in Western music (Loui et al,
2005) and suggest that perception recruits flexible neural processes which
rapidly integrate and form expectations for probable events in a novel
context. Supported by NINDS NS21135. References Loui, P.; Grent-‘tJong, T.; Torpey, D.; Woldorff, M.G. (2005). Cognitive Brain Research, 25,
678-687.
A 108
SUCCESS-RELATED
AND
ERROR-RELATED
FEEDBACK
ACTIVATE REGIONS ASSOCIATED WITH AUTOMATIZATION
AND RECONCEPTUALIZATION, RESPECTIVELY. Matthew
S.
Shane, Kent A. Kiehl; The MIND Institute, University of New Mexico — Success-related and error-related feedback may be theorized to play very different roles in the shaping of goal-directed behavior. Whereas successrelated feedback promotes consolidation and automatization of performed action patterns, error-related feedback promotes reconsideration
of the performed action, as well as the problem space within which the
action was performed. Within this framework, the receipt of positive and
negative feedback may be anticipated to lead to substantially different
neural activity, associated with automatization and reconceptualization,
respectively. In the present study, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was utilized during performance of a time-estimation task
wherein participants were provided with contingent positive and negative feedback indicating the accuracy of their time estimations. This task
was chosen strategically, as a task that minimized both learning-related
and expectancy-related activations. Within this task, we report robust
activity in subcortical regions including nucleus accumbens, caudate, and
pallidum upon receipt of success-related feedback. In contrast, errorrelated feedback was associated with increased activity in dorsal anterior
cingulate cortex. We interpret these results as indicating that successrelated feedback, even within a context minimizing learning-related processing, activates neural regions association with automatization and
habit formation. Error-related feedback, in contrast, activates regions
with well-established roles in executive functions including action-monitoring and motor-selection.
A 109
EFFECTS OF COMPUTERIZED AUDITORY TRAINING ON EVENT
RELATED POTENTIALS ELICITED BY RAPIDLY PRESENTED
TONES IN 6 – 9 YEAR-OLD CHILDREN WITH A LANGUAGEBASED LEARNING IMPAIRMENT Jennifer T.
Friedman, Naseem
Choudhury, April A. Benasich; Rutgers University — Rapid auditory processing (RAP) is believed to underlie successful language acquisition, and
conversely, impaired RAP may be a key deficit in language-based learn-

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing

ing impairments (LI). In this study, RAP was evaluated in 6–9 year old LI
children (n=23) before and after completing a computerized auditory
intervention program (Fast ForWord) that targets impaired auditory processing. Age-matched controls (n=15) with normal language skills
received no intervention. Pre- and post- intervention event-related potentials (ERPs) were passively elicited in an oddball paradigm (standard
stimulus = 100-100Hz tone pair [80%]; deviant = 100-300Hz). Each tone
was 70 ms in duration, with 70 ms between the two tones. Inspection of
the control group’s P1-N1-P2 complex in the deviant waveform revealed
that all three of these components were distinct, peaking at ca. 110, 220,
and 240 ms, respectively. This complex was followed by a prominent N2
with a latency of ca. 270 ms. In the pre-intervention LI group, only the P1
and N2 peaks were observed. Following successful intervention, verified
by significant improvement in standardized language score (CELF-4,
p<.001), the LI group exhibited a typical P1-N1-P2 complex with three
identifiable components that resembled that of controls in morphology
and latency. No changes were observed in the P1 and N2 peaks. These
data suggest that RAP is altered in children with LI after completing Fast
ForWord such that they are better able to automatically process two brief,
rapidly presented, successive auditory stimuli.
A 110
CENTRAL AUDITORY PROCESSING DEFICITS IN PATIENTS
WITH AUDITORY HALLUCINATIONS AS REVEALED BY EVENTRELATED POTENTIALS. Susan
Rossell1, Hamish Innes-Brown1,
2
1
Katherine Henshall , Alex Sergejew , Tracey Shea1, Melissa Wright1, Colette
McKay3, Gary Egan4; 1Mental Health Research Institute of Victoria,
2University of Melbourne 3School of Life and Health Sciences, Aston University,
4Howard Florey Institute — It has been proposed that auditory hallucinations (Ahs) result from cortical or cortico-subcortical disconnection. The
results presented here are an initial event-related potential (ERP) exploration of data examining central auditory function and cortical connectivity. Twenty-two controls, twenty-six non-hallucinating patients with
psychosis (nAVH), and twenty-two currently hallucinating patients
(AVH) with psychosis were recruited. ERPs to words and tones (left-ear,
right-ear and bilaterally) were recorded during a passive listening task.
Data from the left- and right-ear stimuli are presented here. The auditory
N1 ERP was measured in two seven-channel composite regions - lefttemporal and right-temporal. Words: N1 is enhanced contralaterally in
the control group. With left words, both patient groups show reduced N1
in the right hemisphere. With right words both patient groups show a
reduction in the left hemisphere. Only AVH patients show a reduction in
the ipsilateral hemisphere. Tones: No contralateral N1 enhancement is
evident. With left stimuli both patient groups show reduced N1 compared to controls in both contra- and ipsi-lateral hemispheres. With right
stimuli only the AVH group show a reduction in both hemispheres. The
tones data confirms previous studies showing a reduced right ear advantage behaviourally in schizophrenia patients, especially in those that hallucinate – suggesting a neurobiological origin for such behaviour. The
word data suggests that more complex stimuli have a unique linguistic
quality that has been more strongly lateralized. Having shown basic ERP
differences in the processing of lateralized words and tones, our next step
is to look specifically at left-right hemisphere connectivity.
A 111
COMPLEX SOUNDS IN THE BRAIN: NEUROELECTRIC
CORRELATES REPRESENTING PITCH AND HARMONICITY
INFORMATION Ben Dyson1, Claude Alain2, Yu He2; 1University of
Sussex, 2Rotman Research Institute — The joint representation of pitch and
harmonicity information is essential in partitioning our sound world into
multiple and concurrently available acoustic objects. The recording of
auditory ERPs facilitates our understanding of these mechanisms as a
result of the fine temporal resolution and use of both passive and active
listening conditions that auditory ERP recording affords. Data will be
presented describing the passive representation of complex sounds varying in pitch and harmonicity at primary cortical areas (Experiment 1), the

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

effect of repetition and change on such representations (Experiment 2),
the influence of top-down effects in modulating stimulus representation
during responding (Experiment 3) and the distinction between different
stimulus tokens (Experiment 4) in organising complex sound. The data
will be discussed in terms of mandatory and optional constraints in
acoustic processing and current models of processing harmonically
related and unrelated sound.
A 112
CHARACTERIZING INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN SPEECH
PERCEPTION USING A COCHLEAR IMPLANT SIMULATION
Carolyn McGettigan, Stuart Rosen, Frank Eisner, Sophie Scott; Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, UK — The recipient of a
cochlear implant (CI) is faced with the challenge of learning to recognize
sounds in a brand new auditory environment; this can be a lengthy process, with highly variable levels of success across patients. We describe a
project investigating inter-individual variability in speech recognition
and perceptual learning in normal-hearing adults listening to a CI simulation (noise-vocoded speech). Noise-vocoded (NV) speech is degraded
in the spectral domain, sounding like a harsh, noisy whisper (Scott et al.,
2000). Intelligibility improves as the number of bands of information in
the stimulus is increased. We quantified speech recognition performance
along this acoustic parameter (number of bands for criterion recognition),
and explored cognitive correlates of this performance. NV sentence recognition scores were significantly correlated with measures of verbal IQ,
nonword repetition and rhythm perception. However, a study comparing recognition of NV sentences, words, consonants and vowels indicated a complicated pattern of correlations between these tasks i.e. high
recognition scores for one stimulus type does not guarantee a similar performance for all other categories. This suggests that the cognitive correlates of recognition performance may depend on the linguistic and
attentional demands of the perceptual task; for instance, recognition of a
highly predictable sentence loads on top-down semantic processes while
an isolated consonant demands attention at a lower, acoustic-phonetic
level. We conclude that noise-vocoded speech is a useful tool with which
we can quantify variability in speech recognition and identify significant
cognitive correlates, even within a relatively homogenous group of University-educated volunteers.
A 113
REPETITIVE
TMS
OF
CEREBELLUM
INTERFERESWITH
MILISECOND TIME PROCESSING Giacomo Koch1, Miguel Fernandez
del Olmo2, Binith Cheeran3, Sara Torriero1, Silvia Salerno1, Emanuele Lo
Gerfo1, Carlo Caltagirone1, John Rothwell3; 1Fondazione Santa Lucia IRCCS,
2INEF Galicia, 3Institute of Neurology, University College London — Time
processing is important in several cognitive and motor functions, but it is
still unclear how the human brain perceives time intervals of different
durations. Processing of time in millisecond and second intervals may
depend on different neural networks and there is now considerable evidence to suggest that these intervals are possibly measured by independent brain mechanisms. Using repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation (rTMS) we determined that the cerebellum is essential in
explicit temporal processing of millisecond time intervals and motor timing in the same intervals. In the first and second experiment, subjects’
performance in a time reproduction task of short (400-600 ms) and long
(1600-2400 ms) intervals, were evaluated immediately after application of
inhibitory rTMS trains over the left and right lateral cerebellum (Cb) and
the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). We found that rTMS
over the lateral cerebellum impaired time perception in the short interval
(millisecond range) only when the time intervals were encoded but not
when they were retrieved from memory; for the second range intervals,
impaired timing was found selectively for stimulation of the right
DLPFC. In other series of experiments the rTMS over the right lateral cerebellum affected the variability in the right index finger tapping task in
presence of auditory cue at 2 Hz but not at 1 or 0.5 Hz and neither in the
continuation phase or visual cue. Our results are consistent with the

49

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

hypothesis that the cerebellum can be considered as an internal timing
system, deputed to assess millisecond time intervals.
A 114
SCHIZOPHRENIA ALTERS SPECIFIC MISMATCH COMPONENTS
IN MEG AND EEG Klaus Mathiak1, Mikhail Zvyagintsev1, Klaus C.
Harke1, Frank Boers2, Jürgen Dammers2, Christine Norra3, Heike Thönneßen1,
1
RWTH Aachen, Germany, 2Research Center Juelich, Germany, 3Max-PlanckInsititute for Experimental Medicine, Goettingen, Germany — The mismatch
negativity (MMN) is an event-related potential reflecting automatic information processing and auditory sensory memory. This measure of early
cognitive function is well documented to be impaired in schizophrenia.
Different paradigms and methods (EEG and magnetoencephalography,
MEG), however, are applied to measure MMN and it is unclear whether
they reflect one unitary mechanism. We investigated the change of
MMN and its MEG counterpart in schizophrenia for a standard oddball
design (80% standards, 10% duration and 10% frequency deviants) and a
new optimum design (Näätänen et al. 2003; 50% standards and 10% deviants each reflecting change of one of 5 auditory features). Twelve
patients with schizophrenia (DSM IV) and 12 healthy controls were
investigated with EEG (64-channel) and 148-channel whole-head MEG.
Data analysis was performed with fully observer-independent automatized Matlab-routines based on localization from probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps. For the schizophrenia group, the mismatch response was
reduced most significantly and with the highest amplitude difference in
the neuromagnetic optimum design. We conclude that optimized MMN
designs are most promising for diagnostics of endophenotypes in schizophrenia. The differences in effects of schizophrenia on the different MMN
measures suggest (a) that MEG captures more early cortical processes as
compared to EEG which are mostly affected in schizophrenia and (b) that
adaptation/habituation, feature representation, and auditory memory
trace may contribute to MMN depending on its measurement technique
and the design parameters. The abstract feature representation as
addressed by the optimum design may be the core dysfunction in schizophrenia.
A 115
INDUCED GAMMA ACTIVITY IN YOUNG AND ADULT
MUSICIANS FOR THE PREFERRED STIMULI Antoine
Shahin1,
Larry Roberts2, Wilkin Chau3,4, Laurel Trainor2, Lee Miller1; 1University of
California Davis, California, 2McMaster University, Ont, Canada, 3University
of Toronto, Ont Canada, 4Rotman Research Institute — Induced
gamma
band activity (IGBA) is associated with object representation, specifically
for objects exhibiting the neurons’ preferred stimulus. We examined
IGBA in young pianists (4-5 years) trained in the Suzuki method, adult (>
18 years) musicians (violinists and pianists) and age-matched non-musicians. The adult violinists were members of Canada’s National Academy
Orchestra and the pianists were college music students. Participants listened passively to piano and violin tones and pure tones matched in
pitch to the music tones. When compared to pure tones, the highly
trained adult violinists and young pianists showed enhanced IGBA for
their preferred timbre, while the IGBA for the adult pianists was
enhanced for violin and piano tones equally. The Suzuki pupils’ IGBA
were equally present prior to and a year after commencement of musical
practice, suggesting an intrinsic musical aptitude. Non-musicians did not
exhibit any IGBA specificity between tones. The current work suggests
that induced gamma activity reflects a mechanism where sounds of the
preferred timbre are uniquely distinguished in the musician’s brain. This
likely comes about when stimulus characteristics are matched to previously encoded templates in memory.
A 116
NEUROELECTRIC CORRELATES OF RAPID PERCEPTUAL
LEARNING OF SPEECH SOUNDS Claude Alain, Sandra Campeanu,
Kelly Tremblay; Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre, Toronto,
Canada — Learning perceptual skills is characterized by rapid improvements in performance within the first hour of training (fast perceptual

50

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing

learning) followed by more gradual improvements that take place over
several daily practice sessions (slow perceptual learning). While it is
widely accepted that slow perceptual learning is accompanied by
enhanced stimulus representation in sensory cortices, there is considerable controversy about the neural substrates underlying early and rapid
improvements in learning perceptual skills. Here we measured eventrelated brain potentials (ERPs) while listeners were trained to identify
two consonant-vowel syllables. Listeners were also presented with a
broadband noise to examine whether training-related changes in ERPs
were specific to the trained speech cue. Participants performed 10 blocks
with 90 trials in each block. The ability to identify both speech sounds
improved from the first to the fourth block of trials, and remained relatively constant thereafter. Behavioral improvement coincided with an
increased negative peak (between 180-350 ms) over frontocentral sites,
and an increase in sustained activity over the parietal regions. While the
former was also observed for the noise, the latter was specific to speech
sounds. The results are consistent with a top-down non-specific attention
effect on neural activity during learning, as well as a more learning-specific modulation, reflecting behavioral improvements in speech identification.
A 117
AUDITORY CORTEX MONITORS TYPE AND SOURCE OF
ACOUSTIC INPUT AS REVEALED BY SPATIAL-TEMPORAL ICA
Vincent van de Ven1, Ingrid Christoffels1,2; 1University Maastricht, The
Netherlands, 2Leiden Institute of Brain and Cognition, LUMC, The
Netherlands — The monitoring of speech production and comprehension
involves a widespread cortical network, including frontal and temporal
areas, but it remains unclear how these areas contribute to these processes. A previous fMRI study of overt speech and feedback monitoring
identified the right auditory cortex (AC) as an important neural correlate
for speech monitoring. However, how specific is AC for monitoring, and
how is it functionally connected to other brain areas? Independent component analysis (ICA), an explorative, multivariate analysis technique,
can be used to investigate these questions. ICA does not require an a-priori defined model of brain activity, and reveals functionally connected
networks. In fMRI studies ICA is applied to either the spatial or the temporal domain; the combination can yield novel insights about the spatiotemporal dynamics of brain activity. We applied self-organizing group
ICA (sogICA), which investigates components on the multi-subject level,
to fMRI data of six healthy subjects. Each subject performed five tasks
(overt speech production with(out) noise, covert speech production, listening to own prerecorded voice with(out) noise) across five functional
runs. Spatial sogICA revealed seven spatial components (bilateral AC,
bilateral central sulcus, bilateral insula, left fronto-temporal, posterior
cingulate, left fronto-parietal and visual cortex) that contributed uniquely
to overt speech production, comprehension and monitoring. Temporal
sogICA of the AC component further showed two temporally independent sources for a) self-generated vs. perceived speech and b) language
vs. noise. This study revealed that, while independent but overlapping
cortical networks subserve speech processes, the AC distinguishes source
and type of the acoustic input.
A 118
NEURAL RESPONSES IN HUMAN AUDITORY CORTEX TO
VARYING STIMULUS RATES Roy Mukamel1, Yuval Nir2, Amos Arieli2,
Rafael Malach2, Itzhak Fried1,3; 1UCLA, Los Angeles, 2Weizmann Institute of
Science, Rehovot, Israel, 3Tel-Aviv University, Israel — While imaging techniques have provided important insights about the topographical organization of human auditory cortex – little is understood about the
principles that govern it at the single neuron level, especially during natural audition. We recorded extra-cellular spiking activity of neurons in
human auditory cortex of patients undergoing a clinical procedure. In
order to assess the effect of stimulus speed on the neural responses,
patients were presented with an audio-visual movie clip at various
speeds while pitch level across speeds was maintained. Despite the 2-4

Perceptual Processes: Multisensory Processing

fold increase in stimulus rate, no significant effect on firing rate was
observed (average firing rates for normal, double, and quadruple speeds
were 3.46±0.44Hz, 3.45±0.40Hz, and 3.62±0.44Hz respectively). The overall distribution of inter spike intervals (ISI) was similar even for short ISIs
reflecting strong bursts of evoked activity. In order to directly compare
the neural responses evoked by the normal and double speeds, the spike
train of the double speed was artificially “stretched” so that the durations
will be identical. The average level of correlation between the normal and
the “stretched” double speed was 0.44±0.03 and 0.47±0.03 between the
double and quadruple speeds. In comparison, the correlation between
two repeats of the same stimulus was 0.37±0.03 and 0.44±0.03 for normal
and double speeds respectively. Our data suggest that the dynamics of
auditory responses can be explained as a combination of a precise temporal code indicating stimulus onset (within 10 ms) and a speed invariant
rate coding of the stimulus content.

Perceptual Processes: Multisensory
Processing
A 119
SOUND-INDUCED ILLUSORY FLASHES: ISSUES FOR A
PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION. Hamish
InnesBrown1,2, David Crewther1; 1Brain Sciences Institute, Swinburne University,
2Mental Health Research Institute of Victoria — The first clear case where
auditory information radically affects unambiguous visual perception
was documented some years ago (Shams, Kamitani and Shimojo, 2000).
Varying the number of auditory beeps presented coincidently with visual
flashes was found to vary the number of visual flashes perceived. The
illusory effect is phenomenological rather than qualitative, is stable with
respect to many experimental variables and as such is thought to reflect
an extensive property of polysensory mechanisms in the brain. Classic
time-locked averages (ERPs) and event-related spectral perturbation
(ERSP) are compared for this data set. Although the behavioural data
indicated that the illusion occurred on 53% of one-flash/two-beep trials,
no differences were found in the ERP’s between illusion and non-illusion
trials. Examination of ERSP plots revealed that illusion trials showed a
transient increase in gamma-band activity (40-45Hz) at around 170ms,
while non-illusion trials showed a decrease in gamma-band power at the
same time, and a transient increase in beta (20-30Hz) power at around
100 ms. Although only small ERP differences were found between the
illusion and non-illusion trials, non time-locked dynamic changes in
brain activity were found to exhibit different patterns between illusion
and non-illusion trials.
A 120
THE EFFECT OF CROSS-HAND POSITION ON VISUO-SPATIAL
MAP FOR ACTION IN A PATIENT WITH LEFT PARIETAL LOBE
DAMAGE Chiharu Niki1, Takashi Maruyama2, Yoshihiro Muragaki2,
Takatsune Kumada1; 1AIST (Advanced Industrial Science and Technology),
2Tokyo Women's Medical University — There is little evidence that how
visual and proprioceptive representations of hands are integrated into a
visuo-spatial map for action. In this study, we investigated the effect of
visual representation of hands in a spatial S-R compatibility task. Participant: A 32-year-old man (GY) with left parietal lobe damage participated.
Method: A target was presented either to the right or left of fixation. GY
was asked to identify the side of the target by pressing a key assigned to
the location. There were two hand posture conditions: uncross-hand (u)
and cross-hand (c). There were two compatibility conditions: In the compatible condition (C), GY responded to the target location by spatially
corresponding keys. In the incompatible condition (I), GY responded by
opposite keys to the target location. These two conditions were orthogonally combined; uC, uI, cC, and cI. All conditions were performed under
following three visual conditions of own hands; uncovered, covered, and
fake hands. Reaction time (RT) and error rate were recorded. Results: RT
of cI under uncovered hands was longer than any other visual conditions.

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

Error rate was highest in cI under fake hands among other visual conditions. Discussion: Results suggested that the longer RT under uncovered
hands reflected GY's deficit in matching of visual representations of hand
to proprioceptive one, while error responses under fake hands reflected
failure of matching these representations. It was difficult for GY to remap
and match multiple representations of hands. These processes might
involve coding a visuo-spatial map for action.
A 121
THE ROLE OF SUPERIOR COLLICULUS IN AUDIO-VISUAL
INTEGRATION IN HUMANS: CLUES FROM THE REDUNDANT
TARGET EFFECTS Nadia
Bolognini1, Silvia Savazzi2,
Emanuela
Bricolo1, Carlo A. Marzi2, Angelo Maravita1; 1University of Milano Bicocca,
2
University of Verona — The superior colliculus (SC) is a critical structure
for multimodal integration in lower species and may be an important
candidate for multimodal integration in human as well. In particular one
could hypothesize that auditory and visual stimuli must be integrated in
the SC in order to efficiently orient spatial attention in extrapersonal
space. In the present study we aimed at understanding the role of the SC
for audio-visual integration in humans and its spatial constraints by
using a simple reaction time task. Subjects gave speeded responses to
either single (auditory or visual) or audiovisual stimuli presented at fixation (experiment 1) or at lateralized right or left locations (experiment 2) .
Responses to the bimodal stimuli were faster than to single stimuli of
either modality for central as well as lateralized (both spatially congruent
or incongruent) audiovisual pairings, the so-called Redundant Signal
Effect. However, the bimodal speed advantage was related a neural coactivation mechanism (Miller 1982) only when a red monochromatic
visual stimulus was presented at the same location of the auditory stimulus, while probabilistic summation occurred for spatially incongruent
audiovisual pairings. Instead, monochromatic purple stimuli, invisible to
the SC, always yielded probabilistic summation. The disappearance of
the redundancy gain with purple or non-coincident stimuli suggests a
critical role of the human SC for this mechanism. Indeed, animal studies
show that SC neurons do not respond to purple stimuli (Summer et al.
2002) and that they show optimal multisensory enhancement for spatially
coincident audiovisual stimuli (Stein & Meredith, 1993).
A 122
OVERCOMING DIFFERENCES IN EMBODIMENT: THE MIRROR
SYSTEM AND GOAL MATCHING Valeria Gazzola1, Henk van der
Worp1, Theo Mulder1,2, Wicker3, Giacomo Rizzolatti4, Christian Keysers1;
1
University of Groningen, Groningen, NL, 23Royal Netherlands Academy of
Arts and Sciences, Kloveniersburgwal, Amsterdam, 3Institut de Neurosciences
Cognitives de la Méditerranée, CNRS, Marseille, France, 4Universita di Parma,
Parma, Italy — The mirror system (MS) for actions is thought to contribute to the understanding of the actions of others by mapping a particular
observed action onto the corresponding motor program of the observer.
But would the MS contribute to the perception of hand actions even if the
observer never had any hands or arms? Would it remain silent, because
the observer lacks matching motor programs for hand actions, or would
it respond because the observer has motor programs for the foot or
mouth that have corresponding goals? We tested these hypotheses by
scanning two aplasic subjects, born without any arms or hands, while
watching movies of hand actions. We compared their brain activity with
that of 16 control subjects. To identify the MS, all subjects additionally
executed actions with different effectors (feet, mouth and, for controls,
hands). Aplasic subjects activated their ‘mirror areas’ as strongly as controls, demonstrating the brain’s capacity to mirror actions that deviate
from the motor programs and embodiment of the observer. This finding
suggests that the MS is not tied to the effector used by the observed
agent, but instead flexibly maps the observed goal onto what-ever effector the observer may normally use to achieve similar goals. Such effector
independent goal-matching sheds new light on the functional organization of the MS, indicating that the brain can mirror a much wider range of
actions than previously assumed and offers a neural basis for the behavioral predominance of goals during imitation.

51

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

A 123
LOCALIZING THE SELF OUTSIDE ONE’S BODY: A FULL BODY
ANALOGUE OF THE RUBBER HAND ILLUSION Bigna
Lenggenhager, Tej Tadi, Olaf Blanke; Ecole polytechnique fédéral de Lausanne
(EPFL), Lausanne — During the rubber-hand-illusion healthy subjects
misidentify a foreign hand as their own hand (misidentification) and
localize their own hand as shifted towards the foreign hand (mislocalization). These findings corroborate earlier data in patients suffering from
somatoparaphrenia. Yet, clinical evidence from autoscopic phenomena
suggests that not just body parts, but the entire body can be mislocalized
and misidentified. Using Virtual Reality, the present study examined the
potential of a full body analogue of the rubber-hand-illusion to induce
misidentification/mislocalization of the entire body. The subject’s back
was stroked by the investigator and recorded with a 3D-camera from 2m
distance. While being stroked, the subjects either saw their own back
(condition I), the back of a mannequin (condition II) or an object (control
condition) being stroked and projected directly (synchronous) or timelagged (asynchronous) on a Head Mounted Display. After stroking, subjects were passively displaced and asked to return to their initial position
(deviations were measured). Subjects filled out a modified “rubberhandquestionnaire”. Results of the questionnaire showed that for the synchronous conditions I and II, subjects felt as if the virtual character was their
own body. This was not the case in the control or asynchronous conditions. The synchronous experimental conditions showed also a significantly larger shift towards the projected body/mannequin than the
asynchrounous and control conditions. These data suggest that self location – due to conflicting visual-somatosensory input – is prone to misidentification and mislocalization as previously reported for body parts.
These findings are discussed with respect to neural and functional mechanisms of embodiment.
A 125
OCCIPITAL TMS HAS OPPOSING EFFECTS ON VISUAL AND
AUDITORY
PERIPHERAL
STIMULUS
DETECTION:
IMPLICATIONS FOR MULTISENSORY INTERACTIONS Vincenzo
Romei1, Micah M. Murray2, Gregor Thut1; 1University Medical School,
Geneva, Switzerland, 2Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne,
Switzerland — Recent studies show that multisensory interactions occur
during initial sensory transmission, i.e. early in time and in low-level cortical areas. We investigated the mechanisms underlying early auditoryvisual interactions using Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) and a
simple reaction time (RT) task to rudimentary stimuli. Brief auditory or
visual stimuli were presented alone or simultaneously (A, V, AV). These
peripheral stimuli were paired with visual cortex stimulation by singlepulse TMS over the occipital pole, applied at delays of 30-150ms from
peripheral stimulus onset. RTs to auditory stimuli were significantly
shortened (beneficial effect) when the visual cortex was stimulated by
TMS at 60-75ms post-stimulus onset, whereas RTs to visual stimuli were
prolonged (interference effect) by TMS at the same delays (relative to
TMS over a control site). This reveals a double dissociation of TMS-effectiveness depending on input modality. No TMS-effect was observed for
AV-stimulation. The beneficial effect of combined peripheral auditory
and TMS-induced visual stimulation matched the RT facilitation for
peripheral multisensory AV stimulation without TMS, indicative of interactions between the peripherally evoked auditory and TMS-induced
visual activity. Its temporal profile relative to peripheral stimulus onset
(60-75ms) is suggestive of a window of increased visual cortex sensitivity
for conveying auditory-visual interactions that coincides in time with the
initial volley of visual input. The data support a model of early AV-convergence where auditory input is changing the sensitivity of visual neurons (gain control) or their connectivity with ‘auditory’ areas (gating
control) in an early time-window, and consequently affecting behavior in
a multisensory setting.

52

Perceptual Processes: Multisensory Processing

A 126
ROLE OF FRONTAL CORTEX IN RELATIVE DURATION AND
DISTANCE JUDGMENTS Aldo Genovesio, Satoshi Tsujimoto; NIMH — We
recorded frontal-cortex activity from a rhesus monkey discriminating relative durations and distances. In the duration task, a blue circle and a red
square appeared sequentially at the monkey’s fixation point (screen center), each followed by a delay period (D1 after the first stimulus and D2
after the second). Stimulus durations ranged from 50ms to 3.2s. After
D2, the two stimuli appeared simultaneously, one to the left and one to
the right of screen center. To receive a reward, the monkey had to choose
the stimulus that had persisted longer in its initial presentation. In the
distance task, the stimuli appeared for 1s at different distances from
screen center, one above and one below it. Matching the duration task,
the stimuli later appeared simultaneously, and the monkey had to choose
the stimulus that had been located farthest from the center. We used oneway ANOVA (p<0.05) on neuronal activity during the first 400ms of D2,
with relative duration or distance as the factor. In the duration task, 21%
of 182 neurons encoded relative duration: shorter and longer in roughly
equal numbers. In the distance task, 21% of 312 neurons encoded relative
distance from screen center: nearer and farther in roughly equal numbers.
For 37 spatiotemporal- comparator neurons studied in both tasks, 12
encoded only relative duration, 19 only relative distance, and 6 both.
These findings indicate that during comparative judgments, frontal neurons can contribute to decisions about relative magnitude in both the spatial and temporal domains.
A 128
PERCEPTUAL FUSION OF MISMATCHED AUDIOVISUAL
INFORMATION REQUIRES WORKING MEMORY: AN FMRI
STUDY OF THE MCGURK EFFECT Gary E Strangman1, Elena K.
Festa2, Lisa Moran2, Jill C. Gitten2, William C. Heindel2; 1Harvard Medical
School, 2Brown University — In the McGurk effect, perception of auditory
speech information is altered by the presence of conflicting visual speech
information. For example, subjects hearing 'ba' while seeing a speaker
articulate 'ga' often fuse the conflicting information and report hearing
'da.' The neurophysiological mechanism underlying this illusory percept,
however, remains unclear. We examined this question by assessing the
differential brain activation associated with perceptually fused and nonfused audiovisual speech stimuli using either consistent or inconsistent
information across modalities. Participants were prescreened to identify
“McGurk fusers” sensitive to temporal asynchrony (i.e., they identified
conflicting audiovisual stimuli as illusory percepts under temporallysynchronous conditions but as veridical audio matches under asynchronous conditions). For both temporal conditions, audiovisual stimuli consisted of video clips of an individual mouthing non-words (e.g., 'idi')
while the voice provided consistent ('idi') or inconsistent ('imi') audio
information. During an event-related fMRI scanning session, participants were shown all stimulus types and asked to identify the auditory
percept by keypress. When audiovisual information was consistent,
asynchronous (perceptually non-fused) stimuli elicited greater bilateral
activation than synchronous stimuli in brain areas associated with the
visuospatial and phonological working memory systems (dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex, posterior parietal cortex, anterior cingulate). Among
synchronous stimuli, inconsistent (but perceptually fused) information
elicited greater left-lateralized activation of brain areas associated with
phonological working memory than consistent information. These
results suggest that while McGurk speech stimuli elicit a phenomenological experience of coherent illusory percepts, a more active engagement of
the phonological working memory loop appears necessary to generate or
maintain that illusory percept.

Perceptual Processes: High-Level Vision

A 129
SPATIAL SELECTIVE ATTENTION MODULATES AUDITORYSOMATOSENSORY INTERACTIONS. A HIGH-DENSITY ERP
STUDY. Jennifer Montesi1, Mauel Gomez-Ramirez2,1, John Foxe2,1, Pejman
Sehatpour1; 1The Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, 2City
College of The City University of New York — The aim of this experiment
was to determine whether selectively attending to stimuli on one side of
space influences Auditory-Somatosensory interactions, and to characterize the spatiotemporal dynamics of the integration effects on the attended
and the unattended sides. The somatosensory stimuli consisted of vibrations delivered to the tip of the index and the middle finger of the right or
left hand. The auditory stimuli were vibratory sounds delivered through
speakers that were spatially aligned with the hand positions. This was
done to maintain maximal possible ecological validity. Subjects were
required to selectively attend to the stimuli on just one side (right or left)
while ignoring stimulation on the other side. These were counterbalanced
across stimulus blocks. The task of the subjects was to respond when rare
target stimuli were detected. This was done to ensure that the subjects
were attending to the stimuli. Task difficulty was calibrated psychophysically on an individual subject basis. Analyses: ERP multisensory interactions for standard (non-target) stimuli on the attended side were
compared to the multisensory interactions for standard (non-target) stimuli when they were presented to the same side but were ignored (unattended standards). Results: Preliminary electrophysiological results
reveal attentional modulation of the unisensory and the auditory-somatosensory multisensory ERP responses.
A 130
VISUAL SUBSTITUTION LEARNING OF ABSTRACT SHAPES VIA
AUDITORY INPUT Jung-Kyong
Kim, Robert J Zatorre; McGill
University, Montreal Neurological Institute — The notion behind visual
substitution is to replace vision by another sensory input while conveying the essence of the visual information. The current study investigated
tactile learning using auditory input in sighted subjects. We used the
visual substitution algorithm called the ‘vOICe’ which translates visual
images into soundscapes (Meijer, 1992), but applied it to tactile stimuli.
Over the course of approximately three weeks, subjects participated in
nine ~2-hour training sessions during which they learned the relationship of various abstract shapes to their corresponding converted sounds.
In order to prevent the use of vision, subjects were blindfolded throughout each session. They used their right hands to explore a tactile shape
that was embossed on a piece of paper while simultaneously hearing the
sound corresponding to the given shape. Subjects were evaluated with
forced-choice recognition tasks at the end of every three training sessions
using both the items encountered during training and new items
designed to test for generalization. Significant improvement was
observed over time in recognizing the corresponding converted sounds
for both old and novel shapes, suggesting generalization of learning of
shapes via auditory input. In addition, at the end of the three-week training period, subjects were given a visual task where they were to recognize visual images, seen for the first time, corresponding to converted
sounds. High accuracy on this task was observed even though the feedback subjects received throughout training was solely tactile in nature,
suggesting crossmodal transferability of the substitution learning from
the tactile to the visual modality.
A 131
DISTINCT SENSORY-MOTOR INTEGRATION REGIONS FOR
VOCAL TRACT VS. MANUAL EFFECTORS: AN FMRI STUDY OF
SKILLED MUSICIANS Judy Pa, Gregory Hickok; University of California,
Irvine — There has been substantial research on sensory-motor integration within the visual system. For instance, distinct regions of parietal
cortex have been linked to particular motor systems, such as AIP for
grasping and LIP for ocular movements. Recent work has contributed to
this body of work from the perspective of another sensory modality,
namely audition. A Sylvian-parietal-temporal area (Spt) has been found

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

to have auditory-motor response properties, and has been hypothesized
to be part of a sensory-motor integration region for the vocal tract. Such a
view predicts that activity in Spt will be modulated by manipulations of
output modality to a greater extent than by manipulations of sensory
input modality. We employed a 2x2 design in which we co-varied sensory input modality with motor output system. Skilled musicians were
presented with musical notation (visual) or tonal melodies (auditory) and
were instructed to either covertly hum (vocal tract) or imagine playing
(manual) the melody. Spt responded more strongly to the hum than play
condition, but was not affected by input modality, indicating selectivity
for output, but not input manipulations. An inferior parietal site showed
preferential responses to the play condition, and was similarly unaffected
by input modality. These results suggest that Spt and the inferior parietal
site are part of a larger sensory-motor network that is organized around
motor-effector systems, and are multi-sensory in nature.
A 132
INFLUENCE OF LATERALIZED AUDITORY STIMULATION ON
EGOCENTRIC REFERENCE Eve Dupierrix1, Théophile Ohlmann1,2,
Sylvie Chokron1,2; 1CNRS - UMR/Université Pierre Mendès-France, France,
2Fondation Ophtalmologique A. de Rothschild, Paris, France — The
present
study aimed to study the role of perception in the construction of the egocentric reference position. To reach this aim, twenty-four normal participants were submitted to a proprioceptive straight ahead pointing (SAP)
task before and after a lateralized auditory task (in the left or the right
hemispace). In the lateralized auditory task, participants had to judge
whether two sequential pure tones were identical or differed regarding
their frequency. The task was divided in two conditions in which auditory stimuli were presented either in the left or in the right hemispace
respectively. Data analysis consisted in comparing the position of the
egocentric reference (SAP) in the pre and the post-tests. Results showed
that the position of the egocentric reference is depdendent upon the perceptual experience. As a matter of fact, when the auditory judgement task
was restricted to the left hemispace, it induced a subsequent leftward
deviation of the egocentric reference whereas a rightward auditory stimulation did not affect the position of the egocentric reference as recorded
by the SAP task. These findings indicate that the position of the egocentric reference depends on the sensory experience even in the auditory
modality. These results are discussed with regards to cognitive models of
spatial cognition and have some clinical and theoritical implications for
spatial disorders such as unilateral spatial neglect.

Perceptual Processes: High-Level Vision
A 133
CONTEXTUAL
PROCESSING
OF
FACES
IN
THE
PARAHIPPOCAMPAL CORTEX Elissa
Aminoff1,2, Alumit Ishai3,
Moshe Bar2,4; 1Harvard University, 2Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging
at MGH, Harvard Medical School, 3Institute of Neuroradiology, University of
Zurich, Switzerland — The parahippocampal cortex (PHC) has previously
been implicated in both place processing (e.g., PPA) as well as in episodic
memory. We have proposed that the underlying function of the PHC
should instead be perceived as contextual associative processing, which
is a necessary component of both navigation and memory. We have
tested this extensively (Bar & Aminoff 2003, Aminoff et al. 2006) by investigating the activation elicited by objects that are strongly associated with
a place-related context e.g., a parking meter, or by objects that are
strongly associated with a non-spatial context e.g. a birthday cake. Both
showed significant PHC activation compared with the activation elicited
by objects with weak or no contextual associations (e.g., an apple).
According to our proposal, any associative object should activate the
PHC. To test this generalization, we considered famous faces. Famous
faces tend to be highly associative (e.g., Tom Cruise) with rich pictorial
and semantic information, and are not typically associated with any specific place. Indeed, contrasting famous faces (i.e., contemporary Holly-

53

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

wood celebrities) with unfamiliar faces revealed significant activation
within the PHC in agreement with our prediction. We will present a clear
comparison of the activity elicited by place scenes, strong contextual
objects, and famous faces to show that they activate overlapping regions
of the PHC. This observation adds important support to our conclusion
that the PHC emphasizes contextual associations. The modified perception that we propose for the role of the PHC, thus, bridges seemingly contradicting findings by placing them in a broader context.
A 134
PERCEIVING AGE AND GENDER IN UNFAMILIAR FACES:
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL EVIDENCE FOR AUTOMATIC
CATEGORY ACTIVATION Holger Wiese, Stefan R. Schweinberger,
Markus F. Neumann; Friedrich-Schiller-University of Jena — Efficient processing of person-related information from unfamiliar faces is thought to
proceed via categorization processes (e.g. old vs. young, male vs. female).
However, it remains controversial whether relevant categories are activated automatically, or whether category activation is determined by
controlling factors, such as processing strategies set by the experimental
task. We investigated cognitive and neural processes underlying unfamiliar face categorization in an experiment consisting of two consecutive
blocks, each with consecutive priming and test phases. During both priming and test phases, participants categorized unfamiliar faces according
to either age or gender. Faces presented at test were either new, or were
primed in a task-congruent (same task during priming and test) or incongruent (different tasks) condition. Reaction times (RTs) revealed significant priming for both congruent and incongruent faces during age
categorization, and event-related potentials (ERPs) yielded an increased
N170 as a result of priming. During gender categorization only congruent
faces elicited an RT priming effect, although ERPs revealed a significant
reduction of the N400 for both congruent and incongruent faces. These
results suggest a differentiated perspective on category activation in person perception: Information about age is extracted automatically from
unfamiliar faces, and priming in age categorization facilitates early structural encoding stages, represented by the N170. By contrast, while behavioural gender categorization depends on controlled processing, the N400
results suggest that priming in gender categorization automatically facilitates semantic processing of the target face.
A 135
WHEN ACTION INFLUENCES PERCEPTION: EVIDENCE FOR
RAPID ACCESS TO ACTION REPRESENTATIONS DURING
VISUAL OBJECT RECOGNITION Markus
Kiefer1, Eun-Jin Sim1,
Hannah Helbig2, Markus Graf2; 1University of Ulm, Ulm Germany, 2MaxPlanck-Institute for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Munich, Germany — It is
typically assumed that perception for action and object recognition are
subserved by functionally and neuroanatomically distinct processing
streams in the brain. However, in a recent behavioral action priming
study we showed that action representations facilitate object recognition,
suggesting an interaction between both visual processing streams (Helbig, H. B., Graf, M., & Kiefer, M. (2006). Experimental Brain Research,
174, 221-228). The present study aimed at further elucidating the role of
action representations in visual object recognition. We determined the
temporal and spatial pattern of brain activity underlying the action priming effect using event-related potentials (ERPs). Similar to our behavioral
study, two briefly displayed manipulable objects were sequentially presented, either affording congruent or incongruent motor interactions.
Participants had to name the objects after a short delay. We found an
effect of action congruency (action priming effect) on ERPs starting at
about 100 ms after the onset of the target object at fronto-central electrodes close to the motor cortex. As in the previous behavioral study, this
effect was absent when the prime stimulus was presented as a word
showing that the action priming effect relies on action representations
specified by visual object information. Our present ERP findings demonstrate that the action priming effect in object recognition arises from rapid
access to action representations in motor areas even though subjects did

54

Perceptual Processes: High-Level Vision

not act upon the objects. This suggests that knowledge about potential
interactions with objects can influence their recognition within the first
100 ms of perceptual processing.
A 136
TRAINING BLINDSIGHT FOR DISCRIMINATING NATURAL
SCENES IN HEMIANOPIA Aimée de Vanssay1,2, Olivier Coubard1,2,
Christian Marendaz1,2, Nathalie Guyader1,3, Mickaël Obadia1, Olivier
Gout1, Sylvie Chokron1,2; 1Fondation Ophtalmologique Adolphe de Rothschild,
Paris, France, 2UMR 5105 CNRS-Université Pierre Mendès-France, Grenoble,
France, 3CNRS, INPG, Grenoble, France — Homonymous
hemianopia
(HH) results from a unilateral occipital lobe lesion and refers to a symmetrical loss of vision in both eyes. This experiment was designed to
investigate whether hemianopic patients can learn from visual training to
analyze visual information in their blind field. Eight right brain-damaged
patients (RBDs/left HH), 4 left brain-damaged patients (LBDs/right
HH), and 24 healthy participants were flashed city, mountain or beach
scenes in either their central, left, or right visual field in two sessions (pretest and post-test) of a forced-choice categorization task (is it a city, a
mountain or a beach?). Between the pre- and the post-test, participants
took part in two training sessions during which they were asked to
decide if pairs of scenes were identical or not. Contrary to RBDs, LBDs
exhibited greater-than-chance accuracy in the pre-test, although performing less efficiently than normals. During the post-test, reaction times were
significantly reduced in all participants, and accuracy increased even in
the blind visual field for some categories of scenes. These preliminary
findings suggest that hemianopics can learn some complex visual information, and use it to perform visual analysis in their blind hemifield.
A 137
BLINDSIGHT IN NATURAL SCENE PERCEPTION: A STUDY ON
LEFT AND RIGHT HEMIANOPIC PATIENTS Céline Perez1,2, Olivier
Coubard1,2, Christian Marendaz1,2, Carole Peyrin1,2, Nathalie Guyader1,3,
Mickaël Obadia1, Olivier
Gout1, Sylvie
Chokron1,2; 1Fondation
Ophtalmologique Adolphe de Rothschild, Paris, France, 2UMR 5105 CNRSUniversité Pierre Mendès-France, Grenoble, France, 3CNRS, INPG, Grenoble,
France — Homonymous hemianopia (HH) refers to a symmetrical loss of
vision in both eyes and results from a unilateral occipital lobe lesion. This
study explored the ability of hemianopic patients to visually detect and
discriminate natural scenes in their central, left, or right visual fields.
Seven right brain-damaged patients (RBDs/left HH), 8 left brain-damaged patients (LBDs/right HH) and 32 healthy participants were submitted to a detection and a categorization task of natural scenes (city or
forest images) flashed in either their central, left, or right visual field. The
scenes were either filtered in high- (HSF) or low- (LSF) spatial frequencies
or were non-filtered. Within their blind visual field, RBDs showed
impairments in the detection of all kinds of natural scenes, whereas LBDs
mostly failed in the detection of HSF scenes. Performance was better in
categorization than in detection for some patients confirming that some
visual judgement in a forced-choice task can be performed in the blind
hemifield without any conscious detection of the stimulus (blindsight).
Detection and categorization were better for LSF than for HSF scenes in
all patients.These results are discussed with regard to hemispheric specialization for spatial frequencies and to neuroanatomical correlates of
blindsight.
A 138
PERCEPTUAL ORGANISATION IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Nicole
Joshua, Alison O'Regan, Susan Rossell; Mental Health Research Institute — It
has been suggested visual perception using Gestalt principles is impaired
in schizophrenia. However, a small number of studies suggest Gestalt
processing is intact in schizophrenia. The current study investigated this
discrepancy with three perceptual organisation tasks. Gestalt principles
of proximity and similarity were examined in schizophrenia patients (n =
28), and healthy controls (n= 26). Participants completed the Embedded
Figures Task (EFT) and the Similarity Task. Both tasks required participants to determine whether a simple figure was hidden within a more

Perceptual Processes: High-Level Vision

complex figure. Schizophrenia patients did not show impairments on
either task. Initial results suggest they are able to utilise principles of
Gestalt. However, we speculate that reaching this conclusion is premature. The working memory component of the tasks may have masked differences in Gestalt processing. To address this issue, a revised version of
the EFT task was devised. The Contour Integration Task was also
included to test a third Gestalt principle of continuity. Neither task
involved working memory. Results showed no differential effects on the
revised EFT, indicating further evidence to suggest the Gestalt principles
of proximity and similarity are intact in schizophrenia. Results did indicate a difference in performance on the Contour Integration Task, suggesting schizophrenia patients may have difficulties applying the
principle of continuity. Taken together, results suggest deficits in performance of schizophrenia patients do not lie with tasks involving simple,
continuous, geometric shapes, but rather, with tasks involving complex,
non-continuous shapes. Further investigations into continuity as well as
closure capabilities in schizophrenia are planned.
A 139
SELECTIVITY OF HUMAN MIRROR SYSTEM RESPONSES
DURING OBSERVATION AND EXECUTION OF CONGRUENT
VERSUS INCONGRUENT HAND ACTIONS Trevor Chong1, Ross
Cunnington2,1, Mark A. Williams3,1, Jason B. Mattingley1; 1University of
Melbourne, 2Howard Florey Institute, 3Massachusetts Institute of
Technology — The mirror neuron system is thought to underlie the
human ability to recognise the actions and gestures of others. It does so
by providing a neural mechanism through which a perceived action can
be directly matched with its corresponding representation within the
observer’s own motor repertoire. For this direct matching mechanism to
mediate action understanding, a subset of mirror neurons should be
more active when the perceived and executed actions are identical, relative to when they are different. This strict correspondence has been demonstrated in monkeys, but the degree of correspondence required for
activation of human mirror areas remains unclear. Here, we used fMRI to
determine if areas within the mirror system are more active during the
observation of matching (congruent) hand gestures compared to those
that are non-matching (incongruent). Participants performed a series of
pantomimed hand actions, while simultaneously observing either a congruent or incongruent action in separate, counterbalanced blocks. Crucially, the observed actions were irrelevant to participants, so any
correspondence between observed and executed actions was incidental.
Our analysis revealed that, while performing a specific action, particular
nodes within the human mirror system were more active during the perception of congruent, relative to incongruent, actions. These findings
indicate that areas within the human mirror system do indeed demonstrate a strict correspondence between observed and executed actions.
We conclude that these mirror areas may be critical in the direct matching
process that underlies action recognition.
A 140
EXPLAINING INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY IN LATERALIZATION
FOR WORDS AND FACES Evelyne Mercure, Frederic Dick, Hanife
Halit, Mark H Johnson; Birkbeck-University of London — We
explored
potential sources of individual variability in lateralization for words and
faces by examining data from 4 event-related potentials (ERP) experiments. A total of 65 typically developing adults performed a one-back
task, a butterfly detection task or a target recognition task with written
words and human faces balanced for low-level psychophysical properties. Over the 4 experiments, word stimuli elicited a left lateralized N170
and face stimuli a right lateralized N170. Surprisingly, there was a strong
negative correlation between left lateralization for words and right lateralization for faces, suggesting that there may be stimulus-independent
processing strategies influencing lateralization for words and faces. This
idea is further supported by the results of a stepwise regression model on
lateralization of the N170, with age, gender, handedness, schooling, and
behavioral task as predictors. For both faces and words, behavioral task
was the factor with by far the most influence. Specifically, the N170 to

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

words was more left lateralized in the one-back task than in the recognition and butterfly detection task, while the N170 to faces tended to be less
lateralized in the one-back task compared to the other two tasks. Schooling also accounted for significant variance in the degree of left lateralization of the N170 to word stimuli. Gender, age and handedness did not
show a significant influence. These results suggest that most of the individual variability in lateralization may be best explained by differences in
processing strategies that individuals apply to both words and faces,
rather than by age, gender or handedness.
A 141
NEURAL CORRELATES OF COLOR CATEGORY PROCESSING
Elisabeth Fonteneau, Jules Davidoff; Goldsmiths College, University of London,
UK — Previous research using behavioral techniques reveals that the sensory color continuum can be modified by category. Within-category stimuli (Green0-Green1) now look more similar and are harder to distinguish
whereas between-category stimuli (Green0-Blue0) look more different
and are easier to distinguish even though their distances in color space
are equal. We report the first evidence for the neurophysiological architecture of color categories. We compared event-related brain potentials
(ERPs) elicited by physically identical colors (Green0) in three different
color contexts in an oddball paradigm while twenty participants performed an unrelated color task. Two of the contexts were different color
categories (large distance: Green0-Red0 vs. small distance: Green0-Blue0)
and the third context was different colors from the same category
(Green0-Green1). Our results showed that deviant colors stimuli in all
three different contexts elicited a positive deflection in the posterior
regions - the change-related positivity - compared to standard stimuli. In
addition, both magnitude of color difference and category difference
reduced the latencies of the change-related positivity (34 msec and 20
msec respectively). No amplitude effect was found to correlate with
either color magnitude or color category. We conclude that the changerelated positivity reflects color category as well as color deviancy processing. Moreover, category effects were not lateralised and suggest that,
even if color categories are derived from the color terms of a speaker’s
language, the changes to color appearance have been effected at a site
within visual cortex.
A 142
THE EFFECTS OF STIMULUS-ONSET ASYNCHRONY AND PRIME
DURATION ON MASKED REPETITION PRIMING IN PICTURES:
AN ERP STUDY Marianna Eddy, Annette Schmid, Phillip Holcomb; Tufts
University — We previously reported a series of ERP effects in a masked
picture priming paradigm in which a briefly presented prime picture
(50ms) was followed at a relatively short (110 ms) stimulus-onset asynchrony (SOA) by either the same or different target. These repetition
effects included an early anterior negativity/posterior positivity for unrepeated target pictures compared to repeated target pictures, peaking
around 190 ms post target onset (N190/P190). The N190/P190 effects
most likely index early visual processing in the ventral processing
stream. Small N300 and N400 effects were also observed for unrepeated
pictures compared to repeated pictures. It has been argued that the N300
effect is specific to processing of object representations while the N400
reflects a more general semantic process. The current experiments investigated how manipulating prime-target SOA (110ms, 230ms, 350ms,
470ms) and prime duration (30ms, 50ms, 70ms, 90ms) affects these early,
middle, and later ERP components. In the first experiment, the SOA
manipulation produced early priming effects (N190/P190) for all SOAs
while middle and later processing effects (N300/N400) were only
observed at shorter SOAs. When manipulating the prime duration in the
second experiment, effects at all time-windows were larger with
increased prime duration. In particular, with increasing exposure to the
prime, larger N300 and N400 effects were observed at the two longest
prime durations (70 and 90 ms). Taken together, these results suggest that
higher level object specific and semantic processing in feed-forward
object recognition requires a longer exposure to the prime rather than an
additional head start in processing.

55

Saturday, May 5, 6:30 – 8:30 PM

A 143
ARE FACES AND BODIES PROCESSED BY DISTINCT
MECHANISMS? EVIDENCE FROM THE INVERSION EFFECT AND
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES Galit Yovel1, Arielle Tambini2; 1Tel Aviv
University, 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology — It is well established
that faces are processed by specialized configural mechanisms. Interestingly, recent studies suggested that bodies, like faces, also engage configural processing mechanisms. Here we examined whether faces and
bodies are mediated by similar or separate mechanisms. In experiment 1
and 2, we measured the inversion effect for faces or bodies that differed
in identity or in head-view/body-posture. Our results show that the face
inversion effect is larger than the body inversion effect for both identity
discrimination and view/posture discrimination. These findings imply
that faces and bodies may be dissociated. To directly assess this idea in
Experiment 3 we examined the correlations between performance on
memory and perceptual matching of bodies or faces. The body perception task was positively correlated with the body memory task and the
face perception task was positively correlated with the face memory task.
In addition, there was no correlation between perceptual discrimination
of faces and bodies, but there was a positive correlation between the face
memory and the body memory tasks. Our findings suggest that faces and
bodies are processed by stimulus-specific mechanisms at the perceptual
stage and therefore suggest that bodies and faces are not processed by the
same configural mechanisms.
A 144
PRECISE ESTIMATION OF MEAN EMOTION IN CROWDS OF
FACES Jason Haberman, David Whitney; UC Davis, Center for Mind and
Brain — Although visual scenes are cluttered with individual objects,
there is often some degree of similarity between the items. For processing
efficiency, the visual system derives summary statistical information
about crowds of items in lieu of coding individual elements. This has
only been explored for low-level visual features. Here, we tested whether
observers extracted the ‘mean emotion’ of a set of faces, even when it was
impossible to code every member of the set. In experiment 1, participants
viewed sets of faces displaying varying levels of happiness. Participants
were more likely to indicate that a subsequently presented test face was a
member of the set as the emotion of the test face approached the mean
emotion of the set, even though the mean emotion was never presented
in the set. The results are not due to a prototype effect, as the mean emotion changed on every trial, thereby preventing prototype formation. In
experiment 2, participants were unable to identify which of two faces was
a member of the previously presented set, suggesting they lacked individualized item information. In experiment 3, participants indicated
whether a test face was happier or sadder than the mean emotion of the
set. Participants were extraordinarily precise in deriving the mean emotion, nearly matching their performance on a face discrimination task (i.e.
deciding which of two faces was happier). This evidence suggests there
are visual mechanisms, perhaps at multiple stages, that efficiently extract
statistical information about sets of objects ranging from low-level features to high-level objects.
A 145
ARE YOU LOOKING AT ME? NEURAL CORRELATES OF EYE
GAZE ADAPTATION Nadine Kloth1, Stefan R. Schweinberger1, Rob
Jenkins2; 1Friedrich-Schiller-University of Jena, Germany, 2University of
Glasgow, United Kingdom — Eye gaze is an important social signal and a
relevant attentional cue. Humans are extremely accurate at determining
the direction of gaze in others. However, recent research shows a dramatic effect of adaptation on gaze perception: After adaptation to faces
with eye gaze strongly diverted to one side, the ability to perceive smaller
gaze deviations to the same direction is severely impaired (Jenkins, Beaver, & Calder, 2006, Psychological Science). We further analyzed the characteristics of gaze direction aftereffects and examined neural correlates of
gaze adaptation using event-related potentials (ERPs). We compared participants’ ability to correctly classify left, straight and right gaze direction
before and after adaptation to eye gaze strongly diverted to either left or

56

Perceptual Processes: High-Level Vision

right. After adaptation to one side we found that correct classifications to
that side decreased and incorrect classifications as straight gaze
increased. Further, after adaptation gaze directed to the adapted side was
more often classified as being directed to the opposite side. The latter
finding is in some conflict with the assumption of distinct neuronal populations which selectively code particular directions of eye gaze. Our
behavioural results also suggest that gaze direction aftereffects are more
long-lasting (i.e. in the range of minutes) than previously thought.
Whereas the analysis of ERPs revealed an adaptation effect from 250-350
ms, no effects were found for the N170. This suggests that, rather than
changing processing of eye gaze ~170 ms in posterior temporal areas,
adaptation modifies subsequent processes that may be mediated by more
anterior temporal areas.
A 146
HIGH-LEVEL VISUAL AFTEREFFECTS INDUCED BY VIRTUAL
IMAGES. Jae-Jin Ryu, Avi Chaudhuri; McGill University — Findings
from numerous brain imaging studies suggest that real images and our
mental representations of those images share similar neural processing
mechanisms. If the patterns of neural activation elicited by visual imagery are similar to those elicited by real images, then it can be predicted
that the influence of visual imagery on neural processes underlying perception would be comparable to that of real images. The current study
investigated this possibility using selective-adaptation paradigm
designed to induce face-identity aftereffect (FIA). FIA is a high-level
visual aftereffect in which the perception of a face is influenced by previous exposure to a particular face with perceptually opposite features
(anti-face). We hypothesized that if similar neural mechanisms underlie
processing of visual images and visual percepts, FIA should be induced
by both real and virtual face images. In the virtual image condition of our
experiment, participants were shown the name of a newly-learned face
and asked to visualize the face. We found that merely visualizing an antiface was sufficient to produce shifts in the perception of subsequence face
images. Our results suggest that visual imagery and real images not only
recruit similar neural networks but also influence behavior in similar
manners.
A 147
DYNAMIC REORGANIZATION OF FUSIFORM GYRUS: LONGTERM BIRD EXPERTISE REDUCES FACE SELECTIVITY ChunChia Kung1,2, Colin Ellis1, Michael Tarr1; 1Brown University ,2Princeton
University — Category-selective neural responses in ventral-temporal
cortex have often been associated with expert-level processing of homogeneous object categories. Less concern is paid to the capacity issues
across multiple domains of expertise. If faces and other domains of expertise share the same (finite) neural resources, we might expect long-term
competition effects: increasing expertise in a non-face domain may
decrease the neural resources available for processing faces. Across two
fMRI studies using different groups of bird experts, we found that higher
behaviorally-measured bird expertise predicts both increasing categoryselective neural responses to birds and, concomitantly, decreasing category-selective neural responses to faces. This inverse relationship
between bird expertise and face selectivity in fusiform gyrus holds across
various tasks and methods of analysis, and is consistent with similar
results obtained with laboratory-trained experts. In a control experiment
we ruled out the possibility that birders have an attentional bias to birds,
or less interest to artificial face images. Interestingly, bird experts’ face
recognition performance was not measurably worse than novices. It may
be that the tasks used in our study were not sufficiently sensitive to
reveal the behavioral consequences of this neural tradeoff; or that some of
the flexible and redundant neural systems underlying face processing
were compromised without impairing behavioral performance. Overall,
our results point to common neural coding mechanisms in the categoryselective responses seen for faces and other domains of expertise. Moreover, such mechanisms appear to retain plasticity over one’s lifespan,
dynamically reorganizing as a consequence of experience.

Poster Session B
Higher Level Cognition: Executive Functions
B1
NEUROCOGNITIVE MECHANISMS OF PERCEPTUAL DECISIONMAKING IN THE HUMAN BRAIN Bruno
Kopp, Sandra Tabeling,
Carsten Moschner, Karl Wessel; Research Institute of Cognitive Neurology,
Klinikum Braunschweig — Decision-making is a fundamental capacity
which is crucial to many higher-order psychological functions. Nevertheless, very little is known about its neurocognitive implementation. We
recorded event-related potentials during a multidimensional visual targetdetection (´oddball´) task to determine whether variations in perceptual
distinctiveness modulate the nature of perceptual decision-making in the
human brain. In particular, the decision maker had to choose between
two-stage-processing of perceptual information obtained from independent sensory features or one-stage-processing performed on integrated
transformations of multidimensional sensory events. The N2/P3a-complex that was recorded in response to non-target stimuli emerged as decision-related neural activity. The modulations of the N2/P3a-amplitudes
indicated that two-stage-processing dominated when the perceptual distinctiveness of the sensory features differed strongly, whereas sensory features of comparable perceptual distinctiveness favored one-stageprocessing. Our analysis of the neural basis of perceptual decision-making
shows that the making of perceptual decisions involves an adaptive process of selecting among diverse decision rules.
B2
SEQUENCE LEARNING AND MEDIAL-FRONTAL: EXTERNAL
VERSUS INTERNAL ERROR EVALUATION Olav Krigolson, Kyle
Mathewson, Clay Holroyd; University of Victoria — The error-related negativity (ERN) is a component of the event-related brain potential that occurs
following negative feedback (fERN) and erroneous responses (rERN).
Recently, it has been proposed that the ERN reflects a reward prediction
error carried by the midbrain dopamine system. Importantly, this prediction error signal occurs at the earliest indication that events are worse than
expected. As such, during the time course of learning, people should shift
from external error evaluation (i.e., feedback: fERN) to internal error evaluation (i.e., efference copy: rERN). To examine this contention we had participants learn a seven-item sequence by trial-and-error. Our results
indicated that in the initial stages of learning error feedback evoked a
fERN. Furthermore, response errors in the learning phase of the experiment did not elicit a rERN. After learning had occurred, our results indicated that error feedback no longer elicited a fERN. While we did not find
a typical rERN associated with response errors made after the sequence
had been learned, we did find differences in the event-related brain potentials between the waveforms associated with response errors and correct
guesses. Importantly, our results suggest that during the time course of
learning participants in the present experiment shifted from an external to
internal mode of error evaluation
B3
ACTION AND CONSEQUENCE IN NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS
OF UNCERTAINTY Jamil P. Bhanji1, Jennifer S. Beer1, Silvia A. Bunge2,1;
1University of California at Davis, 2Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute,
University of California at Berkeley — Decision-making requires individuals
to choose from a variety of responses to maximize outcomes. In some
cases, a particular choice is clearly associated with a favorable outcome,
and individuals can make a decision by following the rules of association.
In other cases, individuals may be uncertain of what response to choose
and/or uncertain of what outcome will result from a particular choice.

Most previous functional imaging studies have focused on understanding
neural regions recruited under uncertainty while choosing a response. The
current study extended this previous research by examining neural systems associated with uncertainty (a) when choosing a response and (b)
when anticipating an outcome. Functional magnetic resonance imaging
data suggest that separable regions in the brain were recruited according
to level of uncertainty at the point of choice and anticipation of outcome.
Lateral orbitofrontal cortex and anterior insula showed greater activity for
higher levels of uncertainty prior to choice. Dorsal striatum, subgenual
cingulate cortex, and hippocampal regions showed greater activity for
higher levels of uncertainty during anticipation of outcomes. In contrast,
dorsolateral prefrontal and posterior parietal cortex were recruited for
rule-guided decisions that involved no uncertainty. Discussion focuses on
the implications of these findings for models of rule-guided behavior and
reinforcement learning.
B4
DOPAMINE AND COGNITIVE CONTROL: CANNABIS AND
ECSTASY USE IMPAIRS THE UPDATING OF VISUOMOTOR
BINDINGS Lorenza Colzato, Claudia Nanninga, Pieter van Leeuwen, Roxana
Asmus, Rianne van der Kleij, Bernhard Hommel; Leiden University — Animal
studies suggest that feature integration (episodic binding) across perception and action is driven by the dopaminergic system. We investigated in
humans whether the updating of episodic bindings between task-relevant
stimulus features and the response are affected by the use of ecstasy
(MDMA) and cannabis (THC)—two drugs that strongly impact the
dopaminergic system. As expected, recreational users of MDMA and THC
showed more pronounced rebinding costs than never-users, that is, their
performance was more impaired by a mismatch between the stimulusresponse relation in the current and the previous trial. This suggests that
dopaminergic pathways regulate the handling and control of episodic
event representations.
B5
THE INFLUENCE OF TASK CONFLICTS ON SWITCH-RELATED
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Shulan Hsieh; National Chung Cheng
University — This study aimed to investigate how stimulus-induced task
conflicts may affect task switching and how such effect may modulate
switch-related event-related potentials (ERPs). In this study, a pair-wise
task switching paradigm was employed where task switch and repeat trials were compared between conditions of foreknowledge and non-foreknowledge of the forthcoming task transition. The stimulus-display
consisted of a target and a distractor can produce task conflicts when both
are associated with two different tasks. Task conflicts were estimated by
comparing stimulus displays associated with only one task (neutral) to
those associated with two tasks (congruent or incongruent). The results
showed that mean response time for incongruent trials was slower than
that for congruent trials, and mean response time for congruent trials was
further slower than that for neutral trials. Previous ERP studies of task
switching have reported some switch-related ERP components. This study
observed that stimulus-induced task conflicts modulated the switchrelated ERP components. The results thus support the postulation that
suppression processes incurred by task conflicts may take place at the level
of task-set as well as the level of response-set.

57

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

B6
ANXIETY AND ERROR MONITORING: INCREASED ERROR
SENSITIVITY OR ALTERED EXPECTATIONS? Rebecca
Compton,
Joshua Carp, Laura Chaddock, Stephanie Fineman, Lorna Quandt, Jeffrey
Ratliff; Haverford College — This study tested the prediction that the errorrelated negativity (ERN), a physiological measure of error monitoring,
would be enhanced in anxious individuals, particularly in conditions
with threatening cues. Participants made gender judgments about faces
whose expressions were either happy, angry, or neutral. Replicating
prior studies, midline scalp negativities were greater following errors
than following correct responses (F(1,25)=13.79, p<.001). In addition,
state anxiety interacted with facial expression to predict ERN amplitudes
(F(2,46)=3.91, p<.04). Counter to predictions, increasing state anxiety was
correlated with smaller ERNs following errors in angry-face blocks (partial r = 0.58, p<.005) and larger ERNs following errors in happy-face
blocks (partial r = -0.60, p<.004 ). These results are inconsistent with the
simple notion that anxiety enhances error-sensitivity globally. Rather,
we interpret the findings within an expectancy violation framework, in
which anxious participants have altered expectations for success and failure in the context of happy and angry facial cues, with greater ERN
amplitudes elicited when expectations are violated.
B7
ATTENDING TO MIND AND BODY: MINDFULNESS TRAINING
REVEALS DISTINCT NEURAL MODES OF SELF-AWARENESS
Norman Farb1, Zindel Segal1, Helen Mayberg2, Jim Bean3, Deborah
McKeon3, Adam Anderson1; 1University of Toronto, 2Emory University, 3St.
Joseph's Health Centre — Despite of considerable progress specifying the
cognitive and neural mechanisms underlying the temporally extended
self (e.g., retrieval of personality traits from memory), little is known
about the neural mechanisms by which humans monitor momentary selfexperience in the psychological present. To characterize these two aspects
of self-awareness, we used fMRI to examine regional brain activity in
individuals before or after 8 weeks of training in mindfulness meditation
(MT), during 1) “narrative” self-focus (NF), characterized by monitoring
the self related to enduring traits and 2) “experiential” self-focus (EF),
characterized by monitoring the self related to moment-to-moment experience, while reading personality descriptors. Novice participants
engaged cortical midline self-referential regions (medial prefrontal cortex, mPFC) to a lesser degree during EF than NF. Following MT, EF
resulted in more pronounced and widespread reductions in midline cortical activity, which were replaced by a right lateralized network, comprised of the ventral and dorsal PFC and posterior cortical foci, including
regions associated with viscero-somatic representations (right insula,
inferior parietal lobule and secondary somatosensory cortex). Consistent
with the importance of mPFC disengagement for EF, functional connectivity analyses demonstrated a decoupling between the right insula and
mPFC following but not before MT. These results suggest a fundamental
neural dissociation between distinct forms of self-awareness uncovered
through mindfulness training—a mental and bodily self. Focused monitoring of moment-to-moment experience is associated with increased
access to right lateralized neural representations of the bodily self, potentially representing the underlying older substrates and origins of selfhood.
B8
VERBAL/NONVERBAL
MODALITY
INDEPENDENCE
OF
ACTIVATION IN LEFT AND RIGHT INFERIOR PREFRONTAL
CORTEX DURING INHIBITORY CONTROL AS REVEALED BY
FMRI Hiroki Morimoto, Koji Jimura, Tomoki Asari, Junichi Chikazoe, Kenichiro Yamashita, Yasushi Miyashita, Seiki Konishi; The University of Tokyo
School of Medicine — One of the most prevailing views on the functional
localization of human cognition is the functional hemispheric asymmetry, wherein the left hemisphere is implicated primarily in verbal processing whereas the right hemisphere is implicated primarily in
nonverbal processing. Inhibitory control has been known to be involved

58

Higher Level Cognition: Executive Functions

in the lateral prefrontal cortex, particularly in the posterior inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). Although activation during inhibitory control has frequently been reported in the IFG in both the right and left hemispheres, it
remains unclear what factor determines the hemispheric dominance of
the activation. In this fMRI study we tested whether the hemispheric
asymmetry principle applies to the IFG activation during inhibitory control. A flanker task was devised that allowed us to manipulate the modality of the presented flanker stimulus (color word or colored patch) from
which interference effects originate, keeping the total stimulus modality
effects balanced. Consistent with previous studies of the flanker task, the
posterior part of the IFG was prominently activated. Although the dorsal
frontal areas showed prominent hemisphere-by-modality interaction in
simple visual effects (i.e., left frontal activation during word processing
and right frontal activation during color processing), the IFG failed to
show the hemisphere-by-modality interaction in inhibitory control of
flanker interference. These results suggest that the left and right IFG activation during inhibitory control is independent of the modality of presented stimulus from which the interference effects originate.
B9
NEURAL PREDICTORS OF ERRORS DURING A STOP SIGNAL
TASK Chiang-shan Ray Li, Peisi Yan, Rajita Sinha; Yale University — The
ability to detect errors and adjust behavior accordingly is essential for
maneuvering in an uncertain environment. Errors are particularly prone
to occur when multiple, conflicting responses are registered in a situation
that requires flexible behavioral outputs. Previous studies have provided
evidence indicating the importance of the medial cortical brain regions
including the cingulate cortex in error processing. However, little is
known about the neural processes that predict errors. Here in an fMRI
study we employ a stop signal task to elicit errors approximately half of
the time despite constant behavioral adjustment of the observers (n=40,
healthy adults, 20 males). By comparing go trials preceding a stop error
and those preceding a stop success, we showed that (at p<0.05, corrected
for multiple comparisons) the activation of bilateral precuneus and posterior cingulate cortices, perigenual anterior cingulate cortex and rostromedial superior medial frontal gyrus (MNI coordinate: x=4mm, y=52,
z=24mm) precedes errors during the stop signal task. Receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) analysis based on signal detection theory showed
that these three regions predict errors with an accuracy between 0.83 and
0.86 (area under the ROC curve). These results broadly support the
hypothesis that deactivation of the default mode circuitry including these
brain regions is associated with mental effort in a cognitive task. Furthermore, the current results indicate that the extent of activation of these
brain regions can specifically be associated with performance errors.
B 10
A PDP MODEL OF CONFLICT AND ANTERIOR CINGULATE
ACTIVITY IN THE GO-CHANGE TASK Vincent van Veen, Cameron
S. Carter; UC Davis — We and others have proposed hat the anterior cingulate cortex' role in cognition is to monitor for the presence of conflicts
between active representations, and to alert the attentional system to the
presence of such conflicts. This theory has recently been challenged (and
expanded) by Brown & Braver's (2005) "error likelihood model", according to which the cingulate detects situations in which errors are likely to
occur, rather than conflict. Brown & Braver measured cingulate activation in a go/change task, and compared this to the predictions made by
the conflict theory and error likelihood theory as implemented in two
PDP models, and observed that the cingulate activation resembled the
predictions by the error likelihood model better than the conflict model.
However, here we present an alternative PDP model of Brown & Braver's
go/change task in which conflict also closely resembled the pattern of
activation found in the ACC in Brown & Braver's study. We conclude
that the go/change task used by Brown & Braver might not allow us to
distinguish between the predictions made by the error likelihood and
conflict theories of anterior cingulate functioning.

Higher Level Cognition: Executive Functions

B 11
SYMBOLICALLY DRIVEN PREPARATORY ADJUSTMENTS IN
COGNITIVE CONTROL BY ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX
Esther Aarts1, Ardi Roelofs1, Miranda van Turennout2; 1Nijmegen Institute for
Cognition and Information, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Behavioral
Science Institute, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands — Adjustments
in
cognitive control are frequently made on the basis of environmental
information. Previous studies have shown that the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is involved in trial-to-trial adjustments in control following
response conflict. However, adjustments in control also occur in anticipation of demanding activities. The present event-related fMRI study investigates the role of the ACC in preparatory adjustments in control. Twelve
participants performed an arrow-word Stroop task. They responded
manually to the words LEFT or RIGHT combined with incongruent or
congruent left- or right-pointing arrows or neutral rectangles. A symbolic
cue informed the participants about the upcoming stimulus condition or
provided no information. Response times were slower on incongruent
than on neutral trials and fastest on congruent trials. These differences
among stimulus conditions were smaller after informative than after
uninformative cues, indicating control adjustments. ACC activity
reflected these preparatory adjustments in control based on symbolic
cues. The ACC was more active for informative than for uninformative
cues. Importantly, the ACC did not differentiate between informative
cues preceding incongruent and congruent stimuli, showing that the
ACC’s involvement in preparatory control is independent of upcoming
response conflict. In response to the stimulus, ACC activity was larger for
incongruent than for neutral stimuli and lowest for congruent stimuli,
but only following uninformative cues. Following informative cues, no
difference in ACC activity was obtained among stimulus conditions.
Interestingly, these results suggest that when control can be adjusted in
advance the ACC is no longer involved in resolving Stroop conflict.
B 12
RESPONSE MONITORING IN OLDER AND YOUNGER ADULTS
Maria Pietschmann, Tanja Endrass, Norbert Kathmann; Humboldt University
Berlin, Institute of Psychology — The comparison of actions and their outcomes with internal goals, termed response monitoring, is essential for
goal-directed and adaptive behavior. Quite unknown is whether
response monitoring functions decrease with age. Response monitoring
can be studied using the error-related and the correct response-related
negativity (ERN and CRN), two components of the event-related brain
potential following incorrect respective correct responses. It was proposed that response monitoring, particularly of errors alter with learning
(Holroyd and Coles, 2002, Psychol Rev), and that older adults show deficits therein (Nieuwenhuis et al., 2002, Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci). We
examined changes over time in response monitoring during learning, and
whether older adults differ in these processes. The electroencephalogram
(EEG) was recorded at the beginning of an association-learning task and
after completed learning. The results showed similar-sized ERN and
CRN amplitudes in both age groups at the beginning of learning, indicating monitoring of action but no detection of errors in this learning phase.
With advanced learning, response monitoring became error-specific in
younger adults, reflected by decreased CRN and increased ERN amplitudes. This dissociation was observed in older adults only in later task
phases, suggesting that elderly need longer practice periods to develop
error-specific response monitoring.
B 13
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR ENDOGENOUS
CONTROL IN SWITCHING BETWEEN LANGUAGES IN OVERT
PICTURE NAMING Kim M. W. Verhoef, Ardi Roelofs1, Dorothee J.
Chwilla; Nijmegen Institute for Cognition and information — Language
switching in bilingual speakers requires cognitive control to select the
appropriate language. Previous task-switching studies used task cues
preceding the imperative stimuli to study endogenous control in preparation for a task switch. However, it has appeared to be difficult to detect

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

brain activity specific to task-switch preparation. Interpretation of previous work is complicated by, first, a confound of cue switches and task
switches, and, second, by using the color of pictures to indicate the
required language thereby confounding endogenous and exogenous control. We investigated brain activity associated with endogenous control in
language switching, by recording EEG while Dutch-English bilingual
speakers overtly named pictures that were preceded by color-cues indicating the response language (e.g., red or yellow: name in first language,
and green or blue: name in second language). The cue-stimulus interval
was 750 ms and the response language varied randomly from trial to trial
so that the response language on consecutive trials could be the same
(repeat trials) or different (switch trials). The color-cues always changed
so that language switches were not confounded with cue switches. Naming latencies were longer on switch than on repeat trials, independent of
the response language. Cue-locked ERPs on switch trials relative to
repeat trials elicited a negative wave starting at about 260 up to 500 ms
regardless of the response language. This negative effect initially showed
a centroparietal maximum which later extended to more anterior sites.
These data provide the first electrophysiological evidence for an endogenous control process in language switching.
B 14
TWO REGIONS WITHIN PREFRONTAL CORTEX ARE
NECESSARY FOR RESPONSE INHIBITION MEASURED WITH
THE STOP-SIGNAL TASK Ami Tsuchida, Lesley Fellows; Montreal
Neurological Institute, McGill University — The frontal lobes have long
been implicated in inhibitory control. Recent neuroimaging, lesion, and
TMS studies have begun to specify the network involved in motor
response inhibition in more detail. This literature is not entirely consistent, with some work implicating right lateral prefrontal cortex (particularly inferior frontal gyrus), and other studies suggesting a role for
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex. We administered the stop signal task to
28 human subjects with focal frontal lobe damage, and 26 demographically-matched controls. Subjects with frontal lobe damage were grouped
according to the main site of damage: right lateral (N=8), left lateral
(N=5), dorsomedial (N=9), and ventromedial (N=6), and the stop-signal
reaction time (SSRT) for each group was compared to healthy control performance. Only right lateral and dorsomedial groups had significantly
slower SSRT than controls. The precise location of damage within these
areas seemed to be important, with only a subset of patients in each
group demonstrating impairment. Interestingly, although right lateral
and dorsomedial groups were similarly slow to inhibit a response, they
differed in their ‘go’ reaction times. The dorsomedial group made ‘go’
responses as quickly as controls, while those with right lateral damage
were slow to go, as well as to stop. These findings suggest that both dorsomedial and right lateral prefrontal cortex play important, but distinct
roles in response inhibition.
B 15
A VOXEL BASED INVESTIGATION OF THE WHITE MATTER
NETWORKS INVOLVED IN WORKING MEMORY IN NORMAL
AGING Rebecca Charlton1, Thomas Barrick1, Chris Clark1, Hugh Markus1,
Robin Morris2; 1St George's University of London, 2Institute of Psychiatry,
King's College, University of London — The gray matter of the frontal lobes
have been strongly implicated in working memory, although it is also
apparent that multiple brain regions are activated by this ability, including the striatum, anterior cingulate cortex, temporal and parietal lobes.
These multiple areas of activation are thought to represent distributed
neural networks that are involved in task processing demands. Distributed neural networks must rely on the white matter of the brain to form
connections between gray matter regions, enabling communication
between remote areas of the brain. The purpose of this study was to identify the white matter tracts implicated in working memory in normal
aging, in particular the fronto-parietal and fronto-striatal tracts that have
been inferred from functional connectivity studies. 106 normal adults
aged between 50 and 90 years old completed assessment of working

59

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

memory abilities and whole brain diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) was
acquired. Images were realigned and normalized to standard space;
mean diffusivity (MD) and fractional anisotropy (FA) were calculated for
each individual. Using SPM2, voxel clusters (in white matter) that were
significantly associated with working memory performance were identified. Tractography was performed to determine those tracts that passed
through significant clusters. White matter tracts implicated in working
memory are shown to pass between the frontal, parietal, and temporal
lobes, connecting areas of gray matter that fMRI has shown previously to
be involved in working memory performance. These results demonstrate
variations in white matter integrity in normal aging are associated with
working memory networks, and visualize the tracts involved.
B 16
METHYLPHENIDATE NORMALIZES BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN
RESPONSES DURING TASK-SWITCHING PERFORMANCE IN
CHILDREN
WITH
ATTENTION-DEFICIT/HYPERACTIVITY
DISORDER (AD/HD) Jose A. Perianez1, IEsther Cardo2,1, Mateu ServeraBarcelo1, Daniel Adrover-Roig1, Francisco Barcelo1; 1Institut Universitari
d'Investigacions en Ciencies de la Salut, Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma
de Mallorca (Spain), 2Hospital Son Llatzer, Palma de Mallorca (Spain) — This
study aimed to explore the neural correlates of cognitive deficits underlying task-switching performance in children with AD/HD as suggested in
previous studies (Kramer et al. 2001), and the specificity of methylphenidate effects normalizing behavioral and neural responses. Nineteen
healthy and thirty AD/HD children had their event-related potentials
(ERPs) measured while they performed a task-switching paradigm
inspired in the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (Barceló, 2003). The AD/HD
group was evaluated under three medical treatments: Placebo, methylphenidate-immediate release (MPH-ir), and methylphenidate-sustained release (MPH-sr). Under placebo, AD/HD children showed less
correct responses due to increased false alarms and to a weaker consolidation of the task rule during repetition trials. On the contrary, taskswitch costs did not differ between the groups. Only MPH-ir significantly
increased the number of correct responses and reduced false alarms.
Brain responses to both contextual cues and targets from correct trials
showed an abnormal amplitude reduction of the P2 component in AD/
HD children with placebo. Healthy children showed an amplitude
increase of the N4 component (peak latency 340 ms at Fz) elicited by
switch cues that was absent in AD/HD children with placebo. The
groups showed similar N1 and P3 brain responses to both cues and targets. Treatment with MPH-ir increased P2 amplitudes elicited by the
cues, but not by the targets, in AD/HD children. The results are compatible with a task-set interruption deficit to exogenous contextual cues that
was normalized with MPH-ir treatment.
B 17
ROLE OF STRATEGIC SELF-REGULATION AND EXECUTIVE
ATTENTION IN SCHIZOPHRENIA. Gricel
Orellana1,
Andrea
Slachevsky1, Marcela Peña2; 1University of Chile, Chile, 2University Catholic,
Chile — Objective: Contribute to explain the mechanisms of behaviour
disorders in schizophrenia, specifically disexecutive behaviour. Two
functions have not been completely studied in schizophrenia: executive
attention and strategic self-regulation of behavior. The aim of our study
is to determine which of the three attentional networks – alert, orientation
and executive attention – works abnormally in schizophrenia and if
patients present an upheaval the self-regulation. We also study the relation between troubles in these functions and the existence of psychosocial problems. Methods: 20 patients, of both sexes, aged 18 to 30 years,
each with only one psychotic episode treated. The following tests were
applied: Test of Raven to evaluate IQ; ANT to evaluate attentional networks; Mattis’s Dementia Rating Scale, WCST and FAB to evaluate executive functions and Six Element Test to evaluate strategic self-regulation.
The disexecutive behaviour was evaluated the DEX and the Grefex’s
questionnaires. In order to evaluate squizophrenia symptoms, we
applied PANSS. A group of healthy controls matched by sex, age and

60

Higher Level Cognition: Executive Functions

educational level was included in the study. Results: our results revealed
that patients presented a disorder of the three attentional networks, especially the executive attention, and poor performances in the Six Elements
tests – they applied non efficient strategies during the execution of the
task. These deficits are not correlated with the disexecutive behaviours.
Moreover, patients presented statistical differences with controls in
Raven, WCST, Mattis' s Dementia Rating Scale and disexecutive questionnaires. Conclusions: Our results suggest that troubles in executive
attention and strategic auto-regulation could explain some patological
behaviours in schizophrenia.
B 18
THE
EFFECT
OF
ALCOHOL
INTOXICATION
AND
EXPECTANCY ON COGNITIVE CONTROL Rebecca Gloria1, Patrick
Rothwell2, John Curtin1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2University Of
Minnesota — The behavioral deficits associated with alcohol intoxication
are often most severe when inappropriate prepotent responses conflict
with incompatible but more adaptive responses. These same situations
engage cognitive control processes, suggesting alcohol may impair normal cognitive control function. Current cognitive control models include
an evaluative component that detects response conflict and a regulative
component that executes control processes. This project used electrophysiological (ERP) measures to link alcohol effects on each component
with associated behavioral consequences. Participants were assigned to a
no-alcohol control group, a placebo group, or an alcohol group (target
blood alcohol level = 0.08%). They performed a modified Stroop colornaming task in which the frequency of congruent, neutral, and incongruent conditions was manipulated to create mostly congruent (MC) and
mostly incongruent (MI) contexts. Theoretical and empirical work indicates that evaluative and regulative control contribute differentially to
performance in each context. Alcohol expectancy (control-placebo contrast) and pharmacology (placebo-alcohol contrast) produced contrasting
effects on error rate and ERP correlates of regulative control function in
the MC context. Expectancy led to improved performance mediated by
regulative control, while pharmacology impaired both performance and
regulative function. These results further delineate the cognitive mechanisms underlying intoxicated behavioral deficits and have implications
for understanding the development of alcohol use disorders.
B 19
IMMEDIATE-RELEASE
METHYLPHENIDATE
(MPH-IR)
NORMALIZES THE BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL INDEXES OF
CONTEXT PROCESSING IN CHILDREN WITH ATTENTION
DEFICIT AND HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER (AD/HD) Francisco
Barceló1, Daniel Adrover-Roig1, Esther Cardo1,2, José Antonio Periáñez1,
Mateu Servera-Barceló1; 1Institut Universitari d’Investigacions en Ciències de
la Salut, Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca (Spain), 2Hospital
Son Llàtzer, Palma de Mallorca — We explored the neural bases of attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (AD/HD) with event-related
potentials (ERPs) during performance of a continuous performance task
(CPT) (Cohen et al., 1996) that allowed us to isolate attentional control
processes during context updating and maintenance operations (Miller &
Cohen, 2001). Fifteen healthy children were compared with 15 children
diagnosed with AD/HD under two different pharmacological treatments
with immediate-release methylphenidate (MPH-ir) and sustained-release
methylphenidate (MPH-sr) in a double-blind randomized placebo-controlled crossover study. Compared to control children, AD/HD children
under placebo achieved a lower number of correct GO trials, and showed
larger rates of omission errors. Under placebo, both P2 amplitudes to GO
and NOGO trials, and P3 amplitudes to NOGO trials (peak latency 258
ms at Pz) were significantly reduced as compared to those in control children. Under MPH-ir treatment, AD/HD children improved their accuracy in GO trials, and reduced their anticipation errors compared to the
MPH-sr condition. The N1, P2, and P3 ERP components in GO trials were
not modulated by methylphenidate. In contrast, a frontally distributed
negative brain potential (peak latency 308 ms at Fz; N4) was significantly

Higher Level Cognition: Executive Functions

normalized after administration of MPH-ir as compared to placebo.
These results are compatible with the existence of an inhibitory deficit to
exogenous contextual information in AD/HD children that can be significantly normalized with MPH-ir treatment.
B 20
DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGE IN SWITCHING BETWEEN COLOR
TO SHAPE, AND FROM STOPPING TO GOING Mariette
Huizinga, Maurits W. van der Molen; University of Amsterdam — This study
examined developmental differences in the ability to switch between
tasks and to shift between stopping and going. Three age groups (6-7
year-olds, 11-12 year-olds, and 20-21 year olds) performed on a hybrid
task, in which participants were required to consider the color or shape of
a target stimulus, and to execute a choice response on some trials, but a
disjunctive response on others. The paradigm allowed the assessment of
the speed of choice repetitions and choice alternations (i.e., switches from
color- to shape-responses or vice versa, and shifts from go- to choiceresponses or from nogo- to choice-responses) and of disjunctive repetitions (i.e., from go- to go-responses) and disjunctive alternations (i.e.,
shifts from nogo- to go-responses and from choice- to go-responses). The
results showed that the costs involved in switching between choice
responses decreased with advancing age into adolescence. Similarly, the
costs in shifting from stopping to going decreased with the children’s
age, but already reached mature levels by late childhood. The results
indicate that switching between color and shape responses and shifting
between stopping and going are both time-consuming processes that
mature at different rates.
B 21
COGNITIVE
INFLEXIBILITY
IN
PARKINSON’S
DISEASE
REFLECTS
STRIATAL
OR
FRONTAL
DYSFUNCTION
DEPENDING ON MEDICATION STATUS Roshan
Cools1, Asako
Miyakawa2, Richard Ivry2, Mark D'Esposito2; 1Behavioural and Clinical
Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, 2Helen Wills Neuroscience
Institute, University of California, Berkeley — The motor deficits in Parkinson’s disease (PD) are generally attributed to dopamine depletion in the
striatum. Less clear is whether the cognitive deficits in PD are also
related to striatal dysfunction or whether they reflect abnormal dopamine function in frontal cortex. We assessed the performance of mild PD
patients on a task requiring two types of flexible control. One level
involved lower-order switching between concrete stimuli, an operation
associated with the striatum. The other level involved higher-order
switching between abstract task rules, an operation associated with PFC.
When tested OFF their dopaminergic medication, the PD patients' performance was similar to that observed in patients with focal striatal lesions
(Cools et al., 2006): They exhibited an impairment in switching between
stimuli, but not task rules. By contrast, when tested ON medication, the
patients also exhibited a deficit in switching between abstract rules. Thus,
dopaminergic medication induced a frontal-like form of cognitive inflexibility, while having no impact on switching between concrete stimuli.
These results provide a new demonstration of dopamine-induced deficits
in medicated PD patients, consistent with the idea that abnormal frontal
function may result from standard dopamine-replacement therapy.
B 22
MORE FLEXIBLE IN A GOOD MOOD? AN ERP STUDY ON
POSITIVE AFFECT AND COGNITIVE CONTROL Nelleke C. van
wouwe1, Guido P. H. Band1, K. Richard Ridderinkhof2,1; 1Leiden University,
2
University of Amsterdam — In order to be able to adapt ourselves to a
continuously changing environment we need to maintain currently task
relevant information against distracting irrelevant information and to
flexibly update new incoming relevant information. Dopamine projections to the PFC are thought to facilitate working memory performance,
whereas increased cognitive flexibility and facilitation of set switching is
attributed to the dopamine projections into the anterior cingulate. Ashby,
Turken and Isen (1999) suggested that dopamine can be temporarily
increased by means of a positive affect induction. This study investi-

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

gated, by means of ERP components, the effect of a positive mood induction (i.e. a short movie clip) on proactive (context maintenance and
representation) and reactive control in an AX-Continuous Performance
Task. This task was used to test how cue information is applied in making a response decision. The subjects’ task was to respond on a target
probe given that it was preceded by a specific cue. ERP components
(CNV and P3) measured after the cues were not affected by the mood
induction, showing that attention and motor preparation to the cue was
not modulated by mood. The ERPs measured after the probe showed
improved performance and smaller N2 and ERN amplitudes for participants in the positive affect condition, as compared to the neutral affect
group, to trials in which the cue creates a response bias. This indicates
that a positive mood enhances reactive control while cue processing and
preparation remains the same compared to a neutral affect condition.
B 23
ASSOCIATIVE AND NEURAL MECHANISMS MEDIATING THE
RESOLUTION OF CONFLICT BETWEEN GOAL-DIRECTED
ACTIONS Sanne de Wit1, Bernard Balleine2, Sean Ostlund2, Mike
Aitken1, Yutaka Kosaki1, Dana Niry1, Ravi Wariyar1, Tony Dickinson1;
1University of Cambridge, 2University of Los Angeles, California — The associative structures mediating goal-directed action and habit formation
were investigated using congruent and incongruent conditional discriminations. In the congruent discrimination, the stimulus was the same as
the outcome in each component, and this discrimination should therefore
be easy to solve. In contrast, the stimulus of one component of the incongruent discrimination was the same as the outcome of the other component, thereby causing conflict between the two goal-directed actions. We
discovered that rats could solve the incongruent discrimination, but were
unable to redirect their performance when one of the two outcomes was
devalued (through pairing with LiCl-induced nausea) following training.
Therefore, rats appear to resolve the response conflict by inhibiting the
two conflicting goal-directed actions thereby allowing habitual control
over behaviour. Furthermore, temporarily inactivating the prefrontal cortex (through direct infusion into the brain of the GABA-agonist muscimol) impaired performance on the incongruent discrimination (de Wit et
al, 2006, Journal of Neuroscience). This finding is in line with demonstrations that the human prefrontal cortex is involved in response conflict
resolution and executive control. In a further study we investigated
whether human instrumental behaviour is mediated by the same associative structures. In a modified version of our conflict task human participants also solved the incongruent discrimination by adopting a habitual
strategy.
B 24
EXECUTIVE
CONTROL
IN
BILINGUAL
LANGUAGE
PROCESSING: THE PHENOMENON OF INTERFERENCE Julia
Festman1, Thomas Münte1, Antoni Rodriguez-Fornells2; 1Otto-von-Guericke
University Magdeburg, 2University of Barcelona — Generic „executive function“ brain areas (e.g., DLPFC and SMA) are suggested to be involved in
resolving conflicts of language processing resulting, for example, from
the involuntary influence of a non-target language on target-language
production. It has been observed that bilinguals differ in their switch
behaviour. Some use one language without overt intrusions (“controllers”), whereas others alternate frequently between both languages
(„switchers”). We investigate whether a bilingual’s ability to prevent
interference in language processing is related to her/his capability of controlling performance in general, i.e., the efficient use of executive control.
Thirty Russian-German bilinguals were divided into two groups according to their switch behaviour in bilingual screening tasks. We used a
series of psychometric tests to assess executive functions. The controller
group showed significantly faster performance in the TOH test and the
Block design test, and produced more correct items in a Verbal Fluency
test and a picture-naming task than the switcher group. A series of brain
potential experiments are currently underway to explore the consequences of efficient (controller) or less efficient (switcher) executive con-

61

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

trol. Specifically, a tacit picture-naming task (Go/noGo) is used to
determine group differences during phonological interference. We predict interference effects in the bilinguals relative to a monolingual control
group, and more errors and more pronounced interference effects on the
N200-component of the ERP in the „switcher“ than in the „controller“
group. We suggest that expected group differences could be attributed to
differences in the efficiency, with which cognitive control functions are
applied.
B 25
ENHANCED PUNISHMENT BUT NOT REWARD PREDICTION
UNDER TRYPTOPHAN DEPLETION Oliver Robinson, Roshan Cools,
Barbara Sahakian; University of Cambridge, Behavioural and Clinical
Neuroscience Institute — The serotonin (5-HT) system has been implicated
in motivational processes. The present study used the acute tryptophan
depletion (ATD) procedure to investigate the effect of temporarily lowering 5-HT synthesis on reward and punishment prediction in healthy volunteers. We found that ATD enhanced the ability of healthy subjects to
learn to predict punishment in a serial reversal learning paradigm. This
enhanced prediction was valence-specific and did not extend to rewardprediction trials. The effect was irrespective of the need to reverse
responding and contrasts with that of dopamine-enhancing drugs which
selectively impaired reversal learning from punishment (Cools et al. Neuropsychologia 2006). Our data are consistent with previous findings
demonstrating that ATD affects learning (Murphy et al; Rogers et al.,
1999; Parks et al., 1994); enhances the brain response during errors (Evers
et al., 2005; NPP); and enhances processing of negative feedback. The current data extend previous findings by showing that this negative bias
improves the prediction of negative but not positive outcomes. Importantly, this effect was driven by diminished prediction under ‘normal’
balanced tryptophan levels - subjects had greater difficulty with predicting punishment than predicting reward, following the balanced but not
the tryptophan depleting drink. This observation highlights the possibility that serotonin may confer a protective resilience against adverse outcomes in healthy individuals.
B 26
DISTINCT REGIONS OF MEDIAL ROSTRAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX
SUPPORTING
SOCIAL
AND
NONSOCIAL
FUNCTIONS Sam Gilbert, Iain Williamson, Iroise Dumontheil, Jon
Simons, Chris Frith, Paul Burgess; University College, London — While
some recent neuroimaging studies have implicated medial rostral prefrontal cortex (MPFC) in “mentalizing” and self-reflection, others have
implicated this region in attention towards perceptual versus self-generated information. In order to reconcile these seemingly-contradictory
findings, we used fMRI to investigate MPFC activity related to these two
functions in a factorial design. Participants performed two tasks that
alternated between phases requiring stimulus-oriented and stimulusindependent attention. In half of the blocks (“mentalizing condition”),
participants were instructed that they were performing these tasks in collaboration with an experimenter; in other blocks (“non-mentalizing condition”) participants were instructed that the experimenter was not
involved. The tasks were matched between these two conditions. Neuroimaging data revealed adjacent but clearly distinct regions of activation
within MPFC related to a) mentalizing versus non-mentalizing conditions (relatively caudal/superior) and b) stimulus-oriented versus stimulus-independent attention (relatively rostral/inferior). These results
suggest a new axis of functional organization within MPFC.
B 27
FEEDBACK ERN TO IRRELEVANT ACTION CONSEQUENCES
Guido Band1, Henk van Steenbergen2, Bernhard Hommel1, Richard
Ridderinkhof2,3, Michael Falkenstein4; 1Leiden Institute for Brain and
Cognition, 2Leiden University, 3University of Amsterdam 4Institut fuer
Arbeitsphysiologie, Dortmund — The feedback ERN (fERN) is a central
negative brain potential observed after feedback indicating a response
error, as compared to feedback indicating a correct response. The typical

62

Higher Level Cognition: Executive Functions

interpretation of the fERN is that if performance is evaluated to be incorrect or prone to errors, the cingulate zone calls for investment of control.
The current experiment investigated whether the fERN is unique to performance feedback information, or whether it is also observed if subjects
hear an unexpected and irrelevant action consequence. Subjects engaged
in a probabilistic learning task. Each response was followed by a vowel
sound (a, e, o, or i) with or without added noise. The noise element indicated whether the stimulus was categorized correctly or not, with 80%
validity. The vowel sound was irrelevant, but specific vowels followed
specific responses on 80% of the trials. A fERN occurred after a sound
indicating an incorrect response. More important, a smaller negative
waveform with the same latency and scalp topography as the fERN
occurred after an unexpected vowel
B 28
AFTER THE P300: A LATE ERP INDEX OF STIMULUS
EVALUATION FOR COMPLEX CATEGORIZATION RULES
Jonathan Folstein, Cyma Van Petten, MungChen Wong; University of
Arizona — Three experiments examined the effects of novelty and distance from a category boundary on categorization accuracy, RT, and
event-related potentials. Stimuli were a large number of individually distinct artificial animals. In two experiments, participants categorized
stimuli as Mogs if they shared at least two out of three relevant visual features with the prototype of the Mog category, or as Nibs if they shared at
least two features with the Nib prototype. Near Boundary stimuli shared
one feature with their prototype and two features with the other prototype. A third response of “Other” was used for stimuli that contained
neither Mog nor Nib features, and which had no single prototype; these
were comprised of either Common or Novel features. After a training
phase, ERPs were recorded while participants categorized Near Boundary, Far Boundary, Common Other, and Novel Other stimuli. Perceptual
novelty increased the amplitude of the N2 but not the P300 component of
the ERP. Although proximity to the category boundary drastically
slowed reaction times, it had no effect on P300 latency. Instead, NearBoundary stimuli elicited a larger late prefrontal positive component
than Far-Boundary. When a simpler rule was implemented, P300
latency tracked RT, and less prefrontal activity was elicited. We suggest
that, while P300 latency tracks stimulus evaluation time, application of a
complex categorization rule requires a later stage of evaluation involving
prefrontal cortex. In very complex rules, computations indexed by the P3
may be terminated early in favor of computations in PFC.
B 29
A LIFE-SPAN VIEW ON REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AND
ERROR PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM THE ERROR-RELATED
NEGATIVITY (ERN) Ben Eppinger, Jutta Kray, Barbara Mock, Axel
Mecklinger; Saarland University — The aim of this project was to examine
age differences in learning-related changes in the response- and feedback
ERN across the lifespan. The study was based on the reinforcement learning (RL-) theory (Holroyd & Coles, 2002), which suggests that the ERN is
generated when a negative reinforcement-learning signal from the
dopamine system is conveyed to the anterior cingulate cortex. We used a
probabilistic learning paradigm in which participants had to make a twochoice decision upon presentation of an imperative stimulus and
received positive or negative feedback. Feedback was manipulated in
three validity conditions (100%, 80%, or 50% validity). ERP-data from
younger adults, older adults and children indicated that the response
ERN increased with learning in the 100% validity condition. However,
contrary to the models’ predictions, learning-related changes were much
more pronounced in response-locked ERPs for correct trials. A similar
pattern was obtained for the feedback-locked ERPs in which learningrelated changes were only observed for positive feedback, but not for
negative feedback. In contrast to the RL-theory (Holroyd & Coles, 2002),
these findings suggest that learning is driven by positive learning signals
(when the outcome of actions is better than expected). In the present
study we did not find evidence for a reduction of the ERN in children or

Higher Level Cognition: Executive Functions

older adults. However, we found pronounced age differences in the feedback ERN, which was increased for children compared to younger adults
but was absent for older adults. This finding suggests an asymmetry in
the processing of feedback information across the lifespan.
B 30
EXPLORING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CONSCIOUSNESS
AND COGNITIVE CONTROL Simon van Gaal1, Richard Ridderinkhof1,2,
Wery van den Wildenberg1, Victor Lamme1,3; 1University of Amsterdam, 2Leiden
University, 3Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience — Many perceptual and
motor processes can occur in the absence of consciousness, as evidenced
by recent subliminal priming evidence. However, the question which
specific cognitive processes can be triggered by unconscious information
and which cannot is subject to a lively debate. It has been suggested that
cognitive functions depending on cognitive control mechanisms, such as
response inhibition and conflict detection, are specifically associated with
consciousness. Here, we put these claims to a direct test. To examine the
role of consciousness in response inhibition we manipulated awareness
of response-relevant control stimuli in a stop task. By using this experimental setup we were able to demonstrate that response inhibition can be
triggered by unconsciously presented stop-signals, whereas strategic
trial-to-trial behavioral adjustments are not. In a second experiment, we
examined the role of consciousness in the detection of conflicting
response tendencies by manipulating awareness of Nogo signals in a Go/
Nogo task. Preliminary EEG data shows distinct ERPs for Go and unconscious Nogo trials, which are perceptually equivalent. These data suggests that the brain is able to detect unconscious response conflict.
Unconscious response inhibition as well as unconscious conflict detection
were highly dependent on practice and task performance. Both studies
show that unconscious processes are more flexible than previously supposed, and can incorporate control-initiating stimuli that are presented
subliminally. Thus, tasks that are traditionally associated with consciousness and cognitive control can become automatic and applied unconsciously.
B 31
CORRELATIONS BETWEEN BOLD ACTIVATION DURING
ATTENTION TASKS AND PERFORMANCE ON EXECUTIVE
FUNCTIONING MEASURES Keith Shafritz1, Karen Marchione2, Sally
Shaywitz2, Bennett Shaywitz2; 1Hofstra University, 2Yale University — Recent
studies and theoretical perspectives have suggested that executive function (EF) and attention are interrelated processes. However, the extent of
this relationship and the degree to which the two processes utilize overlapping neural structures remain unclear. Here, we investigated the relation between blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) activation during
selective and divided attention tasks and performance on cognitive tests
measuring EF. Thirteen adolescents (ages 12-20) completed four variations of a selective attention task and one divided attention task while
undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). During the
tasks, participants made yes/no lexical decisions for words that were
presented in either visual, auditory, or both visual and auditory domains.
The participants also completed the Tower of Hanoi (TOH) and the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) outside the scanner. Correlation maps
were created comparing BOLD activation during each task with performance measures obtained from the TOH and WCST. Significant positive
correlations between TOH scores and BOLD activation were observed in
left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) during all five task variations.
In addition, significant positive correlations between WCST errors and
BOLD activation were observed bilaterally in inferior posterior parietal
cortex (BA 40) during a complex selective attention task and the divided
attention task. These results suggest that the more a person engaged the
PFC, the easier the person found the TOH. In contrast, the more a person
engaged the parietal cortex, the harder the person found the WCST.
Therefore, the DLPFC and parietal cortex might serve complimentary
roles during attention and EF processes.

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

B 32
THE MEASUREMENT OF EXECUTIVE FUNCTION IN A
POPULATION-BASED SAMPLE OF TWO-YEAR-OLD CHILDREN
Clancy Blair1, Mike Willoughby2, Mark Greenberg1, Emily Werner1; 1Penn
State University, 2University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill — Normative
data on the development of executive function in early childhood are
lacking. Therefore, we measured working memory (a scrambled boxes
task assessing number of attempts to retrieve stickers inside 3 boxes),
inhibitory control/attention shifting (a reverse categorization task in
which children sort big and little blocks into big and little buckets), and
delay of gratification (a snack delay task with 10, 20, 30, and 15 second
delays) in a sample of 1,088 2-year-old children (M = 2.05, range 1.8 – 2.6)
in a population-based longitudinal study of families in primarily lowincome, non-urban communities. Preliminary analyses indicated that
28% of children completed the working memory task with the minimum
number of attempts, and an additional 26% and 14% required one and
two additional attempts. 31% of children waited the full delay before
retrieving the snack across delay trials. 10% retrieved the snack immediately. Performance across trials was highly stable, &#967;2=458.96,
p<.0001. For reverse categorization, 481 children successfully completed
pretest trials. Of these, 49% of children correctly sorted the first 6 blocks
(big blocks into little bucket) but only 15% correctly sorted the second 6
blocks (little blocks into big bucket). Working memory and delay were
moderately correlated (r=.08) and all 3 tasks were related to mental
development (rs =.14,.12,.16 – for working memory, delay, and reverse
categorization). Working memory and delay were also related to characteristics of the home, including income-to-need and parenting behavior,
even when controlling for mental development (rs=.10).
B 33
ITEM
SPECIFIC
ADAPTATION
AND
THE
CONFLICT
MONITORING HYPOTHESIS: A COMPUTATIONAL MODEL
Chris Blais, Serje Robidoux, Evan Risko, Derek Besner; University of
Waterloo — Botvinick, Braver, Barch, Carter and Cohen (2001, Psychological Review, 108, 624-656) implemented their conflict monitoring hypothesis of anterior cingulate function in a computational model. We first
demonstrate that this computational model fails to simulate Jacoby, Lindsay, and Hessels’ (2003) report of an item specific congruency proportion
(ISPC) effect in the Stroop task. We then implement a variant of Botvinick
et al.’s (2001) model based on the assumption that control must be able to
operate at the item level. This model successfully simulates the ISPC
effect. In addition, the model provides an alternative to Botvinick et al.’s
(2001) explanation of the list level proportion congruent effect in terms of
an ISPC effect. Implications of the present modeling effort and new predictions are noted.
B 34
DISSOCIATING THE NEURAL MECHANISMS FOR PROCEDURAL
SKILL AND SEQUENCE LEARNING USING FUNCTIONAL
NEUROIMAGING Hillary
Schwarb, Eric H. Schumacher; Georgia
Institute of Technology — Despite years of research, considerable disagreement remains regarding the cognitive and neural mechanisms responsible for the acquisition and expression of this procedural knowledge.
Neural regions implicated in procedural skill learning include frontal,
parietal, and premotor regions (e.g., Schumacher, Hendricks, &
D'Esposito, 2005) as well the basil ganglia (e.g., Poldrack & Gabrielli,
2001). These regions as well as regions in the medial temporal lobe have
been implicated in sequence learning (e.g., Doyan et al., 1996; Grafton,
Hazeltine, & Ivry, 2002; Schenden et al., 2003). The present study investigates the relationship between the mechanisms responsible for the acquisition and expression of these types of procedural knowledge. While
measuring brain activity, we manipulated the response-selection difficulty and underlying structure of a perceptual-motor task. Results suggest an interacting effect of these cognitive processes as well as the
existence of independent mechanisms to support skill and sequence
learning.

63

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

B 35
NEURAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DIFFERENCES IN PROSPECTIVE
MEMORY ACROSS THE LIFESPAN J Zöllig1, M Kliegel1, M Martin1,
R West2; 1University of Zurich, Switzerland, 2Iowa State University — Prospective memory requires the formation and later realization of intentions that must be delayed over minutes, hours, or days. Behavioural
studies indicate an impaired efficiency in prospective remembering in
children and old adults. However, these two age groups have never been
tested in one paradigm. The present study investigates the development
of prospective memory across the lifespan and assesses possible agerelated differences in neural processing using EEG. The event-related
prospective memory task used a retrieve-delay specification in which
intention execution had to be additionally postponed after cue detection.
This task was embedded in an ongoing activity using the semantic categorization task of West et al. (2003). Three groups were compared: adolescents (11-13), young adults (18-25), and old adults (64-79). Behavioural
results revealed the expected inverted U-shaped function with young
adults having the best prospective memory performance. Analysis of
error data, however, implied that different processes may have contributed to failures of prospective memory in adolescents and old adults.
Whereas the poorer performance of old adults seems to be a result of difficulties in encoding of intentions and self-initiated retrieval of prospective cues, adolescents tend to forget the content of the intention. This
effect of age on prospective memory performance is supported by agerelated differences in ERP-components for intention encoding, cue detection, and post-retrieval monitoring processes. Source localizations of
these ERP-data with LORETA revealed different activation patterns for
adolescents and old adults. Overall, our findings suggest that adolescents
and old adults recruit somewhat different neural generators for prospective remembering.
B 36
THE EFFECTS OF PARKINSON’S DISEASE ON TASK
SWITCHING AND STIMULUS SELECTION Angie Kehagia, Roshan
Cools, Trevor Robbins; University of Cambridge, Behavioural and Clinical
Neurosciences Institute, Cambridge — It is widely known that in addition to
disabling motor symptoms, Parkinson’s disease is associated with a
range of cognitive impairments, especially in executive control. Many
task switching studies have shown elevated switch costs in PD patients
under conditions of high task set interference, for example when switching also necessitates stimulus selection. The purpose of this study was to
investigate this interaction between task switching and stimulus selection. To this end, a group of 32 PD patients and 16 age-matched controls
performed two variants of the task switching paradigm, differing in the
degree to which they required stimulus selection within the display.
Severe, but not mild, PD was associated with a switching deficit. Moreover, PD patients were impaired, irrespective of switching, when tasks
required concrete stimulus selection, but not when tasks were undertaken with single stimuli, and this was not due to general slowing. These
results demonstrate that the ability to switch between task sets is intact
early on in the disease and extend recent findings implicating the basal
ganglia in basic stimulus selection processes.
B 37
CONTEXT PROCESSING DEFICITS AFFECT PERFORMANCE IN
MULTIPLE COGNITIVE DOMAINS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Susan
M. Ravizza, KC Keur Moua, Debra L. Long, Cameron S. Carter; University of
California, Davis — Schizophrenia is an illness that is marked by chaotic
behavior, thoughts, and language. One theory attributes the apparent
randomness in schizophrenia patients’ behavior to difficulty in maintaining or processing contextual information. However, only a limited number of tasks have been used to test this theory. In two experiments, we
examined whether impairments in context processing are related to
impairments in cognitive domains including task-switching and language processing. Importantly, the experimental paradigms that we
employed did not require patients to overcome a prepotent response, a

64

Higher Level Cognition: Executive Functions

requirement that is often involved in studies of cognitive disorders in
schizophrenia. In general, we found that patients with schizophrenia differed from control participants only when contextual processing
demands were high. For example, patients showed greater shift costs
than controls in a contextual shifting task, but were equivalent to controls
in a perceptual shifting task. We found a similar result in a study investigating the influence of sentence context on performance in a picture recognition task. Pictures were presented that either matched or did not
match the implied shape of the object mentioned in the preceding sentence. Controls were faster in the match than the mismatch condition,
whereas patients with schizophrenia showed no influence of sentence
context. Moreover, they actually outperformed control participants when
the picture was related, but not identical, to an object in the sentence.
These experiments demonstrate that impairments in the processing of
context can have far-reaching effects on many aspects of cognition
including language and attention.
B 38
USING MACHINE LEARNING FOR THE PREDICTION OF
COGNITIVE
STATE:
HOW
VIRTUAL
NAVIGATION
ILLUSTRATES FUNDAMENTAL CELLULAR MECHANISMS
Samantha Ellner1, Michael Kahana1, Joshua Jacobs1, Michael Kearns1, Itzhak
Fried2; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2University of California at Los
Angeles — We analyzed multi-cell neuronal recordings taken from
human subjects with intracranial electrodes implanted as part of a surgical treatment for drug-resistant epilepsy. These subjects played a virtual
taxi-driver game, Yellow Cab, in which they alternated between the highlevel goal states of searching for a randomly placed passenger and delivering that passenger to a specific location within a spatial environment.
Our goal was to use these electrical recordings of the subjects’ brain activity to predict their instantaneous behavior in the game. To accomplish
this, we used Boosting, a multivariate machine-learning algorithm, to
predict the subject’s goal state, speed, and location from the average neuronal firing rates in a 500-millisecond epoch. This work demonstrates the
ability of machine learning algorithms, specifically boosting, to repeatedly and significantly outperform simpler univariate statistical models
and baseline (single-cell) classifiers and to illustrate differences in predictability when examining single cells, pairs of cells, or entire brain
regions. In particular, prediction confidence and regional specificity
were seen to improve the accuracy of the models when determining a
subject’s cognitive state. We found that neurons in frontal brain regions
were especially helpful in predicting the subject’s goal state, consistent
with recent literature which highlights its importance in path planning.
This study discusses the emerging concept of conjunctive coding and the
potential advantages of machine-learning algorithms over simple
univariate algorithms for the purposes of brain-controlled prosthetic
devices.
B 39
COMBINING RT DISTRIBUTION ANALYSIS AND FMRI :
PROCESSING DYNAMICS IN THE SIMON TASK K.
Richard
Ridderinkhof, Wery van den Wildenberg, Birte Forstmann; Acacia, University
of Amsterdam — fMRI methods may help in understanding processes of
response activation and response inhibition in conflict tasks, such as the
Simon task. However, data-driven approaches thus far haven’t yielded
consistent insights into these processes. Here, we use a theory-driven
approach that capitalizes on individual differences in the processes of
central interest. Based on the so-called activation-suppression model, we
computed specific behavioral parameters for each individual, derived
from RT-distribution analysis. These parameters correspond closely to
the processes of (inappropriate) location-driven response activation and
of the subsequent inhibition of this response, respectively, as detailed by
the model. In an fMRI study with 24 participants, activation in pre-SMA
was found to correlate with the RT-distribution measure of inappropriate
response activation, whereas the right IFG was found to correlate with
the RT-distribution measure of response inhibition. These results, that

Higher Level Cognition: Other

are consistent against the backdrop of the larger literature on cognitive
control, could have been derived neither from the standard data-driven
approach, nor from inspecting overall mean RT only.

Higher Level Cognition: Other
B 40
THE FRACTIONATION OF MENTAL STATE ATTRIBUTIONS IN
FOCAL LESION PATIENTS R. Shayna Rosenbaum1,2, Donald T.
Stuss2,3, Michael P. Alexander4,2, Gordon G. Gallup Jr.5, Susan Gillingham2;
1York University, 2The Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, 3University of
Toronto, 4Harvard University, 5State University of New York at Albany, New
York — Inferring what people are thinking or feeling appears effortless
but may engage separable cognitive and emotional components that rely
on distinct neural processes that are differentially vulnerable to insult.
Close examination of deficits in patients with lesions to any one of a number of brain structures may help reveal the complexity of social awareness and its relationship to self-awareness. Based on more precise
localization techniques than used previously, the present study contrasted the roles of medial and lateral areas of prefrontal cortex in cognitive and affective aspects of self-related inferences and theory of mind. A
large group of patients with focal frontal lesions (n=33) and non-frontal
lesions (n=15) and healthy control participants (n=14) were tested for
mental state attributions when engaged in a game of deception and in
viewing videotaped emotional situations. The two tests differed in terms
of cognitive vs. affective quality and the ability to represent one’s own vs.
other people’s thoughts and feelings. Analyses based on anatomically
predefined groupings showed that patients with superior medial prefrontal damage were most impaired on these tests. More detailed analyses involving architectonic divisions, independent of groupings, revealed
that the greatest disruption to inferring deceptive intentions involved
right frontal pole (BA 10) and paracingulate (BA 32) lesions, whereas
impairment in affective self-referential judgements was related to left
anterior cingulate (BA 24) lesions. Our findings point to finer segregation
within prefrontal cortex and suggest that current conceptions of ‘mentalizing’ are in need of corresponding refinement.
B 41
EEG CORRELATES OF SPONTANEOUS AND INTENTIONAL
TRAIT INFERENCES Marijke Van Duynslaeger1, Frank Van Overwalle1,
Edwin Verstraeten2; 1Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium, 2University of
Swansea, UK — This study measured event-related potentials during
spontaneous and intentional trait inferences. Participants read sentences
describing the behavior of a target person from which a strong moral trait
could be inferred. The last word of each sentence determined the consistency with the trait induced during an introductory paragraph. In comparison with behaviors that were consistent with the implied trait, a P300
waveform was obtained when the behaviors were evaluative inconsistent
with that trait. In addition, when the inconsistency involved another
domain of personality (e.g., competence), an additional N400 waveform
was observed. This dependency on behavioral consistency indicates that
trait inferences were made previously while reading the preceding
behaviors. Memory measures taken after the presentation of the stimulus
material involved sentence completion, trait- and antonym-cued recall,
and supported the occurrence of inferred traits associated with the actor.
The increased memory for inconsistent as compared to consistent behaviors during the sentence completion task was significantly correlated
with the P300 while making spontaneous inferences, which supports this
latter measure as a valid neural correlate of spontaneous, but not intentional trait inferences.

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

B 42
IMPULSIVITY AND REWARD PREDICTION: A COMBINED ERP/
FMRI INVESTIGATION Laura Martin1, Geoffrey Potts2, Philip Burton3;
1University of Kansas, 2University of South Florida, 3Rice University — Impulsive individuals tend to choose immediate rewards despite long-term
negative consequences, similar to patients with medial frontal lesions.
The current study employed event-related potentials (ERPs) and functional magnetic imaging (fMRI) to determine whether the neural reward
system, particularly its medial frontal projection, was more responsive in
impulsive individuals. The current study used a passive reward prediction design in which Stimulus 1 (S1) predicted Stimulus 2 (S2) with 80%
accuracy. S1 failed to predict S2 on 20% of the trials thus producing
unpredicted reward (better than expected) and predicted reward withheld (worse than expected) conditions, which have been shown to activate the reward system in the monkey. The ERP showed an Outcome x
Prediction interaction (p<.01) over medial frontal cortex between 200 –
300 ms post-S2, with the most positive response occurring when outcomes were better than expected and the most negative occurring when
outcomes were worse than expected. Dipole analyses located this effect
to anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). fMRI revealed an Outcome x Prediction interaction similar to the ERP in an ACC region with the largest
deactivation when outcomes were worse than expected (p<.005).
Although neither the ERP component nor the ACC fMRI showed effects
of impulsivity, fMRI data from a caudate region showed an Impulsivity x
Outcome x Prediction interaction, with a greater response among high
impulsive participants when outcomes were better than expected. The
results indicate that while both cortical and striatal reward system projections respond to reward prediction, only the striatal response varies with
impulsivity.
B 43
THE IMPACT OF PARKINSON’S DISEASE ON PROSODY
EXPRESSION: PERCEPTUAL AND ACOUSTIC FINDINGS Henry
S. Cheang, Marc D. Pell; School of Communication Sciences and Disorders,
McGill University — Adults in the late stages of Parkinson’s disease (PD)
have expressive difficulties to communicate through speech prosody due
to marked acoustic alterations in their speech. Comparatively little is
known about how speech prosody is affected in early stages of PD and
the impact of any acoustic changes on healthy listeners has not been
widely investigated. To address these issues, we elicited speech tokens
that varied in emotional content, phonemic stress, and contrastive stress
from healthy speakers and speakers in the early stages of PD with no relevant cognitive impairments and then evaluated expressive prosody in
each group in two ways: each token was analyzed acoustically; and
tokens were presented to naïve healthy listeners to determine whether
listeners can recognize the intended prosodic meanings. Acoustic analyses revealed significant group-related differences in amplitude, fundamental frequency, and timing across speech token types. As well, naïve
listeners had significantly greater difficulty to discern the intended meanings of prosody when produced by speakers with rather than without
PD. Additional analyses looked at the relative contributions of acoustic
parameters to perceptual errors, revealing that subtle changes in the
acoustic patterning of Parkinsonian speech may have promoted difficulties to understand prosody when listening to individuals in the PD
group. Coupled with our work demonstrating prosody comprehension
deficits in the same PD patients (Pell and Leonard, 2003), we conclude
that PD is associated with impairments in the production and comprehension of prosody which are independent of other forms of cognitive
decline.

65

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

B 44
MULTI-MODAL EFFECTS OF LOCAL CONTEXT ON TARGET
DETECTION: EVIDENCE FROM THE P300 Noa
Fogelson1, Jeffrey
1
1
2
Lewis , Mark Kishiyama , Kilian Koepsell , Robert Knight1; 1University of
California, Berkeley, The Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, 2University of
California, Berkeley, Redwood Theoretical Neuroscience Center — The
P300
component of the event-related potential (ERP) has been linked to contextual processing. We used the P300 ERP to investigate how a predicting
sequence influenced local context. EEG was recorded in 12 subjects during auditory and visual sessions. Stimuli were presented centrally and
consisted of 15% targets (downward facing triangle or 1000 Hz tone) and
85% of equal amounts of three types of standards (triangles facing left,
upwards and right or 1500 Hz, 2000 Hz and 2500 Hz tones). Recording
blocks consisted of targets preceded by either randomized sequences of
standards or by sequences including a three-standard predictive
sequence. Subjects pressed a button in response to the targets. Peak P300
amplitude and latency at Pz were evaluated for 6 conditions: targets after
predictive and non predictive sequences, random preceding standards
and the three standards comprising the predicting sequence. Reaction
times were significantly faster for predictable targets than for non predictive targets. There was a main effect for peak latency and amplitude
across the six conditions in the two modalities. P300 latency was shorter
for sequence predicted targets than for targets after non-predictive
sequences. Peak amplitudes for targets and for the last, most informative
standard of the predictive sequence, were also larger than standards.
These findings suggest that more task-informative preceding stimuli
shorten P300 latency and increase P300 amplitude, independent of sensory modality. The results indicate that local context has modality independent effects on cognitive processing. Supported by NINDS Grant
NS21135
B 45
DIFFERENT SCALES OF CORTICAL INTEGRATION DURING
THE PROCESSING OF MUSICAL SYNTAX: FROM EARLY LONGRANGE ALPHA PHASE SYNCHRONIZATION TO LATE LOCAL
GAMMA OSCILLATIONS Maria Del Carmen Herrojo Ruiz1, Stephan
Koelsch2, Joydeep Bhattacharya3; 1Institut für Musikphysiologie und
Musikermedizin, Hochschule für Musik und Theater, Hannover, Germany,
UNED, Madrid,Spain, 2Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 3Goldsmiths College, University of London,
London, UK, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria — Although
previous studies have demonstrated that brain oscillations and synchronization between multiple brain areas play a crucial role in cognition, little has been done to investigate the temporal dynamics of oscillatory and
synchronization properties of brain responses in humans processing
music syntactical irregularities. Consequently, the present study investigated the processing of music-syntactical irregularities by recording
spontaneous EEG in human subjects while listening to chord sequences
ending on either regular or irregular chords. Consistent with traditional
event-related-potential analysis, we reproduced the early (~200 ms) right
anterior negative component (ERAN), and established that this component was primarily represented by low frequency (<8 Hz) oscillations.
Additionally, we found decreased gamma band (45-55 Hz) oscillations at
a later stage (~500 ms) of processing, which was interpreted as a signature of harmonic integration after top-down processing. By applying synchronization cluster analysis to reveal the involvement of individual
brain regions with a global cluster, we found that irregular chords elicited an early decrease in the alpha band (9-10 Hz) phase synchronization
predominantly in right fronto-central brain regions, due to a decrease of
long-range phase coupling between these areas and left temporal brain
regions, as further elucidated by applying bivariate synchronization analysis. This finding was explained in terms of top-down processes. Taken
together, these results support the hypothesis that the processing of
music as complex set of perceptive and cognitive operations requires dif-

66

Higher Level Cognition: Other

ferent scales of cortical integration, ranging from long-range alpha synchronization to local fast gamma oscillations.
B 46
FOOD FOR THOUGHT: THE SPATIO-TEMPORAL BRAIN
DYNAMICS OF FOOD DISCRIMINATION Ulrike
Toepel1, JeanFrançois Knebel1, Julie Hudry2, Johannes Le-Coutre2, Micah M. Murray1;
1
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Nestle
Research Center, Vers-chez-les-Blanc, Lausanne, Switzerland — We investigated the spatiotemporal brain mechanisms by which images of foods are
discriminated from one another according to their nutritional content.
The images were color photographs of common foods that were subdivided into classes according to their caloric (high and low) or fat (high
and low) content. All photographs were modified to have the same mean
luminance, and classes of stimuli were controlled in terms of their mean
power spectra. During the experiment, subjects were given no information about the classes of foods, but rather actively discriminated photographs of foods from photographs of kitchen utensils (non-foods). The
nutritional content of the foods was thus completely orthogonal. Electrical neuroimaging analyses were conducted using 160-channel visual
evoked potentials (VEPs) to food stimuli. Comparing responses to photographs of different food classes, these analyses tested for modulations in
1) local VEP waveforms, 2) global response strength, and 3) the topography of the electric field at the scalp. In addition, the local auto-regressive
average (LAURA) distributed linear inverse solution was applied to periods of observed modulations. Within the initial ~100ms post-stimulus
onset, responses to different food classes significantly differed. Responses
to high-fat foods were stronger than those to low-fat foods, and responses
to high-calorie foods were stronger than those to low-calorie foods. The
nutritional content of visually controlled food images is thus rapidly and
incidentally assessed. We interpret these results in terms of the brain
mechanisms mediating the determination of the nutritional value of seen
foods.
B 47
DO MENTAL AND VISUOSPATIAL PERSPECTIVE-TAKING
SHARE THE SAME NEURAL CORRELATES? Nicole David1, Carolin
Aumann1, Natacha S. Santos1, Bettina H. Bewernick1, Simon Eickhoff2,3,
Albert Newen4, N. Jon Shah3, Gereon R. Fink1,3, Kai Vogeley1,3; 1University
of Cologne, Germany, 2C. & O. Vogt Institute for Brain Research, University of
Duesseldorf, Germany, 3Institute of Biophysics and Neurosciences, Research
Center Juelich, Germany, 4University of Tuebingen, Germany — Being able to
take others' perspectives in order to understand and predict their behavior is crucial for social interactions. Different kinds of perspective-taking
exist such as mental and visuospatial perspective-taking. Because it is still
debated whether they rely on the same functional mechanisms, we investigated neural correlates of mental and visuospatial perspective-taking
with fMRI using the same stimulus material. Stimuli depicted a virtual
character in a vis-à-vis position expressing a preference towards one of
two different objects located on each of his side with a subtle difference in
position. Subjects performed a mental preference task (MPT) and visuospatial judgment task (VST), from the subjects' own perspectives (firstperson perspective, 1PP) or the perspective of the virtual character (thirdperson perspective, 3PP). During MPT subjects decided which object they
themselves (MPT_1PP) or the virtual character preferred (MPT_3PP).
During VST subjects located the elevated object from their own
(VST_1PP) or the virtual character's perspective (VST_3PP). We found
overlapping activation in bilateral middle/ inferior occipital, superior
parietal and middle/ inferior frontal cortices for mental and visuospatial
perspective-taking (MPT+VST collapsed across perspectives). Mental
compared to visuospatial perspective-taking (MPT>VST) additionally
recruited the cerebellum bilaterally, bilateral fusiform, superior/ inferior
frontal gyri, and superior/ middle temporal areas including the temporal
pole, posterior superior temporal sulcus and temporoparietal junction
(particularly for 3PP). Visuospatial compared to mental perspective-taking (VST>MPT) only recruited the anterior cingulate cortex. In conclu-

Memory: Memory Systems

sion, mental and visuospatial perspective-taking could be dissociated
with fMRI, despite using the same stimuli, suggesting differences in their
functional basis.
B 48
TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF AUDITORY DECISION-MAKING: A
MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY STUDY Jochen Kaiser1, Therese
Lennert2, Werner Lutzenberger2; 1University of Frankfurt am Main, Germany,
2University of Tubingen, Germany — Perceptual decision-making requires
the comparison and integration of sensory evidence to generate a behavioral response. We used magnetoencephalography (MEG) to investigate
the time course of decision-making during an auditory task that involved
forced-choice decisions about whether a pair of syllables S1 and S2 differed either in their sound patterns or their perceived sound source lateralization. Conditions with easy and difficult decisions were created by
manipulating the similarity of S1 and S2. Thirteen healthy adults participated in the study. Behavioral data showed main effects of task difficulty
both for correct response rates and reaction times. Statistical probability
mapping was employed to investigate oscillatory activity in MEG. We
observed enhanced gamma-band activity (GBA) over posterior parietal
cortex for spatial and over left inferior frontal cortex for pattern changes
(at ~120-220 ms after S2 onset). Activations were more pronounced for
easy than difficult decisions. GBA over superior prefrontal cortex was
more pronounced at ~280-430 ms for easy than difficult decisions regardless of type of change, possibly reflecting decision-relevant networks that
integrate information from higher sensory areas representing the perceptual alternatives. During the same latency window, a different frontal
and a parietal sensor showed increased GBA for difficult than easy decisions. Sensorimotor beta desynchronization indicating motor preparation
processes peaked at ~460 ms for easy and at ~520 ms for difficult decisions, thus reflecting the reaction time difference between both conditions. In summary, the analysis of oscillatory activity in MEG served to
elucidate the temporal dynamics of perceptual decision-making in
humans.
B 49
SELF-OTHER DISCRIMINATION AND THE MIRROR NEURON
SYSTEM: NO INTERACTION IN LEFT PRIMARY MOTOR
CORTEX Marie-Christine Désy, Hugo Théoret; Université de Montréal,
Centre de recherche en Neuropsychologie et Cognition and Hopital SainteJustine, Montréal — Recent evidence suggests that the human mirror neuron system (MNS) may be involved in self-other discrimination. Disruption of the inferior parietal lobule with transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS), a key structure within the MNS, results in impaired self-other discrimination. In primary motor cortex, excitability is increased during presentation of self-images and self-descriptive personality-trait words as
well as during observation of finger movements. Here, we ask whether
the MNS is preferentially activated by passive observation of hand
actions similar to self in terms of sex and skin color. TMS-induced motor
evoked potentials (MEP) were recorded from the right first dorsal interosseus (FDI) muscle while participants viewed 4 short videos depicting
index finger movement made by female or male participants with black
or white skin color. Thirty-two participants took part in the study, which
included four groups of 8 subjects (black males, black females, white
males, white females). TMS intensity was adjusted to reliably induce
MEPs of peak-to-peak amplitude of approximately 1&#956;V. Each video
was presented 16 times in randomized order. Results show the absence of
significant effects on the size of the TMS-induced MEP as it relates to the
similarity with the observed hand on the skin color and sex dimensions.
These data show that the left primary motor cortex, which is reliably activated by stimuli related to basic MNS function, does not show a preference for physical characteristics resembling those of the observer. This is
in line with previous reports suggesting hemispheric specialization of the
right hemisphere in self-awareness.

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

B 50
HIGHER VISUAL AREAS ENCODE THE SPATIAL ANALYSIS OF
PERCEIVED SOCIAL THREAT IN OTHERS Donna
Lloyd1, India
2
1
2
Morrison ; The University of Manchester, U.K., Sahlgrenska University
Hospital, Sweden — An fMRI study by Lloyd et al (2006) recently demonstrated a role for posterior parietal cortex (PPC) in visual encoding of
potentially threatening or painful objects in the peripersonal space of the
observer. The purpose of the current study was to determine whether
PPC (via inputs from afferent visual streams) has a more generic ability
to spatially differentiate visual events signalling potential threat posed by
another person when this person is in peripersonal vs. extrapersonal
space. During fMRI we presented 16 female participants with real-life
scenes of a male and female actor in which the social context was manipulated to be either threatening (young male wearing a hooded top with
the hood covering his face) or non-threatening (hood not covering the
face) and the male actor to be in either the peripersonal (i.e., within arms
reach) or extrapersonal space (at a distance of over 6m) of the young
female. The results reveal a network of cortical areas involved in viewing
threatening and non-threatening social interactions, including PPC and
sites along the ventral visual stream, cerebellum, ventral and dorsomedial prefrontal lobes (including anterior cingulate cortex; BA32). However, we also show, for the first time, a unique role for higher-order
visual areas in left temporal-occipital junction, extrastriate and fusiform
cortices in the purely spatial analysis of viewing threatening social
encounters. Together these results suggest a putative network of regions
involved in the visuo-spatial analysis of social perception and interpersonal behaviour.

Memory: Memory Systems
B 51
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF POST-RETRIEVAL
PROCESSING ARE NOT SPECIFIC TO MONITORING THE
PRODUCTS OF MEMORY RETRIEVAL Hiroki Hayama, Jeffery D.
Johnson, Michael D. Rugg; University of California, Irvine — Post-retrieval
processes are engaged when the outcome of a retrieval attempt must be
monitored or evaluated. Previous research employing event-related
potentials (ERPs) has implicated a specific ERP modulation - the ‘right
frontal old/new effect’ - as a correlate of post-retrieval processing. In two
experiments we examined whether the right frontal effect is specifically
associated with episodic memory retrieval. During study, subjects in both
experiments were cued to make one of two semantic judgments on serially presented pictures. In experiment 1, one study phase was followed
by a source memory task, in which subjects responded ‘new’ to unstudied pictures, and signaled the semantic judgment made on each studied
picture. A separate study phase was followed by a task in which the studied items required, not a source memory judgment, but a judgment about
their semantic attributes. Robust right frontal effects were elicited by old
items in both tasks, indicating that the effects are not selective for the
monitoring of the content of information retrieved from episodic memory. In experiment 2, separate study phases were followed by test phases
where semantic judgments were either made on old items (as in experiment 1), or on new items. Right frontal effects were elicited by whichever
class of items, old or new, required the semantic judgment. Together, the
findings indicate that the right frontal old/new effect is not associated
selectively with mnemonic decision-making, and instead reflects processing associated with monitoring or decision making more generally.
B 52
INTACT WORKING MEMORY FOR RELATIONAL INFORMATION
IN PATIENTS WITH MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE LESIONS Yael
Shrager1, Larry R. Squire2,1; 1University of California, San Diego, 2Veterans
Affairs Healthcare System, San Diego, California — The hippocampus and
adjacent medial temporal lobe structures (entorhinal, perirhinal, and

67

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

parahippocampal cortices) are known to support declarative memory.
Traditionally, the medial temporal lobe has not been thought to be necessary for working memory. Yet, some recent findings have been interpreted to mean that structures of the medial temporal lobe, including the
hippocampus, do support working memory, particularly working memory for relational information (e.g., an object and its location). We tested
patients with damage limited to the hippocampus and patients with large
lesions of the medial temporal lobe. Participants were tested for their
memory of objects (1, 2, 3, 4, or 6) and their locations on a 3 X 3 grid.
Memory was tested at two delays (1 and 8 seconds). Patients performed
as well as controls at the 1-second delay in all tests (1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 object
locations), and they also performed as well as controls at the 8-second
delay when asked to remember 1, 2, 3, or 4 object locations. The patients
performed more poorly than controls at the 8-second delay when asked
to remember 6 object locations. That is, the patients performed poorly
when the test was most difficult (high memory load at the longer delay),
and when the capacity of working memory was likely exceeded. We
interpret this finding as a deficit in long-term memory and propose that
the hippocampus and adjacent medial temporal lobe structures are
important for declarative memory but not for working memory.
B 53
ENCODING
ITEMS
AND
CONJUNCTIONS:
A
HIGHRESOLUTION FMRI STUDY OF MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE
CONTRIBUTIONS TO FULL AND PARTIAL EVENT ENCODING
Alison R. Preston, Crystal L. Cook, Gwen M. Lawson, Anthony D. Wagner;
Stanford University — Memory for the past yields knowledge that can be
used to satisfy current goals. When we interrogate memory, recollection
of a specific (criterial) contextual detail may be required to guide present
behavior, with recollection of other (non-criterial) information often
being insufficient to satisfy the goal. The distinction between criterial and
non-criterial recollection may be vital to understanding the contributions
of specific medial temporal lobe (MTL) substructures to encoding of item
and conjunctive information. The current high-resolution fMRI study
used the subsequent memory paradigm to assess how MTL encoding
processes support later item recognition and later recognition accompanied by varying levels of contextual recollection. During encoding, participants were scanned while they incidentally encoded visually-presented
adjectives in one of four ways: generated an associated mental image of
an indoor scene or outdoor scene, or generated an associated name of a
famous female person or male person. A post-scan recognition memory
test probed for item and conjunctive memory in a three-step procedure:
(1) item recognition (old/new), (2) task recollection (scene/person), and
(3) detailed recollection (indoor/outdoor or male/female). Encoding activation in MTL subregions was analyzed based on later item recognition
and varying levels of context recollection. Preliminary results suggest
that MTL cortex and hippocampus demonstrate distinct encoding patterns, with MTL cortex tracking the item dimension regardless of the
level of recollected detail, and hippocampal subfields tracking the recollective dimension with greater levels of activation associated with
increasing levels of recollected detail. These findings suggest that MTL
subregions make distinct contributions to declarative memory.
B 54
DIFFERENTIAL ACTIVATION OF MOTOR BRAIN REGIONS IN
PROSPECTIVE MEMORY ENCODING Anne
Eschen1, Jayne E.
Freeman2, Thomas Dietrich3, Mike Martin1, Judi A. Ellis2, Ernst Martin3,
Matthias Kliegel1; 1Institute of Psychology, University of Zurich, 2University of
Reading, 3Magnetic Resonance Center, University Children's Hospital
Zurich — Prospective memory research is focused on cognitive processes
supporting the realization of actions intended for future enactment.
Behavioural findings indicate that these actions are more accessible from
memory than actions intended for later observation or verbal report and
that their higher accessibility is caused by preparatory motor operations
during encoding. Accordingly, in an fMRI study with young participants,
it was investigated whether motor brain regions are differentially acti-

68

Memory: Memory Systems

vated during verbal encoding of actions for later enactment in contrast to
that of actions for later verbal report. The encoding of actions for later
verbal report was additionally contrasted to that of abstract verbs for
later verbal report to examine whether the semantic motor information
inherent in action but not in abstract verbs activates different brain
regions from those involved in the preparation of actions for later enactment. Differential activation for the verbal encoding of to-be-enacted in
comparison to to-be-reported actions was indeed found in brain regions
known to be involved in covert motor preparation. There was no overlap
between these brain regions and those differentially activated during the
verbal encoding of action in contrast to abstract verbs for later verbal
report, suggesting the presence of preparatory motor processes is a distinctive characteristic of prospective memory encoding. For the encoding
of to-be-enacted actions, differential brain activation was completely left
lateralized and participants reported mental simulation of future actions.
An ongoing follow-up fMRI study examines two possible causes for this
left lateralization, another the influence of mental simulation on differential brain activation.
B 55
USING HIGH-DENSITY EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS TO
UNDERSTAND THE MEMORIAL POWER OF PICTURES AND
THE DYNAMICS OF RECOGNITION MEMORY Brandon A. Ally,
Jill D. Waring, Ellen H. Beth, Andrew E. Budson; Boston University, Bedford,
MA — Numerous studies of recognition memory have demonstrated the
picture superiority effect. However, there has been limited investigation
into how pictures affect the electrophysiological correlates of recognition
memory. Our goal was to examine differences in three specific components of the old/new event-related potential (ERP) waveform associated
with the processes of familiarity, recollection, and post-retrieval monitoring. Seventeen young adults saw four study-test phases (Word-Picture,
Picture-Word, Word-Word, Picture-Picture) with 50 study items and 100
test items (50% old). Both conventional ANOVAs and t-tests, and novel
nonparametric analyses were used to analyze the effect of pictures versus
words at study and the effect of matched versus nonmatched study and
test modalities. Results revealed that when words were studied and
when study-test modality was matched, the early frontally based component associated with familiarity was enhanced. When pictures were
studied and when study-test modality was matched, the parietally based
component associated when recollection was enhanced. Finally, with difficult old/new decisions frontal and parietal regions were simultaneously active during the post-retrieval monitoring interval, supporting
the hypothesis that interplay between the two regions is necessary to
make many recognition decisions. We suggest that the frontal lobes may
utilize the parietal cortex as a sketchpad to match the representation
stored in memory with perception or to hold multiple representations for
response selection. It is also concluded that the memorial power of pictures stems from enhanced recollection. Based on these findings and a
review of the literature, we have developed a novel ERP model of recognition memory.
B 56
BEHAVIOURAL AND ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDIES ON
THE EFFECT OF AGEING ON SOURCE MEMORY ABILITY. Páraic
Scanlon1, Paul Dockree2, Seán Commins1, Richard Roche1; 1National University of
Ireland, Maynooth, 2Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience — Two
experiments were carried out in order to examine the effect of ageing on source
memory capacity in normally functioning humans. Experiment 1 consisted of 3 groups: young adults (18-26 years), middle-aged adults (40-50
years) and older adults (65-75 years). Each group completed the Opposition Task (Jennings & Jacoby, 1997) in which a study- and test-list of
words are presented to each participant, who must decide if words presented in the test-list were present in the study list. Words are presented
at 3 different lag lengths; 0, 4 and 16. Older adults found it more difficult
to differentiate between words from the study list and words that were
presented earlier in the test list, particularly for lag 4 and lag 16 words.

Memory: Memory Systems

Experiment 2 was an ERP-based study involving 2 groups (n=10);
younger adults (18-26) and older adults (65-75). A modified Opposition
task was used in this study, in which lag length was increased for the
young adult group in order to achieve maximum difficulty in the task, to
determine if similarities occurred between the ERP data of the more difficult task and the data of the older adults’ simpler task. We also examined
electrophysiological changes that occurred over differing lag lengths and
neural generators of the ERP waveforms in both young and older adult
performance using BESA© software, revealing cortical dipole sources for
the scalp recorded componentry.
B 57
DYNAMIC CORRELATIONS OF PREFRONTAL CORTEX
NEURONS REPRESENTING FUTURE AND PREVIOUS GOALS
Satoshi Tsujimoto, Aldo Genovesio, Steven Wise; NIMH — We recorded the
activity of cells in the prefrontal cortex as monkeys chose one of three
spatial goals (Genovesio et al., J. Neurosci. 26: 7281, 2006). The monkeys
based their decision on symbols that instructed them either to reject or to
repeat their most recent, previous goal as the next fixation point. We
found that separate populations of cells encoded future versus previous
goals. Here, we investigated dynamic cross-correlations between pairs of
simultaneously recorded neurons from these populations. The database
included 34 future-future (F-F) pairs, 41 previous-future (P-F) pairs, and
23 previous-previous (P-P) pairs. We found that previous-goal cells
tended to correlate with future-goal cells (P-F correlations), but not with
other previous-goal cells (P-P correlations). Future-goal cells, however,
not only tended to correlate with previous-goal cells (as mentioned
above), but also did so with other future-goal cells (F-F correlations).
Specifically, 17% of P-F pairs and 24% of F-F pairs, but no P-P pairs satisfied our criterion for correlation (r>0.15). This finding suggests that previous-goal representations might rely less on cell-to-cell correlations than
do representations of future goals. We also studied the temporal profile
of dynamic correlations. P-F and F-F correlations both increased as a goal
could be chosen and remained relatively stable as that goal was remembered and later fixated. P-F correlations increased further after fixation.
These results provide insight into the mechanisms of goal selection and
output monitoring: F-F and P-F correlations could contribute to goal
selection, and P-F correlations could, in addition, be especially important
in output monitoring.
B 58
UNCERTAINTY
DURING
FEAR
CONDITIONING:
OBSERVATIONS OF BOLD ACTIVITY AND IMPLICATIONS FOR
ANXIETY DISORDERS Seth Shipman1, Matthew Johnson1,2, Michal
Assaf1, Clayton Maxwell1, Becket Greten-Harrison1, Kira Bailey1, Robert
Astur1,2; 1Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center, 2Yale University — Uncertainty is pervasive in the natural world. It is, therefore, imperative that
we understand the ramifications of uncertainty on neural systems. There
have been some inroads into this study, particularly with the discovery of
the partial reinforcement extinction effect, which has its roots in the
uncertainty of reward or punishment presentation (Leonard, 1975).
Additionally, recent evidence about dread indicates that a proportion of
humans would prefer a more severe adverse event immediately rather
than a less severe adverse event at some time later, indicating the effect of
uncertainty in the timing of adverse event presentation (Berns et al.,
2006). Clinically, uncertainty is of crucial relevance to the treatment of
anxiety disorders as unpredictability and lack of control have been proposed as key escalating factors in both panic disorder (Bouton et al., 2001)
and PTSD (Foa et al., 1992). We have addressed the issue of uncertainty
during fear learning directly, testing 20 participants on a fear conditioning paradigm during fMRI. We focused on BOLD signal changes, particularly within the amygdala, and changes in galvanic skin response
during an experiment that exposed healthy adults to shocks that were
preceded by either certain or ambiguous markers of whether a shock
would follow. Important differences are evident as a function of the predictability of the shock. Specifically, the BOLD signal response elicited by

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

the uncertain predictor of a shock appears more resistant to extinction
than that elicited by the certain predictor, possibly mirroring the maladaptive response that characterizes some anxiety disorders.
B 59
COCAINE-INDUCED PLACE PREFERENCES WITHIN A VIRTUAL
ENVIRONMENT Robert Astur1,2, Seth Shipman1, Shepard Siegel3, Albert
Rizzo4, Robert Malison5; 1Hartford Hospital/Institute of Living, 2Yale
University, 3McMaster University, 4University of Southern California 5Yale
University School of Medicine — The context and environment where
drugs are used can induce cravings and precede relapse in substance
abusers. This contextual influence often is independent of the specific
drug paraphernalia These learned associations are problematic for the
treatment for drug addiction because it is challenging for users to avoid
places, people, and objects associated with substance use prior to recovery.
This Pavlovian conditioning has been experimentally demonstrated in nonhumans in a paradigm known as conditioned place
preference (CPP), in which an animal is conditioned to prefer a specific
environment through repeated pairings of a rewarding substance to that
environment.
We have created a virtual reality analogue of the CPP
paradigm to explore the contributions of contextual conditioning to substance abuse in humans.
In this study, five non-treatment seeking
cocaine abusers have been given repeated pairings of cocaine in one specific virtual environment, and a placebo in a different virtual environment. Before and after the pairings, the subjects were allowed
unrestricted access to both environments without the influence of
cocaine. Following the pairings, participants spent an increased percentage of time in the cocaine-paired environment as well as rated the cocaine
paired room as ~42% more preferable than the placebo paired room.
Subjective ratings of drug effects and mood were also collected throughout the experiment. This work is the first report of an experimentally
induced CPP in humans, and this paradigm could be used to test the efficacy of treatments aimed at reducing the effect of conditioned place preferences on substance abuse in humans.
B 60
NEURAL SUBSTRATES UNDERLYING HUMAN DELAY AND
TRACE EYEBLINK CONDITIONING Dominic
Cheng1,
John
Disterhoft2, John Power3, Deborah Ellis1, John Desmond1; 1Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, 2Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, 3Queensland Brain Institute — Eyeblink classical conditioning
has been widely used as a model system to study the neurobiological
mechanisms of learning and memory. In delay conditioning, the conditioned stimulus (CS) and unconditioned stimulus (US) coterminate while
in trace conditioning, a period of time (called the trace interval) passes
between offset of the CS and delivery of the US. Considerable evidence
from laboratory animal and human lesion studies suggests the hippocampus plays a critical role during trace conditioning, while the cerebellum is critical during both delay and trace conditioning. However,
human studies often compare performance of delay and trace eyeblink
conditioning in a between-subjects design. The current study used fMRI
and healthy human volunteers to investigate the neural substrates underlying delay and trace eyeblink conditioning in a within-subjects design.
Delay (850 ms) and trace (250 ms, 500 ms trace interval) CSs were 1200 Hz
tones and white noise delivered binaurally (95 dB) and the US was a 100
ms corneal airpuff (4 psi). Behavioral eyeblink data indicate that subjects
learned the CS-US association for both delay and trace conditioning trials. Imaging data showed that common cerebellar regions were recruited
during both delay and trace conditioning. Furthermore, increased hippocampal activity during trace conditioning was detected supporting the
idea that this region is critically important for this type of learning.

69

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing
B 61
NEURAL RESPONSES TO MAJOR/MINOR CHORD CHANGES IN
MUSICAL PHRASES: AN EEG STUDY Tamar Baer1,2, Karen Froud3,2;
1Barnard College, 2Columbia University, 3Teachers College — The goal of this
experiment was to investigate how the brain recognizes a shift from a
major to a minor chord of music or vice versa. Past research has been conducted focusing on the Event Related Potential (ERP) component elicited
when a dissonant chord is played at the end of a familiar tune. Violations
of terminal note expectations of musical pieces have been found to elicit
late positive components, between 300 and 800 milliseconds (ms) post
stimulus presentation. In addition, dissonant terminal notes have been
associated with shifts in P3 amplitude, and with elicitation of a negative
component between 200 and 600 ms. Past findings however, have not
indicated if a shift from a major chord to a minor chord or vice versa (by
raising/lowering the third scale of the given chord by a semi-tone) has
the same effect as a dissonant terminal note. In this experiment, 4 types of
unfamiliar musical pieces were played for subjects: a piece in an all major
chord, an all minor piece, and pieces which shifted from major to minor
or from minor to major. Our results indicated an earlier and greater negative amplitude post chord shift, compared with the non-shift condition.
There was also a negative complex between 200 and 500 ms post chord
shift. This negative complex was followed in some subjects by a late positive component (LPC), which could be interpreted as indexing additional
attentional processing and/or cognitive restructuring effects.

Memory: Memory Systems
B 62
HIPPOCAMPAL RECRUITMENT IN IMPLICIT LEARNING:
NEUROIMAGING EVIDENCE FROM A VISUAL SEARCH TASK
Ruskin Hunt, Kathleen Thomas; Institute of Child Development, University of
Minnesota — Neuropsychological evidence suggests a functional dissociation between brain systems recruited for explicit versus implicit memory and learning, with structures in the medial temporal lobe (MTL)
needed for explicit but not implicit function. Contrary to this model, successful performance on the contextual cueing task (CCT), an implicit
learning task, is thought to require the integrity of MTL. We investigated
this in healthy adults (N=8) using a CCT modified for fMRI. Our CCT
was a visual search task in which a target was embedded among distractor stimuli and participants indicated target orientation via button press.
Stimulus displays were of three types: Fixed, Novel, or Baseline. Fixed
displays contained fixed locations for both target and distractors. With
repeated exposure, reaction times (RT’s) to Fixed displays improved
without overt awareness. Novel displays contained fixed locations for
targets across presentations, but randomly located distractors. RT’s to
Novel displays improved slower than RT’s to Fixed displays. Baseline
displays contained random locations for both targets and distractors. Furthermore, Baseline distractors differed in appearance from targets,
requiring less effortful search. RT’s to Baseline displays were faster than
RT’s to other displays. Consistent with patient data, significant hippocampal activation was found for Familiar displays (Familiar > Baseline),
but not for Novel displays (Novel vs. Baseline). Significant activation was
also found in bilateral medial prefrontal, posterior parahippocampal, and
fusiform gyri for both Familiar and Novel displays (Familiar/Novel >
Baseline), but with greater activation for Novel displays. Results are discussed in terms of visual search and the dissociative model above.
B 63
PERCEPTUAL PROCESSING IN RECOGNITION MEMORY: AN
ERP STUDY Erika
Nyhus, Tim Curran; University of Colorado,
Boulder — The perceptual match between study and test has been found
to contribute to recognition memory under the right conditions. Event-

70

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing

related brain potentials (ERPs) recorded from the human scalp during
recognition memory experiments have revealed differences between old
(studied) and new (not-studied) items that are thought to reflect the
activity of memory-related brain processes. The present experiment
examined how orienting task and distinctiveness contribute to the perceptual match effect in recognition memory and which ERP components
index these effects. Distinctiveness modulated the perceptual match
effect by acting on familiarity and recollection processes, as indexed by
the FN400 and parietal old/new effects. The present results indicate that
perceptual information can aid recognition memory by acting on familiarity and recollection processes.
B 64
IS MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX CRITICAL IN MONITORING
LEARNING AND MEMORY? Mandana Modirrousta, Lesley K. Fellows;
Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada — The frontal lobes in general and the ventromedial frontal
region in particular have been implicated in the monitoring of memory
processes (so-called ‘meta-memory’). Previous neuroimaging studies
have implicated medial prefrontal cortex specifically in prospective feeling-of-knowing judgments, and at least one prior lesion study found that
frontal damage affected prospective, but not retrospective memory monitoring. Here we evaluated 3 aspects of meta-memory in a group of
patients with damage involving medial prefrontal cortex, compared to 12
age- and education-matched control subjects. Overall, both recall and
recognition memories of face-name pairs were impaired in all 3 patients.
The effects of medial prefrontal damage on meta-memory depended on
the specific form of monitoring: Patients were more optimistic about
their future ability to remember, judged immediately after initial learning, than controls. Prospective feeling-of-knowing judgments prior to
recognition testing were also less accurate in the patient group (mean
gamma = 0.06, SD = 0.28 for patients and mean gamma = 0.52, SD = 0.34
for controls). However, the accuracy of confidence ratings after recall
(retrospective meta-memory) was comparable across the two groups.
Interestingly, even restricted damage to a region within left anterior cingulate cortex was associated with this pattern of performance. Medial
prefrontal cortex appears to play a critical role in prospective but not retrospective monitoring of memory performance, arguing that these two
meta-memory processes are supported by at least partially distinct neural
substrates.
B 65
SUPPORT FOR AN INHIBITORY MODEL OF WORD
RETRIEVAL Kathryn H. Caddick1, Lauren R. Moo2, Robert S. Ross1, Scott
D. Slotnick1; 1Boston College, 2MGH — Word retrieval has been described
as a competitive process involving either selection from multiple activated alternatives or an inhibitory process where a word is activated with
related alternatives suppressed. We aimed to distinguish between these
models using fMRI during an anagram solving paradigm. Participants
were first presented with a distractor word that was read aloud followed
by a 5-letter to-be-solved anagram. Distractor types were defined relative
to orthographic overlap with the subsequent anagram solution and
included related words with one letter different (e.g., “gripe” for the anagram of “price”) and unrelated words which served as controls (related
non-words were also included). We reasoned that the competition model
would predict greater activity in language processing regions associated
with the related distractor condition versus the control condition (due to
co-activation of the distractor word and anagram solution). Conversely,
the inhibition model would predict less activity in language processing
regions for this contrast (due to suppression of the anagram solution).
Behavioral results revealed a slower anagram solution reaction-time in
the related distractor conditions. In support of the inhibitory model, fMRI
results showed significantly less activity in language processing regions
for the related distractor word condition versus the control condition.
Furthermore, activity in prefrontal cortex was of opposite sign (i.e.,
increased activity for this contrast) indicating this region may mediate

Memory: Memory Systems

inhibition of related word representations. A similar pattern of results
was observed for related non-word distractors relative to controls, suggesting these effects operate at the orthographic-phonological level.
B 66
MODULATION OF THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF EPISODIC
ENCODING BY STUDY-TEST OVERLAP Heekyeong Park, Michael
Rugg; University of California, Irvine — Successful memory depends both
on study processing and the nature of the retrieval cue. Findings from
studies that have manipulated the relation between study and retrieval
processing have motivated the proposal that the greater the degree of
study-test overlap, the greater the likelihood of successful retrieval (the
transfer appropriate processing (TAP) principle). Here, we investigated
whether the neural correlates of episodic encoding differ according to
degree of match between study material and the cues employed in the
subsequent memory test. Subjects were scanned while they made incidental indoor/outdoor judgments on a visually presented list of words
and pictures. On a later memory test, half of the studied items were
probed with a matching cue (word-word, picture-picture) and half with a
non-matching cue (word-picture, picture-word). Each test item was subjected to a Remember/Know/New judgment. To identify encodingrelated activity potentially associated with TAP, activity elicited at encoding for later recollected words or pictures probed with matching cues was
contrasted with activity for recollected items probed with mismatching
cues, and the outcome inclusively masked with regions selectively activated by the relevant study material (pictures > words and vice-versa).
This procedure identified two regions, in right occipital and parietal cortex, where activity was greater during picture encoding than word
encoding, and for later recollected pictures probed with matching vs.
non-matching cues. These findings suggest that, at least in the case of pictures, matching cues are more likely than non-matching cues to recapitulate study processing, consistent with one of the tenets of TAP.
B 67
COLOR AND SPATIAL SOURCE MEMORY ACTIVATE UNIQUE
SUB-REGIONS OF THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE Robert S. Ross,
Scott D. Slotnick; Boston College — Hippocampal and parahippocampal
activation has previously been reported during source memory retrieval.
However, to our knowledge, no study has directly examined whether
different source memory judgments are associated with unique subregions of the medial temporal lobe (MTL). In this study, participants
were shown monochromatic line drawings of objects in two different
source conditions. In one condition, participants were shown objects on
the left or right side of the screen. In a second condition, participants
were shown objects with green or red backgrounds. At test, words were
presented at the center of the screen and participants were asked to indicate if the word represented a previously viewed (old) object or was new
and, if it was old, the context in which it appeared (left or right for half
the trials, green or red for the other half). Preliminary analysis revealed
that color source memory, as measured by color-old-hit-hit vs. color-oldhit-miss (i.e., correct item + source vs. correct item), activated the hippocampus and parahippocampal cortex while spatial source memory activated the hippocampus. When color source memory was directly
compared to spatial source memory, using the comparison color-old-hithit vs. spatial-old-hit-hit and vice versa, differential activation was seen
in all regions of the MTL including the hippocampus, entorhinal, perirhinal, and parahippocampal cortices. No differences in MTL activation
were found when item memory activations were compared using the
comparison color-old-hit-miss vs. spatial old-hit-miss or the reverse contrast. These results suggest that different source memory judgments may
rely on unique sub-regions of the medial temporal lobe.

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

B 68
EPISODIC ENCODING ACTIVATION OF THE LEFT POSTERIOR
PARIETAL CORTEX Pamela Perschler1, Reza Habib1, Endel Tulving2;
1Southern Illinois University, 2Rotman Research Institute of Baycrest
Centre — In a recent review, Wagner et al. (2005) highlight the important
role that the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) serves during pisodic memory retrieval. They note that the PPC is active 1) during old-new comparisons, 2) during false alarm - correct rejection comparisons (i.e. perceived
recognition), and 3) when retrieval is accompanied by recollective experience (i.e. remember responses in a remember/know task). Here we
report positron emission tomography (PET) data on the role of the PPC
during episodic memory encoding. Subjects were scanned while looking
at novel and two kinds of familiar pictures, and were later given an incidental recognition test. Novel pictures had never been seen before,
whereas familiar pictures had been shown to subjects either immediately
prior to the start of scanning (recent familiar) or the day before the scanning session (distant familiar). Overall, activity in the left inferior parietal
lobule (IPL, BA 40) was greater during encoding of familiar rather than
novel pictures. One possible interpretetaion of these results is that encoding of familiar pictures involves retrieval of previously stored information about these pictures. Additionally, further specificity of the
involvement of the IPL was observed: in the anterior portion, activity was
greater for recent familiar rather than distant familiar pictures, whereas
in the posterior portion it was greater for distant familiar rather than
recent familiar pictures. These results complement the observations made
by Wagner et al(2005).
B 69
BIOLOGICALLY PLAUSIBLE MODEL OF REWARD-MEDIATED
LEARNING Brian J. Spiering, Robin W. Scaife, F. Gregory Ashby; UC
Santa Barbara — Ashby, Ennis, and Spiering (2006, submitted) proposed a
model of reward-mediated learning that assumes synapses between cortex and the striatum are strengthened if three conditions are met: 1)
strong presynaptic activation, 2) postsynaptic activation exceeds the
NMDA threshold, and 3) dopamine levels are above baseline. If one or
more of these conditions is missing then the synapse is weakened. This
model also specifies the exact amount of dopamine released on every trial
in response to the feedback signal (which determines the amount of
strengthening and weakening that occurs). This new model is compared
to standard neural network learning algorithms. For example, the ability
of the reward-mediated learning model to mimic gradient descent is
explored. In addition, it is shown that the known properties of dopamine
release imbue this model with natural simulated annealing and cooling
properties. These features allow the model to escape local minima. The
model accounts for behavioral data in which humans can escape from a
local minimum in a categorization task. During the categorization task,
participants were first trained on an information-integration category
structure. Later they learned a new category structure in which the previously learned strategy is now a local minimum. Some participants were
able to escape the local minimum and learn a new global minimum strategy. The neurobiological mechanisms of the strategy shift are explored.
B 70
CONTRIBUTIONS OF RECOLLECTION AND FAMILIARITY TO
SOURCE MEMORY FOR INTRAITEM AND EXTRAITEM SOURCE
INFORMATION: TESTING A HYPOTHESIS GENERATED FROM
IMAGING DATA Rachel A. Diana, Andrew P. Yonelinas, Rick James
Addante, Robert S. Blumenfeld, Charan Ranganath; University of California,
Davis — Recognition memory can be supported by the assessment of the
familiarity of an item, and by the recollection of contextual information
associated with the item. In general, neuroimaging studies have shown
that familiarity-based recognition is associated with activity in the perirhinal cortex, whereas performance on source memory tasks—traditionally thought to rely on contextual recollection—is associated with activity
in the parahippocampal cortex (Eichenbaum, Yonelinas, & Ranganath, in
press). However, one recent study found that activity in perirhinal cortex

71

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

was associated with successful source memory (Staresina & Davachi,
2006). In that study, participants encoded each item in a manner such
that source and item information might have been integrated as a single
unit (“unitized”). Here, we tested the hypothesis that source information
that is incorporated into an item representation (intraitem source) can be
accessed using familiarity processes, whereas source information that is
not incorporated into an item representation (extraitem source) requires
the use of recollection processes. Analyses of receiver operating characteristics (ROCs) of source memory data revealed that familiarity made a
significantly larger contribution to the intraitem source task, as compared
to the extraitem source task. These results suggest that familiarity can
support source memory if source and item information are integrated
during encoding. Under these circumstances, perirhinal activity may be
expected to contribute to source recognition.
B 71
EYE MOVEMENT AND SPATIOTEMPORAL BRAIN DYNAMICS
UNDERLYING
PROCESSING
OF
RELATIONS
AMONG
OBJECTS. Jennifer Ryan1,2, Anthony Herdman3, Lily Riggs1,2, Sandra
Moses1; 1Rotman Research Institute, 2University of Toronto, 3Simon Fraser
University — The spatiotemporal dynamics underlying the processing of
relations among objects were outlined using recordings of eye movements and magnetoencephalography (MEG). Subjects were presented
with an initial scene of three abstract objects overlaid on a real-world
background context. Following a delay of two seconds, a repeated or
manipulated version of the original scene was presented. The manipulation involved moving one of the three objects to a new location. Eye
movement data from 16 subjects revealed increased viewing of the new
location of the moved object for manipulated compared to repeated or
original scenes. MEG single trial data from 15 subjects were averaged
with respect to stimulus onset. Viewing of either the repeated or manipulated picture, relative to the initial presentation, resulted in activation of
the medial occipital gyrus, superior temporal gyrus, cuneus, inferior and
medial frontal cortices within 150 ms and responses were observed in
parahippocampal gyrus approximately 300 ms post-onset. Comparisons
of the repeated and manipulated scenes revealed increased activity for
the repeated picture within inferior frontal cortex and increased activity
for the manipulated scene in medial occipital, temporal gyri and superior
temporal gyrus within 200 ms post-onset. These findings suggest early
processing and detection of relational changes that may contribute to
subsequent changes in eye movement behavior.
B 72
DISSOCIATIONS BETWEEN ITEM-SPECIFIC AND RELATIONAL
ENCODING Robert Blumenfeld, Colleen Parks, Andrew Yonelinas, Charan
Ranganath; UC Davis — Results from recent neuroimaging studies have
supported the idea that different prefrontal regions support processing of
information about specific items and processing of relationships between
different items. These findings beg the question of whether item and relational processing can be dissociated behaviorally. Previous studies on
this topic have yielded mixed results, and it is unclear whether the differences between item-specific and relational encoding processes are just
quantitative rather than qualitative. In the present study, we sought to
dissociate the behavioral effects of item-specific and relational encoding
processes by using mathematical modeling of data from parallel measures of item and inter-item memory. In experiment 1, participants
encoded word pairs using either an item-based (separation-imagery) or
relational (interactive-imagery) strategy, and were subsequently given
either a 6-point confidence item recognition test or a 6-point confidence
associative recognition test. Consistent with the notion that encoding of
item and relational information produce qualitative differences in longterm memory, separation and interactive imagery produced equivalent
item recognition, yet interactive imagery led to far greater associative recognition. In experiment 2, participants encoded word pairs using either
an item-based (large-small separation-imagery) or relational (interactiveimagery) strategy. After encoding, participants were tested for recogni-

72

Memory: Memory Systems

tion of specific item details (via left-hand vs. right-hand side of screen
recognition), or for inter-item memory (via associative recognition).
Results showed that separation-imagery led to better memory for item
details, yet interactive-imagery led to better inter-item recognition. This
double-dissociation suggests that item-specific and relational encoding
make qualitatively different contributions to LTM formation.
B 73
SENTENCE NOVELTY INDUCES INCREASED HIPPOCAMPALPREFRONTAL FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY Jordan
Poppenk1,
Stefan Köhler2, Morris Moscovitch1, Anthony McIntosh1; 1University of
Toronto, 2University of Western Ontario — The hippocampus is known to
be important for encoding novelty. To determine whether network interactions involving the hippocampus characterize various kinds of novelty
processing, an fMRI novelty-processing study was reanalyzed using multivariate statistics. During scanning, participants encountered sentences
that were familiar, contained novel syntax, contained a novel semantic
detail, or described an entirely novel episode. Subsequent recognition
memory was superior for the conditions containing semantic novelty
(i.e., detail change and entirely new sentences) than for syntactic novelty,
which was near chance levels. A partial least squares (PLS) analysis of the
functional data with a seed planted in the left hippocampus revealed two
significant latent variables (LVs), the second of which represented stable
novelty-dependent relationships between the hippocampus and other
regions. Salient voxels from LV2 were filtered for reliability, and regions
of interest (ROIs) were selected from surviving voxel clusters in PFC and
the temporal lobe. These included clusters in bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and the left superior temporal gyrus (L-STG). For
each novelty condition, the mean regional BOLD response for the left
hippocampus and selected ROIs was then entered into a correlational
analysis. Correlations involving the left hippocampus were relatively
weak in familiar and syntactic novelty conditions but were mostly negative for semantic novelty conditions. Because network correlations were
generally strongest under conditions where encoding was most effective,
these results suggest that synchronization of the hippocampal network
underlies the effective encoding of novelty.
B 74
INTERACTION BETWEEN SUBSEQUENT MEMORY AND SERIAL
POSITION OF WORDLIST ENCODING USING MEG Sverker
Sikström1, Xing Tian2, David Huber3, Petter Kallioinen1, Andrew Smart4,
Eddy Davelaar5, Kristoffer Åberg6; 1Lund University Cognitive Science,
2
University of Maryland, 3University Californa San Diego, 4New York
University, 5School of Psychology Birkbeck College, 6Laboratory of
Psychophysics Lausanne — The subsequent memory effect (SME) is the
empirical finding that the pattern of neural activity during encoding is
different for items that later are recalled compared to non-recalled items.
The primacy effect is the behavioral finding that the first few items in a
list are better recalled than items later in the list. However, few studies
have investigated how the SME effect interacts with serial position. We
let participants study short word list and measured the magnetic encephalogram (MEG) during conditions to actively encode the presented
words followed by a free recall test, or to passively read the words without intention to encode. The behavioral data showed a primacy effect.
The Evoked Magnetic Field (EMF) for subsequently recalled words
increased as a function of serial position, whereas both non-recalled
words and words studied under passive reading conditions did not
change across position. In particular the subsequent memory effect in
EMF were absent during the primacy effect, but became increasingly
stronger across serial position. We further analyzed the SME effect in the
theta, alpha, and gamma bands. The spatial locations of these findings
were investigated by using a minimal norm technique. The interaction
effect between serial position and SME for recalled words, and the
absence of this effect for passive reading, indicates that instructions to
encode play an important role in changes of neural activity across serial
position.

Memory: Working Memory

B 75
COMMON AND DIFFERENTIAL BRAIN REGIONS ASSOCIATED
WITH
RETRIEVING
SPATIAL
AND
NON-SPATIAL
INFORMATION FROM EPISODIC AND SEMANTIC MEMORY
Chun-Yu Lin, Katie Ketcham, Lee Ryan, Lynn Nadel; University of
Arizona — The present study examined the brain regions involved in the
retrieval of spatial and non-spatial information from episodic or semantic
memory using event-related fMRI. In the study phase, participants
viewed six object arrays (each had pictures of objects in four quadrants),
and were instructed to remember the objects, their locations, and the
details of their appearance. At test, participants were presented with verbal names of two objects at a time during scanning and made relational
judgments on questions from the following conditions: EPISODIC SPATIAL, EPISODIC NON-SPATIAL, SEMANTIC SPATIAL, SEMANTIC
NON-SPATIAL, and CONTROL. Objects in the semantic conditions were
either from the study phase or new. Results indicated similar brain activation patterns across all the memory conditions. However, the various
conditions yielded differential activations in terms of magnitude, cluster
size, and location in specific sub-regions. For example, posterior medial
temporal lobe (MTL) was more active for episodic and spatial conditions
than semantic and non-spatial conditions, while anterior MTL showed
the opposite pattern. Precuneus and lateral parietal regions also showed
differential activations that might be related to "perceived familiarity"
and spatial processing, respectively. For instance, even when using the
same semantic questions that did not require episodic retrieval (e.g.
which object is normally softer), precuneus was more active when the
objects in the questions had been studied in the study phase than when
they were new, perhaps reflecting involuntary feelings of familiarity.
Interactions between conditions and the implications of the results will be
discussed.
B 76
DISSOCIATING FAMILIARITY DERIVED FROM CONTEXT AND
ITEM REPETITION: AN ERP STUDY Shih-kuen
Cheng1, YuHan
Chen1, Daisy L. Hung2, Ovid J.L. Tzeng3; 1National Central University,
Taiwan, 2National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, 3Academia Sinica,
Taiwan — This study examined the ERP correlates of familiarity in recognition for episodes sharing semantically related components. At study,
subjects were presented with lists of word pairs formed by pairing one of
two associated words with different associates of an unstudied theme
word (e.g., time-religion, watch-temple etc. in one list; demand-bed, supply-rest etc. in another list). At test, subjects discriminated ‘Old pairs’
(e.g. time-religion) from ‘Intra-list Rearranged pairs’ (e.g., time- temple),
‘Inter-list Rearranged pairs’ (e.g., time-rest), ‘Old-New pairs’ (e.g. timebulb), and ‘New-New pairs’ (e.g., wine-painting). The false alarm rate for
Intra pairs was lower than the hit rate but was significantly higher than
the false alarm rates for the other test pairs. The ERPs elicited by hits to
Old pairs and false alarms to Intra pairs were indistinguishable and were
more positive-going than those associated with other response categories
in the time window of 300-500 ms after stimulus onset, during which the
familiarity-related ERP old/new effect has been identified in previous
studies. However, this positive-going effect showed different topographies when the ERPs associated with hits were compared with correct
rejections to Inter pairs and correct rejections to New-New pairs. We
therefore conclude that the contribution of context repetition and item
repetition to familiarity can be dissociated.
B 77
COMMON SYSTEMS FOR THE COMPREHENSION AND
PRODUCTION OF NARRATIVE SPEECH Richard
Wise1, Jane
1
2
1
Warren , Sophie Scott ; Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital,
London, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University
College London, United Kingdom — Humans devote much time to the
exchange of personal memories within the context of shared general
semantic knowledge. Our hypothesis was that functional imaging in normal subjects would demonstrate that everyday speech comprehension

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

and production converge principally on high order heteromodal and
amodal cortical areas that have been implicated in declarative memory
functions. Activity independent of speech phase was most evident in left
and right anterolateral temporal cortices. Lesser, but significant, effects
were observed in posterior cortex, just ventral to the angular gyri. The left
and right hippocampus and adjacent inferior temporal cortex demonstrated significant activity during speech comprehension, compatible
with a role in mnemonic encoding of narrative information, but no activity was evident during the overt memory retrieval associated with speech
production. Further, the response profiles of activity indicated that the
inferomedial temporal lobes contribute to the perceptual processing of
sequences of complex auditory stimuli, over and above their role in mnemonic encoding. In contrast, the retrosplenial and parahippocampal
areas, which are closely associated anatomically with the hippocampus,
were equally active during speech comprehension and production. The
results of this study indicate why a severe and persistent inability both to
understand and produce meaningful speech in the absence of a linguistic
impairment is usually only observed after bilateral, and particularly anterior, destruction of the temporal lobes; and emphasizes the potential
importance of retrosplenial cortex, an area known to be affected early in
the course of Alzheimer’s disease, in the processing of declarative memories during communication.

Memory: Working Memory
B 78
DIFFERENCES IN PATTERNS OF CEREBRAL ACTIVATION ON
FMRI ON WORKING MEMORY TASKS IN INDIVIDUALS WITH
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS VERSUS HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS Nancy
Chiaravalloti1,2, Glenn Wylie1,2, Amanda O'Brien1,2, Helen Genova2, Julie
Balzano1, John DeLuca1,2; 1Kessler Medical Rehabilitation Research and
Education Corporation, 2UMDNJ - New Jersey Medical School — Working
memory (WM) allows for the storage and manipulation of information.
Although WM impairments have been consistently demonstrated in
Multiple Sclerosis (MS), the neurological correlates of these impairments
are poorly understood. The current study was designed to examine
where the source of the WM deficit in MS lies: maintenance or manipulation. Participants consisted of 28 individuals with clinically definite MS
and 10 healthy individuals (HC). fMRI was performed on a 3 Tesla scanner to assess brain activation during three versions of the n-back task: 0-,
1-, and 2- back. The 1- and 2- back tasks examined the maintenance and
manipulation of information in working memory, respectively. The 0back was the control task. Significant differences in patterns of activation
were noted between the MS and HC groups on the 1-back task. The MS
group showed more diffuse patterns of activation in bilateral frontal and
parietal regions as compared with HCs. In addition, the MS group
showed more activation in the anterior cingulate while performing the 1back task. In contrast, patterns of cerebral activation on the 2-back task
was similar for the two groups. Individuals with MS appear to require
significantly more resources to complete a relatively simple task requiring the maintenance of information (1-back). In contrast, no additional
cerebral resources appear to be required, above that which is required by
healthy control subjects, to successfully complete a task requiring the
manipulation of information (2-back).
B 79
RECRUITMENT OF INTUITIVE VS. ANALYTIC THINKING
STRATEGIES AFFECTS THE ROLE OF MEMORY IN THE
GAMBLING TASK Marta Gozzi, Paolo Cherubini, Costanza Papagno,
Emanuela Bricolo; University of Milano-Bicocca — Previous
literature
reports apparently inconsistent results concerning the role of memory on
performance in the Iowa Gambling Task. Inconsistencies might depend
on the different demands of the various versions of the gambling task
(GT) that have been used (Dunn, Dalgleish, & Lawrence, 2006). In this

73

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

study we capitalize on the distinction between intuitive thinking strategies and analytic thinking strategies (e.g., Kahneman, 2003) to illustrate
that, whilst the standard versions of the gambling task can be successfully acquired by using intuitive thinking strategies, the complex versions of it involve analytic thinking. In Experiments 1a-b we used a
complex version of the GT, comparing participants with and without a
concurrent memory load. Participants in both conditions recruited intuitive strategies, and accordingly performed badly. In Experiment 2 we
simplified the task, even though it still could be successfully acquired
only by using analytic thinking. Participants in the memory load condition recruited intuitive thinking strategies, and performed badly; participants in the condition without memory load managed to recruit analytic
thinking strategies, and successfully acquired the task. In addition to
standard performance measures on the GT, we also used the participant’s
subjective expected utility, showing that it sometimes differs from standard measures in some important regards. Finally, in Experiments 1a
and 2 we compared performances of participants trained in economic
decision making with those of untrained participants. The two groups
did not differ reliably.
B 80
THE INFLUENCE OF WORKING MEMORY LOAD ON FACE
PROCESSING: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY OF
THE P300, N170, AND N250R. Helen M. Morgan, Christoph Klein,
Stephan G. Boehm, Kimron L. Shapiro, David E. J. Linden; School of
Psychology, University of Wales, Bangor — This study used event-related
potential (ERP) methodology to examine cortical activity associated with
visual working memory (WM) for faces. There were two main goals.
First, to confirm previous findings of P300 modulation by WM load in a
new procedure. Second, to examine whether the face-related N170 and
N250r components are influenced by WM load. One, two, three, or four
faces (WM loads 1-4) were simultaneously presented for memory encoding. After a one second delay, a target face appeared and participants
had to judge whether this face was part of the previous face array. P300
amplitude decreased as WM load increased, and this P300 suppression
was observed at both encoding and retrieval. WM load was also found to
modulate face-related ERP components. The amplitude of the N170 elicited by the target face was reduced for higher loads. In addition, an
increase in negativity over inferior temporal areas (N250r) was observed
for target faces that were present in the encoding array relative to target
faces that were absent from the encoding array, and this N250r also
showed a reverse load effect. These findings confirm previous work
showing that working memory load influences late cognitive components such as the P300. Furthermore, these results suggest that WM load
affects early visual components such as the N170 and N250r. The processing capacity of visual areas at retrieval may thus contribute to the
limited number of faces that can be stored in WM.
B 81
EVALUATING THE ROLE OF PREFRONTAL AND PARIETAL
CORTICES IN MEMORY-GUIDED RESPONSE WITH REPETITIVE
TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION Massihullah Hamidi,
Giulio Tononi, Bradley R. Postle; University of Wisconsin-Madison — Patients
with frontal lobe damage are relatively unimpaired on simple tasks of
working memory, such as forward digit span. Similarly, we have previously found that delay-period repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) does not affect
recognition of locations or of letters. However, with tasks involving
memory-guided decision-making, the patients’ performance suffers.
Specifically, patients performed poorly on tasks requiring a response
dependant on the relationship of the probe with the items in working
memory, but not when performing tasks requiring immediate serial
recall. In this study, we predict that recognition will be differentially sensitive to rTMS of the dlPFC, but not superior parietal lobule, in making
two types of responses in a spatial working memory task. Subjects were
presented four identical circles in four quadrants on the screen, followed

74

Memory: Working Memory

by a three-second delay period. Memory-guided decision-making was
tested with a memory probe that required subjects to compare the locations of the remembered items to that of a probe stimulus and make a
match/non-match decision. In the direct recall task, one quadrant of the
screen was highlighted and subjects were required to move the cursor to
the remembered location of the target in that quadrant. rTMS (10 Hz, 3 s,
110% motor threshold) was coincident with the onset of the probe/
response cue of each task. Preliminary results indicate differential sensitivity of dlPFC to response-locked rTMS, consistent with the idea that
dlPFC plays a more important role in memory-guided action than in storage processes in working memory.
B 82
BINDING AND MEMORY: DOES THE HIPPOCAMPUS
INTEGRATE BRAIN REGIONS? Roy
P.C.
Kessels1,2,
Carinne
3,4
3
3,2
Piekema , Karl Magnus Petersson , Guillén Fernández ; 1Nijmegen Institute
for Cognition and Information, Radboud University Nijmegen, The
Netherlands, 2Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, The Netherlands,
3F.C. Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Nijmegen, The Netherlands,
4
Helmholtz Instituut, Utrecht University, The Netherlands — Recent studies
have shown medial temporal-lobe (MTL) involvement in working-memory tasks, possibly related to the formation of associations within memory (i.e., binding). Previously, we showed hippocampal involvement
during the maintenance of associations of objects with their spatial location, but not in the maintenance of a single item or an object-color association. While this may be explained by the spatial component of the
stimuli, an alternative explanation is that the hippocampus is involved in
binding information processed in any two spatially segregated brain
areas. In an fMRI study (Siemens 1.5T system, TR=2.3s, TE=30ms, 33 axial
slices, slice thickness=3.5mm), 8 subjects performed a 3-item delayedmatch-to-sample task using a factorial design with factors Association
(single vs. multiple) and Feature Type (spatial vs. color vs. spatial distribution) (34 trials per condition). Each of the 3 items was composed of a
face and a house (that are processed in distinct brain areas) which were
presented in one of eight colors (random) and one of eight locations (random). A cue at the start of each trial indicated which feature or combination of features of the stimulus set had to be maintained. Results indicate
that maintenance of single items and associations with color did not activate the MTL. When associations between houses and faces had to be
maintained, the MTL, specifically the hippocampus, was more active
than when an association with a spatial location had to be maintained.
This suggests that the hippocampus indeed is implicated in the binding
of information from spatially segregated brain regions.
B 83
IS THE PARIETAL LOBE CRITICAL FOR VISUAL WORKING
MEMORY? EVIDENCE FROM PATIENTS WITH UNILATERAL
AND BILATERAL PARIETAL LESIONS. Marian
Berryhill, Ingrid
Olson; University of Pennsylvania — Recent neuroimaging studies report
parietal activity during visual short-term or working memory (VWM)
tasks (Todd & Marois, 2004; Xu & Chun, 2006), suggesting posterior parietal involvement in visuospatial working memory. Yet there is little evidence from other sources to indicate any role for the parietal lobe in
memory. In the present study, we sought to evaluate the presence of a
causal link between parietal function and VWM performance by testing
patients with various types of parietal lobe damage: unilateral left, unilateral right, or bilateral parietal lesions. Their performance was compared to that of age and education matched controls. We tested a set of
related hypotheses. First, we hypothesized that right parietal damage
would cause impaired VWM for tasks and stimuli that had a strong spatial component. Second, we hypothesized that left parietal lobe damage
would cause impaired VWM for manipulable objects such as tools. VWM
for four novel shapes, colors, and tools, over a 1 second delay was tested.
Two tasks were used: a sequential task in which spatial processing was
irrelevant, and a simultaneous task in which spatial processing was
essential. The results reveal a pattern of preserved and impaired VWM,

Memory: Working Memory

depending on task and stimuli. However, there was no association
between overall loss of VWM and parietal damage, suggesting that the
parietal lobe does not have a general role in VWM.
B 84
SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY AND ATTENTIONAL SELECTION
SHARE COMMON NEURAL SUBSTRATES Jutta S. Mayer1, Fabian
Fußer1, Robert A. Bittner1, Danko Nikoli2,1, Corinna Haenschel2,1, David E. J.
Linden3; 1Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt, 2Max Planck
Institute for Brain Research, Frankfurt, 3University of Wales, Bangor — Selective attention and visual working memory (WM) are fundamental cognitive mechanisms both operating at the interface between perception and
action. Selective attention has been implicated as a limiting factor for the
storage capacity of WM. Behavioral evidence indicates interference
between visual attention and visuospatial WM. In this study we used
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to test the hypothesis that
spatial WM and selective attention share common neural substrates. We
designed a paradigm that separated attention and WM encoding in time
and allowed for an orthogonal manipulation of the two. Subjects performed a task that combined attention-demanding visual search and
delayed discrimination for spatial locations. Attention was manipulated
by the difficulty of the search, and WM load was varied parametrically (1,
3 and 5 locations). We report fMRI data of 20 subjects (3 Tesla Trio, Siemens, Erlangen; 17 slices; TR = 1 s; TE = 30 ms) that were analyzed within
the General Linear Model using a random effects whole brain analysis.
Pure effects of WM load and attentional demand were found bilaterally
in the prefrontal cortex for WM and the visual cortex for attention. Conversely, distributed visual, parietal and precentral areas showed overlapping activation for the two task manipulations and were reduced in their
memory load response under the condition with high attentional
demand. These findings demonstrate that the processes underlying attentional selection and spatial WM draw largely upon the same limited neural resources and may define the neural locus of a processing bottleneck
of spatial WM and attention.
B 85
ENHANCED VISUAL WORKING MEMORY FOR ANGRY FACES:
AN FMRI STUDY Margaret Jackson, Claudia Wolf, Stephen Johnston,
David Linden; University of Wales Bangor — Emotional expression modulates visual working memory (WM) for face identities: WM is significantly enhanced for angry faces compared to happy and neutral faces
(Jackson et al., 2006). In the current study, we aimed to determine the
neural correlates of this angry face advantage using fMRI. Between one
and four angry, happy, and neutral faces were presented in a single
probe visual WM task. An event-related design was adopted in which
emotion and load conditions were pseudo-randomised. Thirty-five subjects responded ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to whether a single probe face matched the
identity of one of the faces presented 1000 ms earlier in a memory display. Emotional expression remained constant within any one trial and
was not task relevant. Behavioural data showed significantly enhanced
visual WM for angry compared to happy faces, and a trend towards an
angry vs. neutral face advantage. Functional data revealed significantly
higher angry vs. happy and neutral face-related activity in right hippocampus, middle temporal gyrus, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and globus pallidus. Activity in these regions did not interact with load.
Generalised increases in brain activity during emotional vs. neutral face
trials were found in cingulate cortex, and left hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus, and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. These findings suggest
that a mainly right hemispheric network for emotion processing becomes
activated when angry faces are to be remembered. This network may
serve the function of enhancing processing capacity for threatening stimuli that are of particular evolutionary relevance.

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

B 86
MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE ACTIVITY PREDICTS ACCURACY ON
AN ALLOCENTRIC SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY TASK Deborah
Hannula, Charan Ranganath; University of California, Davis — Results from
recent investigations have implicated medial temporal lobe (MTL) structures in retaining information over the course of short delays, but when
and how these regions might support accurate performance remains
unclear. Here, we used event-related FMRI to investigate the role of MTL
structures in the encoding, maintenance, and retrieval of spatial relationships among objects in a visual scene. On every trial, four objects were
presented, each in one of nine possible spatial locations of a three-dimensional grid. Participants were instructed to mentally rotate the grid during the delay in anticipation of a test stimulus, which was a rendering of
the grid that was rotated 90 degrees from the original viewpoint. Participants were to indicate whether: (A) the object-location bindings in the
grid were intact (match), (B) one of the objects occupied a new, previously unfilled, location (mismatch-location), or (C) two of the objects had
swapped positions (mismatch-swap). Activation in anterior and posterior
left hippocampus during the encoding phase of each trial was predictive
of response accuracy. Additionally, activation in the left anterior parahippocampal gyrus (likely corresponding to perirhinal cortex) was correlated with individual differences in behavioral performance during the
delay; this result suggests that good, but not poor performers exhibit
additional MTL recruitment during the maintenance phase of this task.
Finally, activity in the right anterior hippocampus distinguished between
correctly identified match and mismatch probes. These results are consistent with the idea that MTL structures contribute to the retention of relational information even across short delays.
B 87
MEMORY-DEPENDENT
INHIBITION
OF
VISUAL
DISCRIMINATION SHOWS A MEXICAN-HAT DISTRIBUTION
Carsten Finke1, Florian Ostendorf1, Peter Martus2, Mischa Braun1, Christoph
J. Ploner1; 1Neurology, Charité Berlin, 2Institute of Biometry and Clinical
Epidemiology, Charité Berlin — Recent evidence suggests that maintenance
of spatial items in working memory not necessarily facilitates behavioural responses to stimuli presented at remembered locations. Surprisingly, both in monkeys and humans, accurate memory of a spatial
stimulus in a memory-guided saccade task leads to sustained and spatially selective inhibition of manual responses to visual stimuli presented
during the memory delay (Ostendorf et al. 2004, Krishna et al. 2006). In
extension of previous theories on inhibition of return, these results suggest that top-down modulation of visual processing during working
memory tasks may be the net effect of two simultaneously acting complementary mechanisms. Their relative strength at each time-point during
the memory delay may determine whether a behavioural response is
facilitated or inhibited. To investigate this issue we employed a memoryguided saccade paradigm (6-s delay) with a visual discrimination task,
performed either 1,500, 2,500, or 3,500 ms after presentation of the memory cue. In additional analyses of the dataset from our first report (Ostendorf et al. 2004), reaction times to discrimination stimuli were analysed as
a function of memory-guided saccade amplitude. By fitting polynomial
approximations to our data, we show that memory-dependent inhibition
of visual discrimination significantly differs from a gradient distribution.
Similar to recent studies on the spatial distribution of attention, and in
direct support of a memory-dependent push-pull modulation of visual
processing, our data show the existence of a central inhibitory peak surrounded by an excitatory annulus, forming a transient inverted “mexican
hat” profile that gradually diminishes as the memory delay proceeds.
B 88
EXPLORING THE INNER SPEECH PROCESS IN VERBAL
WORKING MEMORY Corrine
Durisko, Julie Fiez; University of
Pittsburgh — Verbal working memory (VWM) is the ability to dynamically preserve and manipulate verbal information for brief periods of
time. VWM is maintained through a silent “inner speech” process. It is

75

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

well established in the behavioral and neuroimaging literature that VWM
can be disrupted by the simultaneous performance of simple speech
tasks. Our primary goal in these experiments is to test whether VWM
and overt concurrent articulation have overlapping regions of activation
in speech processing associated areas, and to determine whether such
regions are active during simple tapping tasks. Due to concerns about
overt movement artifacts, we also explore covert versions the tasks.
Experiment 1 examines the effects of overt and covert concurrent articulation and finger tapping on VWM. We find that concurrent articulation
tasks are the most detrimental to subjects’ recall ability. These effects
could be attributed to dual-task interference effects at the level of inner
speech in VWM, thus, indicating a shared set of regions for speech and
VWM. Also, the effect sizes differ between overt and covert versions of
our tasks, raising questions about the common assumption of shared substrates. Experiment 2 examines whether there are shared neural regions
between simple speech tasks and VWM and to further explores differences between overt and covert tasks. The results from this experiment
provide evidence implicating the left cerebellum and left superior temporal gyrus as the shared locus of activation. We also found evidence in
support of distinct sets of regions for overt versus covert versions of the
tasks.
B 89
FEEDFORWARD MODULATIONS OF PERCEPTUAL ACTIVITY
ARE CRUCIAL FOR SUCCESSFUL WORKING MEMORY
MAINTENANCE: AN ERP INVESTIGATION Kartik
Sreenivasan,
Danielle Spiegel, Amishi Jha; University of Pennsylvania — Recent imaging
studies have demonstrated enhanced activity in domain-specific perceptual regions during working memory (WM) maintenance (e.g. Druzgal
and D’Esposito, 2003; Ranganath et al., 2004). Furthermore, our lab has
recently demonstrated that WM maintenance-related enhancement of
perceptual activity occurs at early feedforward levels of processing
(Sreenivasan et al., submitted), which is consistent with evidence suggesting that WM maintenance is achieved via the recruitment of selective
attention (see Awh et al., 2006 for a review). However, the relationship
between feedforward enhancement of perceptual processing and WM
performance remains unclear. We sought to explore this relationship by
comparing maintenance-related perceptual activity on correct and incorrect trials. Our prediction was that if the enhancement of perceptual processing is crucial for WM success, delay-period perceptual activity
should be greater for correct relative to incorrect trials. Subjects performed a delayed-recognition task for faces as event-related potentials
(ERPs) were recorded from 64 channels. During the delay period, taskirrelevant visual noise probes were presented sequentially. We used the
face-sensitive N170 ERP component elicited by the probes as an index of
delay-period perceptual activity associated with face-processing, and
found that N170 amplitude to probes was greater for correct relative to
incorrect trials. This effect was robust for trials in which the test item and
memory item were identical (p < 0.01), but not for trials in which the test
and memory item were not identical (p > 0.1). These results suggest that,
at least for match trials, successful WM maintenance requires the
enhancement of feedforward perceptual activity.
B 90
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF RETRIEVAL PROCESS IN
CORRECT DETECTION BASED ON VISUOSPATIAL WORKING
MEMORY: AN EVENT-RELATED FMRI STUDY Yei-Yu
Yeh1, BoCheng Kuo1, Ho-Ling Liu2, Jyh-Horng Chen1; 1National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan, 2Chang Gung University and Chang Gung Medical Center,
Taoyuan, Taiwan — Spatial cueing instigates both top-down control and
stimulus-driven attention. Manipulating the cue onset time to affect the
effectiveness of top-down control and the demand on retrieving detailed
information in a change detection paradigm, we examined the neural correlates in the contrast between correct detection and correct rejection.
Under effective top-down control, fronto-parietal activation including the
left inferior parietal lobule subserved easy decision that did not require

76

Memory: Working Memory

retrieval of detailed information. When the decision required retrieval of
detailed information, activation in the left inferior frontal gyrus and activation in the occipital and temporal regions increased. When top-down
control was ineffective, easy decision increased activation only in the
right inferior frontal gyrus and difficult decision enhanced activation in
an extensive fronto-parietal network including the bilateral inferior parietal lobule, the right front-eye-field, the right anterior cingulate and the
bilateral middle frontal gyrus. The findings suggest that the left inferior
frontal gyrus associating with episodic retrieval is also involved in the
retrieval process of visuospatial working memory when a detailed episode is retrieved for correct decision. When multiple elements compete in
processing and memory retrieval, activation in the parietal regions
increases because the demand on selection is high. The region related to
post-retrieval monitoring also increases activation when selection is difficult under ineffective top-down control. Attention plays an important
role in affecting the neural correlates of retrieval process in visuospatial
working memory.
B 91
OBJECT
OR
SPACE,
VISUAL
OR
VISUOSPATIAL?
CONTRASTING VISUAL AND SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY
Boris Suchan, Kathrin Hey, Odo Köster, Irene Daum; Institut of Cognitive
Neuroscience — Results from neuroimaging studies on working memory
suggest a dissociation between visuospatial and visual subcomponents.
This dissociation is based on results from separate studies on visual and
spatial working memory. The current experiment combined visual and
visuospatial items in a 2x2 experimental design by using a special
designed 2-back task. This combination included “pure” visual and visuospatial 2-back tasks as well as 2back tasks that included the possibility of
having a one back item from the second, non matching modality (e.g.
strings of non-matching 1-back item: spatial, object, spatial or object, spatial, object). This task allowed looking for additional interference effects
of one modality onto the other. Main effects yielded activation of the dorsal stream for visuospatial working memory performance in contrast to
ventral stream activation including the hippocampus for visual working
memory. The interaction term yielded evidence for activation in the right
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in combination with middle occipital gyrus
activation for contrasts with visuospatial one-back items (spatial, spatial,
spatial and visual, spatial, visual). Results confirm the dissociation
between visuospatial and visual working memory networks. Additionally, results yield evidence for exclusive, rehearsal related right sided lateral prefrontal cortex activation for visuospatial items suggesting
different ways of processing for visual and visuospatial working memory
contents.
B 92
EFFECTS OF NICOTINE ON BRAIN FUNCTION DURING
OCULOMOTOR DELAYED RESPONSE TASK PERFORMANCE IN
HEALTHY HUMANS Dhanesh Patel, Ulrich Ettinger, Tanja Michel, Mma
Nwaigwe, Ojuolape Oniwinde, App Anilkumar, Steven C. R. Williams, Veena
Kumari; Centre for Neuroimaging Sciences, Institute of Psychiatry — Nicotine
is known to improve cognitive function in healthy humans; however, the
neural correlates mediating these improvements remain unclear. The
present study employed the oculomotor delayed response (ODR) task, a
measure of spatial working memory, and investigated the effects of acute
administration of nicotine on brain function using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). Eleven neurologically and psychiatrically
healthy, right-handed, male non-smokers took part in a double-blind,
placebo-controlled, randomised design. Participants underwent fMRI at
1.5T during performance of the ODR task before and after subcutaneous
administration of nicotine (12µg/kg bodyweight) or an identical amount
of placebo (saline). Assessments took place one week apart, with time of
day kept constant for each subject. Activation at baseline showed a neural
network underlying the working memory task which consisted of bilateral medial frontal eye fields, left lateral frontal eye field, supplementary
eye field, bilateral anterior and posterior intraparietal sulcus, left puta-

Memory: Working Memory

men, and left posterior cerebellum. Nicotine enhanced brain activation in
posterior regions but decreased activation in frontal cortex. Reductions in
activation due to repeated exposure were seen in frontal and parietal cortex, putamen, and cerebellum. These findings suggest that the influence
of nicotine on spatial working memory in humans is mediated by differential effects on anterior and posterior brain activation levels. Implications of the present study concern the development of cholinergic-based
cognitive enhancers for neuropsychiatric disorders with known cognitive
dysfunction, such as schizophrenia and Alzheimer’s disease.

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

underlying reading and VSTM suggests an intimate relation between
long- and short-term linguistic representations.

B 93
EARLY VISUAL COMPONENT OF ERP REFLECTED THE MENTAL
IMAGERY GENERATION AND INSPECTION Keiko
Yamazaki,
Jun'ichi Katayama; Hokkaido University — We examined the brain activity
related to the mental imagery generation and inspection using ERP. In
two experiments, participants visualized an uppercase letter on a 5x5
grids corresponding to a cue lowercase letter and decided whether an X
probe mark fell on the visualized letter. The half of trials were “early trials”, in which the probes placed on, or near, the segment drawn early in
the order if they would be drawn on paper, and the other half were “late
trials”. In long SOA between cue and probe, participants needed only
inspection of once created image, while they were required to generate
and inspect image in short SOA condition (Exp. 1). The earliest ERP effect
of probe position was on the negative component over the occipital electrodes around 200 ms (N200), which was larger in the late trials than in
the early trials without the effect of SOA. This result suggests that N200
reflects inspection process, which is required in both SOA conditions. To
examine whether the N200 reflect generation process in the short SOA,
we analyzed ERP elicited by simple and complex trials, defined by the
complexity of visualized letter (Exp. 2). Main effects of probe position
and complexity on N200 amplitude were significant. Taken together,
these results indicate that the N200 amplitude reflects both imagery generation and inspection processes. We concluded that both processes are
involved in visual areas activated in early latency range.

B 95
ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX MEDIATES THE INTERACTION OF
EMOTION AND COGNITION DURING VERBAL WORKING
MEMORY Christian Fiebach1,2, Isabelle Bareither2, Mark D'Esposito2;
University of Heidelberg, 2Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of
California, Berkeley — While the influence of emotions on long-term memory is investigated extensively, little is known about the interaction of
affective processing and working memory. We explored how affective
valence in to-be-maintained words influences performance and brain
activation patterns elicited during working memory encoding and retention (8 sec). Specifically, we used fMRI to examine how affective valence
(neutral, positive, negative) modulates the utilization of cognitive
resources in case of increased working memory load. Behavioral results
show an interaction of memory load and valence. Accuracy under low
memory load is improved for affective relative to neutral words, while
only negative valence improves performance under high memory load.
The effect of affective valence on working memory-related brain activation is greatest during stimulus encoding. During encoding, fMRI demonstrates a dissociation between lateral orbitofrontal and ventromedial
prefrontal cortex for negative vs. positive words. During working memory retention, left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is more strongly activated for higher memory loads. Activity in this region is modulated by
the affective valence of the maintained words. Analyses of functional
connectivity using the method of beta series correlation (Rissman et al.,
2004) demonstrate an increased coupling of valence-sensitive orbitofrontal regions with lateral prefrontal cortex for negative as compared to positive valence, during encoding. This difference in functional
connectivities may be the basis of the observed valence by working memory load interaction. These results suggest that positive and negative
affect differentially influence working memory, and specify the neural
mechanisms underlying this emotion-by-cognition interaction.

B 94
NEURAL
SUBSTRATES
ASSOCIATED
WITH
THE
REPRESENTATIONS OTHER THAN PHONOLOGY IN VERBAL
SHORT-TERM MEMORY Hsiyin Chen1, Denise H. Wu1, Daisy L. Hung2,
Ovid J.L. Tzeng3; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central
University, Taiwan, 2Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University,
Taiwan, 3Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taiwan — Phonology
has
been assumed to play a dominant role in verbal shot-term memory
(VSTM), but recent neuropsychological and neuroimaging research has
indicated the importance of semantic and orthographic factors as well. In
the current fMRI study, we employed homophonic Chinese characters to
examine the neural substrates underlying the representations other than
phonology in VSTM. Specifically, participants were instructed to retain a
short list of Chinese characters and performed probed recall based on
phonology or meaning of the list items. When the task instruction
encouraged semantic retention, the list items also shared the same sound
which rendered the phonological information insufficient to reach a correct response. When comparing the brain activation between the retention and resting periods, a network subserving VSTM including bilateral
middle frontal gyrus, left precentral gyrus, and left superior parietal lobule was identified. Within this network, the left middle frontal gyrus
(LMFG) and superior parietal lobule (LSPL) were preferentially associated with retaining homophonic than non-homophonic Chinese characters. In contrast, no regions within the VSTM network demonstrated the
opposite pattern. Our results are compatible with previous findings in
showing the involvement of LMFG and LSPL in reading Chinese. The
homologous region of LSPL in the right hemisphere has also been suggested to play a role in orthographic processing of VSTM. Our data highlight the semantic and orthographic contribution to VSTM. More
importantly, the close correspondence between the neural substrates

B 96
DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF HIGH LOAD AND HIGH ITEMSIMILARITY ON SHORT-TERM RECOGNITION: A COMBINED
ERP AND FMRI STUDY Christoph
Bledowski1, Benny Rahm2,3,
Katharina Spira1, Juliane Simon1, Jochen Kaiser1; 1Institute of Medical
Psychology, Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany, 2University of Freiburg, Germany, 3University of Basel,
Switzerland — In recognition, a higher memory load is often thought to
increase the number of comparisons to be made, whereas greater targetprobe similarity requires participants to match items more precisely. Up
to now, there is no evidence whether these two manipulations tap similar
or different resources. We integrated both as factors in our design to
explicitly test for main and interaction effects in the recognition phase of
a delayed-match-to-sample-task. Either 1 or 3 colours had to be encoded
and maintained for a short delay of 1.7 seconds. In the recognition phase,
a single probe was presented which matched, was similar or was dissimilar to the learned colour(s). Behavioral results showed that both high load
and high similarity increase recognition difficulty. Moreover, we
observed an interaction of load and similarity. While load had no effect
on dissimilar recognition, accuracy and response times were increased
both for similar lures and matches under high load. Accordingly, fMRI
revealed significant load and similarity main effects in the ventral and
dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) and medial frontal areas, whereas
posterior parietal cortex responded selectively to the load manipulation.
Moreover, ventrolateral PFC showed an interaction effect with similar
lures leading to stronger activation than for matches only under low load.
Modelling the ERP-source activity of this region revealed that this interaction was evident at late time points (400-800ms). We propose that ventrolateral PFC reflects control processes of selecting targets among
competing items.

77

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

B 97
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DLPFC RECRUITMENT DURING VERBAL
WORKING MEMORY MAINTENANCE DEPEND ON MEMORY
LOAD Katherine Cappell1, Leon Gmeindl2, Patricia Reuter-Lorenz1;
1University of Michigan, 2Johns Hopkins University — Both
age-related
under-activation and over-activation of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) have been reported across multiple task domains, including
working memory (WM). We recently proposed the Compensation
Related Utilization of Neural Circuits Hypothesis (CRUNCH) to explain
this phenomenon. According to CRUNCH, more neural resources are
used by older brains to accomplish computational goals completed with
fewer resources by younger brains. Therefore, seniors are more likely
than young adults to experience resource limitations at lower levels of
task demand. An adequate test of CRUNCH requires varying task
demand in a single group of young adults and seniors. Using eventrelated fMRI, we scanned young adults and seniors while they performed a verbal WM task in which memory load was manipulated (4, 5,
or 7 letters). Our fMRI design allowed us to separate encoding-, maintenance-, and retrieval-related neural activity. Here we report results for
the maintenance interval. In accordance with CRUNCH, we predicted
that relative to young adults seniors would over-activate DLPFC at the
low memory load and under-activate at the high load. We examined the
effects of load and age on neural activity in left and right Brodmann’s
area (BA) 46. In left BA 46, neural activity was age-equivalent. However,
consistent with our predictions, in right BA 46, we observed age-related
over-activation at the two lower loads, and under-activation at the high
load. Thus, like seniors, young adults display bilateral activation with
increasing task demand. However, seniors recruit additional circuits,
and therefore appear to reach a resource ceiling, at lower levels of load.
B 98
THE EFFECTS OF EFFORT AND INCENTIVE ON HUMAN
CORTICAL AND SUBCORTICAL BRAIN ACTIVITY Clayton
Curtis1, Mauricio Delgado2, David Valenzuela1; 1New York University,
2
Rutgers University — Although neural activity correlates with the expectation of reward in a variety of cortical and subcortical areas, such observations do not necessarily implicate these areas in the direct modulation
of behavior based on reward. For instance, increased activity could simply reflect the greater effort that one is willing to exert in order to obtain
the greater reward. Here, using event-related fMRI, we image the human
brain performing a spatial delayed-response task, while we independently manipulate both reward incentive and effort. To manipulate
incentive, we told subjects at the beginning of each trial how much
money (5¢ vs. $5) could be gained or lost depending on their performance
on that trial. At the same time, to manipulate effort, we told subjects how
difficult the current trial was going to be (easy vs. hard). We controlled
difficulty by adjusting the precision necessary to discriminate the spatial
memoranda from a probe stimulus presented after the delay. A psychophysical staircase procedure was used to dynamically adjust difficulty to
arrive at 85% and 60% accuracy for the easy and hard conditions, respectively, for each subject. Behaviorally, reaction time, pupil size, and subjective ratings indicate that our manipulations of incentive and effort
were successful. Neurally, classic oculomotor cortical areas showed
strong effects of effort independent of the magnitude of incentive. Moreover, both the striatum and prefrontal cortex showed strong effects of
reward incentive independent of effort level. These results suggest that
effort and incentive may depend on distinct cortical and subcortical
structures whose interaction promotes the attainment of desired goals.
Supported by: Seaver Foundation & NIH R01 EY016407
B 99
SPATIAL REMAPPING OF MULTIPLE OBJECT LOCATIONS IN
TRANSSACCADIC MEMORY Paul Bays, Masud Husain; Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, UK — In the absence of
visual landmarks, object displacements that occur during a saccade go
largely undetected. However, displacements of the saccade target can be

78

Linguistic Processes: Lexicon

detected with high precision if it is blanked for a short period following
saccade onset. Thus retinal location of the saccade target can be
remapped in memory to account for the change in eye position. In this
study we test whether such remapping is limited to the saccade target or
can also occur for other objects in the visual scene. Subjects made a saccade to a target object embedded in an array of coloured objects. The display was blanked at saccade onset, and then one object re-appeared in a
shifted position. The accuracy with which subjects could detect the direction of displacement decreased with increasing number of objects in the
display, consistent with a limited capacity object memory. However,
memory capacity was no lower than in a control condition without an
intervening saccade, indicating that remapping occurs for all objects held
in visual short-term memory. Nonetheless, the saccade target appears to
have a privileged status, as detection of saccade target displacements was
unaffected by the number of other objects in the display. The same effect
was observed for an object that attracted covert attention by flashing
immediately prior to the blanking period, suggesting that independent
memory for the saccade target may result solely from the allocation of
attention to it prior to the saccade.
B 100
MODULATION OF OSCILLATORY GAMMA AND ALPHA
ACTIVITY DURING WORKING MEMORY TASKS ENGAGING THE
DORSAL AND VENTRAL STREAM Daniel Jokisch, Ole Jensen; F.C.
Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging — Experimental work in both
animals and humans has focused on the role of oscillatory brain activity
during working memory maintenance. Gamma band activity (30-100 Hz)
has been hypothesized to reflect either the maintenance of neuronal representations or demands in attention. With respect to posterior alpha
activity, it is under debate if it reflects functional inhibition or actual
maintenance of working memory. The aim of the present study was to
further elucidate the role of oscillatory brain activity in humans during
working memory operations. We recorded brain activity using magnetoencephalography (MEG) from subjects performing a delayed-matching-to-sample task. Subjects were instructed to remember either the
identity or the spatial orientation of shortly presented faces thus engaging either the ventral or the dorsal visual stream. Time-frequency spectral
analysis revealed significantly stronger alpha power over parieto-occipital sensors during retention of face identity (ventral stream) compared to
the retention of face orientation (dorsal stream). By contrast, successful
retention of face orientation was associated with a significant increase in
gamma power over dorsal areas relative to the face identity condition. In
several subjects the alpha and gamma power were anti-correlated on a
trial-by-trial basis. We propose that gamma activity reflects the actual
neuronal maintenance of visual representations whereas the alpha
increase results in functional inhibition due to a top-down drive serving
to allocate resources to actual working memory areas by reducing the
influence of interfering visual input.

Linguistic Processes: Lexicon
B 101
SOUNDS AND MEANING: AN FMRI STUDY OF PHONOLOGICAL
AND SEMANTIC PROCESSING OF SPOKEN AND WRITTEN
WORDS Matt H. Davis1, Jack Rogers1, Ferath Kherif2, Ian Nimmo-Smith1,
Matthew Brett1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK,
2
Functional Imaging Laboratory, University College, London, UK — Recent
evidence suggests functional and anatomical distinctions between frontal
and temporal lobe networks involved in semantic and phonological components of visual word recognition (Jobard, 2003, NeuroImage). In this
work we use fMRI to compare neural separation for phonological and
semantic processing of spoken words with that previously observed for
written words. In four 5 minute runs, 20 participants were scanned using
a 3T Bruker scanner while performing semantic (living/non-living) or

Linguistic Processes: Lexicon

phonological decisions (1/2-syllables) on written or spoken words. We
used a fast sparse imaging design for runs using auditory stimuli
(TR=2.5s, TA=1.1s) and continuous acquisition for visual runs
(TR=TA=1.1s) with 20 second blocks of test trials alternating with rest
and with non-language baseline tasks matched for stimulus/response
characteristics. In line with previous observations for visual stimuli, we
observed a network of inferior frontal, posterior middle temporal and
anterior fusiform activity when participants made semantic decisions to
spoken words. In contrast, phonological decision making evoked more
distinct temporal lobe activity for spoken and written input, with overlapping activity only in inferior frontal and premotor regions. Consistent
with these functional imaging observations, a second scanning phase
during which some stimuli were repeated from the initial phase showed
significant cross-modal behavioural priming for semantic decisions but
not for phonological decisions. Univariate and multivariate analysis of
fMRI data collected during this second phase will be used to assess neural correlates of cross-modal and cross-task transfer of repetition priming.
B 102
PREVERBAL EFFECTS OF OBJECT MANIPULATION ON 11-13
MONTHS AGED CHILDREN Maurizio Gentilucci, Arianna Bello, Paola
Pettenati, Silvia Stefanini, Paolo Bernardis; Dipartimento di Neuroscienze,
Parma, Italy — The execution of transitive actions, such as grasping and
bringing-to-the-mouth affects mouth kinematics and voice spectra of syllables pronounced simultaneously with the action (Gentilucci et al. 2001,
2004). Consequently, it has been proposed that a dual motor command to
the hand and mouth transfer features of the action to the mouth articulation postures in order to be used for verbal communication. The aim of
the present experiment was to determine whether this dual command
system is present in children. Eight 11-13 months children experiencing
the preverbal phase participated in the experiment. The stimuli were colored wooden objects, which were either small (2.5 cm size) or large (4.5
cm size) geometrical and meaningful solids. They were presented and,
when requested, given to the child who manipulated them, occasionally
vocalizing. The child’s behavior was recorded by a video camera and successively analyzed. The periods of vocalization while manipulating and
simultaneously fixating the object were selected for voice spectra analysis: mean values of the formant 1, formant 2, pitch and voice intensity
were taken into account. In the ANOVA formant 1 was significantly
affected by the size of the manipulated object. Specifically, it was higher
when manipulating the large than the small object. The type of object did
not induce any effect. Summing up, aspects of the object manipulation
were transferred into mouth articulation postures. The data of the present
experiment support the notion that a strict relationship exists between
early speech development in children and several aspects of manual
activity.
B 103
CROSSLINGUISTIC SEMANTIC AND TRANSLATION PRIMING IN
NORMAL
BILINGUAL
INDIVIDUALS
AND
BILINGUAL
APHASIA Swathi Kiran, Keith Lebel; University of Texas at Austin — The
present study examined lexical representation in early Spanish-English
bilinguals using an unmasked semantic and translation priming paradigm. Stimuli included cross-language semantically related pairs (SR,
e.g., screw - clavo), cross-language semantically unrelated pairs (SU, e.g.,
screw - lagarto), translation pairs (TR, e.g., screw - tornillo), translation
unrelated (TU, e.g., screw - jabón), unrelated fillers (UF, e.g., steak - lluvia), and word-nonword pairs (NW, e.g., drawer - loleno). Within each of
the above conditions, there were equal numbers of word pairs in each
direction (English-Spanish and Spanish-English). In experiment 1, 24 normal participants were divided into two groups based on performance
(more-balanced bilinguals, MB and less-balanced bilinguals, LB) on the
experimental task. In experiment 2, four patients with bilingual aphasia
(BA) performed the same experiment. Results from both experiments
revealed that all groups were more accurate for English targets (S-E
direction) than Spanish targets (S-E direction). In experiment 1, semantic

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

priming was observed from English to Spanish in both the LB and MB
groups although the effect was greater for the LB group. Further, only the
LB group showed priming from Spanish – English. For both normal
groups, there was no difference between translation and semantic priming effects. In experiment 2, patients with bilingual aphasia demonstrated
different patterns of activation with no clear trends. Two participants
demonstrated greater priming from Spanish to English whereas two participants demonstrated the opposite effect. The results are discussed
within the context of normal bilingual models of conceptual memory and
processing impairments in patients with aphasia.
B 104
BILINGUAL CONTROL IN LANGUAGE PRODUCTION: AN
EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIAL STUDY Ingrid
K.
Christoffels1,2, Christine Firk2, Niels O. Schiller3,2; 1Leiden Institute for Brain
and Cognition & Cognitive Psychology Unit, Leiden University, The
Netherlands, 2Maastricht University, The Netherlands, 3Brain and Cognition &
Cognitive Psychology Unit, Leiden University — Using event-related brain
potentials (ERPs) and naming latencies, this study addressed how bilingual speakers control their languages. We assessed sustained language
control as evidenced by mixed language context effects and top-down
trial-by-trial control induced by switching between languages. Unbalanced German (L1) – Dutch (L2) speakers named pictures either in their
L1 or in their L2 (blocked language conditions), or switched between
their first and second language unpredictably (mixed language condition). Furthermore, form similarity between translation equivalents (cognate status) was manipulated to assess phonological activation of the
non-response language.We found that cognates were responded to faster
than non-cognates for L1 and L2 and cognate status influenced the ERPs.
Language switching resulted in equal switch costs for both languages
and was associated with a modulation in the ERP waveforms (time windows 275-375 ms and 375-475 ms). The effect of mixed language context
was evident (blocked versus non-switch trials). Both the RT and the ERP
data indicated a profound impact on L1 production but less clearly on L2
production. L1 latencies were slowed down, and the cognate facilitation
effect for L1 is larger in the mixed compared to the blocked language context. Also, modulation of ERP components occurred mainly in the L1.
Our data indicate that when speaking only in the L2 or in a mixed language context, both languages were relatively active. However, modulation of the relative activation of the languages appeared to take place
mainly by adapting accessibility of the L1 rather than in both the L1 and
L2.
B 105
BANKS, ORGANS AND EVEN CHICKENS: THE ROLE OF THE
LEFT INFERIOR FRONTAL GYRUS IN RESOLVING LEXICAL
SEMANTIC AMBIGUITY Marina
Bedny1,2, Megan McGill2, Sharon
Thompson-Schill2; 1Harvard Medical School, 2University of Pennsylvania — Although we perceive words as having a single meaning, most word forms
have multiple interpretations. For example, “organ” can refer to a musical instrument or a body part, and “chicken” can refer to a food or a bird.
During comprehension we rapidly settle on a particular meaning of a
word based on the context. What neural systems support the meaning
selection process? Prior neuroimaging and neuropsychological evidence
suggest that the left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) resolves competition
during language processing. We therefore hypothesized that the LIFG
resolves meaning competition during word comprehension. According
to his hypothesis, activation of the LIFG during word comprehension
should increase when words are ambiguous. To test this hypothesis we
performed an event-related fMRI study in which participants made relatedness judgments to word pairs. Pairs varied in the degree of lexical
ambiguity and the amount of novel semantic information. Results
showed that the LIFG is more active when ambiguity is high, irrespective
of the amount of novel semantic information. This response profile of the
LIFG differed from that of other regions such as the posterior superior
temporal gyrus (STG), which did not respond to semantic competition,

79

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

but did respond to increases in the amount of novel semantic information. These data demonstrate that the LIFG and the STG play distinct
roles in word comprehension: the LIFG resolves competition, while the
STG retrieves word meanings. These findings are consistent with the
broader framework of the LIFG serving as a cognitive control mechanism
during language processing.
B 106
AN ERP STUDY FOR INVESTIGATING THE SEMANTIC
COMBINABILITY EFFECT AND PHONETIC CONSISTENCY
EFFECT IN READING CHINESE. Chun-Hsien Hsu1, Jie-Li Tsai1, ChiaYing Lee1,2, Daisy L. Hung1, Ovid J.L. Tzeng1,2; 1National Yang-Ming
University, Taiwan, 2The Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taiwan — The
majority of Chinese characters are phonograms, which usually contain a
phonetic radical on the right and a semantic radical on the left. According
to the split-fovea theory, the semantic and phonetic radicals of a central
fixated phonogram may be initially projected to and processed in right
and left hemispheres, respectively. Recently, a repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation (rTMS) study by Hsiao et al. (2006) showed that
rTMS over the left occipital cortex impaired the facilitation of semantic
radicals with large combinability, whereas right occipital rTMS did not.
Their results suggested that for a character with a large combinability
semantic radical, the reliance is more skewed to the information on the
right of the character. The presented event-related potential (ERPs) study
aimed to examine this hypothesis by manipulating character consistency
and semantic combinability in a homophone judgment task. Character
consistency was defined as whether a group of characters containing the
same phonetic radical have same pronunciation. Semantic combinability
was defined as the number of characters sharing the same semantic radical. If the hypothesis is true, the consistency effect shall be more salient in
reading characters with high semantic combinability. The results showed
significant semantic combinability effect and consistency effect on P200.
Meanwhile, there was a significant consistency-by-semantic combinability interaction in N400. High consistency characters revealed greater negative of N400 than low consistency characters for reading characters with
high semantic combinability, but not for those with low semantic combinability. These findings support the split-fovea theory for lexical processing.
B 107
THE COMBINABILITY EFFECT OF SEMANTIC RADICAL IN
READING CHINESE CHARACTERS Ying-Ying Cheng1, Chia-Ying
Lee1,2, Jie-Li Tsai2, Daisy L. Hung2, Ovid J.L. Tzeng; 1The Institute of
Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taiwan, 2National Yang-Ming University,
Taiwan — More than 80% of Chinese characters were phonetic compounds which are usually made of a semantic radical and a phonetic radical. Previous study has used the semantic combinability to reflect the
tendency of a semantic radical to enter into few or many combinations to
form phonetic compounds and reported that lexical decision time for
characters with large semantic combinability were faster than those with
small semantic combinability (Feldman and Siok, 1997). A series of experiments were aimed to further examine this effect by manipulating both
character frequency and semantic combinability in the character decision
task. In experiment 1, when psedocharacters were used for no trials, the
inhibitory combinability effect was found in reading low frequency characters. In experiment 2, when non-characters were used for no trials, the
facilitative combinability effect was found in reading high frequency
characters. A follow-up ERP study showed a significant frequency-bycombinability interaction on P200 and N400. Characters with high
semantic combinability revealed less positive P200 and greater negativity
of N400 than those with low semantic combinability. This pattern could
be found in reading low frequency characters, but not for high frequency
characters. These evidences supported the two-stage framework of lexical processing. In the early stage, characters with high semantic combinability would lead to greater activation at orthographic processing that
facilitated response latencies and reflected on P200. For the later stage,

80

Linguistic Processes: Lexicon

radicals with higher semantic combinability might activate more candidates that share the same radical and thus induced a greater semantic
competition that reflected on N400.
B 108
DISSOCIATION IN THE NEURAL NETWORK AND TIME
COURSE UNDERLYING AFFECTIVE AND CONCEPTUAL
SEMANTICS OF DUAL-MEANING WORDS Hongyan Liu1, Danling
Peng1, Zhiguo Hu1, Yanhui Yang2; 1Beijing Normal University, China,
2Xuanwu Hospital, Beijing, China — Word contains both affective and conceptual information. However, the processing mechanism of affective
semantics and the corresponding difference with conceptual semantics
have been largely ignored by current language researches. Adopting two
types of priming paradigms (Conceptual and affective priming) with various SOAs (50ms and 300ms), we investigated dissociation mechanism of
affective and conceptual semantics using fMRI. Ten subjects were
scanned twice while they performed a lexical decision task to dual-meaning Chinese word (e.g. “Pharaoh” has meaning of both “emperor” and
“cruelty”). Results showed that: (1) Under both SOA conditions, conceptual semantics processing exhibited a neural network with brain areas
engaging in traditional semantic and preattentional / attentional processing, involving bilateral ACC, left MGF, right SGT, left cerebellum, right
precuneus, right lingual et al., while affective semantics processing exhibited a neural network with brain areas responsible for emotional and
attetnional / strategy processing, involving right MGF, left MGT, bilateral IGP, right PCC, bilateral caudate, left angular et al.; (2) Comparing
activation under two SOAs, conceptual semantic processing received
higher response amplifies in frontal and temporal areas at long SOA condition than short one, while affective semantic processing gained highest
activation in many cortex (e.g. PFC) and sub-cortex areas (e.g. amygdala)
at short SOA condition; (3) From short SOA to long SOA, conceptual
semantic processing represented a brain lateralization trend from left to
bilateral, while affective semantic processing was from right to bilateral.
These findings identify different neural mechanisms and time patterns
underlying conceptual and affective semantics.
B 109
A 4T ERF MRI STUDY OF ORTHOGRAPHIC EFFECTS ON
PICTURE NAMING IN CHINESE Brendan
Weekes1, Greig de
Zubicaray2, Sam Hutton1, Katie McMahon2, Deming Wang2, Qifang
Zhang1; 1University of Sussex, 2University of Queensland — A phonological
relationship between a context word (cap) and the name of a target picture (cat) facilitates picture naming in the picture-word interference task
in alphabetic languages such as English and Dutch. In non-alphabetic
languages such as Chinese the relative contribution of orthographic and
phonological information to the facilitation effect can be examined. We
report results from an event related fMRI experiment investigating the
influence of orthography and phonology on name retrieval in five native
Chinese speakers. The task was picture naming and all participants were
trained to criterion prior to data collection (no errors were made). The
study was performed on a 4T Bruker Medspec system. For the functional
MRI studies a sparse temporal acquisition was used to acquire 80 T2*weighted GE EPI volumes (36 slices, 3mm x 0.6 mm gap, and in-plane
resolution of 3.6mm) with TR/TE of 3000/30 ms. Functional MRI data
were pre-processed and analysed in SPM99. Activation from the group
random effects analysis is reported, thresholded at p<.005 (uncorrected)
with a cluster size minimum of 5 contiguous activated voxels. Activation
during phonological processing was observed in multiple left hemisphere sites including temporal, lingual, insula, post-central, supramarginal frontal inferior orbital and supplementary motor areas. Activation
during orthographic processing was observed in left hemisphere sites
including middle and superior temporal lobe, angular gyrus, thalamus,
lingual, and supramarginal gyrus. We conclude that phonological effects
without a confounding of orthography are genuine and orthography has
a unique effect on picture naming in Chinese.

Linguistic Processes: Lexicon

B 110
NEURAL PATHWAYS UNDERLYING THE EMOTIONAL
MODULATION OF WORD PROCESSING Zhiguo
Hu1, Danling
2
2
3
1
Peng , Hongyan Liu , Yanhui Yang ; Shantou University Medical College,
Shantou, P.R. China, 2Beijing Normal University, Beijing, P.R. China,
3
Xuanwu Hospital, Beijing, P.R. China — The influence of emotion has
been ignored in word processing until now. Using fMRI, we explored the
neural pathways underlying the emotional modulation of word processing at different attentional levels. Eleven healthy subjects were scanned
during a lexical decision task involving neutral and negative words. Half
of the words were masked with random dot noise (i.e., noisy condition),
the others were not (i.e., clear condition). To test the prior hypothesis, we
created several regions of interest (ROIs) including visual cortex (i.e.,
fusiform gyrus (FG), inferior/middle occipital gyrus (IOG/MOG)),
amygdala and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). Furthermore, we performed psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis to examine the
functional connectivity between brain regions. We obtained three main
results: (1) All the ROIs were involved in the processing of negative
words contrary to neutral ones. (2) For clear condition, PPI analysis
revealed a covariation between amygdala and visual cortex (left FG/
MOG). And for noisy condition, bilateral FG/IOG, right MOG, and ACC
were modulated by amygdala. (3) Further PPI analysis indicated
amygdala and visual cortex were also modulated by ACC in reverse. Our
results suggested that there are three ways underlying the emotional
modulation of word processing: (1) Emotional information directly modulates the activity in visual cortex. (2) Visual cortex activity is modulated
and enhanced by amygdala, which facilitate ongoing word processing.&#65288;3&#65289;Amygdala could modulate activity within visual
cortex via its projections to ACC which controls the allocation of attentional resources and affect word processing indirectly.
B 111
ERP EVIDENCE FOR EARLY EFFECTS OF NEIGHBORHOOD
DENSITY IN WORD RECOGNITION Vanessa Taler, Natalie Phillips;
Concordia University — Orthographic neighborhood density (ND) may be
defined as the number of words in the lexicon that differ from a given
word by one letter (e.g., “badge” has two neighbors, “budge” and
“barge”). ND has been shown to play an important role in lexical access,
albeit with differing effects in different tasks: high ND lexical items
engender shorter response times in lexical decision tasks but longer fixations in reading tasks. The present study aimed to shed light on these
conflicting results utilizing event-related brain potentials (ERPs). Healthy
young adult participants (n=28) read sentences terminating in a high or
low ND word, which was either congruent or incongruent with the sentence context. Sentences were presented one word at a time and EEG
epochs were time-locked to the sentence-final word. High ND stimuli
elicited a significantly more positive waveform than low ND stimuli
between 150 and 300 ms post-stimulus onset. We suggest that this early
positivity to high ND stimuli reflects greater initial global activation in
the lexical system due to initial activation of orthographic neighbors.
Stimuli seen in incongruent sentence contexts elicited a more negativegoing waveform between 300 and 600 ms post-stimulus onset than those
seen in congruent contexts, a prototypical N400 effect. Surprisingly, no
effect of ND was seen in the N400 window. The fact that the ND effect
occurred early and did not interact with congruency effects suggests that
activation of orthographic neighbors in a reading task proceeds automatically and independently of context.
B 112
PRIMING OF THE AUDITORY M350 RESPONSE: A SINGLE-TRIAL
ANALYSIS APPROACH Lauryn
Zipse1, Kevin Kearns2, Alec
Marantz3,4; 1MIT HST Speech, Hearing, Bioscience & Technology, 2MGH
Institute of Health Professions, 3New York University, 4MIT KIT MEG
Laboratory — Magnetoencephalography (MEG) was used to track cortical
activity while normally speaking subjects listened to auditory word stimuli presented in a priming paradigm. Target words were presented in the

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

context of semantically related pairs (e.g., bread-cake), identity pairs (e.g.,
cake-cake), and control pairs (e.g., leg-cake) during a lexical decision task.
Data were analyzed with a single-trial analysis procedure, in which an
idealized m350 activation pattern was created for each subject, and the
presence and strength of this activation pattern was measured following
presentation of each target word. The m350 activation was then compared among the various target word conditions. Subjects showed attenuated m350 activation in both primed conditions, compared to the
control condition. These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that
the m350 response reflects spreading activation among lexical entries
(Pylkkänen, Stringfellow, and Marantz, 2002). Pilot data from subjects
with aphasia are also presented. The single-trial analysis method used in
this study can be applied to explore differences between individual trials,
and offers increased statistical power for single-subject studies. It may
therefore prove useful for studying patients with language disorders
such as aphasia, and for evaluating cognitive models of aphasic processing deficits.
B 113
THE TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF CONSISTENCY EFFECT IN
READING CHINESE: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS
STUDY Wen-Hsuan Chan1, Chia-Ying Lee1, Jie-Li Tsai2, Chun-Hsien
Hsu2, Daisy L. Hung2, Ovid J. L. Tzeng1; 1The Institute of Linguistics,
Academia Sinica, Taiwan, 2Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming
University, Taiwan — This event-related potentials (ERPs) study aimed to
explore the temporal dynamic of the consistency effect in lexical processing for reading Chinese phonograms. Given consistency effect was
mainly observed in reading low frequency characters, high and low consistency characters within low frequency characters were used in the
homophone judgment task. The data showed that the low consistency
characters elicited greater N170 in temporal-occipital region and greater
P200 in frontal region than high consistency characters, while high consistency character showed greater negativity of N400 than low consistency characters. These findings suggested that the low consistency
phonetic characters which were associated with a large number of phonological candidates produced the greater activation for the initial analysis of orthography and phonology representations and showed greater
positivity of P200. The greater N400 activation for high consistency characters suggested that a specific phonological representation had been
selected in the earlier stage. Given that the phonetic combinability was
matched between high and low consistency conditions, there were more
homophones within a selected phonological subgroup for high consistency characters than low consistency characters. Thus, the high consistency characters involved the greater lateral inhibition to identify the
correct lexical item in the later stage and showed greater N400. These
results support that Chinese phonetic radical is a functional sublexical
unit for Chinese character recognition and the consistency of orthography-to-phonology mappings affects both early and late stages of lexical
processing.
B 114
THE NEURAL BASIS OF FREQUENCY EFFECTS FOR INFLECTED
AND UNINFLECTED VERBS: AN EVENT-RELATED FMRI
STUDY Jennifer
Vannest1, Elissa L. Newport2, Daphne
Bavelier2;
1
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 2University of Rochester — It
is well-established that a word’s frequency of occurrence affects how
quickly it is accessed. This frequency effect has been exploited to investigate the role of morphological structure in processing complex words,
making use of the distinction between frequency of the word’s own surface form (e.g., “walk”) and its base frequency (total frequency of all
words containing the base morpheme “walk”.) Inflected words (like
“walked”) consistently show effects of base frequency in behavioral studies, whereby frequency of the base predicts reaction time better than frequency of the surface form.
Unexpectedly, recent studies have
discovered effects of base frequency in uninflected words, suggesting
that even for words without complex structure, processing is influenced

81

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

by the word’s entire morphological family. fMRI studies of frequency
reveal increased activation in language-processing regions for low frequency words. We used event-related fMRI to examine contrasts in base
and surface frequency in complex and uninflected verbs. Fifteen participants made lexical decisions to visually presented verbs; BOLD response
was measured in several regions of interest. Variation due simply to
response time was removed from the data using regression analysis.
Results revealed that left inferior frontal regions responded to base and
surface frequency for both verb types. Subcortical areas were sensitive to
surface frequency only when surface frequency was high. Only visual
processing areas showed increases in activation specific to complex
words. These similar patterns of frequency effects for uninflected and
inflected words support the hypothesis that morphological family relationships influence access of all words, even uninflected ones.
B 115
CROSS-LANGUAGE INTERFERENCE IN A BILINGUAL STROOP
TASK Emily M. Stanley1, Delia Kothmann1, Nicole Y. Y. Wicha2,1;
1University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, 2University of
Texas at San Antonio — Bilinguals experience cross-language interference
when inhibiting one language while using the other (e.g., Sumiya &
Healy, 2004), and exhibit increased brain activity related to inhibitory
control even when switching between languages is task irrelevant – e.g.,
scanning for Spanish words in a mixed language list (Rodriguez-Fornells,
et al, 2002; Crinion et al, 2006). The goals of this experiment were to test
the timing of lexical interference in the first and second languages of fluent bilinguals, and to determine if language switching can affect processing when it is not relevant to the task. Voice-onset times and accuracy
were recorded during a bilingual Stroop task in which Spanish-English
bilinguals named the ink color for color words. Words were presented in
English or Spanish, or both (mixed block), and naming was performed in
English or Spanish on alternate blocks. We observe a classic Stroop
effect, with greater interference in the form of slower RTs and increased
errors for color incongruent than congruent items. This effect was larger
when the naming language was the same as the written words than when
they differed, and relative proficiency in the response language modulated overall response time. There was no difference in the pattern of
effects between mixed and single-language blocks. We compare these
findings with preliminary data from a parallel event-related potentials
study to observe subtle differences in brain response during bilingual
interference with and without language switching. These findings help
elucidate the nature of bilingual lexical access and cross-language interference.
B 116
ACTION-OBJECT PROCESSING IN CHINESE APHASIA ACROSS
THREE TASKS: A CROSS-LINGUISTIC AND CROSS-MODAL
ANALYSIS Ching-ching Lu1, Analia Arevalo2, Bao-Yi Hu1, Elizabeth
Bates3, Nina Dronkers2,4; 1National Hsinchu University of Education,
Hsinchu City, Taiwan, Graduate Institute of Taiwan, Languages and Language
Education, Hsinchu City, Taiwan, 2VA Northern California Health Care
System, Martinez, CA, 3University of California, San Diego, CA, 4University of
California, Davis, CA, USA — The current study is part of a cross-linguistic investigation comparing action and object processing across different
tasks and modalities in both healthy and aphasic participants. As in a
previous English-language version of this experiment (Arévalo et al.,
2006), words and pictures representing actions and objects were tested in
25 Mandarin Chinese aphasic patients. The set of 120 stimuli (normed
with healthy native Chinese speakers) was presented to each patient
across three word production tasks: picture-naming (PN), single word
reading (WR) and word repetition (WRP). Results revealed striking similarities between the Chinese- and English-speaking participants in terms
of task difficulty, lexical category effects, and even motor imagery characteristics. We discuss theories of cross-linguistic differences, noun-verb
processing and classic theories of aphasia classification.

82

Linguistic Processes: Lexicon

B 117
ON THE ROLE OF STANDARDS IN STUDYING LANGUAGESPECIFIC MMN EFFECTS Carsten Eulitz1, Jonas Obleser2, Aditi Lahiri1;
1University of Konstanz, 2University College London, Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience — Most studies on language-specific MMN effects highlight
the importance of the deviant. Consequently the experimental designs
are optimized for studying the effects of deviants. The control for the
effects of standards is, however, often reduced to a minimum or even
neglected. Here we present a study where language specific and non-specific speech sounds were used as both standards and deviants to study
the role of the standard in activating language specific memory traces in
more detail. The control for the language-specificity of effects was
achieved by using a cross-linguistic experimental setup. We studied the
MMN in groups of English and German subjects using the high vowels /
i/, /y/ and /u/ as standards as well as deviants. For the English subjects, the rounded, high, front vowel (/y/) is not a part of their phonemic
inventory and was experienced (offline) as a rather strange sound. Nevertheless, the MMN to /y/ as a deviant was similar to those of the German
subjects. However, a marked difference in MMN amplitude between
English and German subjects was seen when /y/ was used as the standard. This pattern of results is compatible with the idea that abstract phonological information is activated in the course of repeated presentations
of the standard, whereas the phonetic information extracted from the
deviant is rather mapped onto the closest-matching category of the corresponding first language.
B 118
TO WATCH, TO SEE, AND TO DIFFER: AN EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL STUDY OF CONCRETENESS EFFECTS AS A
FUNCTION OF WORD CLASS AND LEXICAL AMBIGUITY Chialin Lee1, Kara Federmeier2; 1University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 2The
Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign — Event-related potentials were used to assess the
generalizability of concreteness effects on word processing across word
classes and different types of lexical ambiguity. Four types of words were
embedded in minimal phrases and tested in a semantic relatedness judgment task: word class unambiguous nouns (e.g., sofa), word class unambiguous verbs (e.g., eat), word class ambiguous items (e.g., vote), and
word class ambiguous items with meaning disparity across their noun
and verb senses (e.g., duck). Each word type was subdivided into high
and low concreteness sets, based on concreteness norming that took word
class into consideration. Our results replicate prior work showing an
enhanced N400 response over central/posterior electrode sites and a sustained frontal negativity to concrete as compared with abstract words.
The effect of concreteness on the N400 appeared for all conditions,
whereas the frontal effect was present for all word types except for the
syntactically and semantically ambiguous items when these were used as
verbs. These data thus show that concreteness effects previously documented for nouns can be generalized to verbs; however, concreteness
effects are modulated by both word class and ambiguity. The dissociable
ERP indices of concreteness revealed by these data further suggest that
the central/posterior and the sustained frontal effects may derive from
different sources and that concreteness may thus impact multiple aspects
of neurocognitive processing – e.g., the richness of associated semantic
information as well as the possibility/efficacy of imagery processes elicited by these words – which is coherent with proposals in earlier ERP
studies.
B 119
INVESTIGATING THE INFLUENCE OF PHYSICAL FEATURES ON
VISUAL
WORD
RECOGNITION:
AN
EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL STUDY Krysta Chauncey1, Jonathan Grainger2, Phillip
Holcomb1; 1Tufts University, 2CNRS, Université de Provence — Previous
event-related potential (ERP) studies have suggested that some of the
earliest processes involved in visual word recognition are influenced by
the physical features of words. However, it is as yet unclear exactly

Linguistic Processes: Lexicon

which features are important and when they come into play. In this
study, native English speakers were exposed to word pairs in which
primes were masked (duration 50ms), and ERPs were recorded to subsequent target words. There were eight trial types resulting from the crossing of three factors: target size (same as the prime or larger), target font
(same as the prime or different) and target repetition (the same word as
the prime, or a different word). All three variables modulated the early
P/N150 component. Targets that were larger, in a different font or were a
different word than the preceding prime all generated smaller posterior
positivities and anterior negativities, than targets that were the same size,
in the same font or were the same word as their primes. However, only
the repetition factor had a notable influence on the amplitude of the later
N250 and N400 components, with different target words producing
larger negativities than repeated targets. Interestingly, while the font
manipulation did not influence the amplitude of the N250 or N400, the
peak latency of both components were significantly later when the target
font differed from the prime font. The data will be discussed in terms of
current models of visual word recognition.
B 120
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF BILINGUAL
WORD PRODUCTION Maya Misra1, Taomei Guo2, Susan Bobb1, Judith
Kroll1; 1The Pennsylvania State University, 2Beijing Normal University,
China — Previous research has shown that both of a bilingual’s languages
may be active during comprehension and production, suggesting that
elegant control mechanisms must allow for the selection of the intended
form and/or inhibition of the unintended form. The current experiments
evaluated the time-course of lexical activation and the interaction of a
bilingual’s languages during speech production using event-related
potentials (ERPs). In two experiments Chinese-English bilinguals named
pictures while 32 channels of ERPs were recorded. Participants named in
Chinese or English, depending on the picture’s background color. Pictures were named at either short (250 ms) or long (1000 ms) delays, with
ERPs evaluated only at long delays to minimize artifact. In Experiment 1
(mixed naming) pictures to be named in Chinese and English alternated
in a predictable fashion. In Experiment 2 (blocked naming) participants
named the pictures in one language in the first block and then named
them in the other language in the second block. The effects of switching
from one language to another were evaluated for each experiment, and
mixed naming was compared to blocked naming between experiments.
Results suggest that there is a processing cost associated with forcing
both languages to be active, reflected in effects on both the P200 and N400
for mixed naming. However, in contrast to expectations based on the
behavioral literature, where costs to the first language are typically
greater, processing costs were similar for both languages in most conditions. Implications of these results for models of bilingual production will
be discussed.
B 121
EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS
TO
SEGMENTAL
AND
SYLLABIC RETRIEVAL IN A PICTURE NAMING TASK IN YOUNG
AND OLD ADULTS Yael Neumann1, Valerie Shafer1, Hilary Gomes2,1;
1CUNY, 2City College — A common complaint among healthy older
adults is the increased frequency of word-finding problems. Research
points to breakdowns in phonological processing. The aims of this study
were 1) to investigate the effects of age on specific phonological substages
of processing, namely, sound segments and syllables and 2) to establish
baseline norms of behavioral (reaction time) and ERP responses (both
early sensory and attentional components, e.g. visual evoked potentials
(VEPs), and later cognitive components, e.g. N200), across the normal
adult lifespan on a word retrieval task. Two groups of 16 younger (21-40
years) and 16 older (65-85 years) adults performed two experimental
implicit naming tasks. They were asked to either push a button (GO) or
withhold a button press (NOGO) based on the final phoneme of the picture name, and then in a separate task based on the syllabic length of the
target word. Examination of the grand mean difference waves at frontal

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

electrode site FP1, where the N200 is largest, showed latency differences
across the groups and across the tasks. Results reveal that older adults
seem to retrieve both types of phonological information at a later time
than do younger adults. Additionally, retrieval of syllabic information
occurs earlier than that of segment information in both groups. In sum,
this study reveals how phonological processing of segments vs. syllables
contributes to the naming problems of older adults. Clinical implications
for improved methods of assessment and treatment of naming problems
in both non-clinical and, by extension, clinical populations, can be
derived.
B 122
THE VISION-BASED AND MANIPULATION-BASED SIGNS
PROCESSING IN TAIWAN SIGN LANGUAGE: AN ERP STUDY
Yi-Shiuan Chiu1,2, Wen-Jui Kuo2,3, Daisy L. Hung2,3,4, Ovid J.- L. Tzeng2,3,5;
1Fu Jen Catholic University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan, 3Institute of Neuroscience, School of Life Sciences, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
College of Science, National C, 5Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica,
Taipei, Taiwan — This study examined the representation of iconicity of
Taiwan Sign Language (TSL) by the event-related potential (ERP) technique. Iconicity reflects how the form of a sign resembles the referent’s
meaning. The concrete nouns of TSL were categorized into vision-based
and manipulation-based signs. The vision-based signs represent the features of shapes or contours of target objects, such as the TSL sign DOG
representing the ears of a dog. The manipulation-based signs represent
the way to manipulate or interact with the object, such as the TSL sign
HORSE representing the way of horse riding. We investigated the role of
sign familiarity and the representation of iconicity (vision-based, manipulation-based) among the deaf signers and hearing non-signers by picture signing and naming tasks. During the interval of 225-250 ms after
stimulus onset, familiarity effects were showed in both signers and nonsigners. Between 600-650 ms, only signers showed familiarity effects.
These results revealed that the mechanism of familiarity might be independent of language modality at early pre-lexical level, but it might be
influenced by language modality after accessing the lexicon. The effects
of iconicity representation were showed between 220-250 ms and 600-650
ms only among signers, suggesting that the way to represent the concept
in each language would construct the representation of the concept in the
lexical processing. Interestingly, between 450-500 ms the iconicity effects
were only found among non-signers, suggesting the activation of significant related properties of the concept. These results revealed that our lexicons are constructed both by linguistic knowledge and perceptual
experience.
B 123
EARLY COMPONENTS OF WORD READING: A HIGH-DENSITY
ERP STUDY OF LEXICAL ACCESS Xin Zheng, Sidney Segalowitz;
Brock University — Word reading has been shown to depend on both
automatic and contextually sensitive processes. We examined these processes using high-density ERPs in a word recognition study. Participants
(n = 16) performed a standard lexical decision task in which rapidly presented real words were distinguished from pseudo-words and a lexical
semantic version in which words were selected from one category (e.g.,
animals) and at the end of the block participants were asked to indicate
the category by selecting a word that fits the category (e.g., zebra). The
same words were used in both task conditions which were counterbalanced across subjects, but were dispersed across the blocks in the lexical
decision task so no category was dominant in any single block. There
were 5 blocks in each task. Results: (1) The earliest word-pseudoword
(orthographic) differentiation occurred within 100 ms after stimulus
onset and could be localized to bilateral posterior regions followed by a
right posterior hemisphere component at 150 ms - much earlier than the
word-pseudoword differentiation usually reported (e.g., N400). (2) Processes of word recognition were also influenced by context. We found
that the real words were processed differently depending on task: The

83

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

semantic instructions produced early components of greater amplitude
100 to 150 ms post-onset, topographically localized to the left frontal
region. Conclusions: Taken together, these data suggest that lexical
access initially occurs within 100 ms bilaterally and then differentiates
into simultaneous but separate semantic and orthographic processes that
can be tracked with EEG.

Linguistic Processes: Semantics
B 124
LATERALIZED SEMANTIC PRIMING AND RELATIONSHIP WITH
THOUGHT DISORDER Erica
Neill1, Simon Collinson2, Marjorie
Collins3, Nicholas Voudouri; 1Latrobe University, 2Mental Health Research
Institute of Victoria, 3Murdoch University — The semantic priming paradigm can be used to explore language deficits in individuals with
thought disorder. Research suggests that thought disorder may reflect a
difficulty in inhibition or an increase in spreading activation in one or
both of the hemispheres in response to language based information. Currently, little research has been done in this area and the research that is
available is methodologically flawed. For the current study a lateralised
version of a semantic priming task was employed to examine the role of
each hemisphere in processing language, and also to examine how the
two hemispheres synchronize information. As in the standard semantic
priming task reaction times to related and unrelated word pairs were
contrasted. Novelly to this experiment word pairs were presented solely
to the left (LL) or right (RR) visual field, or across visual fields; left-right
(LR) or right-left (RL). Participants included 21 healthy controls and 42
participants with a diagnosis of schizophrenia (21 with thought disorder,
21 without). Repeated measure ANOVA’s were used to compare stimulus type (related vs. unrelated), visual field (LL, RR, LR, RL), and group.
Preliminary analyses suggest that there are significant differences in
priming across visual fields between healthy controls and individuals
with schizophrenia. There were no significant differences between the
two psychiatric groups. This data suggests that participants with schizophrenia have difficulty when performing a task where the two hemispheres must synchronize information. However, this pattern this does
not seem to be causal for thought disorder.
B 125
EFFECTS OF SENTENCE CONTEXT IN NON-NATIVE NATURAL
SPEECH COMPREHENSION Ian FitzPatrick, Peter Indefrey; Max Planck
Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, F.C. Donders Centre for
Cognitive Neuroimaging, Nijmegen, The Netherlands — Electrophysiological
studies consistently find N400 effects of semantic incongruity in nonnative written language comprehension. Typically these N400 effects are
later than N400 effects in native comprehension, suggesting that semantic
processing in one’s second language (L2) may be delayed compared to
one’s first language (L1). In this study we were firstly interested in replicating the semantic incongruity effect using natural auditory speech,
which poses strong demands on the speed of processing. Secondly, we
wished to investigate whether a possible delay in semantic processing
might be due to bilinguals accessing lexical items from both their L1 and
L2 (a more extensive lexical search). We recorded EEG from 30 DutchEnglish bilinguals who listened to English sentences in which the sentence-final word was: (1) semantically fitting, (2) semantically incongruent, (3) initially congruent: semantically incongruent, but sharing initial
phonemes with the most probable sentence completion within the L2, (4)
semantically incongruent, but sharing initial phonemes with the L1 translation equivalent of the most probable sentence completion. We found an
N400 effect in each of the semantically incongruent conditions. This N400
effect was significantly delayed to L2 words that were initially congruent
with the sentence context. We found no effect of initial overlap with L1
translation equivalents. Taken together these findings firstly demonstrate
that non-native listeners are sensitive to semantic incongruity in natural

84

Linguistic Processes: Semantics

speech, secondly indicate that semantic integration in non-native listening can start on the basis of word initial phonemes, and finally suggest
that during L2 sentence processing listeners do not access the L1 lexicon.
B 126
NEURAL CORRELATES OF LEARNING JAPANESE WORDS WITH
AND WITHOUT ICONIC HAND GESTURES Spencer Kelly, Megan
Esch, Tara McDevitt; Colgate University — Hand gestures are a natural
part of spoken language. Behavioral research has demonstrated that
iconic gestures influence language comprehension (Goldin-Meadow,
2003), and electrophysiological research has shown that these gestures
affect speech during semantic stages of processing (Kelly, Kravitz & Hopkins, 2004). These results suggest that hand gestures may be an effective
tool in teaching people new words in a foreign language. The present
study investigated whether: 1) gestures increase memory for newly
learned Japanese verbs, and 2) there are identifiable electrophysiological
correlates of such learning. Twenty English-speaking adults watched
three 15-minute training videos presenting ten Japanese verbs. The
instructor on the video produced half of the words with speech alone and
half with a congruent iconic gesture. Following training, ERPs measured
the auditory processing of the ten trained words and five new Japanese
words. Behavioral results demonstrated that participants learned words
in the Speech + Gesture condition better than the Speech Alone condition.
Electrophysiological results revealed P300 and P600 differences between
trained and untrained words, and P600 differences between words in the
Speech Alone versus Speech + Gesture conditions. The behavioral results
suggest that hand gestures do play a role in foreign language learning,
and the ERP data suggest that gestures may enhance that learning by
strengthening the imageability of semantic memory traces. Together, the
results reinforce the claim that gesture and speech form an integrated
system of meaning during language processing (McNeill, 1992).
B 127
ON SENSE AND REFERENCE: FMRI EVIDENCE FOR DISTINCT
NEURAL MECHANISMS SUPPORTING SEMANTIC AND
REFERENTIAL ASPECTS OF LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION
Mante Nieuwland1, Karl Magnus Petersson2,3, Jos van Berkum1,2; 1University
of Amsterdam, the Netherlands, 2F. C. Donders Centre for Cognitive
Neuroimaging, Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands, 3Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, University of Algarve, Faro, Portugal — In an
event-related fMRI study, we investigated to what extent semantic and
referential aspects of language comprehension recruit common or distinct neural ensembles. We compared BOLD responses to sentences containing semantically anomalous or coherent words, and to sentences
containing referentially ambiguous pronouns (e.g., “Ronald told Frank
that he…”), referentially failing pronouns (e.g., “Rose told Emily that
he…”) or coherent pronouns. Semantic anomaly elicited activation
increases in lateral prefrontal brain regions associated with semantic processing. Referential failure elicited activation increases in brain regions
associated with morphosyntactic processing, and additional activations
associated with elaborative inferencing if readers took failing pronouns
to refer to unmentioned entities. Referential ambiguity selectively
recruited medial prefrontal regions, suggesting that readers engaged in
problem-solving to select a unique referent from the discourse model.
Furthermore, our results showed that semantic anomaly and referential
ambiguity recruit overlapping neural ensembles in opposite directions,
possibly reflecting the dynamic recruitment of semantic and episodic
processing to resolve semantically or referentially problematic situations.
These findings suggest that neurocognitive accounts of language comprehension will have to address not just how we parse a sentence and combine individual word meanings, but also how we determine who’s who
and what’s what during sentence and discourse comprehension.
B 128
THE NEURAL-CORRELATES OF THE CONCRETENESS EFFECT
IN CHINESE NOUNS AND VERBS Brenda H.-Y. Yu1, Denise H. Wu1,
Chia-Ying Lee2, Ovid J.-L. Tzeng2, Daisy L. Hung3; 1Institute of Cognitive

Linguistic Processes: Semantics

Neuroscience, National Central University, Taiwan, 2Institute of Linguistics,
Academia Sinica, Taiwan, 3Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming
University, Taiwan — Previous ERP studies have demonstrated the
semantic difference between nouns and verbs reflected in P200 and
N400.To investigate whether such difference can be solely accounted for
by the concreteness effect in a language with relatively ambiguous word
class, we employed Chinese disyllabic words while manipulating their
word class and concreteness independently. In three experiments, the
participants were instructed to perform lexical decision (Experiment 1),
semantic relatedness judgment (Experiment 2), and concreteness rating
(Experiment 3) while ERP recording was simultaneously applied. The
difference between word classes was detected in P200 in Experiment 2
and 3, which was independent of concreteness of the stimuli. In contrast,
the concreteness effect was consistently observed, with a more robust
influence in nouns than verbs, in all three experiments in N400. More
importantly, the amplitude of N400 also reflected the interaction between
word class and concreteness in Experiment 2 and 3, which indicated that
verbs did not show a concreteness effect in N400 in semantic tasks. In
summary, our findings suggest that P200 is an early index of noun-verb
difference independent of concreteness, which is revealed in tasks that
are more semantically driven. The interaction between word class and
concreteness that was expressed in N400 across three tasks further supports the difference between nouns and verbs along the concreteness
dimension. Overall, the current findings demonstrate that the word class
difference at the semantic level cannot be fully explained by concreteness
difference between nouns and verbs.
B 129
HEMISPHERIC SENSITIVITIES TO LEXICAL AND SENTENTIAL
CONSTRAINTS Zohar Eviatar, Orna Peleg; Haifa University — Previous studies suggest that ambiguity resolution is governed by lexical (frequency) and contextual factors. However, the relative contribution of
these factors to hemispheric processes is still under investigation. We
examined the extent to which each hemisphere uses frequency and sentential context to guide the resolution process of polarized homographs.
Participants read either unbiased sentences, or sentences biased toward
the dominant or the subordinate meaning of their final homograph, and
performed a lexical decision task on lateralized targets presented 250 ms
after the onset of the final ambiguous prime. Hemisphere asymmetry was
found in the absence of biasing context, where dominant meanings were
exclusively activated in the LH, while both dominant and subordinate
meanings were activated in the RH. These results converge with the
"fine/coarse coding model", suggesting that the LH activates small and
precise semantic fields, while the RH diffusely activates large semantic
fields. Hemisphere symmetry was found in the presence of a biasing
context, where dominant meanings were exclusively activated in dominant-biasing contexts, while both dominant and subordinate meanings
were activated in subordinate-biasing contexts. Contrary to the claim that
the RH primarily processes word-level meaning, these results indicate
that both hemispheres are sensitive to both lexical and sentential information.
B 130
REAL-WORLD INTERFERENCE IN DETECTING VIOLATIONS OF
COUNTERFACTUAL AND NEGATED WORLDS Heather
J.
Ferguson, Anthony J. Sanford, Hartmut Leuthold; University of Glasgow,
UK — Counterfactual reasoning is valid reasoning arising from premises
that are true in a hypothetical model, but false in actuality. Negated
statements cancel real-world expectations, but do not create an alternative model. The present study examined in separate ERP experiments
whether and to which extent real-world knowledge interferes with our
understanding of counterfactual and negated worlds. Context provided
by a first sentence was counterfactual-world (CW- “If cats were vegetarians…”), negated-world (NW- “If cats were not carnivores…”) or realworld (RW- “If cats were hungry…”). The second sentence was visually
presented word-by-word. The noun in this sentence was manipulated to

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

create RW anomalous continuations (“Families could feed their cat a
bowl of carrots”), where events included a violation of RW knowledge,
and continuations congruent with RW knowledge (“…fish”). Note that
RW violations are congruent in a CW or NW context, and vice-versa.
Experiment 1 revealed a centroparietal N400 for RW anomalous compared to congruent continuations following a RW context. However, the
opposite N400 pattern was present following the CW context, indicating
that here RW violations are processed as acceptable and RW congruent
items as anomalous. In Experiment 2 the N400 to RW anomalous rather
than congruent continuations demonstrates that a NW context does not
‘neutralise’ RW anomalies. Further analysis suggests subtly different
location and timing for processing CW, NW and RW information. In
conclusion, the fact that local-semantic RW anomalies are overruled by
the CW but not the NW context suggests that semantic analysis is context-dependent when an alternative model is immediately available.
B 131
CROSS-MODAL IDENTIFICATION OF SEMANTIC CATEGORIES
IN WORDS AND PICTURES FROM FMRI BRAIN ACTIVATION
Svetlana Shinkareva, Vicente Malave, Robert Mason, Tom Mitchell, Marcel
Just; Carnegie Mellon University — Machine learning methods were
applied to brain imaging (fMRI) data to identify the cognitive states associated with each 4 s viewing of words (5 tools and 5 dwellings) and, separately, ten line drawings of the objects depicted by the words. These
methods were able to (1) identify with high accuracy the category of the
word the participant was viewing, based on that participant’s characteristic neural activation patterns; (2) identify with even higher accuracy the
category of the object the participant was viewing, based on that participant’s characteristic neural activation patterns; and (3) identify, for the
first time, with reasonable accuracy, the category of the object the participant was viewing, based only on that participant’s characteristic neural
activation patterns during word viewing, and vice versa. The locations of
the voxels that were important for category identification were similar
across participants, and distributed throughout the cortex where various
object properties might be neurally represented. These findings indicate
the presence of stable, distributed, and identifiable amodal neural states
corresponding to object concepts.
B 132
DISSOCIATIONS IN THE REPRESENTATION OF SPATIAL
RELATIONSHIPS Prin Amorapanth, Page Widick, Anjan Chatterjee;
University of Pennsylvania — Recent work from Kemmerer and Tranel
suggests that neural systems important for mediating the categorical spatial relationships lexicalized by locative prepositions localize to areas in
left inferior prefrontal and parietal cortices. Conversely, work from Kosslyn and others suggests that coordinate spatial processing of the type
needed for fine-grained representations localizes to right parietal cortex.
To examine this issue further, we developed a battery aimed at testing
comprehension of both categorical and coordinate spatial relations with a
series of matching and naming tests involving words, sentences, and pictures. We tested the hypothesis that knowledge of spatial relationships
fractionates into different patterns by examining the performance of 34
subjects with left and right hemisphere damage (LHD, RHD). Behaviorally, groups displayed a double dissociation of categorical and coordinate
tasks in the expected directions. On categorical tasks, individual LHD
patients demonstrated double dissociations of language-to-picture
matching and picture-to-picture matching. Permutation mapping analysis suggests that damage to middle/superior temporal cortex is likely to
produce a behavioral deficit on language related tasks, and that further
damage to the parietal cortex is likely to impair generalization of categorical spatial relationships. While the RHD group performed relatively well
on categorical tasks, a similar pattern of damage accounts for the impairments they did exhibit. In addition to confirming the idea that categorical
spatial relations lateralize to the left hemisphere and vice versa for coordinate spatial relations, these results also suggest that verbal and non-

85

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

verbal knowledge of categorical locative relations may have distinct neural and functional instantiations.
B 133
ERP EVIDENCE PROVIDES A LINK BETWEEN HARMONY AND
SEMANTICS Nikolaus Steinbeis, Stefan Koelsch; Max-Planck Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences — The present study sought to investigate the functional role of the N500, an event-related potential (ERP)
elicited in response to violations of harmonic expectancy. Its close resemblance to the N400 has suggested the possibility of reflecting similar cognitive mechanisms (i.e. semantic processing). The question addressed by
the present study was whether the N500 is a mechanism dedicated to
either syntax or semantics or reflects more general demands placed on
working memory. To test this we used sentences which were either correct or contained a syntactic or a semantic violation at the end. Twentysix non-musical subjects were visually presented with language material,
while simultaneously listening to chord sequences ending either on a
harmonically expected or unexpected chord. Sentences and harmonic
sequences each contained five items (words and chords respectively),
which were presented in synchrony, but of which only the last item was
analysed. Assuming that cognitive processes of similar function recruit
the same neural resources regardless of modality, we were interested in
how the language violations affect the N500. It was found that the N500
was reduced only when presented concurrently with a semantic violation, but not with a syntactic violation. This suggests that the N500 may
in fact reflect some type of semantic processing established by harmonic
chord sequences. As well as providing evidence in favour of musicological notions on the potential semantic impact of tension-resolution patterns, this study may also end a long empirical quest for attempting to
find a musical match to the language-related ERP for semantic processing.
B 134
SENSITIVITY OF SECOND LANGUAGE USERS TO SUBTLE
ASPECTS OF WORD MEANING Dorothee Chwilla1, Noriko Hoshino2,
Judith Kroll2; 1NICI Radboud University of Nijmegen, 2Pennsylvania State
University — Do second language (L2) users have access to the full range
of meanings available to native speakers? Psycholinguistic studies yield
controversial results. Some studies suggest that access to L2 semantics is
limited by age of acquisition and proficiency, while other studies suggest
that accessing L2 semantics occurs early in acquisition. One semantic factor explored in monolingual studies is the number of meanings (NOM).
Azuma and Van Orden (1997) reported an interaction of NOM with relatedness in lexical decision for native English speakers. Performance was
faster for words with many than few meanings, but only for words low in
relatedness. We find that proficient Dutch-English bilinguals show the
same interaction in English as their L2. A second factor that affects
semantic ambiguity is word regularity. Rodd (2004) demonstrated a relation between the number of senses of meaning and word regularity in a
word naming task in English: a semantic ambiguity effect only occurred
for irregular words. Critically, we replicated the interaction for monolingual English speakers and extended it to proficient Dutch-English bilingual speakers. Currently, we are testing whether this pattern generalizes
to language comprehension. ERPs are recorded to the Rodd materials
consisting of irregular versus regular words with few or many senses.
The main question is whether an interaction of consistency and number
of senses is obtained for N400. The implications of the behavioral and
ERP results for the sensitivity of L2 speakers and readers to nuances of
word meaning are discussed.
B 135
HOW MUCH GESTURE DO YOU NEED ?: EXPLORING
TEMPORAL
ASPECTS
OF
ICONIC
GESTURE
COMPREHENSION. Thomas C. Gunter1, Henning Holle1, Christian
Obermeier2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human and Cognitive Brain Sciences,
Leipzig, Germany, 2Catholic University Eichstätt – Ingolstadt, Germany — A
steadily increasing number of studies have shown that iconic gestures

86

Linguistic Processes: Semantics

have an effect in speech comprehension. While such experiments indicate
that a listener can extract additional meaning from iconic gestures, it is
still unclear how much of a gesture is needed before it becomes meaningful. A gesture can usually be divided into three consecutive time phases:
preparation, stroke and retraction. Most researches consider the stroke as
the essential part of a gesture phrase, because it has been theorized as the
segment in which the meaning is expressed. In this experiment, we
explored how much of an iconic gesture is needed to successfully disambiguate a homonym. A gating paradigm was used to determine the earliest point at which gesture information reliably contributed to the
selection of one of the two meanings of a homonym. For 60 out of 96 gestures, the information in the preparation phase already sufficed for a successful disambiguation. We extended this finding using an ERP
experiment. Participants were presented with short video clips of an
actress uttering sentences ('She was impressed by the BALL, because the
TOY/DANCE ...'). The ambiguous noun was accompanied by a dynamic
gesture that was presented up to its disambiguation point. Then the
visual stream stopped whereas the acoustic stream continued. ERPs elicited by the target words (i.e. TOY/DANCE) showed N400 effects, which
indicated that the shortened gestures had disambiguating properties.
Thus, listeners seem to be able to extract a substantial amount of information already during the preparation phase of a gesture.
B 136
DEFINITE DESCRIPTIONS AND PROPER NAMES REVEAL
DISTINCT DEMANDS DURING REFERENTIAL PROCESSING:
EVIDENCE FROM ERPS Petra Burkhardt1, Dietmar Roehm2; 1University
of Marburg, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — Referential processing (when an expression
refers to a discourse entity) is influenced by syntactic, semantic, and discourse-based factors. We examined whether the type of expression
(proper name vs. definite description – e.g. Jeff/the speaker) impacts referential processing in distinct ways. In a reading experiment conducted
in German, we assessed the processing of these two referential-types following three context manipulations: [A] no mention of critical entity (e.g.
Peter sent Sarah a letter), [B] introduction as a salient entity (Peter visited
Jeff in Seattle), [C] introduction as part of a conjoined clause, making the
entity less salient (Peter visited Jeff and Ron). ERPs were measured to the
onset of the critical entity in a subsequent sentence (He said that Jeff/the
speaker…). Statistical analyses revealed an interaction of referential-type
by context between 350-450ms post-onset, with a two-way distinction for
definite descriptions ([A] showing the most enhanced N400 while [B&C]
patterned alike) and a three-way distinction for names (with an N400modulation [A>C>B]). In addition, new entities [A’s] elicited a pronounced P600 (between 600-850ms) over previously introduced entities
[B&C], irrespective of referential-type. These results first support previous findings that report an N400-P600-pattern for the integration of given
and new information. Second they indicate that definite descriptions and
proper names are subject to distinct processing demands. This can be
attributed to discrete degrees of semantic strength that differentially
impact integration (definite descriptions carrying more lexico-semantic
information than names). The data therefore provide new evidence that
referential-type is one of the factors that affects referential processing.
B 137
THE INFLUENCE OF DISCOURSE FOCUS ON ANAPHOR
RESOLUTION: A SIMULTANEOUS SELF-PACED READING AND
ERP INVESTIGATION Tali Ditman, Phil Holcomb, Gina Kuperberg;
Tufts University — The ability to link multiple references to the same
character or object -- i.e., resolve anaphors -- is essential for successful
discourse comprehension. One factor that influences the ease of anaphor
resolution is whether the referenced character/object is in a reader's
focus of attention. Past studies have provided evidence that repeated
noun-phrase (NP) anaphors are more difficult to resolve when they refer
to characters/objects that are in focus of attention compared with when
they refer to characters/objects outside of focus of attention (e.g., Almor,

Linguistic Processes: Semantics

1999). However, the reason for this differential preference is under
debate. The present study investigated the influence of focus of attention
on repeated NP anaphor resolution using a novel methodology: simultaneous self-paced reading and event-related brain potential (ERP) techniques. Two-sentence scenarios were constructed. The first sentence
introduced two NPs in one of two clefted-sentence constructions ("It was
the bird that ate the fruit", "What the bird ate was the fruit"). The second
sentence introduced a repeated NP anaphor that referred to either the
first (bird) or second NP (fruit) in the previous sentence. It-clefts put the
first NP in the focus of attention whereas what-clefts focus the second
NP. Reading time differences replicated previous findings of longer reading times when repeated NP anaphors referred to in-focus characters/
objects following it-clefts (Almor, 1999). In addition, ERP results demonstrated a larger left anterior negativity for repeated NP anaphors that
referred to characters/objects that were in focus of attention, providing
evidence for a working memory load explanation.
B 138
MODALITY-SPECIFIC BRAIN ACTIVATION REFLECTS LEXICOSEMANTIC PROCESSES IN VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION: A
PARAMETRIC FMRI STUDY Olaf Hauk1, Matthew H Davis1, Ferath
Kherif2, Friedemann Pulvermuller1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit,
2
UCL Wellcome Trust Functional Imaging Laboratory — A great advance in
cognitive neuroscience was the discovery of different patterns of brain
activation for words with different semantic associations. However, existing data have not fully decided whether these “category-specific” activations reflect processes involved in accessing the semantic representation
of the stimuli, or some secondary process not mandatory for word or
object recognition (e.g., deliberate mental imagery). In our fMRI study,
we addressed this issue by investigating the impact of the lexical variable
“word frequency”, on neural responses to two different semantic word
categories: action words and visual words. We first replicated previous
fMRI results showing that action-relatedness modulates neural responses
in action-related areas in middle temporal and left precentral gyrus,
while imageability modulates object processing areas in bilateral fusiform gyrus. Crucially, activation modulated by lexical frequency in left
fusiform gyrus was specific for visually-related words, and in left middle
temporal gyrus frequency effects emerged only for action words. These
category-specific effects of lexical frequency on neural activity is
explained by lexico-semantic processes central to word recognition, but
not by secondary, post-access phenomena such as imagery. Our data are
consistent with accounts postulating lexico-semantic information processing and storage in distributed, modality-specific neuronal ensembles,
which ground language and concepts in perception-action systems of the
human brain.
B 139
EARLY AND LATE BRAIN REFLECTIONS OF WHAT MAKES
SENSE: ATTENTION EFFECTS IN A NEURONAL MODEL OF THE
LANGUAGE CORTEX Max
Garagnani, Friedemann Pulvermuller;
Medical Research Council, Cognition & Brain Sciences Unit — Meaningful
material and senseless unknown stimuli lead to different patterns of
brain activation. The major neurophysiological response indexing
“sense” has been the N400, a late event-related brain response (elicited
under conditions where subjects are attending to the input) larger for
senseless materials (e.g., meaningless pseudowords) than for matched
meaningful words. Recently, early MEG and EEG differences have also
been recorded – for example, in the Mismatch Negativity (MMN, latency
100-250ms). The MMN is elicited even when subjects are distracted and is
larger for words than for pseudowords, thus exhibiting the reverse pattern seen for the N400. We present a neuroanatomically-grounded neural-network model of the left-perisylvian language cortex that offers a
unifying explanatory account for these seemingly contradictory observations. The network was trained using biologically-plausible Hebbian
learning mechanisms and then stimulated with “words” and
“pseudowords” while varying the global excitation (internal noise) start-

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

ing level and feedback inhibition. We found that low excitation and weak
feedback inhibition produced late activation differences, with a stronger
response to pseudowords than to words (mirroring the N400 pattern). In
contrast, high starting levels of excitation or strong feedback inhibition
lead to early activation differences, with a stronger response to words
(paralleling the MMN data). In light of these results, we interpret global
excitation and feedback inhibition as possible brain correlates of attention. Accordingly, our model predicts that this cognitive process modulates latency and “polarity” of event-related brain responses to linguistic
stimuli. Recent experimental evidence (see poster by Shtyrov, Kujala and
Pulvermüller, submitted to CNS2007) confirms this prediction.
B 140
COMPENSATORY REGIONS FOR PICTURE NAMING IN
ALZHEIMER DISEASE DEMONSTRATED WITH FMRI AND
RTMS Howard Chertkow1, Anh Duong1, Dion Fung1, Tomas Paus2;
1
McGill University, 2University of Nottingham — The posterior left temporal lobe (PLTL) regions normally most involved in semantic processing
and picture naming, are also regions strongly affected by cortical pathology in Alzheimer Disease (AD). Previous PET and fMRI studies have
shown a change in blood flow during cognitive processing in AD. While
AD produces impaired naming (anomia), there may be other brain
regions involved in a compensatory fashion. We have demonstrated in 8
young normals using fMRI and rTMS that there is increased cbf in PLTL
during picture naming, and blocking this region (but not inferior left
parietal) slows picture naming. In 13 mild AD individuals, stimulating
inferior left parietal, but not PLTL region, improves picture naming. This
implies that compensatory networks in AD are involving the inferior left
parietal region, and are amenable to stimulation using rTMS.
B 141
VERB ASSOCIATIVE KNOWLEDGE IN FRONTOTEMPORAL
DEMENTIA AND ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Luisa Vesely1, Catherine
Price2, Peachie Moore1, Katy Cross1, Shaleigh Kwok1, Murray Grossman1;
1Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, 2University of Florida — Previous research demonstrated verb comprehension deficits in both frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) on measures of
naming and word-picture matching. In this study, we examined verb
associative knowledge in FTD and AD using a novel measure of associative knowledge, the Verb Similarity Test (VST).
We compared 17 AD
and 30 FTD with 14 healthy matched-adults. The FTD patients were subdivided into progressive non-fluent aphasia (PNFA; n=9), semantic
dementia (SD; n=11), and social/dysexecutive (EXEC; n=10). Verb associative knowledge was assessed using a 48-item VST, while a 52 item Pyramids and Palm Trees (PPT) Test assessed noun associative knowledge.
VST and PPT stimuli were matched for frequency, familiarity, and concreteness. During both tasks, participants were presented with a target
word and instructed to indicate, from two choices, the word most similar
in meaning to the target. Both FTD and AD showed significant impairment on VST (FTD: p<0.001; AD: p<0.02) and PPT (FTD: p<0.001; AD:
p<0.002) compared to controls. Controls and AD performed with 94%
and 85% accuracy, respectively, on both VST and PPT. Unlike controls
and AD, FTD were significantly less accurate with verbs (77%) than
nouns (85%), p<0.01. Analysis of individual FTD subgroups revealed
worse performance with verbs than nouns in PNFA (p<0.02) and EXEC
(p<0.04), but not SD.
This study shows relative verb comprehension
difficulty in FTD and emphasizes a deficit in verb associative knowledge.
This was most evident in PNFA and EXEC, FTD subgroups with frontal
disease. This implicates frontal brain regions in verb associative knowledge.
B 142
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SEMANTIC ORGANIZATION:
RELIANCE
ON
DIAGNOSTIC
VS.
CHARACTERISTIC
FEATURES Jonathan Peelle, Vanessa Troiani, Peachie Moore, Murray
Grossman; University of Pennsylvania — To investigate the organization of
semantic memory we used BOLD fMRI to measure neural processing of

87

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

two types of nouns: nominal kinds and complex nouns. Nominal kinds
are nouns that possess a diagnostic feature (e.g., an UNCLE is the
“brother of a parent”). These are distinguished from complex nouns,
which may have high-contribution features, but do not possess a diagnostic feature (e.g., “red” is a feature of most APPLES, but some apples
are green). We hypothesize that processing of nominal kinds depends in
part on rule-based categorization (the diagnostic value of the presence of
a specific feature), while complex nouns depend more on similaritybased categorization (the probabilistic weighting of several contributing
features). Features were presented visually one at a time to a group of 26
healthy young adults, who then decided whether these features accurately described a target noun. Half of the participants were given rulebased instructions and half similarity-based instructions. Differences in
neural processing were observed for feature processing for complex
nouns and nominal kinds. Relative to nominal kinds, complex nouns produced more superior temporal activation bilaterally, as well as increased
activity in the inferior frontal lobe. By comparison, nominal kinds
resulted in more medial parietal processing compared to complex nouns.
Sensitivity to violations of object descriptions was modulated by the class
of feature that was violated, and the rule- or similarity-based instruction
condition that was administered. These results suggest that semantic
processing is modulated by task requirements and the qualitative nature
of the concept being considered.
B 143
THE CONSTRUCTION OF MEANING:
NEUROLOGICAL
REFLECTS OF PHRASE–LEVEL SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS IN
NATIVE AND NON–NATIVE ENGLISH SPEAKERS Robin
J.
Schafer, Jennifer Roth, Todd Constable; Yale University — We investigated
the processing of simple phrases by native and non–native English speakers (N=30, 16 native speakers). Phrases provide a constrained environment where semantics and syntax can be directly compared. Stimuli
include 32 abstract and 32 concrete count and mass nouns, presented
with a pair of adjectives (e.g. plans: fragrant or frequent) or a pair of
quantifiers (e.g. knowledge: fewer or less) depending upon condition.
Subjects completed a phrase by choosing an adjective or quantifier.
Quantifier choice is driven solely by syntax, adjective choice by semantics. Mean task accuracy was above 88% and did not differ significantly
across conditions and subject groups.
fMRI whole–brain images were
collected on a 1.5T Siemens Sonata with gradient echo planar imaging
(64x64 matrix, TE=45ms, a=80, TR=1500ms). Individual data underwent
voxel-wise regression on each task prior to random effects analysis. Data
were corrected for multiple comparisons by spatial extent of contiguous
supra–thresholded voxels to maintain a p<.01. Thus far results for native
speakers show significant bilateral, left dominant activation in both conditions. BA 47 and 44 show a greater extent of activation in the semantic
condition. This activation, particularly in absence of superior and middle
temporal activations, may be attributed to the compositional nature of
the task. In addition, a greater extent of activation in the fusiform gyrus is
observed in the syntactic condition, suggesting that fusiform gyrus takes
a larger role in unification than its label as the “word form area” would
suggest.
B 144
SEMANTIC ACTIVATION IN THE POSTERIOR MIDDLE
TEMPORAL GYRUS: AN ERP/FMRI CO-REGISTRATION STUDY
Aminda O'Hare1, Joseph Dien1, Cary Savage2; 1University of Kansas,
2
University of Kansas Medical Center — The posterior middle temporal
gyrus (pMTG) is an area that has frequently been found to activate in
brain imaging studies. In particular, studies involving aspects of semantic
processing seem to elicit pMTG activation the most consistently, yet the
cognitive processes underlying activation in this area are still unclear.
Participants for this 3T fMRI study (n=13) were presented with a series of
sentences that had either congruent or incongruent endings. A significant
activation in the pMTG [-42 -54 8] was found to be stronger for congruent
endings and correlated with meaningfulness ratings. Both the location

88

Linguistic Processes: Semantics

and condition effects of this result seem to correspond to the N330 ERP
result of a previous study by Dien, Frishkoff, Cerbone, and Tucker (2003);
thus it may be possible to use this component to investigate the function
of the pMTG and its mental chronometry. Additionally, a significant
main effect was found for congruency in the posterior cingulate [-18 -31
50]. The posterior cingulate is an area that has been found to activate in a
myriad of imaging studies, including semantic language studies (O’Hare,
Dien, Waterson & Savage, submitted). We suggest that this activity represents a general aspect of expectancy.
B 145
PERCEPTION OF PANTOMIME, AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE
VERBS, AND NONSENSE SIGNS BY DEAF SIGNERS AND
HEARING NON-SIGNERS Karen
Emmorey1, Jiang Xu2, Patrick
Gannon3,Susan Goldin-Meadow4, Allen Braun2; 1San Diego State University,
2NIDCD/NIH, 3Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 4University of Chicago — Using
BOLD fMRI, we examined the neural systems that underlie the perception of meaningful, non-linguistic gestures (pantomimes), meaningful
linguistic gestures (ASL verbs for signers), and non-meaningful gestures
(nonsense signs). Fourteen hearing non-signers and 14 deaf signers passively viewed blocked video clips of pantomimes (e.g., peeling a banana),
ASL action verbs that do not involve tools and do not exhibit sensorymotor iconicity (e.g., TO-DANCE), and meaningless non-signs (phonologically legal, but non-occurring ASL forms). In contrast to visual fixation, pantomimes strongly activated fronto-parietal regions (the “mirror
neuron” system) for hearing non-signers, whereas activation for deaf
signers was primarily observed in bilateral middle temporal regions. For
deaf signers, activation in left inferior frontal and middle temporal
regions was observed for both ASL verbs and nonsense signs, with
greater activation in these regions for nonsense signs. For hearing nonsigners, both ASL verbs and nonsense signs activated left fronto-parietal
regions, in addition to bilateral posterior temporal regions. For signers,
the contrast between pantomimes and ASL verbs revealed stronger activation in inferior temporal (IT) cortex for the object-based pantomimes.
For non-signers, this contrast also revealed greater activation in left IT
and in the intra-parietal sulcus for pantomimes. Overall, the results indicate that when observing pantomimes and sign gestures, parietal cortices
were extensively activated for hearing non-signers, but not for deaf signers. Deaf signers may not automatically engage the mirror neuron system when perceiving pantomimes due to their expertise and experience
comprehending human gesture. Research in part supported by NIH
DC00201.
B 146
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES
OF
IDIOM
PROCESSING Debra Titone1, Sabrina Wiebe1, Marie-Eve Rivard2,
Karsten Steinhauer2; 1McGill University, 2School for Communication Sciences
& Disorders, McGill University — Few studies have examined idiom processing electrophysiologically, though many studies have made use of
idioms as a means of manipulating contextual constraint. As well, idioms
presented in previous studies have not systematically manipulated characteristics of idioms shown to be important in the psycholinguistic literature (syntactic complexity, length, Cloze probability). Thus, it is unclear
whether event related potentials (ERPs), such as N400, are elicited by idioms because of their high Cloze probability, or because of a unique process specific to idiom comprehension. In this study, 23 participants read
120 “verb-the-noun” idioms (She kicked the bucket), 120 literal sentences
matched to the idioms on Cloze probability, length, and frequency of the
sentence-final word (She wore the skirt), and 120 anomalous sentences
matched on length and frequency of the sentence-final word (He read the
fun). High Cloze idioms elicited a more positive-going N400 than
matched literal sentences. This idiom-related enhancement of N400
amplitude occurred over frontal sensors in the first half of the experiment, and over central/posterior sensors in both the first and second
halves of the experiment. In contrast, low Cloze idioms did not differ in
N400 amplitude from matched literal sentences. These results are consis-

Linguistic Processes: Semantics

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

tent with the view that early retrieval of idiomatic meanings, which likely
occurs prior to the sentence-final word for high Cloze idioms, reduces
N400 amplitude observed at the sentence-final word. Follow-up experiments are underway to determine whether these results are due to the
requirement of an overt semantic judgment during comprehension.
B 147
LATE POSITIVITY OR LATE POSITIVITIES? A COMPARISON OF
P600 EFFECTS ELICITED BY MORPHOSYNTACTIC AND
SEMANTIC-PRAGMATIC ANOMALIES Stefanie Regel, Thomas C.
Gunter, Angela D. Friederici; Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and
Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — Event-related brain potential (ERP)
studies have shown distinct ERP components reliably related to semantic
anomalies (N400) and to syntactic anomalies (P600). Recent ERP studies
have challenged these well-defined components in which P600 effects
were triggered by semantic reversal or thematic anomalies (Van Herten
et al. 2005, Hoeks et al. 2004). ERP correlates to the processing of verbal
irony are in accordance with these current findings. Sentences like "That's
really rich" achieved an ironic meaning when they were embedded in
negative contexts thereby contradicting its literal meaning (i.e. receiving
a very small dish). Compared to their literal sentence meaning, ironic
sentences evoked a posterior positivity between 500-900 ms in the
absence of syntactic difficulties. Thus, it may reflect semantic-pragmatic
processes necessary for the comprehension of irony, i.e. derivation of an
appropriate message-level representation. In the present ERP study we
investigated in how far the irony-related positivity can be dissociated
from the syntax-related positivity. Discourses ending in an ironic or nonironic target sentence were presented visually. The target sentence final
word was also manipulated morphosyntactically having either a correct
or an incorrect morphosyntactic word ending, e.g. "rich/richs". Between
500-900 ms, ERPs on the sentence final word revealed two distinct late
positivities differing in their morphology. Ironic discourses evoked an
anteriorly distributed positivity, whereas morphosyntactic violations
elicited a broadly distributed positivity. These findings support a dissociation of both late positivites being independently involved in the processing of grammatical and semantic information.
B 148
RESOLVING AMBIGUITY IN LEXICAL ITEMS AND IDIOMS
Laurie A. Stowe1, Monika Z. Zempleni2, John C.J. Hoeks1, Remnco Remken1,
Richard Bruggeman3; 1University of Groningen, 2University of Zurich,
3University Medical Center Groningen — We report the results of two fMRI
studies carried out with the same subjects in which we examined the neural networks involved in resolving ambiguity. In the first study, neurologically healthy adults read sentences in which ambiguous words (e.g.
bank) were resolved to the more frequent (dominant: financial institution) or less frequent (subordinate: boundary of river) meaning. The
results showed that a bilateral network involving inferior frontal and
temporal areas was activated in this task. In the second study, subjects
read sentences containing ambiguous and unambiguous idioms (kick the
bucket (ambiguous) vs. be in a blue funk (unambiguous)). This task also
showed the involvement of a bilateral network involving generally the
same areas (inferior frontal and inferior temporal gyri). Taken together
the results suggest that the hemispheres collaborate in order to deal with
ambiguity resolution. However, they also suggest that the collaboration
is triggered by the greater processing demands of ambiguity (dealing
with an initially implausible reading) rather than by ambiguity per se.
The functions of the individual regions involved in the networks will be
discussed in more detail. Additional data concerning the processing of
ambiguities by patients diagnosed with schizophrenia will also be discussed. Schizophrenics perform less well in comprehending sentences
containing ambiguous words or idioms. Preliminary results suggest that
schizophrenics are less able to make use of the bilateral resources offered
by the network invoked by normal adult comprehenders.

89

Sunday, May 6, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

90

Linguistic Processes: Semantics

Poster Session C
Cognitive And Brain Development
C1
GENETIC DISSECTION OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF ATTENTION
NETWORKS: A CONVERGING PATHWAYS STRATEGY. John
Fossella1,2, Jin Fan1, Deborah Mann1, Tobias Sommer3, Michael Posner4;
1
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 2Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
3University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Germany, 4University of
Oregon — We have examined the reliability and heritability of the Attention Network Task (ANT) in adult subjects (Fan et al., 2001; 2002). Gene
association studies using DNA obtained from cheek swabs showed suggestive evidence of association in executive attention in the dopamine D4
receptor (DRD4) and monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) genes (Fossella et al.,
2002). Imaging genetic studies on these genes as well as the DRD2 gene
showed a relationship to brain activity in the anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) (Fan et al., 2003). The recurrent finding of genetic associations with
brain activity in the ACC by our group as well as others has prompted us
to evaluate genes that are expressed in, or functionally linked to the development of, the ACC. We present the results of bioinformatic-search strategies that yield provisional candidate genes for the ACC. Imaging genetic
results of selected candidates and gene associations for Stroop task performance from a test population of 100 adult volunteers is also included as an
assessment of the effects of genetic variation on ACC function.
C2
NEURODEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN TASK-SWITCHING AND
INTERFERENCE SUPPRESSION Carol
Baym1, Michael Souza2,
1
1
1
2
Samantha Wright , Silvia Bunge ; UC Berkeley, UC Davis — Interference
suppression and task-switching are critical for effective selection of relevant thoughts and actions. Behavioral studies show improvements over
childhood in both abilities, although it is unclear whether these behavioral
improvements rely on common or distinct neurodevelopmental changes.
In an event-related fMRI study designed to address this question, young
adults (20-27; current N = 16) and healthy children (7-13; current N = 13)
performed a test involving both cognitive abilities. On each trial, participants viewed an instructional word cue – “Color” or “Direction” – and a
cartoon stimulus. On color trials, they were to press a left or right button
depending on the color of the cartoon. On direction trials, they selected
one of these two buttons depending on the direction in which the cartoon
character was facing. The interference manipulation contrasted incongruent and congruent trials: trials on which the color and orientation of the
stimulus specified opposite responses or the same response, respectively.
The task-switching manipulation contrasted rule switch trials with rule
repetition trials. Preliminary analyses show that adults’ performance was
less affected than childrens’ by interference and by task-switches, indicated by strong Group x Congruency and Group x Switch effects on accuracy, and a moderate Group x Congruency effect on response times. In
both groups, there were strong effects of both manipulations, and only
minimal interactions between the two. FMRI analyses will be performed to
determine whether these abilities rely on common or distinct neurodevelopmental changes.
C3
THE ROLE OF MUSIC KEYBOARD TRAINING ON THE
VOCABULARY AND VERBAL SEQUENCING SKILLS OF
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL STUDENTS Joseph Piro, Camilo Ortiz; Long
Island University, C.W. Post Campus — The effect of music lessons on nonmusical aspects of cognitive development is a much-debated topic. Several
studies have reported positive associations between formal music lessons

and abilities in nonmusical (e.g., linguistic, mathematical, and spatial)
domains. Nonetheless, compelling evidence for a causal link still remains
elusive. The major aim of the research study we are reporting was to examine the effects of music study on the vocabulary and verbal sequencing
skills of second grade students. Two cohorts of these students were studied over a period of one school year. The first (treatment) group (n=46)
studied piano formally for a period of three years as part of the Music and
the Brain Program (MATB), a program in which a scaffolded music curriculum was used to deliver a combination of piano performance, music
notation, singing theory, ear training, and music appreciation. The second
(control) group (n=57) had no exposure to music lessons either in school
programs or in private study. Both groups were pre- and post-tested
using two subtests from the Structure of Intellect (SOI) measure, vocabulary and verbal sequencing. Subjects were also asked to complete the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory to assess hand preference. Results showed
that the intervention group had significantly better vocabulary and verbal
sequencing scores at posttest than did the control group. Results of this
study may help to clarify further the role of music study on specific cognitive skills and shed light on the question of the potential of music to
enhance school performance in both verbal and spatial domains.
C4
REALISTIC HEAD MODELS FOR CORTICAL SOURCE ANALYSIS
IN INFANT PARTICIPANTS John
Richards; University of South
Carolina — Cortical source analysis of EEG/ERP with infant participants
has used adult models for the electrical and spatial characteristics of the
head. The current poster will overview a method for using infant MRIs to
develop realistic head models for infant participants for cortical source
analysis. The method consists of several steps: 1) the MRI of a representative infant or the infant in the psychophysiological experiment must be
obtained; 2) the head must be “segmented” with computer programs that
analyze the MRI recording; 3) values for impedance for skull, scalp, CSF,
and brain for infant participants must be estimated; 4) sufficient number of
electrodes must be recorded; 5) realistic “forward” models using the spatial topography of the MRI must be computed. These steps allow the use
of “realistic models” in computer programs that do cortical source analysis
(e.g., “equivalent current dipole” analysis in BESA, or Source-Signal EMSE
programs). This technique is illustrated with analysis of cortical sources in
infant spatial cueing, infant visual recognition memory, the response of
infants to mother’s and stranger’s face, and EEG during object disappearance and appearance. It is also shown that changing the impedances of
infant skull and scalp (lower than adults) results in cortical sources much
closer to the surface and improved fit.
C5
DEVELOPMENT CHANGES IN ACTIVATION PATTERNS AND
EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY DURING PHONOLOGICAL AND
SEMANTIC PROCESSING AND ITS BREAKDOWN IN READING
DISORDERS James Booth1, Tali Bitan2, Fan Cao1, Tai-Li Chou1, Genna
Bebko1, Douglas Burman1; 1Northwestern University, 2Haifa University — Children with and without reading disorders (9- to 15-year-olds) were given
rhyming judgment and meaning (association) judgment tasks while
undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). In the rhyming tasks, children saw two sequentially presented words and had to
determine whether they rhymed. Development was associated with
greater activation in left inferior frontal gyrus and inferior parietal lobule,
suggesting greater reliance on phonological segmentation/articulation
and more elaborated mapping between orthographic and phonological
representations. Development was also associated with increasing effec-

91

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

tive connectivity with dorsal inferior frontal gyrus, suggesting greater
top-down modulation. Children with reading disorders showed less activation in left inferior frontal gyrus, inferior parietal lobule, lateral temporal cortex and fusiform gyrus during conflicting trials (e.g. pint-mint,
grade-laid) only. Children with reading disorders showed weaker effective connectivity for conflicting pairs, but stronger effective connectivity
for non-conflicting pairs (e.g., fall-ball, press-list), possibly reflecting
compensatory processing. In the meaning tasks, children either saw or
heard two sequentially presented words and had to determine whether
they were associated in meaning. Development was associated with
increasing activation in left inferior parietal lobule and middle temporal
gyrus for both modalities, suggesting greater integration and elaboration
of semantic representations. Children with reading disorder showed a
weaker correlation between association strength and activation in left
inferior parietal lobule, middle temporal gyrus and inferior frontal gyrus
for both modalities. Together, these results show developmental changes
in brain networks for phonological and semantic processing and suggest
that children with reading disorder have brain deficits in these networks.
C6
SOCIAL DISPARITY AFFECTS PREFRONTAL DEVELOPMENT IN
CHILDREN: AN ERP STUDY Mark Kishiyama1, Amy Jiminez1, Lee
Perry1, Thomas Boyce2, Robert Knight1; 1University of California, Berkeley,
Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, 2University of British Columbia — Societal inequalities have a profound effect on children’s health. Children of
lower socioeconomic status (SES) are at greater risk for most forms of
childhood morbidities including chronic medical conditions and behavioral disorders. Recent evidence suggests that chronic stressors in the
early life experiences of low SES children may adversely affect development of the prefrontal cortex (PFC). To address this, we tested both low
and high SES children (10 in each group; ages 8-11) using a visual novelty
oddball paradigm with event-related potential (ERP) techniques. SES was
determined by maternal education and family income-to-needs ratio. In
the oddball task, subjects detected infrequent target events (10%) embedded in a series of repetitive background stimuli (75%) and task-irrelevant
novel items (15%). This paradigm allowed us to assess two prefrontal
dependent attention effects including top-down PFC control of extrastriate processing and the automatic response to novelty (Barcelo et al, 2000;
Knight and Scabini 1998). Simple target detection was comparable
between groups as indexed by the parietal target ERP (P3b). Low SES
children had reduced early visual extrastriate ERPs (N1) (p < .01) and
reduced fronto-central novelty detection ERPs (N2) (p < .05) relative to
high SES children. Low SES children have electrophysiological deficits
resembling that observed in patients with lateral PFC lesions. These
results indicate that stressors associated with social disparity may lead to
disrupted development of the lateral PFC in children. Supported by
NIMH Grant MH070950 (P.I., W.T. Boyce) and NINDS Grant NS21135
(P.I., R.T. Knight)
C7
A FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING STUDY OF
OVERT WORD GENERATION IN CHILDREN AND ADULTS Kai
Hwang, Kiley J. Hill, Molly M. Davies, Erica D. Palmer, Ralph-Axel Müller;
San Diego State University — The present study examined neurodevelopmental differences related to word generation with functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). In the few fMRI studies that have applied verbal fluency paradigms to children and adults, participants responded
covertly and results were inconsistent. The present study adopted overt
word generation, which has advantages over covert generation because it
allows monitoring of task compliance and performance. Twelve children
(ages 8-10 years) and fifteen young adults (ages 20-29 years) were
included. In each 40-second experimental block, participants were presented with a different semantic category (8 categories total) and were
asked to overtly produce exemplars every 3 seconds (prompted by an
exclamation mark on the screen). An overt speech control condition (saying the word “nothing”) and a resting baseline were also included. Imag-

92

Cognitive And Brain Development

ing data were analyzed by the general linear model and subjects’ verbal
responses were recorded to measure task performance. Children and
adults activated overall similar brain regions, predominantly in left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). Additional
ROI analyses showed greater activity in LIFG for adults, and greater
activity in ACC for children. Our finding in LIFG is consistent with some
previous studies using covert word generation (e.g., Szaflarski et al. Ann
Neurol 59). The group difference observed in ACC may relate to more
effortful processing in children, which underscores the importance of
behavioral performance measures unavailable in previous covert word
generation studies.
C8
CONSISTENT EVIDENCE FROM CONVERGING ANALYSES OF
FRACTIONAL ANISOTROPY FOR CORPUS CALLOSUM
CONNECTIVE CHANGES IN CHROMOSOME 22Q11.2 DELETION
SYNDROME Tony J. Simon1, Zhongle Wu1, Hui Zhang2, James C. Gee2;
1University of California, Davis, M.I.N.D. Institute, 2University of
Pennsylvania — Children with chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome
manifest impairments in attentional, spatial and numerical cognition.
Our recent analyses of the morphology of corpus callosum found multiple significant differences in the shape and size of the anterior half of the
corpus callosum between the children with deletion and typical developing controls. These and other results lead us to hypothesize that the
above cognitive impairments are related to dysfunction in the frontoparietal attention network that may arise from changes in neural connectivity. However, statistical tests of fractional anisotropy (FA) maps from
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) are difficult to interpret, especially in the
case of atypical development in children. Therefore, we carried out voxelbased statistics, tract-based spatial statistics and regional statistics on the
parcellation of the mid-sagittal corpus callosum based on the cortical projection. DTI Images at 3T with 12 gradient directions were acquired from
11 children with 22q11.2 deletions and 11 typically developing controls
aged 7-14 years scanned on a MRI machines. Despite differences in significance values and cluster sizes, the different analyses produced consistent
maps with higher FA values in the anterior corpus callosum (mostly in
the genu and rostrum) in children with the deletion. These findings further support our hypothesis of connective changes in brains of children
with the deletion exist and that these strongly contribute to cognitive
impairments. We discuss whether these connective changes are indicative of smaller axons and reduced fiber branches that could delay interhemispheric transfer through smaller diameter fibers in the frontoparietal
attention network.
C9
VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX MEDIATES IMAGINED
PHYSICAL AGGRESSION IN MALE ADOLESCENTS Maren
Strenziok1, Frank Krueger1, Rhoshel Lenroot1, Elke van der Meer2, Jordan
Grafman1; 1NINDS\NIH, 2Humboldt-University Berlin, Germany — Clinical observations in humans indicate that the prefrontal cortex, particularly the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), plays a critical role in
the regulation of social and aggressive behavior. To our knowledge there
are no functional imaging studies to date that investigate the neural substrates of aggressive behavior in male adolescents - a population that displays higher levels of aggression compared to adults. In a block design
fMRI experiment combined with self-reported aggression measurement,
17 healthy adolescents (16.0 ±1.2 years, range 14 to 17) were instructed to
imagine self-defense scenarios with a teenage opponent varying in physical aggression: (a) minor: kicking and pushing; and (b) major: savagely
beating. In addition, control conditions were applied in which participants were asked to imagine non-aggressive interactions with the teenager: (c) neutral: exchanging objects/information, and (d) exciting:
offering valuables and playing. We hypothesized that the imagined scenarios involving aggressive behavior will decrease activation in the
vmPFC compared to imagined control scenarios. Overall, all conditions
engaged an imagining network including premotor cortex, superior pari-

Cognitive And Brain Development

etal lobule, paracingulate cortex, and a secondary sensory area. Consistent with our hypothesis, the imagined aggressive scenarios evoked less
activation in the vmPFC compared to imagined control scenarios. This
functional decrease in vmPFC activation is supported by a significant
correlation with self-reported aggressive behavior. In conclusion, our
results along with findings from structural and functional brain studies
in adults give support to the assumption that abnormal expression of
aggressive behavior in aggressive adolescents are accompanied by a
functional dampening of the vmPFC.

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

controls. Therefore, results indicated a selective impairment in learning
temporal sequences in ADHD children. Impaired implicit learning of
temporal sequential information is likely to reduce ADHD children’s
ability to predict when events will occur, thereby, preventing effective
adaptation to the environment.

C 10
PHONOLOGICAL PROCESSING AND READING DEVELOPMENT
IN CHILDREN EXPOSED TO DOMESTIC VIOLENCE Judith
Blackburn; Towson University — This study examined the impact of witnessing domestic violence on children’s phonological processing and
reading development. Forty children 6-9 years old were recruited from
domestic violence shelters and the community. Their mothers completed
the following questionnaires: the Conflict Tactics Scales-Revised, measuring the frequency of violence in the home (CTS2; Straus, Hamby, &
Warren, 2003), and the Conflict Tactics Scales-Parent Child Version, measuring the frequency of child maltreatment in the home (CTSPC; Straus,
Hamby, & Warren, 2003). The participants were divided into two groups
(control or domestic violence) based on the mother’s responses on the
CTS2. The two groups were matched on age, gender, nonverbal IQ, and
socioeconomic status. The children completed the following tests: the
Comprehensive Test of Phonological Processing (CTOPP; Wagner,
Torgesen & Rashotte, 1999), measuring phonological awareness and phonological memory skills; the Woodcock Reading Mastery Tests-Revised
(WRMT-R; Woodcock, 1987), measuring word decoding, nonword
decoding, and reading comprehension; the Matrices subtest of the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test, measuring nonverbal IQ (K-BIT; Kaufman &
Kaufman, 1990); and a hearing screening. The groups were significantly
different on phonological awareness and all of the reading measures, but
not on phonological memory. As expected, the domestic violence group
had significantly lower scores than the control group. Factors correlated
with phonological awareness and reading development in the domestic
violence group included family history of reading disabilities, psychological aggression between the mother and her partner, externalizing behavior problems, socioeconomic status, and length of residence.

C 12
INTEGRITY OF THE ARCUATE FASCICULUS AND LANGUAGE
OUTCOME IN CHILDREN WITH PERINATALLY ACQUIRED
BRAIN INJURY Gemma Northam1, Frederique Lie1, Angela Morgan2,
Donald Tournier3, Kling Chong4, John Wyatt5, Brigitte Vollmer1, Torsten
Baldeweg1; 1UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK, 2Murdoch Childrens
Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 3Brain Research Institute, Melbourne,
Australia, 4Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, UK, 5UCL
Institute for Women’s Health, London, UK — Perinatal brain injury in the
preterm child typically involves the periventricular white matter. Such
injury may impair development of tracts essential for speech and language functions, such as the superior longitudinal/ arcuate fasciculus
(AF) which connects anterior and posterior language areas. The present
study examined language abilities in preterm children (born <33 weeks
gestation) aged 10-16 years with perinatal brain injury, and investigated
associations with structural and functional imaging findings, specifically
the integrity of the AF. Twenty children with unilateral or bilateral
lesions on neonatal cranial ultrasound were eligible for inclusion in the
study. Outcome was assessed using standardised tests of language functions including tests of expressive and receptive language (CELF-3UK).
Neuroimaging included conventional structural MRI (T1, T2 weighted
sequences), functional MRI (fMRI) to determine language reorganisation
and Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) for assessment of white matter
(WM) integrity. Volumes of the SLF/AF were obtained by tracing the
anatomical boundaries in the frontal and parieto-temporal WM on
colour-coded eigenvector maps. Results showed language abilities
(CELF-3UK total score) in preterm children correlated with the volume of
the AF, even after correcting for total WM volume. This correlation was
strongest for the left AF, in agreement with findings of left language lateralisation on fMRI. In one case with severe unilateral damage to the left
AF language reorganisation to the contralateral side occurred. This data
suggests that the integrity of the AF constrains the development of language abilities in children with perinatal brain injury.

C 11
IMPAIRED IMPLICIT SEQUENCE LEARNING BUT NOT SPATIAL
CONTEXTUAL LEARNING IN CHILDHOOD ADHD Kelly
A.
Barnes1, Jennifer Foss-Feig2, Devon Shook1, James H. Howard3, Darlene V.
Howard1, Laura Kenealy4, Chandan J. Vaidya1,4; 1Georgetown University,
2
Vanderbilt University, 3Catholic University of America, 4Children's National
Medical Center — Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is a
common neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by symptoms of
inattention, impulsivity and hyperactivity that are mediated by dysfunction in frontal and striatal brain regions. Neural circuits that are dysfunctional in ADHD, including fronto-striatal-cerebellar networks, support
implicit learning of temporal sequences. We hypothesized that learning
that relies on fronto-striatal-cerebellar networks would be impaired in
ADHD. Further, in order to determine the extent to which an implicit
learning impairment was selective to fronto-striatal-cerebellar circuits,
we included a task examining implicit learning of spatial context (Contextual Cueing) that is known to depend on medial temporal lobe structures. Children with ADHD and age, gender, and IQ matched controls
performed the Contextual Cueing task (Chun & Jiang, 1998), a measure of
implicit learning of spatial context, and the Alternating Serial Reaction
Time (ASRT) task (Howard & Howard, 1997), a measure of implicit learning of higher order temporal sequences. Learning on the contextual cueing task was obtained in children with ADHD, but the timecourse
differed from controls. Specifically, children with ADHD showed early
learning that was not maintained throughout the task. In contrast, children with ADHD did not show learning on the ASRT task, relative to

C 13
BRAIN REGIONS MEDIATING FEEDBACK PROCESSING ACROSS
DEVELOPMENT: AN FMRI STUDY Kiki
Zanolie1,2, Linda van
Leijenhorst1,2, Serge Rombouts3,2, Michiel Westenberg1, Eveline Crone1,2;
1Leiden University,
2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, 3Leiden
University Medical Center — To adjust performance appropriately to environmental demands, it is important to monitor ongoing action and process performance feedback for possible errors. Performance feedback
may indicate that prior performance is no longer correct, that current
hypotheses are invalid, or that a performance error has been made. Several behavioral studies have shown that children fail to adjust performance appropriately following negative performance feedback, but the
neural substrates that underlie this development are poorly understood.
In the current study, 18 children aged 8-11 years, 20 children aged 14-15
years and 20 adults aged 18-25 years performed a rule-switch task (Crone
et al., 2004) in an fMRI session. Adults showed more activation in medial
prefrontal cortex (PFC) when negative feedback indicated that the previous rule was no longer correct, but more activation in dorsolateral (DL)
PFC when negative feedback was used for hypothesis testing. Adolescents showed adult-like activation in medial PFC, but reduced activation
in DLPFC following negative performance feedback. In contrast, 8-11year-old children showed immature activation in both medial PFC and
DLPFC. The results show that (1) different PFC regions contribute to different types of negative feedback in adults, and (2) medial PFC and
DLPFC have separate developmental trajectories, with DLPFC showing
the slowest developmental time course.

93

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

C 14
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HOLISTIC FACE PROCESSING:
BEHAVIORAL AND ERP MEASURES USING THE COMPOSITE
FACE TASK Susan M. Letourneau1, Teresa V. Mitchell2; 1Brandeis
University, 2University of Massachusetts Medical School — Holistic processing of faces was measured using a composite face task in 69 subjects aged
6-22 years. Participants judged whether the top or bottom half of a pair of
composite faces was the same or different while behavioral and ERP data
were recorded. Holistic processing was observed in all age groups; spatial misalignment of the stimuli improved performance, and this
improvement was greatest when the attended halves of the faces were
the same. ERP amplitudes of the P1, N170, and N250 showed inverted Ushaped functions with age, with peak amplitudes increasing between
ages 6-7 and 8-9, gradually decreasing through adolescence, and slightly
increasing again in early adulthood. P1 and N170 latencies decreased
steadily with age, while latencies of the N250 increased with age, causing
this peak to gradually separate from the N170 with increasing age. Misaligned faces elicited larger amplitudes than aligned faces in all age
groups, and this effect was larger over the right hemisphere. Young children showed the largest P1 alignment effects, whereas older children and
adults showed larger N170 alignment effects than younger age groups.
As observed in previous research with adults, children showed greater
alignment effects in the right hemisphere than the left specifically when
attended halves were the same, suggesting that holistic processing supports right hemisphere asymmetries while piecemeal, featural processing
does not. The results of this study indicate that holistic processing takes
place similarly in children and adults, but that perceptual discrimination
may change with age, influencing early ERP components.
C 15
LATERALIZATION OF WORKING MEMORY PROCESSING IN
DEVELOPMENT Moriah Thomason
Caires1, Brittany E. Burrows1,
Elizabeth Race1, Gary H. Glover1, John D.E. Gabrieli2; 1Stanford University,
2Massachusetts Institute of Technology — We examined the development of
hemispheric asymmetry in working memory (WM), as measured by
functional magnetic resonance imaging, by comparing activations in children (ages 7-12 years) and adults (ages 20-29 years) as they performed
separate tests of verbal and spatial WM. For spatial relative to verbal
WM, clusters of significant activation were observed in both groups
across a large extent of the right hemisphere, including the inferior parietal lobule, the visual association area of the occipital lobe, and premotor
regions in the frontal lobe. For verbal relative to spatial WM, widespread
activations were observed for both groups in the left inferior and middle
frontal gyrus, including BA 44, and regions of the left temporal lobe. Laterality indices (LIs) were obtained for each age group as quantitative
measures of hemispheric activation asymmetry. LIs for the spatial WM >
verbal WM scans were not significantly different in adults (LI = 0.533)
compared with children (LI = 0.523); t (1) = 0.355, p = 0.78. and, LIs in the
VWM > SWM scans were not significantly different in adults (LI = -0.892)
compared with children (LI = -0.947); t (1) = 0.327, p = 0.79. This similar
lateralization in children and adults occurred despite large differences in
activation as a function of WM loads in both the spatial and verbal WM
tasks. Thus, children and adults demonstrated similar hemispheric
asymmetries, with greater activation in the right hemisphere for SWM
and greater activation in the left hemisphere for VWM.
C 16
DEVELOPMENTAL
CHANGES
IN
BRAIN
ACTIVITY
ASSOCIATED WITH THE COMMISSION OF RESPONSE
INHIBITION ERRORS. Katerina Velanova, Enami Yasui, Beatriz Luna;
University of Pittsburgh — Correct antisaccade performance requires the
active inhibition of a prepotent response to saccade towards a stimulus,
and a voluntary saccade to an empty space in the mirror location. Errors
typically take the form of a rapid saccade towards the stimulus, followed
by a second corrective saccade towards the intended “target” location.
Behaviorally, error rates are known to decrease from childhood through

94

Cognitive And Brain Development

adolescence and into adulthood. This decrease has variously been attributed to performance optimization (associated with improvements in
inhibitory control), and with improvements in error monitoring, evaluation, and subsequent adjustment. Here we examined developmental
changes in brain activity associated with corrected antisaccade errors
(versus correct trials) and hence with failures in performance optimization, and with error feedback processing. BOLD fMRI data were acquired
in 66 participants (22 children, aged 8-12 years, 22 teens, aged 13-17 years,
and 22 adults, aged 18-27 years) across four runs, during which jittered
antisaccade (and prosaccade) trials were presented. Timecourses of activity were derived from functionally defined regions of interest and were
compared across age groups. Consistent with prior reports, differential
timecourses of activity for error versus correct trials were prominently
observed in distinct regions of rostral and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex. These effects were attenuated in adolescents, and even more so in
children, with younger age groups showing more robust (and differential) activity in canonical eye-movement regions and in subcortical structures. Our results are discussed in terms of a developmental transition
from simple execution to feedback utilization.
C 17
SOCIOECONOMIC
STATUS
PREDICTS
HEMISPHERIC
SPECIALISATION OF BROCA'S AREA IN YOUNG CHILDREN
Rajeev Raizada, Patricia Kuhl; University of Washington — Reading is a
complex skill that is not mastered by all children. At the age of five, on
the cusp of pre-reading development, many factors combine to influence
a child's future reading success, including behavioural factors such as
phonological awareness, neural factors such as the auditory processing of
phonetic input, and environmental factors, such as socioeconomic status,
or SES (Noble, Norman & Farah, 2005; Noble et al., 2006). We investigated the interactions between these factors in five-year old children, by
administering a battery of standardised cognitive and linguistic tests
(PPVT, CELF, WPPSI, PAT), measuring SES with the standard Hollingshead scale, and using fMRI to record neural activity during a behavioural
task, rhyming, that is predictive of reading skills (T.L.Richards et al.,
1999). Correlation tests were performed, and then corrected for multiple
comparisons using the False Discovery Rate (FDR) procedure (Benjamini
& Hochberg, 1995). It emerged that only one relationship linking neural
with behavioural or environmental factors survived as significant after
FDR-correction: a correlation between SES and the degree of hemispheric
specialisation in Broca's area. This neural-environmental link remained
significant even after controlling for the children's scores on the standardised language and cognition tests. These findings suggest that the weaker
language skills of low-SES children may be a consequence of reduced
underlying neural specialisation, and that these neural problems go
beyond what is revealed by behavioural tests alone.
C 18
NEUROCOGNITIVE
DEVELOPMENT
OF
IMITATION
INHIBITION: AN FMRI STUDY Jonne Oldenburg1, Egbert Hartstra1,
Serge Rombouts1, Marcel Brass2, Eveline Crone1; 1Leiden University, 2Ghent
University — Whereas the ability to imitate has an early onset in life, the
ability to inhibit imitative actions has a much slower developmental trajectory. Thus, with age children learn to exert voluntary control on which
actions to inhibit. Here, we use fMRI to study the neurocognitive development of imitation inhibition relative to cognitive inhibition in children
aged 8-12 and adults aged 18-25. Participants perform two tasks in the
scanner (1) an imitation inhibition task adapted from Brass et al. (2000)
and (2) a Simon task. In both tasks, participants are asked to press the
index finger when a ‘1’ is presented and the middle finger when a ‘2’ is
presented. In the imitation task, the numbers are presented in front of a
mirror hand which can make the same (congruent condition) or a different movement (incongruent condition). Likewise, in the Simon task the
number can be presented on the same side as the required response finger (congruent) or the opposite side (incongruent). Behavioral findings
show that adults (current n=12, anticipated n=20) respond slower and

Cognitive And Brain Development

less accurate in the incongruent compared to the congruent condition,
and the response cost is the same for both tasks. In both tasks, participants show increased activation in lateral prefrontal cortex, consistent
with the hypothesis that both tasks require response inhibition. The data
for twenty 8-12-year-old children are currently being collected. The
results will be discussed vis-à-vis current theories on mentalizing and
response inhibition.
C 19
EVALUATING THE PROCEDURAL DEFICIT HYPOTHESIS IN
PRESCHOOL CHILDREN WITH LANGUAGE AND MOTOR
DEFICITS Renee Fabus1,2, Peter Gordon3,4, 1Brooklyn College; 2City
Univeristy of New York, 3Teachers College, 4Columbia University — The aim
of this study was to examine the relationship between speech, language,
and motor deficits in 28 four-to-five-year-old preschool children. Four
groups of children were tested: (1) children receiving occupational therapy (OT) only, (2) children receiving speech-language therapy (SLP)
only, and (3) children receiving therapy for both OT and speech-language
deficits (O.T. + SLP), and (4) a control group of normally developing agematched children, with a battery of speech, language, and motor measures. The Procedural Deficit Hypothesis (PDH) (Ullman, 2001) was evaluated as a possible theoretical explanation for why speech, language and
motor deficits might be associated in the three impaired groups of children. Several correlations between language, speech and motor abilities
were significant. These data support the co-occurrence of speech-language and motor deficits in these populations. A past tense elicitation
task with irregular and regular verbs was administered to evaluate the
declarative and procedural memory systems, respectively. Unlike previous tests of past tense production, where the verb was initially modeled
with first person uninflected forms (e.g., “Everyday I eat …”), the current
study modeled the present tense with third person forms (e.g., “… he
eats”), which take the –s inflection. All three impaired groups, but not the
unimpaired group, showed a significant tendency to perseverate with the
third person form in past tense contexts (e.g., “yesterday he eats”). This
error supports a deficit in the analysis of past tense morphology in both
language and motor-impaired children that could possibly be due to
sequencing problems in procedural memory.Word Count: 249
C 20
IMPAIRED NEURAL SYNCHRONY IN THE AUDITORY SYSTEM
COMPLEX IN CHILDREN WITH AUTISM DISORDER: A
MULTIDISCIPLINARY INVESTIGATION Nicole
Gage, Sharon
Fujikawa-Brooks, A. Lisette Isenberg, M. Anne Spence; University of
California, Irvine — We hypothesize that language dysfunction in autism
disorder (AD) stems from impaired neural synchrony in the auditory system complex (ascending and descending pathways, cortex). We have
reported latency prolongation in auditory brainstem response (ABR) for
AD vs. typically developing (TD) children (7-14 yrs), providing evidence
for neural dysynchrony at brainstem, and reduced M100 modulation by
speech contrasts, providing evidence for impaired feature extraction at
cortex. Here we assess the medial olivocochlear (MOC) circuit in the
descending path, critical for neural tuning and under indirect cortical
control, using distortion product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAEs) to
evaluate the correspondence between MOC dysfunction and brainstem
abnormalities. DPOAES were recorded in silence and noise: ‘typical’
response in noise is suppression (~2-3 dB) in the contralateral ear.
RESULTS: both groups showed mixed findings, some children had bilateral (B) and some had unilateral (U, left/right only) suppression. ABR
CORRESPONDENCE: TD: all showed typical left (L) and right (R) ABR
latency and no ear differences (L=5.54ms, R=5.56ms) regardless of condition (B, U). AD: B – prolonged latency vs. TD but no ear differences
(L=5.75ms, R=5.75ms). AD: U – prolonged latency in the unsuppressed
ear (0.17ms). Thus impaired suppression in the MOC circuit corresponds
to abnormal ABR latency, but only in AD. The auditory system has many
redundancies and is typically highly resilient to even moderate impairment. Our findings here provide evidence that descending pathway

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

impairments have profound, early onset (<3yrs), and long-lasting effects
on neural synchrony and signal processing at brainstem and cortex for
AD but not TD children.
C 21
QUALITY OF LIFE AND PSYCHOSOCIAL FUNCTIONING IN
CHILDREN WITH LATERALIZED EPILEPTIC SEIZURES Krystyna
A. Mathiak1, Magorzata Uba2, Katarzyna Karzel2, Tomasz Wolaczyk3, Klaus
Mathiak1,
Jolanta
Bielicka-Cymerman4, Elbieta Szczepanik5, Pawe
6
1
Ostaszewski ; RWTH Aachen University, Germany, 2Warsaw University,
Poland, 3Medical University of Warsaw, Poland, 4Warsaw Hospital for
Children, Poland, 5Institute for Mother and Child in Warsaw, Poland, 6Warsaw
School of Social Psychology, Poland — Quality of life (QOL) is an individual’s overall satisfaction with life and general sense of well-being. Focusing on this measure leads to broad-based treatment approaches and helps
to delineate the mechanisms underlying the interaction of disease and
psychosocial factors. In adults, seizures in the left temporal lobe led to
lower QOL and higher depression and anxiety as compared to right. No
such studies have been performed in children, leaving the development
of those disturbances unknown. We examined the QOL of children with
lateralized seizures.Thirty one parents of children with epilepsy (12
female and 19 male, age 11.4±2.6 years) filled the Quality of Life in Childhood Epilepsy Questionnaire. Fifteen children had seizures in the left and
sixteen in the right hemisphere, as verified with multiple EEG examinations. There were no significant differences in age and clinical measures
between the groups. The parents of children with right-hemispheric seizures reported lower overall QOL (t(29)=1.769; p=0.044). Five out of sixteen subscales contributed significantly to this result: anxiety
(t(29)=1.726; p=0.048), social activities (t(29)=1.734; p=0.047), stigma item
(t(29)=2.090; p=0.023), general health item (t(29)=1.795; p=0.042), and
quality-of-life item (t(29)=3.055; p=0.002). We demonstrated for the first
time that in children left- and right-hemispheric seizures have different
impact on QOL. In contrast to findings in adults, seizures in the right
hemisphere led to worse emotional and social functioning. This confirms
that seizures impact the brain differentially across development. Supported by State Committee for Scientific Research 2H01F04325 in Poland
and International Research Training Group 1328, German Research
Council.
C 22
AMYGDALA RESPONSE TO OVERT AND MASKED FACIAL
EXPRESSIONS OF EMOTION: A DEVELOPMENTAL FMRI
STUDY Angela Tseng1, Nathalie Vizueta2, Kathleen M. Thomas1; 1Institute of
Child Development, University of Minnesota, 2University of Minnesota — Adult
neuroimaging literature indicates the amygdala’s critical role in processing facial expressions of emotion, even when emotions are not consciously perceived. Prior research in children has shown that overt
presentations of face emotion effectively elicit amygdala response. However, it is unknown whether children activate the amygdala to covert
facial expressions in the absence of explicit awareness of the emotion.
Additionally, it is unclear whether these amygdala responses are early
maturing or show developmental change. The present study utilized
fMRI and a backward masking paradigm to examine amygdala response
to overt and covert presentations of fearful and neutral facial expressions.
Twelve children (8-9 years) and 12 adults completed 3 runs: 1) alternating
blocks of fixation and neutral faces; 2) fixation and overt fearful and neutral faces; and 3) fixation and masked (covert) fearful and neutral faces.
In the covert condition, participants viewed a brief (26ms) face stimulus
(neutral or fearful) masked immediately by a neutral face (169ms). Preliminary analyses with adults replicate the finding of greater amygdala
activity to overt fearful than to overt neutral faces. In addition, there was
a trend towards increased amygdala response to masked fearful faces relative to neutral. While children also showed amygdala activation to overt
fearful and neutral faces, they did not demonstrate the adult patterns.
Masked emotional faces did not reliably activate the amygdala in children. Results are discussed in terms of developmental differences in the

95

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

amygdala response to facial emotion, as well as implications for using
backward masking in pediatric research.
C 23
DOPAMINE-TRANSPORTER GENOTYPE INTERACTS WITH
FAMILIAL RISK FOR ATTENTION-DEFICIT/HYPERACTIVITY
DISORDER AND STRIATAL ACTIVITY Sarah Durston1,2, John A.
Fossella2, Martijn J. Mulder1, B.J. Casey2, Tim B. Ziermans1, M. Nathalie
Vessaz1, Herman van Engeland1; 1University Medical Center Utrecht, 2Sackler
Institute for Developmental Psychobiology — Background: The dopaminetransporter (DAT1) gene has been implicated repeatedly in ADHD,
although the mechanism by which it exerts its effects remains unknown.
The polymorphism associated with ADHD has been shown to affect
expression of the transporter in vitro and in vivo. Dopamine-transporters
are predominantly expressed in the striatum, although they are also
present in the cerebellar vermis. Stimulant medication is often effective in
ADHD and is believed to exert its effects by blocking dopamine transporters in the striatum. We hypothesized that DAT1-genotype would
affect brain activation patterns in a manner similar to stimulant medication, with the lower expressing allele mirroring its effects. Methods: We
investigated DAT1-gene effects on brain activation patterns in a sample
of sibling-pairs discordant for ADHD and controls (N=29). All subjects
participated in an fMRI session using a go/no-go paradigm, and provided a DNA-sample for analysis. Results: We found that dopaminetransporter genotype affected activation in striatum and cerebellar vermis. Genotype interacted with familial risk for ADHD in striatum, but
not vermis.Discussion: These results suggest that dopamine-transporter
gene effects in striatum may be involved in translating genetic risk for
ADHD into a neurobiological substrate. This may point towards longterm possibilities for tailoring individual therapies by DAT1-genotype: If
DAT1-genotype has differential effects on striatal activation, it may
become possible to use this as a surrogate endpoint in individualized
treatments targeting genotype/fMRI-activation profiles.
C 24
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF RESPONSE INHIBITION IN
ADULTS BORN PRETERM Emma
Lawrence, Rubia Katya, Robin
Murray, IPhilip McGuire, Larry Rifkin, IChiara Nosarti; Institute of
Psychiatry, King's College London — Background: In comparison to controls, individuals who were born very preterm display altered neural
activation during response inhibition at age 14, despite intact behavioural
performance. This study explored response inhibition in a similar sample
aged 20. Methods: A ‘go-no-go’ task was used including ‘oddball’ trials
for attentional control. A rapid, mixed trial event-related fMRI design
was employed. 26 preterms (16 males; age 20.11 years, ± .65; gestation
28.77 weeks ± 1.94) and 21 controls (9 males; age 20.13 years ± 1.71) were
tested. Participants were scanned using a GE Signa 1.5T neuro-optimised
MR system (General Electric, Milwaukee, USA). 3.3mm thick high resolution structural scans were acquired along with T2-weighted images at 16
7mm thick near-axial planes. Results: There were no group differences in
performance. When ‘no go’ were contrasted with ‘oddball’ trials, preterm
participants showed increased blood-oxygen-level-dependent signal in
the middle temporal gyrus (BA39) extending to the angular gyrus and
inferior parietal lobule (BA40), and precuneus (BA7/BA31) extending to
the cingulate gyrus (BA31) and paracentral lobule (BA4). Conclusions:
In comparison to controls, and despite intact performance, preterm individuals exhibit differential neural activation during response inhibition.
The precuneus and cingulate gyrus form part of a posterior attention network, suggesting this group may have relied on additional attentional
resources in order to achieve the comparable behavioural performance to
controls.
C 25
OPTIMIZED VOXEL-BASED MORPHOMETRY IN DYSCALCULIC
AND NORMALLY ACHIEVING CHILDREN Stephanie Rotzer1, Karin
Kuc1, Michael von Aster1,2, Erst Martin-Fiori1, Thomas Loenneker1,3;

96

Cognitive And Brain Development

1

University Children's Hospital Zurich, Switzerland; 2DRK Hospital Berlin,
German, 3University of Zurich, Switzerland — Functional imaging studies
indicate an involvement of prefrontal and parietal cortices in arithmetic
tasks. In particular, the intraparietal sulcus seems to play a major role in
number processing. The aim of the present study was to analyze if children with developmental dyscalculia (DD) show structural differences in
above-mentioned areas compared to normally achieving children. T1weighted volumetric MRI data were acquired in 12 children with DD
(9.3&#61617;0.2 years) and 12 control children without any learning disabilities (9.7&#61617;0.2 years). Voxel-based brain morphometry with an
optimization of the spatial segmentation and normalization (OVBM) was
applied to identify volume differences in cerebral gray and white matter.
Compared to controls, children with DD showed a significant reduction
in gray matter volume in the anterior cingulum, the bilateral middle frontal gyri, the left inferior frontal gyrus, and the right intraparietal sulcus.
Analysis of white matter volume revealed a reduction in the left frontal
lobe and adjacent to the right parahippocampal gyrus. Children with DD
did not show increased volume in any cluster compared to controls. A
neural equivalence to developmental dyscalculia constitutes the decrease
of gray matter volume in the right intraparietal sulcus. However, volume
differences in frontal regions, especially the anterior cingulum, refer to
early impairments of the attentional system and the working memory,
which might have a preliminary negative effect on the acquisition of
number representation and number processing capacities.
C 26
ASSESSING INFANT’S SPEECH PERCEPTION WITH NEARINFRARED SPECTROSCOPY Yasuyo Minagawa-Kawai1,2, Heather van
der Lely2, Emmanuel Dupoux1; 1ENS-EHESS-CNRS, 2University College of
London — Although human infants are born with almost universal biological functions, regardless of their culture or language, their brains are
quickly tuned to a language-specific pattern within the first year of life. In
order to elucidate this neural development, particularly for languagespecific phonemic acquisition, we performed a longitudinal auditory
study using near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS). Cerebral hemodynamic
responses of Japanese infants to native ([i] vs. [unrounded u]) and nonnative ([unrounded u] vs. [u]) vowel contrasts within pseudo-word contexts were measured at the ages of 4 months and 8 months. The NIRS
results showed that at 8 months of age hemodynamic responses to the
non-native contrast were attenuated indicating that the auditory area are
specifically sensitive to the native vowel contrast at this age. The principal finding from the present study, however, is a cerebral lateralization
process: 4 month-olds exhibited bilateral activation for both native and
non-native contrasts whereas at 8 months of age, infants showed leftdominant responses solely to the native contrast. We suggest that these
results reveal the neurophysiological basis underlying previous behavioral findings that an infant’s perceptual ability to discriminate vowels is
altered to a language-specific pattern within 6-months of life. We will discuss our data in relation to recent behavioral findings of phonemic acquisition focusing on the behavioral correlates of left-dominant responses.
C 27
COGNITIVE AGING AND DECISION MAKING: THE IMPACT OF
INHIBITION ON CHOICE Rui Mata; University of Michigan — Decision field theory (Busemeyer, Jessup, Johnson, & Townsend, 2006) was
used to test the plausibility of the hypothesis that cognitive aging impacts
decision making abilities trough deficits in inhibitory function. Agerelated cognitive decline impacts several higher order cognitive capacities such as decision making abilities. One potential factor underlying
older adults' decision-making deficits may be their deficits in inhibitory
function: There is consensus that neuromodulatory efficiency declines
with age in brain areas associated with decision making abilities such as
the basal ganglia, which have important inhibitory functions. Decision
field theory is a connectionist model of decision making which has been
proposed as a link between the neural and behavioral levels of description. According to decision field theory, lateral inhibition, the inhibitory

Cognitive And Brain Development

connections between alternatives being evaluated, is related to a number
of effects that challenge conventional views of rational decision making.
Simulations suggest that decreased inhibitory function may indeed play
a role in decision making behavior of older adults. Decision field theory
can account for older adults' superior performance in conditions eliciting
the attraction effect (Kim & Hasher, 2005) and suggests a similar result
concerning the compromise effect. However, the simulations suggest that
older adults' inhibitory deficits could make them more prone to choosing
a a poorer option when a similar alternative is added to the choice set
(i.e., similarity effect). Neural correlates of the model and empirical tests
of the predictions are discussed.
C 28
PHONOLOGICAL
MECHANISMS
OF
SPOKEN
WORD
RECOGNITION IN CHILDREN AND ADULTS: EVIDENCE FROM
EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS Amy S. Desroches1, Randy Lynn
Newman2, Erin K. Robertson1, Marc F. Joanisse1; 1University of Western
Ontario, 2Acadia University — We used event-related potentials [ERPs] to
investigate the time course of spoken word recognition in children and
adults. Neurologically healthy right-handed English speaking adults and
children (7-12 yr olds) were tested during a visual-auditory mismatch
paradigm. Scalp potentials were recorded from 32 sites as participants
viewed a target picture followed by an auditory word that was either a
match (picture: CONE, word: cone), a rhyme mismatch (CONE-bone), a
cohort mismatch (CONE-comb), or an unrelated mismatch (CONE-fox)
to the target picture. The conditions of greatest interest, rhyme and
cohort, elicited different ERP components in adults. The Phonological
Mismatch Negativity [PMN], a component associated with phonological
processing, was elicited at approximately 250 ms post stimulus onset in
the rhyme condition. In the cohort condition an N400 component (commonly associated with semantic processing) peaked around 450 ms post
stimulus onset. While these same components were present in children,
they differed in scalp distribution and latency. The findings provide evidence that phonologically similar items compete for recognition as
speech perception unfolds; however, different competition effects are
reflected in distinct neural markers (PMN and N400). The developmental
changes in these components also provide useful information as to how
phonological similarity impacts spoken word recognition in children.
C 29
ENHANCEMENT
AND
BILATERALIZATION
OF
EARLY
SENSORY PROCESSING IN THE VENTRAL VISUAL STREAM MAY
BE A FEATURE OF NORMAL AGING: A HIGH-DENSITY
ELECTRICAL MAPPING STUDY Pierfilippo
De Sanctis1, Richard
Katz2, George S. Alexopoulos2, Glenn R. Wylie3, John J. Foxe1; 1Nathan S.
Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, 2Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, 3Kessler Medical Rehabilitation Research and Education
Corporation — Across a variety of electrophysiological investigations of
normal aging, evidence has emerged for age-related changes in sensory
processing, indexed by early components of auditory (AEPs) and visual
evoked potentials (VEPs). Because these age-related differences have
often been incidental to the main focus of these studies, many of which
have investigated task performance in cognitive designs, researchers
have been unable to determine if the effects seen are performance dependent or alternately, represent intrinsic changes in sensory processing. A
test employing a design without task or performance confounds is clearly
warranted. Here, participants passively viewed centrally presented
alphanumeric stimuli to investigate whether age-related differences in
sensory processing persist even without task involvement. High-density
VEPs were acquired from 19 healthy elderly participants (74.2 years) and
of 15 young control subjects (23.6). Results show a robust increase in N1
amplitude and latency with age. Using spatiotemporal topographic analysis and source solutions we found both enhanced and delayed neural
responses within structures of the ventral visual stream with age. A
reduced hemispheric asymmetry in the elderly may be indicative of a
decline in hemispheric specialization. Additionally, considerably

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

enhanced early sensory-driven frontal cortical activation was observed in
the older subjects, suggesting a hyper-activation of these structures.
These age-related differences in early sensory processing are discussed in
terms of recent proposals that normal aging involves large-scale compensatory reorganization. Our results suggest that such compensatory mechanisms are not restricted to later higher-order cognitive processes but
may also be a feature of early sensory-perceptual processes.
C 30
ORBITOFRONTAL RECRUITMENT VARIES WITH TRAITRELATED IMPULSIVITY IN CHILDHOOD Ericka Burgos-Ruiz1, Jenn
Foss-Feig2, Philip Lee1, Chandan Vaidya1,3; Georgetown University,
2Vanderbilt University, 3Children's Research Institute, Children's National
Medical Center — Functional neuroimaging of inhibitory functions that
contribute to executive function has revealed involvement of several prefrontal cortical regions (e.g., orbitofrontal –OFC, ventrolateral, and cingulate). The extent to which involvement of these regions relates to traitrelated inhibitory control is relatively unknown. We examined whether
involvement of these regions correlated with parent reported ratings of
behavioral impulsivity (ADHD rating scale) and of deficits in everyday
executive functioning (BRIEF global executive composite) in 7-13 yearold children with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and age and
IQ-matched controls. Event-related fMRI was performed during a visual
task that required children to ignore salient distracting information.
Regions activated during trials with perceptually-salient distractors (e.g.,
novel, colorful) relative to those without salient distractors (e.g. no-color)
included OFC and medial parietal cortex. ADHD children also activated
ventral striatum whereas control children activated the amygdala. We
performed voxel-wise correlational analyses to determine regions that
correlated negatively with impulsivity and executive function ratings
across all children. Results indicated that children with lower behavioral
impulsivity/hyperactivity activated the left OFC (BA 11) to a greater
extent. Similarly, children with lower executive function impairment
activated that same OFC region to a greater extent. Thus, childhood individual differences in impulsivity and its debilitating effect on executive
function in every day life depend upon functioning of the orbitofrontal
cortex.
C 31
NEURAL CORRELATES OF CORRECT AND INCORRECT
INHIBITION: RELATIONSHIP TO BEHAVIORAL MEASURES OF
PERFORMANCE Jessica Kirkland, Marilyn Essex, Jeffrey Armstrong,
Richard Davidson; University of Wisconsin, Madison — This study used
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine neural activation during a go/no-go task, in a sample of adolescents at risk for psychopathology (N = 54, 29 female). Significant activity during correct and
failed button press inhibition was examined in relation to behavioral
measures of performance (signal detection ability, reaction time variability). Consistent with inhibition literature, group t-tests on mean percent
signal change revealed increased MR signal during correct inhibition in a
network of regions including right anterior cingulate (ACC), bilateral
basal ganglia, prefrontal areas, and left cerebellum. Failed inhibition
showed similar MR signal increases in areas including the ACC, but
attenuated activity in several areas including basal ganglia and ventral
prefrontal cortex. Individual subject mean percent signal change values
were extracted for regions significant for correct and failed inhibition at
the group level, and relationships of these values to individual performance measures were explored. During correct inhibition, increased
activity in several motor and cognitive control-related areas, including
basal ganglia and ACC, was correlated with more variable reaction time
(ACC: R=.364, .007) and poorer signal detection ability (left putamen: R =
-.387 , .005). Increased activation in the basal ganglia during failed inhibition was also related to greater reaction time variability (R = .338 , .013).
These results have potential to advance our understanding of the relationship between inhibitory neural activity and behavioral performance
in adolescents.

97

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

C 32
DEVELOPMENTAL DIFFERENCES IN RECOLLECTION AND
FAMILIARITY: AN FMRI STUDY. Dana
DeMaster, Simona Ghetti,
Silvia Bunge, Andrew Yonelinas; University of California, Davis — Recognition memory – the capacity to determine whether an event has been previously encountered – can be based on two distinct processes: 1)
recollection, the process that allows for retrieval of qualitative features
associated with the context in which the event originally occurred and 2)
familiarity, the process that results in a general sense that the event
occurred. Recent behavioral studies indicate a developmental dissociation between the two processes: whereas familiarity stabilizes during
childhood, recollection continues to develop until adulthood. The neural
mechanisms underlying this dissociation remain largely unknown. In
this study, 64 healthy, right-handed, native English speakers from four
age groups (8yr, 10-11yr, 14yr, and adult) will participate in an fMRI
study (current N = 55). During fMRI data acquisition, participants
semantically process drawings presented either in green or red ink.
After the scanning session, participants complete a self-paced recognition
test on studied and new drawings. Participants report whether each item
was studied, and provide confidence judgments on a 3-point scale. For
items identified as studied, participants indicate the color in which the
item was originally viewed. Behavioral results confirm age-related
improvements in recollection, but not familiarity. Based on fMRI research
with adults, it is proposed that recollection- and familiarity-based recognition will recruit dissociable areas in the medial temporal lobes (hippocampus/posterior parahippocampal gyrus vs. perirhinal cortex) and in
the prefrontal cortex (ventral-lateral vs. orbital frontal) for adults. Selective recruitment of areas critical for recollection and familiarity is
expected to emerge and increase with age.

Higher Level Cognition: Disorders
C 33
NEONATAL LESIONS OF THE RAT NUCLEUS ACCUMBENS /
SEPTUM Michael T. Amlung1,2, Sarah A. Berg1,2, R. Andrew Chambers1,2;
1Indiana University Bloomington, 2Institute of Psychiatric Reseaerch, Indiana
University School of Medicine — BACKGROUND: The nucleus accumbens
(NAc) is implicated in major psychiatric disorders including addiction,
schizophrenia, ADD, and OCD. Collectively, these disorders are associated with disturbances of motivational control as reflected by abnormal
addictive drug responsivity, compulsivity, and/or impulsivity. Neonatal
lesions to brain regions that project into the NAc (including hippocampus
and amygdala) and adult lesions directly to the NAc have previously
been shown to alter one or more aspects of motivational control. The
behavioral impact of neonatal NAc lesions is unknown. METHODS: To
explore the NAc in a neurodevelopmental context, we pioneered techniques for bilateral neonatal lesions (ibotenic acid) of the NAc and septum in 7-day-old rat pups. In adulthood, rats with sham surgeries were
compared to those with neonatal NAc lesions (NNAcL) and neonatal
septal lesions (NSL) in behavioral sensitization to cocaine (15 mg/kg IP
per day) followed by measures of compulsivity and impulsivity in foodrewarded operant conditioning paradigms. RESULTS: Preliminary
trends suggest that NNAcL vs. NSL produce differential activity profiles
compared to control rats upon repeated cocaine injections. In control rats,
cocaine history tended to increase compulsivity but decrease impulsivity.
This drug effect tended to be attenuated by the presence of NSLs. CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest the feasibility of neonatal lesioning of the
NAc and septum. Lesions to these regions may produce differential
effects on motivational endophenotypes reflected in cocaine sensitization
and profiles of compulsivity and impulsivity. Further work is needed to
better characterize the role of the NAc and septum in neurodevelopmental models of psychiatric syndromes.

98

Higher Level Cognition: Disorders

C 34
SPEEDED
PROCESSING
OF
GRAMMAR
AND
TOOL
KNOWLEDGE IN TOURETTE’S SYNDROME Michael
Ullman1,
Matthew Walenski1, Stewart Mostofsky2; 1Georgetown University, 2Kennedy
Krieger Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — Tourette’s
syndrome (TS) is a developmental disorder characterized by motor and
verbal tics. The tics are fast and involuntary, and result from frontal/
basal-ganglia abnormalities leading to unsuppressed behaviors. Language has not been carefully examined in TS. We tested the processing of
two basic aspects of language, idiosyncratic and rule-governed linguistic
knowledge. Evidence suggests that idiosyncratic knowledge (e.g., in
irregular past-tense formation; bring-brought) is stored in a mental lexicon that depends on the temporal-lobe-based declarative memory system, which also underlies conceptual knowledge. In contrast, rulegoverned combination (e.g., for regular past-tenses; walk + -ed) takes
place in a mental grammar that relies on the frontal/basal-ganglia based
procedural memory system, which also underlies motor skills such as
how to use a hammer. We found that TS children were significantly faster
than control children at producing rule-governed past-tenses (slipslipped, plim-plimmed, bring-bringed) but not irregular and other
unpredictable past-tenses (bring-brought, splim-splam). They were also
faster than controls at naming pictures of manipulated (hammer) but not
non-manipulated (elephant) items. These data were not explained by a
wide range of potentially confounding subject- and item-level factors.
The results suggest that the processing of procedurally-based knowledge,
both of grammar and of manipulated objects, is particularly speeded in
TS. Therefore the frontal/basal-ganglia abnormalities in the disorder may
lead to not only tics, but to a wider range of unsuppressed and rapid
behaviors and types of processing, including in the cognitive processing
of rule-governed forms in language and other types of procedural knowledge.
C 35
THE PROCEDURAL DEFICIT HYPOTHESIS OF DYSLEXIA Joshua
Hartshorne1,2, Claudia Bonin3,1, Michael Ullman1; 1Georgetown University,
2Harvard University, 3University of Maryland — Although the most salient
characteristic of developmental dyslexia may be its associated reading
impairments, an array of seemingly unrelated co-occurring deficits have
been observed, including impairments of motor coordination, implicit
learning, visual motion detection, working memory, and grammar. Analogous to a recently proposed explanatory account of Specific Language
Impairment, we hypothesize that a substantial portion of the deficits in
dyslexia are tied to abnormalities in a single brain system: procedural
memory. This system, which subserves the learning and processing of
sensory-motor and cognitive “skills”, depends on a network of structures
that is rooted in frontal/basal-ganglia circuits, but includes parietal,
superior temporal, and cerebellar regions. These structures have been
linked to a wide range of tasks and functions, including some whose relationship with actual procedural memory functions are not yet clear (e.g.,
sequencing, rule learning, motor function, working memory, grammar,
dynamic mental imagery). As a first step in testing the “Procedural Deficit Hypothesis”, or PDH, we compiled a list of functions linked to procedural system brain structures, as well as functions dissociated from this
system. A detailed literature examination of the status of these abilities in
dyslexia suggests that most impairments in the disorder can explained by
the PDH, whereas at least certain abilities that are spared do not depend
on this system. Should future studies confirm that the PDH has explanatory power for dyslexia, findings from the wide range of animal and
human studies on the procedural memory system may be applicable to
the disorder.

Higher Level Cognition: Disorders

C 36
EXPLORING SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE OF CHINESE CHILDREN
WITH WILLIAMS SYNDROME: NEW INSIGHTS FROM FALSE
MEMORY TASKS Ching Fen Hsu1, Annette Karmiloff-Smith1, Ovid, J.-L.
Tzeng2, Chi-Rung Tai2, Hua-Zhen Wang3; 1Birkbeck College, UK, 2National Yang
Ming University, Taiwan, 3National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan — The aim
of this study is to explore the relationship between the context-using abilities of people with Williams syndrome (WS) and their semantic knowledge. Previous work has shown that their semantic priming performance
is no different from normal controls (Tyler, et al., 1997), but an abnormal
N400 is observed in their processing of semantically anomalous sentences
(Neville, Mills & Bellugi, 1994). To clarify the inconsistencies in the data
on WS, we used an auditory false memory paradigm taking both behavioral and neurological (ERPs) measures from three groups: WS, mentalage matched children and college students. Behavioral results indicate
that people with WS display the same pattern of recognition for semantically related non-presented lures as their controls. However, their neural
correlates tell a different story. College students display brainwave differences between studied words and unrelated new words, whereas people with WS show the same effect in a shorter time window.
Furthermore, college students differentiate between semantically-related
lures and unrelated new words, but the brains of people with WS reveal
no such difference. Unlike college students, people with WS show a difference between studied words vs. semantically-related lures. Our findings suggest that in WS proficient behavior camouflages a deviant neural
pathway in context use. Our results also reveal developmental changes in
typical development, since children show a distinctive pattern from college students. Overall, our findings suggest that semantic organization
develops slowly in the typical case, and abnormally in the WS case.
C37
THE NEURAL REORGANIZATION OF LANGUAGE AFTER
DAMAGE: AT THE CROSSROADS OF NEUROIMAGING AND
COGNITION Birgit Keisker1, Spyridon Kollias1, Dorothea Weniger1;
1
University Hospital Zurich — The neural reorganization of language after
brain damage continues to be a matter of debate. The crucial issue is
whether language improvement represents sparing or restoration of
function in perilesional zones or recruitment of homologous right hemisphere regions. With the advent of functional imaging the relationship
between brain damage and recovered language functions can be examined in vivo. In examining the neural reorganization of language functions following brain damage few attempts have been made to
investigate the residual and/or restored language processing capacities
by a set of linguistic activation tasks that minimizes the demands on
working memory and attentional resources. The present study is concerned with the patterns of reorganization in individuals with lesions
affecting language-related areas. We present behavioural data and f-MRI
activation patterns of normal controls and brain-damaged individuals
performing a lexical decision and a picture/word matching task, in a
blocked design with an auditory and visual mode of stimulus presentation. Normal controls displayed more correct responses and faster reaction times with visual rather than auditory stimulus presentation.
Specific activation patterns were obtained for the two tasks, with the
mode of stimulus presentation being reflected in expected differences.
Brain-damaged individuals performed on a comparable level of accuracy, but had longer reaction times. They showed specific activation patterns for the two tasks, related to lesion location. The correlation of their
reaction times and the time course of their activation patterns are discussed within a neuroanatomical framework combining neuroimaging
data with cognitive models of word processing.

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

C 38
TAKE-IT-OR-LEAVE-IT: THE ROLE OF THE VENTROMEDIAL
PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN THE ULTIMATUM GAME Laura
Moretti1, Irene Cristofori2, Davide Dragone2, Elisabetta Ladavas2, Giuseppe
Di Pellegrino2; 1Istituto di Psicologia, Università di Urbino, Italia, 2Università
di Bologna, Italia — In the Ultimatum Game (UG), a Proposer offers a division of a sum of money to a Responder, who can accept or reject it, ending the game. Rational choice model predicts that responders should
accept all non-zero offers, however about half of the unfair offers are
rejected. fMRI data show that unfair offers activate brain areas involved
in negative emotional states, suggesting a role for emotions in decisionmaking. Here we studied UG in patients with ventromedial prefrontal
cortex (vmPFC) lesion, a brain region interfacing cognition and emotion.
Six vmPFC patients and 12 healthy controls played in the role of the
responder in the UG. Participants played 12 rounds, each with a different
anonymous partner, via a computer interface. Offers were predetermined
so that all participants saw the same set of offers (4 fair, 8 unfair), in random order. For all participants, the acceptance rate decreased as offers
became less fair. Importantly, vmPFC patients rejected unfair offers with
a significantly higher rate than controls, ending the game with lower
gains. In the UG, behavioural choice reflects the competition between
conflicting states. Thus, unfair offers generate an impulse to reject. However, the negative prospect of losing money if offers are declined may be
anticipated through the vmPFC, motivating people to override emotional
forces. Damage of vmPFC weakens the neural mechanism that enable
one to make decisions according to long-term outcomes, thus leading to
loss of adaptive decision-making in favour of more automatic, impulsive
behaviour.
C 39
FMRI ACTIVATION OF LANGUAGE AREAS IN AUTISTIC
CHILDREN Tracey A. Knaus1, Andrew M. Silver1, Kristen A. Lindgren1,
Nouchine Hadjikhani2, Helen Tager-Flusberg1; 1Boston University School of
Medicine, 2Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School — Language deficits are one of the core symptoms of autism. Functional neuroimaging has examined language functions in autism however their
results have been variable. We used fMRI to examine language functions
in autistic children compared to typically developing children. We examined brain activation during a language task in 10 right-handed autistic
boys compared to 9 normal right-handed boys. Performance was similar
in both groups. Both groups demonstrated activation in the left pars triangularis and the superior, middle, and inferior temporal gyri, as well as
bilaterally in the amygdala and hippocampus. Autistics had additional
regions activated, including parieto-occipital regions and the caudate. In
both groups, regions of interest located in frontal and temporal languagerelated areas (pars triangularis and pars opercularis and posterior superior temporal gyrus) revealed left lateralization of activation in both
groups (p<.001). In addition, autistics had higher percent signal change
in frontal regions compared to controls (p=.009). A correlation between
signal change in the left frontal with left temporal areas was found in the
control group (r=.908, p=.001), but not in the autism group (r=.621,
p=.051). These results suggest that language functions may be organized
differently in autism, resulting in more activation than typically developing controls despite similar performance level. The lack of correlation
between frontal and temporal language region activation in autism also
suggests that these regions may not be working together as efficiently in
autism as in controls.
C 40
CONTROL
OVER
CONFLICT
DURING
MOVEMENT
PREPARATION: ROLE OF THE POSTERIOR PARIETAL
CORTEX Elizabeth Coulthard1, Parashkev Nachev2, Masud Husain1;
1
University college London, 2Imperial College London — Conflicting information activates parietal as well as prefrontal cortices, while lesion studies
suggest involvement of parietal regions in directional movement planning. Here we use a modified Eriksen flanker task in patients with and

99

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

without neglect to assess how they resolve conflict between competing
motor programmes. Importantly, to control for lateralised perceptual
bias, we present stimuli in the vertical midline. Twenty-four right-hemisphere stroke patients (16 neglect, 8 without) and 14 age-matched controls were tested. Subjects moved a joystick left or right in response to a
central target arrow flanked vertically by incongruent, congruent or neutral flankers. Two patterns of performance emerged within the neglect
group. Neglect patients with posterior parietal damage were paradoxically faster to move rightward in the incongruent than the neutral condition, i.e. rightward movements were actually facilitated by leftward
flankers. In contrast, these individuals had normal incongruence cost for
leftward movements. The second group of neglect patients, who had a
common frontal focus of lesion involvement, were disproportionately
slowed bilaterally by incongruent flankers. A second, free choice experiment established that parietal neglect patients were biased toward rightward movements, even in the absence of visual directional information.
These results suggest there are two complementary systems activated by
conflicting information. The first requires intact posterior parietal cortex
and activates competing motor plans in response to incongruent flankers,
resulting in reaction time delay and most likely being important for the
selection of movement programmes. The second system involves prefrontal cortex and limits the intrusion of distracting information by
increasing ‘cognitive control’.
C 41
THE
PERVASIVE
SUBJECTIVE
EXPERIENCE
OF
DETERIORATION; A DISTINCT TYPE OF IMPAIRED INSIGHT.
Edward De Haan1, Martine van Zandvoort1, Jaap Kappelle2; 1Utrecht
University, 2University Medical Center Utrecht — Insight into one’s own
functioning, be it physical, cognitive or emotional, is a central human
ability crucial for survival. The clinical literature holds many examples of
deficits in conscious awareness that may occur after brain disease. For
instance, amnesic patients may still be able to learn new skills althought
they have no explicit recollection of learning. ‘Anosognosia’ concerns
neurological patients who are unaware that they suffer from a demonstrable impairment, such as blindness (Anton’s syndrome). Finally, there
is one case description of a patient with ‘inverse Anton’s syndrome who
actively denies his residual functioning. Here, we report a man who suffered a posterior bilateral stroke and as a result has visuoperceptual problems and a memory impairment. The right upper quadrant of his visual
field is relatively intact (he can still watch television and read large print)
and this has been stable for a year. In contrast to the objective assessment,
he is convinced that his vision is deteriorating and that he is ‘going blind’.
This conviction is not influenced by evidence to the contrary and he contiuously demands medical care to counteract the experienced progressive
visual decline. This pervasive subjective experience of deterioration does
not include his memory problems which he feels have somewhat
improved. We suggest that this is a specific type of disorder of insight
characterised by a false belief of deterioration.
C 42
IMPAIRMENTS IN COGNITIVE CONTROL IN CHILDREN WITH
CHROMOSOME 22Q11.2 DELETION SYNDROME Yukari
Takarae1,2, Joel Bish3, Tassone Flora1, Leeza Kondos1, Tony Simon1; 1M.I.N.D.
Institute, 2University of California, Davis, 3Ursinus College — Individuals with
Chromosome 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome (DS22q11.2) have impairments
in visual attention, numerical cognition, and executive function that negatively impact their intellectual and behavioral development. We examined performance of 7-14 year old children with DS22q11.2 on the Stroop
task, the SNARC task, and the Attention Networks Test (ANT). Children
with DS22q11.2 had increased Stroop interference relative to typically
developing children. The SNARC task, which manipulates spatial and
numerical conflict, produced increased RT cost for children with
DS22q11.2 on trials requiring incongruent spatial responses to numerical
judgments. The ANT results replicated our previous finding (Bish et al.,
2005) of reduced ability in children with DS22q11.2 to adapt when pre-

100

Higher Level Cognition: Disorders

sented with two contiguous incongruent trials but showed adaptation for
sequences of three incongruent trials. This suggests that conflict adaptation is not absent but takes more time to affect behaviors in DS22q11.2.
Based on our previous data suggesting normal psychomotor speed in a
simple reaction time paradigm, we conclude that a specific impairment of
the cognitive processes involved in top down control is responsible for
the performance decrement. Further experimental and computational
modeling studies are investigating its nature. Performance on the ANT
also differed with alleles of the COMT gene, which is located in the
deleted region of chromosome 22 and is critical in metabolizing dopamine in prefrontal cortex. These findings suggest general impairments in
cognitive control in DS22q11.2. and relationships between cognitive control and dopamine levels in prefrontal cortex.
C 43
NEUROCOGNITIVE CORRELATES OF IMPULSIVITY AND
ALCOHOLISM: EVOKED OSCILLATIONS DURING A GAMBLING
TASK Chella Kamarajan, David Chorlian, Ramotse Saunders, Madhavi
Rangaswamy, Yongqiang Tang, Nagaraj Roopesh, Niklas Manz, Arthur
Stimus, Bernice Porjesz; SUNY Downstate Medical Center — Neurocognitive correlates of impulsivity have been thought to underlie several of
externalizing/disinhibitory disorders including alcoholism. The current
study examines the aspects of impulsivity in terms of behavioral measures as well as event-related oscillations (EROs) while performing a
gambling task that involves monetary gain and loss. Behavioral measures
of impulsivity were analyzed and brain oscillations were decomposed
into time-frequency-amplitude data using the S-Transform algorithm.
The mean amplitude in the outcome-related negativity (ORN) time window (225-275 ms) in each frequency band was statistically analyzed in
both groups across four outcomes that involved valence (loss or gain)
and magnitude (50 or 10 cents). Alcoholics showed higher impulsivity as
measured in Barratt Impulsivity Scale (BIS) and in other task-related
impulsivity responses. Further, alcoholics showed significantly
decreased amplitude in delta (1-3 Hz) and theta (4-7 Hz) band during the
ORN time window. The frontal theta activity was markedly suppressed
in alcoholics during all the outcomes. These results are discussed in the
light of possible frontal lobe dysfunctions that may mediate high impulsivity and neurocognitive deficits in alcoholics.
C 44
PRIMING DEFICIENCY IN MALE SUBJECTS AT RISK FOR
ALCOHOLISM: THE N4 ERP DURING A SEMANTIC TASK
Nagaraj Roopesh1, Madhavi Rangaswamy1, Chella Kamarajan1, David
Chorlian1, Yongqiang Tang1, Arthur Stimus1, Lance Bauer2, John
Rohrbaugh3, Sean O'Connor4, Samuel Kuperman5, Marc Schuckit6, Bernice
Porjesz1; 1SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY, 2University of
Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut, 3Washington University,
St. Louis, Missouri, 4Indiana University Medical Center, Indianapolis,
5
University of Iowa Hospitals, Iowa City, Iowa, 6University of California, San
Diego — While there is extensive literature on the relationship between
the P3 component of event-related potentials (ERPs) and risk for alcoholism, there are few published studies regarding other potentially important ERP components. One important candidate is the N4(00) component
in the context of semantic processing, as abnormalities in this component
have been reported for adult alcoholics. A semantic priming task was
administered to young male offspring (18 to 25 years) of alcoholic fathers
[high risk (HR) n = 23] and non-alcoholic fathers [low risk (LR) n = 28], in
order to determine if N4 deficits antecede the development of alcoholism.
Subjects were presented with 150 words and 150 non-words sequentially.
Among the words, 50 words (prime) were preceded their antonyms
(primed, n=50), whereas the remaining 50 words were unprimed. For the
analysis, N4 amplitude and latency, as well as behavioral measures for
the primed and unprimed words were considered. A significant interaction effect was observed between semantic condition and group, where
HR subjects failed to suppress N4 for primed stimuli. HR subjects scored
significantly less correct responses compared to LR. The lack of N4 atten-

Higher Level Cognition: Disorders

uation to primed stimuli and/or inability to differentiate between primed
and unprimed stimuli, without latency and reaction time being affected,
suggest neuronal structural abnormalities with normal speed of information processing in HR male offspring. This N4 deficit in HR, similar to
that of alcoholics indicates that it antecede the development of alcoholism
and may provide another electrophysiological endophenotype that
reflects genetic vulnerability to develop alcoholism
C 45
RESPONSE INHIBITION AND PRODUCTION IN ALCOHOLICS:
AN ERP ANALYSIS OF N2 COMPONENT IN A GO/NO-GO
TASK Ashwini
Pandey, Bernice Porjesz, Chella
Kamarajan, Madhavi
Rangaswamy, Yongqiang Tang, David Chorlian, Nagaraj Roopesh, Niklas Manz,
Arthur Stimus, Henri Begleiter; SUNY Downstate Medical Center — Numerous
studies in the literature have focused on P3 deficits in alcoholics. The
objective of the present study is to elucidate characteristics of the N2
(N200) component of the event-related potential (ERP) in alcoholics during response inhibition and production using a Go/No-Go task. The sample consisted of 78 alcoholic males with an age range between 21 and 50
years and 58 healthy controls aged between 18 and 25 years. The N2 component of the ERP was compared across task conditions and groups.
Alcoholics produced significantly reduced anterior N2 amplitude during
No-Go condition and weaker current density during both Go and No-Go
conditions. Behaviorally, the alcoholic group was slower in executing a
motor (GO) response. Additional analysis using LORETA (Low Resolution Electromagnetic Tomography) indicated that the alcoholic group
had less activation in the frontal regions during both Go and No-Go conditions. These findings suggest that alcoholics have deficits in effortful
processing during response inhibition and execution as well as possible
frontal lobe dysfunctions.
C 46
FUNCTIONAL
ABNORMALITY
IN
COVERT
SPEECH
PRODUCTION SYSTEM IN CHRONIC SCHIZOPHRENIA Ryuichiro Hashimoto, KangUk Lee, Alexander Preus, Robert McCarley, Cynthia
Wible; Schizophrenia Research Group, Clinical Neuroscience Division, Harvard
Medical School — Previous functional imaging studies suggested that several core symptoms of schizophrenia (e.g. auditory hallucinations) derive
from deficits in functional abnormality of the speech production/perception system, involving the left prefrontal cortex (PFC), temporo-parietal
cortex (TPC) and the posterior middle/superior temporal gyrus (STG/
MTG), and homologous regions in the right hemisphere (Hans et al., in
press). In the present fMRI study, we measured brain activity of 10
chronic schizophrenic patients (CSZs) and 10 normal control subjects
(NCs) during a covert (inner) speech, with the specific aims of localizing
functional abnormality within the speech production system in patients
with auditory hallucinations and/or formal thought disorders, and elucidating how such localized deficits exert their influence on functional
integrity among other cortical areas. During the task, subjects were presented with three words (e.g. “bear, coal, flood”) either aurally or visually, and then asked to subvocally rehearse these words during the
ensuring rehearsal period of 16 sec for subsequent recall. Significant taskrelated activations were found in the bilateral STG/MTG, TPC, and PFC
in both groups, but the CSZs showed reduced activation especially in the
left PFC compared with NCs. Subsequent functional connectivity analyses using the methods described by Rissman et al (2004) revealed significantly reduced connectivity between the left PFC and the left temporal
lobe, and reduced inter-hemispheric connectivity of the temporal lobes.
These findings suggest that there are deficits in functional integrity in
fronto-temporal connections as well as in connections among key temporal regions, which may underlie core clinical symptoms of schizophrenia,
such as auditory hallucinations.

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

C 47
DEFICITS OF PROCEDURAL LEARNING IN PATIENTS WITH
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER Norbert
Kathmann1, Anja
2
1
2
Bauer , Kathrin
Holzschneider , Edgar
Geissner , Tanja
Endrass1;
1Humboldt-University at Berlin, 2Medizinisch-Psychosomatische Klinik
Roseneck, Prien am Chiemsee — Procedural learning, as measured in the
serial reaction time task (SRTT), is a product of fronto-striatal brain function. Neuropsychological and brain imaging studies revealed that obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) may be associated with fronto-striatal
dysfunction (Saxena et al., 1998). Deckersbach et al. (2002) reported an
experiment showing reduced procedural learning in OCD patients in a
dual task situation requiring the concurrent performance of a memory
task. We conducted two experiments to further address this issue. Experiment 1 was run with 33 OCD patients and 27 healthy controls demonstrating reduced procedural learning in patients using a single task SRTT
(p = .005). This deficit remained stable across time although symptoms
remitted substantially (Kathmann et al., 2005). In Experiment 2, using
new samples of OCD patients and healthy controls and a depressive control sample, both single and dual task versions of the SRTT were administered. OCD patients had deficits in each of the two tasks. It is concluded
that deficits in procedural learning are a stable finding in OCD patients.
The deficit is independent of the working memory load of a concurrent
task. This replicates and extends earlier findings from Deckersbach et al.
(2002) in two new samples. The results support the fronto-striatal model
of OCD. More information regarding the diagnostic specificity of this deficit is needed.
C 48
AN FMRI STUDY OF THE CROSSED RESPONSE INHIBITION
TASK IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Benzi
Kluger, Keith McGregor,
Valeria Drago, Michelle Benjamin, Tomoyuki Mizuno, Keith White, Bruce
Crosson, Kenneth Heilman; University of Florida — Background:
The
crossed response inhibition (CRI) task has been shown to be impaired in
many non-demented patients with Parkinson’s Disease (PD). Previous
studies of this task suggest a critical role for the supplementary motor
area (SMA). While pathological studies show specific cell loss in the SMA
of PD patients, functional imaging studies have shown mixed results
using other paradigms, including both increased and decreased activation. Objective: To determine the activity of medial motor systems in PD
utilizing the CRI task. Methods: Five non-demented patients with PD and
9 healthy right-handed age-matched controls performed a simple unimanual hand raise in two response conditions. During Uncrossed trials,
subjects were to move the hand ipsilateral to a tactile stimulation (computer-controlled air puff) given to the hand. In Crossed trials, subjects
were asked to move the hand contralateral to the tactile stimulation. Subjects performed a total of 200 counterbalanced response executions (50
per hand per condition). A group analysis of the healthy controls was
performed using a three-factor ANOVA (Age x Response Condition x
Handedness) for the whole brain using area under the curve of the estimated hemodynamic response functions obtained from a deconvolution
procedure. Individual analyses were done for the PD patients due to an
expected increase in response and signal variability in this group.
Results: Our preliminary analyses indicate that patients with PD demonstrate less activity than controls in medial motor areas during crossed
response trials. Conclusions: fMRI and the CRI task may be useful in documenting medial frontal pathology in PD.
C 49
ABNORMALITIES IN WHITE MATTER STRUCTURE IN AUTISM
SPECTRUM DISORDERS DETECTED BY DIFFUSION TENSOR
IMAGING Roger J. Jou1, Sarah J. Paterson1, Andrea P. Jackowski2, Marcel
Jackowski1, Xenophon Papademetris1, Nallakandi Rajeevan1, Lawrence H.
Staib1, Robert T. Schultz1; 1Yale University School of Medicine, 2Federal
University of São Paulo, Laboratório Interdiciplinar de Neuroimagem e
Cognição — Objective: The neurobiology of autism spectrum disorders
(ASD) is currently unknown. This study tests the hypothesis that ASD

101

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

are attributable to impaired connectivity between those cortical areas
responsible for social cognition and language function. Methods: Diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging was performed in 20 males, ages
9 to 22 years: 10 with ASD and 10 typically developing controls (TDC).
Subjects were group-matched according to age, handedness, and fullscale IQ. Fractional anisotropy (FA), a useful measure of the structural
integrity of axonal tracts, was compared between groups using an integrated image analysis software suite. Volumes of interest (VOIs) were
identified using predetermined probability and cluster thresholds. Diffusion tensor tractography was performed to confirm anatomic location of
all VOIs. Results: Significantly reduced FA values were observed along
portions of the following white matter structures: corpus callosum, cingulum, superior and inferior longitudinal fasciculi, and inferior frontooccipital fasciculus. Significantly reduced FA values were also observed
bilaterally in the white matter adjacent to the fusiform gyri. All findings
survived after covarying for age, FSIQ, and TBV. Tractography yielded
fiber bundles bearing strong resemblance to those major fiber tracts
known to course through the identified VOIs. Conclusions: These data
provide evidence for impaired corticocortical connectivity in ASD. Aberrant axonal connections between those cortical areas implicated in social
cognition and language function may contribute to the impairments characteristic of ASD.
C 50
FMRI EVIDENCE THAT CHILDREN WITH ADHD RELY ON
DIFFERENT NEURAL MECHANISMS FOR SUCCESSFUL MOTOR
INHIBITION Stacy Suskauer1,2, Daniel Simmonds1, Sunaina Fotedar1,
Joanna Blankner3, James Pekar1,2, Martha Denckla1,2, Stewart Mostofsky1,2;
1Kennedy Krieger Institute, 2Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
3
University of Tennessee College of Medicine — Objective:
Deficient
response inhibition is a hallmark of ADHD. The few prior fMRI studies
of response inhibition in children with ADHD have used tasks with a
range of additional cognitive demands. We used a simplified Go/No-go
task with minimal cognitive demands to better identify differences in
neural activation associated with response inhibition in ADHD. Methods: Twenty-five children with ADHD and twenty-five typically developing (control) children, 8-12 years old, completed a simple Go/No-go
task incorporating a well-ingrained stimulus-response association
(Green=Go, Red=No-go). fMRI data were acquired on a 1.5T Phillips
scanner; analyses were completed using SPM2. For each subject, voxelwise contrast maps were created for Go and No-go conditions; this was
followed by random effects comparisons within and between the groups
(ADHD and control). Results: The groups were matched for percent
commission errors. In group contrast maps for No-go activation, children with ADHD showed greater activation in the right superior parietal
lobe (BA40, BA7); control children showed greater activation in right
angular gyrus (BA 39), right inferior parietal lobe (BA40), and left rostral
supplemental motor area (“pre-SMA”, BA6). Conclusions: The findings
suggest that children with ADHD rely on different neural mechanisms
for successful motor inhibition. Compared to typically developing children, children with ADHD demonstrate less activation in the pre-SMA,
an area that is important for motor response selection, as well as differences in the pattern of activation within parietal regions important for
integrating cues and motor actions into stimulus-response associations
necessary to guide response inhibition.
C 51
THE INFLUENCE OF PRISM ADAPTATION ON EXOGENOUS
AND ENDOGENOUS ORIENTING OF ATTENTION Tanja
Nijboer1, Robert McIntosh2, Gudrun Nys1, Chris Dijkerman1, David Milner3;
1
Utrecht University, 2University of Edinburgh, 3Durham University — Prism
adaptation has been shown to temporarily ameliorate the symptoms of
unilateral neglect. The underlying mechanisms, however, are not fully
understood or identified as yet. In this study, we further investigate the
influence of prism adaptation on attentional orienting, by exploring the
effect of prism adaptation on exogenous and endogenous orienting of

102

Higher Level Cognition: Disorders

attention, using a Posner Reaction Time task. In two patients, we found
that prism adaptation does not seem to remediate exogenous orienting of
attention, whereas it does improve endogenous orienting of attention.
We therefore concluded that prism adaptation seems to improve compensatory processes or voluntary orienting of attention.
C 52
NORMALIZING EFFECT OF METHYLPHENIDATE ON WORKING
MEMORY MAINTENANCE IN CHILDHOOD ADHD: A PHFMRI
STUDY Devon Shook1, Colin Brady1, Jen Foss-Feig1, Philip Lee1, Laura
Kenealy2, Chandan Vaidya1; 1Georgetown University, 2Children’s National
Medical Center — Cognitive dysfunction in Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) often involves reduced ability to maintain information in working memory.
While stimulant medication (e.g.,
methylphenidate–MPH) improves working memory, the neural basis of
that efficacy is unknown. ADHD children performed a Sternberg task
(loads 1, 3, 5 letters) on and off their therapeutic MPH dose during fMRI;
control children performed the same task without MPH. Overall accuracy was lower with increasing load and improved on-MPH in ADHD
children. Efficacy of MPH and associated activation patterns differed for
loads 3 and 5 (vs. load 1). For load 3, control children activated a left-lateralized network comprising inferior frontal (BA 45/47), superior parietal (BA 7) and posterior superior temporal (BA 22) regions. Off-MPH,
ADHD children activated right superior temporal gyrus (BA 22) and hippocampus, and cuneus. MPH reduced activation in the cuneus and
engaged bilateral anterior temporal (BA 34) and right cerebellar regions.
Thus, MPH improved maintenance of a low load in working memory by
engaging an atypical neural network. For load 5, controls activated bilateral inferior frontal (BA 45, 47), superior parietal (BA 7), and medial frontal (BA 6, 32) regions in addition to right cerebellum and left premotor
cortex. While a subset of these regions were activated by ADHD children
off-MPH (bilateral inferior and medial frontal), MPH increased involvement of the same neural network as that in controls. Thus, MPH
improved maintenance of a high load in working memory by engaging a
typically activated neural network.
C 53
ENHANCED PICTURE NAMING IN AUTISM Matthew
Walenski1,
Stewart Mostofsky2,3, Jennifer Gidley-Larson, Michael Ullman1; 1Georgetown
University, 2Kennedy Krieger Institute, 3Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine — Although deficits of language and communication are diagnostic of autism, not all aspects of language appear to be equally affected
in the disorder. Here we examine lexical processing in autism with a picture-naming task, in which subjects named pictures of objects, whose
names varied in their frequency of occurrence in English. We tested
native English-speaking high-functioning boys with autism and typically-developing control boys and control girls. Although no group differences in response time were found for higher-frequency names, the
groups differed significantly on lower-frequency names, where the boys
with autism responded faster than control boys, but not faster than control girls, who were themselves faster than the control boys. These
response-time differences cannot be explained by a speed-accuracy
tradeoff, as no group differences were found in accuracy. They are also
not explained by potentially confounding variables such as word-length,
item-order, age, education, and IQ, among others. The results may indicate enhancements in high-functioning autism of at least certain aspects
of declarative memory, which underlies lexical and conceptual knowledge. The sex difference between the typically-developing groups is consistent with a female advantage at lexical and declarative memory. The
lack of a difference between the boys with autism and typically-developing girls is therefore also consistent with enhanced memory in autism,
relative to typically-developing boys. The findings extend to language
the view that the “disorder” of autism may constitute not simply a set of
deficits, but rather a set of relative strengths and weaknesses within and
across domains. Additional implications will be discussed.

Higher Level Cognition: Executive Functions

C 54
APHASIA AND LIMB APRAXIA ARE NOT DUE TO A DAMAGE
TO A UNIQUE MECHANISM: EVIDENCE FROM A STUDY WITH
LEFT-BRAIN DAMAGED PATIENTS. Raffaella Ida Rumiati1, Gioia A.L.
Negri1, Nicola Canessa1,2, Paola Mengotti3, Alessia Tessari4,1, Alberta
Lunardelli5; 1SISSA International School for Advanced Studies, Trieste, 2CRESA,
San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, 3University of Trieste, 4University of
Bologna, 5Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedali Riuniti di Trieste — Patients with leftbrain damage often show both apraxia and aphasia. Whether the cooccurrence of the two deficits depends on damage to a single system that
processes both action and language, or whether these two functions are
independent, but due to the contiguity of the areas sustaining, a lesion in
the left-hemisphere often impair both, is still under debate. Here we
present the performance of 52 left brain-damaged patients on tests assessing language (comprehension) and praxis (imitation and tool use). Overall, comprehension deficits correlated with Ideomotor Apraxia (IMA),
(Spearman’s rho: p<.05) but not with Ideational Apraxia (IA). However,
single-cases analyses showed that apraxia and aphasia double-dissociated: 12 patients showed IMA without aphasia, whereas 6 patients
showed the opposite pattern; seven patients had IA without aphasia,
whereas 17 aphasic patients did not show IA. Lesion analysis of the double-dissociating cases showed that both Aphasia and IMA, and Aphasia
and IA, are associated with damage to middle and superior-temporal
gyri. Aphasia and IMA also show common damage in the Putamen. Relative to either IMA or IA, Aphasia is specifically associated with lesions of
the superior-temporal-gyrus posteriorly (Wernicke area, BA 22). Relative
to aphasia, IMA and IA are associated with lesions in the anterior and
posterior cortex, respectively. These data support a separation of action
and language systems.
C 55
DISSOCIABLE COMPONENTS OF MOTOR SWITCHING IN
CHILDREN WITH ADHD Philip Lee1, Jennifer Foss-Feig1, Leah Lozier1,
James Herrera2, Devon Shook1, Elizabeth Poggi1, Michael Billington1, Laura
Kenealy2, Chandan Vaidya1; 1Georgetown University, 2Children's National
Medical Center — Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is a
developmental disorder marked by dysfunction of prefrontal-striatal-cerebellar circuitry important for executive control. An important operation
of executive control is switching flexibly between multiple task sets. We
used event-related fMRI in 8-12 year old children with ADHD and age
and IQ matched controls to examine whether the neural basis of task set
switching was atypical in ADHD. Subjects responded to targets (circles,
squares) according to a cue indicating the mapping of responses to hands
(e.g., right – circles; left - squares). “Stay” cues instructed subjects to continue the same mapping whereas “Switch” cues instructed reversing of
the mapping (e.g., left – circles; right - squares). Comparison of cue trials
(Switch vs. Stay) reflected activation associated with planning the new
response set whereas comparison of response trials (first response trial
after Switch vs. Stay cue) reflected activation associated with executing
the new set. Response accuracy and speed were worse for Switch relative
to Stay trials (switch cost) for both groups. However, activation patterns
differed between groups – For cue trials, both groups recruited dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA9/46) but differed medially such that controls
recruited anterior cingulate (BA32) whereas children with ADHD
recruited anterior regions (BA10). For response trials, children with
ADHD showed greater recruitment of premotor (BA8), superior parietal
(BA7/40) and lateral cerebellar regions during execution of the motor
switch. This suggests that children with ADHD may require greater
recruitment of both regions associated with maintenance of the rule set
and regions associated with planning the motor response.

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

Higher Level Cognition: Executive Functions
C 56
THE NEURAL CONSEQUENCES OF STEREOTYPES: AN FMRI
INVESTIGATION OF THE EFFECTS OF STEREOTYPE THREAT
ON COGNITION Anne Krendl1, Jennifer Richeson2, William Kelley1,
Todd Heatherton1; 1DartmouthCollege, 2Northwestern University — Research
has shown that being the target of a stereotype can have a deleterious
effect on academic performance. For instance, recently emerging research
on stereotype threat suggests that simply reminding a group (e.g.,
women) of a common stereotype (e.g., gender differences in math aptitude) can negatively impact that group's performance on relevant tasks
(e.g., difficult math problems). The present study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to identify the underlying neural mechanisms that give rise to this effect. Twenty women were imaged for the
present study, with half in the “threatened” condition, and the other half
in the control condition. In both conditions, women were asked to complete 50 difficult math problems while being imaged. Halfway through
the scan, the women in the threatened condition completed an implicit
task to activate the math-gender stereotype. The women then completed
50 additional difficult math problems. Women in the control condition
performed the same tasks, but were given a neutral implicit task followed
by the 50 difficult math problems. The neuroimaging results underwent a
state-item analysis to evaluate state (extended) and transient (brief) neural effects over the duration of the task. Analyses revealed that the stereotype threat effect was related to global state effects in the anterior
cingulate cortex and left inferior prefrontal cortex, regions that have been
implicated in working memory, inhibition, and complex processing.
Transient effects were observed in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, a
region commonly engaged during working memory and cognition depletion tasks.
C 57
FMRI AND ERP ANALYSIS OF HYPOTHESIS TESTING WHEN
SWITCHING
BETWEEN
INTRADIMENSIONAL
AND
EXTRADIMENSIONAL RULES Sarah Donohue1, Santani Teng2, Guido
Band3, S. A. Rombouts3, Eveline Crone3; 1Duke University, 2UC Davis,
3Leiden University — A crucial element when testing hypotheses about
rules for behavior is the use of performance feedback. Neuroimaging
studies have reported that medial prefrontal cortex (PFC) is important for
signaling the need for behavioral changes (Holroyd et al., 2005), but these
results are not conclusive (Nieuwenhuis et al., 2005). In this study, we
used fMRI and EEG in order to test the role of medial PFC in hypothesis
testing using a modified intra-dimensional/extra-dimensional rule shift
task. Eighteen adults were asked to infer rules about color or shape on the
basis of negative and positive feedback in sets of 2 trials. Half of the trials
involved color-to-color or shape-to-shape trials (intradimensional
switches) and the other half involved color-to-shape or shape-to-color trials (extradimensional switches). All participants performed the task in
two sessions: an fMRI and an EEG session. Extradimensional trials were
associated with reduced accuracy relative to intradimensional trials. Negative feedback resulted in increased activation in medial PFC and dorsolateral (DL)PFC, for both intradimensional and extradimensional rules.
Additionally, around 250 ms following negative performance feedback
participants showed a feedback-related negative scalp potential, which
was larger for extradimensional trials. These results show that medial
PFC and DL PFC have a monitoring function in hypothesis testing.
C 58
DISSOCIABLE MECHANISMS OF RESPONSE INHIBITION
REVEALED BY THE STOP-SIGNAL PARADIGM Matthew Hughes1,
Bill Budd1,2, Ross Fulham1,2, Johanna Badcock3,4, Patricia Michie1,2; 1University
of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, AUS, Neuroscience Institute of Schizophrenia and
Allied Disorders (NISAD), Sydney, NSW, AUS, 2James Fletcher Hospital,
Newcastle, NSW, AUS, 3University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, AUS,

103

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

Neuroscience Institute of Schizophrenia and Allied Disorders (NISAD), Sydney,
NSW, AUS, 4Graylands Hospital, Perth, WA, AUS — Response
inhibition
refers to the ability to suppress prepotent and on-going actions, and is
one function of the executive system. Neuroanatomical loci commonly
reported as having roles in response inhibition include middle (MFC)
and inferior (IFC) frontal corticies, pre-SMA, inferior parietal lobe (IPL),
ACC and premotor cortex (Aron et al., 2003; Aron and Poldrack, 2006;
Mostofsky et al., 2003; de Zubicaray et al., 2000). The stop-signal paradigm (SSP) is often used to investigate response inhibition as inhibition
difficulty is easily manipulated, and an estimate of the speed of response
inhibition processes (stop-signal reaction time, SSRT; Logan, 1994) is
afforded. Recent evidence using the SSP suggests that a network including right hemispheric IFC and subthalamic nucleus (STN) constitute a
hyper-direct pathway that is recruited when fast response inhibition is
necessary (Aron et al., 2006; Nambu et al., 2002). In the current study, we
used a stop-signal variant where each participant was given equal time to
inhibit responses over a range of stop-signal delays. This meant that participants with faster SSRTs should inhibit more often than participants
with slower SSRTs; SSRT predicted the probability of inhibition (R2 =
.86). Use of this variant enabled an analysis of areas generically recruited
for response inhibition (one-sample t-test of inhibition contrast images),
and areas recruited when inhibition is increasingly difficult (areas predicted by SSRT in inhibition contrast images). The network generically
recruited for response inhibition included right MFC and right IPL.
Faster inhibition required recruitment of the rIFC/insula - STN network.
C 59
THE ROLE OF EXPECTANCIES IN ERROR-DRIVEN LEARNING:
AN ERP STUDY Nicola K. Ferdinand, Anja Weiten, Axel Mecklinger,
Jutta Kray; Saarland University — Error-monitoring plays an important
role in knowledge acquisition, as it allows error detection and the adaptation of behavior to varying situational demands. We examined whether
the detection of committed and perceived errors (deviant events in the
otherwise repeating sequence) and their role for learning require an
intention to learn, or can occur without awareness. To do so we compared event-related potentials (ERPs) in a sequence-learning task under
explicit and implicit learning conditions. We obtained an error-related
negativity (ERN/Ne) to incorrect responses irrespective of learning condition. Deviant stimuli elicited a negativity (N2b) approximately 200ms
after stimulus onset in both learning conditions. Interestingly, this component was related to the gradual development of knowledge about the
sequence structure. In a model recently proposed by Holroyd and Coles
(2002) the ERN/Ne was related to a reduction of reinforcement learning
signals from the dopamine system in situations in which an event is
worse than expected. Our results suggest that the N2b might be generated by a similar mechanism in response to perceived errors. With growing knowledge about the sequence structure expectations about the next
stimulus occur and a deviant stimulus signals that the event is worse
than expected. By this the N2b serves as internal feedback signaling a
perceived error and plays an important role for error-induced learning.
To explore age-related changes of error-induced learning, we conducted
an additional study with healthy elderly subjects. Since the dopamine
system is impaired in the elderly this should be visible in reduced ERN/
Ne and N2b components.
C 60
THE
NEURAL
EFFECT
OF
OPERATION-RESPONSE
CONFIGURATION ON DUAL-TASK PERFORMANCE: AN EVENTRELATED FMRI STUDY Bo-Cheng Kuo, Yei-Yu Yeh, Keng-Chen Liang,
Jyh-Horng Chen; National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan — Previous
fMRI studies manipulated stimulus-response modality compatibility and
showed that the right inferior frontal sulcus (IFS) is involved in resolving
process interference in dual-task coordination. Yet, no study investigates
the neural mechanisms of the operation-response configuration in the
dual-task context. The present study aims to investigate the role of the
IFS in coordinating dual-task performance with different operation-

104

Higher Level Cognition: Executive Functions

response task configurations. Using an event-related fMRI, task configuration between operations (similar and dissimilar) and responses (compatible and incompatible) were manipulated in a dual arithmetic
calculation paradigm. On each trial, the first numeric pair was the base
for arithmetic calculation on the following pair of digits. When operations were similar or responses were compatible, a task set could be configured using one task rule. When operations were dissimilar or
responses were incompatible, no task set could be configured as the task
representation differed between the two tasks. Our previous results
showed that the IFS activation was enhanced when reconfiguration was
required between operation and response processes. When no reconfiguration was required, activation in the middle frontal gyrus and superior
parietal lobule increased.
C 61
THE IMPACT OF GENOTYPES IN THE DOPAMINERGIC SYSTEM
ON
EXECUTIVE
FUNCTIONS
–
BEHAVIORAL
AND
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE Ulrike M. Krämer1, Antoni
Rodriguez-Fornells2,3, Estela Càmara1, Toni Cunillera3, Josep MarcoPallarés1, David Cucurell3, Anna Mestres-Missé3, Wido Nager4, Jürn
Möller1, Rebecca Schüle-Freyer5, Ludger Schöls5, Thomas F. Münte1; 1Institut
für Psychologie II, Universität Magdeburg, 2Institució Catalana de Recerca i
Estudis Avançats (ICREA), 3Universitat de Barcelona, 4Medizinische
Hochschule Hannover, 5Hertie-Institut für Klinische Hirnforschung,
Universität Tübingen — Executive functions enable humans to dynamically adapt their behavior to an ever changing and demanding environment. However, the executive system underlies considerable
interindividual variation. Several lines of research suggest that the
dopaminergic system is of special importance for the regulation of executive control. As the function of the dopaminergic system is partly determined by certain genetic polymorphisms, the question arises to which
degree interindividual differences in executive processes can be
explained by genetic variance. We therefore screened a sample of 658
subjects for polymorphisms of four dopaminergic genes (DRD4, DAT,
COMT, MAO-A). The participants additionally underwent a neuropsychological test battery measuring working memory processes, attentional, control and inhibition aspects of executive functions. We found
significant differences in behavioral markers (“endophenotypes”)
between the groups, clarifying the relation of functions in the executive
system and the different dopaminergic polymorphisms. Smaller subgroups were formed on the basis of the presence of specific alleles
(COMT Val108Met and DRD4 SNP 521). These subjects took part in event
related potential experiments assessing self-monitoring of behavior (error
detection and correction) observed with the error-related negativity and
the lateralized readiness potential, the ability to inhibit an initiated motor
action by studying the N2-stop component of the ERP in a stop-signal
task as well as the dynamics of attentional allocation in an orienting task
using novel auditory stimuli. Again, an influence of genetic factors was
found for specific ERP components suggesting a specific modulating
effect of these polymorphisms on distinct functions of the executive system.
C 62
POST-ERROR PERFORMANCE ADAPTATION: AN EVENTRELATED FMRI DESIGN COMPARING ERROR-RELATED NEURAL
ACTIVITY FOR ADAPTIVE AND MALADAPTIVE COGNITIVE
CONTROL. Robert Hester1, Natalie Barre1, Jason B. Mattingley1, John J.
Foxe2, Hugh Garavan3; 1University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia,
2Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, New York,
USA, 3Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Trinity College, Dublin,
Ireland — The magnitude of anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) activity has
been shown to relate to adaptive post-error changes in response behaviour, ostensibly improvement in response speed that suggest heightened
cognitive control, or generalised slowing of responding that appears to
reflect more cautious post-error behaviour. These studies have focused
on immediate changes in response behaviour, typically the trial immedi-

Higher Level Cognition: Executive Functions

ately following an error. Here, we examine the neural mechanisms
underlying sustained adaptive changes in task performance that avoided
repetition of errors. We administered a Go/No-go response inhibition
task during fMRI data collection. In the ‘adapt’ condition, participants
learned that no-go inhibition performance influenced the trial sequence,
whereby commission errors were followed 1-7 trials later by another Nogo trial, but correct inhibition ensured the next no-go was not for 10-15
trials. A second control condition had a similar distribution of go and nogo trials, but which did not vary as a function of performance. Behavioural data (n=15) indicated significantly higher levels of post-error slowing and response inhibition during the adapt condition, as-well-as fewer
consecutive commission errors. Preliminary fMRI analyses suggested
error-related ACC activity predicted increases in cognitive control, with
higher levels of activity seen during errors that preceded elevated posterror slowing and successful inhibition on the next no-go trial. These data
suggest that error-related ACC activity may influence sustained adaptive
changes in behaviour. Our continuing analysis investigates how the magnitude of error-related activity in regions such as the ACC relates to posterror implementation of cognitive control, via cortical regions such as the
prefrontal cortex.
C 63
THE EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY OF ANTERIOR CINGULATE
CORTEX DURING CONFLICT Jin Fan1, Patrick1, Kevin Guise1, John
Fossella1, Michael Posner2; 1Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 2University of
Oregon — Although the functional activation of the anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC) related to conflict resolution has been studied extensively,
the effective connectivity of the ACC with other brain regions during
conditions of conflict is still unclear. In this study, we examined the
physiological response of brain regions in terms of an interaction
between the cognitive process of conflict resolution and activity in the
ACC. Participants performed the attentional network test (ANT) while
they were scanned using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
Conflict resolution was tested using flanker interference with target
response. We found effective connectivity of caudal ACC with other subdivisions of ACC (e.g., area 24d) and other brain regions, such as left
superior frontal gyrus, right middle frontal gyrus, bilateral precentral
gyrus, left postcentral gyrus, right cuneus, and caudate nucleus above
and beyond the main effect of conflict and ACC baseline activity. These
findings suggest that conflict resolution significantly modulates the effective contribution of caudal ACC to the neuronal activity of other subdivisions of the cingulate cortex, as well as other cortical regions such as
lateral prefrontal, primary and supplementary motor areas.
C 64
NEURAL IMPLEMENTATION OF BEHAVIORAL ADJUSTMENTS
Joseph King, Markus Ulsperger, D. Yves von Cramon; Max Planck Institute
for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences — Effective adaptation of behavior to ever-changing environmental demands is dependent on fine-tuning of perceptual processes to goal-relevant aspects while attention to less
relevant features is suppressed. Current theory of how the human brain
achieves this end proposes that the posterior medial frontal cortex
(pMFC) is not only intrinsically involved in monitoring performance by
means of detecting response conflicts, errors and unfavorable/unexpected action outcomes, but moreover, in light of such circumstances, in
signaling the lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) to exert top-down attentional bias on relevant posterior sensory inputs. By employing a speeded
Simon task comprised of face targets in this fMRI study, we investigated
the implementation of post-performance monitoring behavioral adjustments in the fusiform face area (FFA) of healthy individuals as defined by
a localizer task. Main expectations were twofold: (1) conflict adaptation
and post-error slowing would be associated with phasic FFA activation
(2) blockwise stimulus-response compatibility frequency manipulations
would be associated with tonic modulation of FFA activity. Whole brain
contrasts of pre-response conflict level and response accuracy revealing
partially overlapping context dependent activation patterns in the pMFC

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

were confirmed by region-of-interest (ROI) signal change analyses. Further analyses found FFA activation patterns associated with component
performance monitoring and cognitive control mechanisms to be dependent on experimental block context. The current study extends recent
findings of pMFC involvement in a performance monitoring network
engaging brain sensory processing centers in the subservence of action
outcome optimization. However, electrophysiological data is needed to
fully answer the question of how behavioral adjustments are neurally
implemented.
C 65
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
ACTIVITY
IN
THE
HUMAN
NUCLEUS
ACCUMBENS
DURING
REWARD-GUIDED
LEARNING Michael Cohen1, Nikolai Axmacher2, Roshan Cools3, Doris
Lenartz4, Christian Elger2, Volker Sturm4, Thomas Schlaepfer2; 1UC Davis,
2University of Bonn, Germany, 3University of Cambridge, 4University of
Cologne, Germany — The nucleus accumbens acts as a “gateway” between
motivation and action: It receives inputs from limbic structures involved
in emotion (i.e., amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex) and projects to structures involved in action selection and behavioral control (i.e., basal ganglia output structures). Studying the human nucleus accumbens is
difficult because of limitations in spatial and temporal resolution of neuroimaging techniques such as PET and fMRI. To overcome these limitations, we recorded local field potentials from the nucleus accumbens of
patients undergoing Deep Brain Stimulation for treatment of major
depression. Electrodes were implanted into the nucleus accumbens, and
before stimulation began, externalized leads were used to record electrical potentials. We recorded these potentials while patients engaged in a
reward-based reversal learning task, in which patients could maximize
their rewards by learning to adapt their behavior to changes in reinforcement contingencies. Behaviorally, patients quickly adapted their decision-making to maximize rewards, demonstrating that reinforcement
learning circuits remained intact. ERPs from around 300-400 ms following feedback differentiated wins from losses, and predicted whether
patients would choose the same or the opposite decision option on the
following trial as on the current trial. Frequency decomposition revealed
enhanced power in the gamma frequency band from 100 – 400 ms following feedback onset, and increased alpha band activity following wins
compared to losses. The spatial and temporal resolution of these electrophysiological recordings provide novel insights into the function of the
nucleus accumbens’ role in using reinforcement information to guide
behavior.
C 66
PERCEPTUAL SIMILARITY OF GAIN AND LOSS STIMULI
AFFECTS THE FEEDBACK-RELATED NEGATIVITY Yanni
Liu,
William Gehring; Univeristy of Michigan — A medial-frontal negativity
(MFN) is elicited by error- and loss-related feedback in simple gambling
and decision tasks. Investigators have assumed the perceptual properties
of the feedback stimuli are unimportant in determining these feedback
effects. In the present study we tested this assumption. We recorded ERP
data from 12 subjects who chose one of four doors displayed on the computer and received letter feedback indicating a monetary gain or loss. The
perceptual similarity of feedback was manipulated: in four blocks (a.k.a.
SIM blocks), E(/F) and F(/E) denoted gain and loss respectively; in the
other four (a.k.a. DIS blocks), S(/T) and T(/S) denoted gain and loss. Letter feedback was presented as classical flanker stimuli: half were congruent, in which five letters were identical (e.g., EEEEE); the other half were
incongruent, in which the center letter was different from peripheral ones
(e.g., TTSTT). Rewarding information was only conveyed by the center
letter. Loss feedback elicited a larger MFN than gain feedback. However,
the interaction between block (SIM/DIS) and reward (gain/loss) was significant, revealing a larger MFN effect in DIS compared to SIM blocks,
which indicated that the perceptual similarity of gain and loss feedback
contributes to the MFN effect. We also found a significant interaction
between congruency and reward: when the feedback was a gain rather

105

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

than a loss, the incongruent feedback elicited a larger negativity than did
congruent feedback. The results suggest that theories assuming that the
feedback-related MFN is driven only by the reward properties of the
feedback must be modified.
C 67
STRIATO-HIPPOCAMPAL INVOLVEMENT IN COGNITIVE SET
SHIFTING Steven Graham; National University of Singapore — Using
event-related fMRI, this study explored the interaction of caudate and
hippocampal regions during performance of a cognitive set shifting task.
Activation differences were interrogated at each time-point of the BOLD
signal in an event-related fMRI experiment. Different temporal profiles of
activation were seen in multiple brain regions including prefrontal cortex
(PFC), parietal lobes, basal ganglia, thalamus and hippocampi. In particular, quite different activation profiles were observed in the caudate nuclei
and hippocampi. Whereas caudate nuclei were involved in the early
parts of cognitive set shifting (learning of the new cognitive set), the hippocampus was seen to deactivate during early stages of set shifting. Caudate activation may reflect the need to rapidly form a response strategy
under time-pressure. In contrast, hippocampal deactivation may reflect
inhibition of recently formed pre-potent stimulus-response associations
which following rule change would no longer be appropriate. Reciprocal
striato-hippocampal relationships have been noted elsewhere and the
interaction of complementary learning systems that may underlie cognitive set-shifting performance is discussed.
C 68
ERROR-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIALS TO PERCEIVED AND
UNPERCEIVED ERRORS IN A PERCEPTUAL DECISION MAKING
TASK. Tanja Endrass, Katja Schwitzkowski, Christian Kaufmann, Norbert
Kathmann; Humboldt-University Berlin, Germany — Studies on error processing identified two event-related brain potential (ERP) components
associated with the execution of incorrect actions, the error related negativity (ERN or Ne) and the error positivity (Pe). Previous studies compared aware and unaware antisaccade errors: Error awareness did not
affect the ERN amplitude, but larger Pe amplitudes were reported for
aware than for unaware errors. The primary goal of the present experiment was to extend the findings from oculomotor system reactions to
manual motor system reactions. Therefore, we designed a visual discrimination task with three difficulty levels to examine effects of decision
uncertainty. In addition, participants were asked to indicate whether
their response was correct or incorrect. This allowed us to compare aware
and unaware correct and incorrect reactions. After incorrect reactions the
ERN was reduced in our study with higher task difficulty. Interestingly,
whereas the ERN did not vary with error awareness, a significantly
reduced Pe amplitude was obtained for unaware compared with aware
errors. Results for correct reactions indicated a substantial correct-related
negativity (CRN) that did neither differ with task difficulty nor with
awareness. The present results provide further support to the view that
the ERN emerges independently from subjective error awareness, as an
ERN was observed even though participants thought their manual
response was correct. In contrast, the Pe was strongly associated with
subjective error perception. Regarding the CRN and ERN amplitudes, we
found only the latter to be sensitive to trial-to-trial variation of task difficulty.
C 69
FMRI INVESTIGATIONS OF TASK PREPARATION PROCESSES
IN THE FACE OF CONFLICT: SELECTION VS. INTERFERENCE
CONTROL Franziska M. Korb, Marcel Brass, D. Yves von Cramon; Max Planck
Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — Adaptive
behaviour requires the efficient filtering of goal-relevant from goal-irrelevant environmental information. During task preparation, the brain must
select which aspects of the environment signalling diverse behavioural
options will lead to desired action outcomes. Few neurophysiological
studies of task preparation processes have accounted for how ambiguity
inherent in natural situations influences the selection of task-relevant fea-

106

Higher Level Cognition: Executive Functions

tures. The current fMRI study explored the Stroop-like effect of dominant
albeit irrelevant features of a cue indicating an upcoming task by employing a task switching paradigm in which cue congruency was manipulated. Two dimensional cues were comprised of dominantly and
subordinately represented features. While the latter were relevant for
task goals, the former included verbal information that was related either
to the task at hand (congruent condition), to the other possible task
(incongruent condition), or to neither of the two possible tasks (neutral
condition). Thus, the design enabled us to reveal brain regions involved
in the selection of task-relevant information by contrasting activation patterns elicited from the incongruent and congruent conditions. As hypothesized, greater activity in the posterior inferior frontal sulcus (pIFS) and
the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) under the incongruent condition reflected
the behavioral interference effect incited by the equivocal cue. However,
brain regions independently involved in the selection of task-relevant cue
information from that of the inhibition of interfering task-irrelevant cue
information were not clearly dissociated. To address this question, a follow-up experiment designed to disentangle these processes was
employed.
C 70
DECISION UNDER RISK AND AMBIGUITY – BEHAVIOR AND
NEURAL CORRELATES Ifat Levy1, Jason Snell1, Aldo Rustichini2, Paul
W. Glimcher1; 1New York University, 2University of Minnesota — For most
people a sure bet of a $100 is preferable to a 50% chance of winning $120,
which is in turn preferable to an ambiguous chance of winning $500, even
though the average chance of winning remains 50% across many ambiguous trials. These preferences are the result of risk and ambiguity aversion
respectively. Both have been extensively studied, but it is not known
whether each stems from a unique process or whether they are two manifestations of a single process. Investigating brain regions that are
involved in their processing may help answering this question. We characterized decision under risk and ambiguity behaviorally and examined
their neural basis using fMRI. In each trial of the ambiguity experiment
subjects chose between a constant non-ambiguous choice (50% chance of
winning $5) and an ambiguous choice, which varied in both ambiguity
and reward levels. Both choices were represented by urns containing colored chips. Ambiguity level was manipulated by occluding portions of
the urn (25%, 50%, 75%). Reward levels were indicated by a number next
to the urn. Six trials were randomly selected at the end and the choices
made by the subject in these trials were played for real money. To make
subjects indifferent between the ambiguous and non-ambiguous choices,
the 25% ambiguity payoff had to be 90% higher than the non-ambiguous
payoff. For 50% and 75% ambiguity this payoff had to be 450% and 800%
higher respectively. fMRI results implicate a network of frontal and parietal areas in the processing of ambiguity.
C 71
MECHANISMS OF ACTION SELECTION AND INHIBITION IN
THE BASAL GANGLIA: CONVERGING COMPUTATIONAL AND
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE Michael Frank1, Johan Samanta2, Ahmed
Moustafa1, Adam
Aron3, Scott
Sherman1; 1University of Arizona,
2Muhammad Ali Parkinson Research Center, Barrow Neurological Institute,
3
University of California at San Diego — The basal ganglia (BG) interact
with frontal cortex to facilitate adaptive actions while suppressing competing actions. Neural network simulations have been particularly useful
for investigating the interactive dynamics of this system, and have led to
novel testable predictions. Here we focus on the role of the subthalamic
nucleus (STN) within the overall BG system in action selection. Our
model suggests that the STN provides a "Hold your Horses" signal that
prevents premature responding during difficult decisions. This STN signal is dynamically modulated by the degree of frontal cortical decision
conflict, providing an adaptive mechanism for modulating decision
thresholds. We tested model predictions in Parkinson's patients on and
off STN deep brain stimulation. As predicted, patients on DBS failed to
modulate their reaction times by the degree of decision conflict. This

Higher Level Cognition: Executive Functions

same effect was seen across multiple measures. We also extended the
model to include inferior frontal cortex, and showed how the same functional circuitry can be recruited for outright response inhibition in the
context of a stop-signal task, in a manner consistent with more abstract
mathematical horse race models. Finally, neuroimaging data corroborates model predictions regarding the roles of the STN and frontal areas
in both conflict-induced slowing and response inhibition.
C 72
THE ROLE OF PREFRONTAL INHIBITORY ATTENTIONAL
CONTROL DURING SEMANTIC AMBIGUITY RESOLUTION: ERP
EVIDENCE FROM A NOVEL RESPONSE-FREE PARADIGM Klaus
Hoenig, Susanne Hellwig-Brida, Markus
Kiefer; University of Ulm,
Germany — Semantic ambiguity is pervasive in natural languages and
constitutes an omnipresent challenge to the human brain. A central
mechanism in ambiguity resolution is the inhibition of contextually inappropriate homonym meanings. To date, the neurocognitive correlates of
this mechanism have remained largely unexplored. The available behavioral evidence is largely indirect, i.e. inhibitory control is frequently
inferred from the amount of processing interference to subsequent target
words. The current ERP study is a novel experimental approach that
allows for relating behavioral target interference from residual activation
of an irrelevant homonym meaning to differences in brain activation pertaining to disambiguation of a prior homonymy without requiring any
response to the homonym. Our task asked healthy subjects (N = 32) to
decide whether a target noun (GARDEN or ACE) fits the semantic field
spanned by two preceding nouns (BUCKET-SHOVEL), with the second
one being ambiguous in half the trials (SPADE). Semantic verifications to
ambiguous trials were significantly slower and less accurate compared to
unambiguous ones reflecting response costs due to interference from the
irrelevant meaning of the preceding homonym. Analysis of the ERP timecourses to the second word (ambiguous vs. unambiguous) revealed a
substantial difference between high- and low-interference subjects, with
the latter exhibiting a much more pronounced positivity to ambiguous
trials at left prefrontal electrode sites starting at 300 ms following word
onset. These findings suggest that the increased prefrontal activity for
low-interference subjects reflects effective inhibitory attentional control
over contextually inappropriate homonym meanings in service of the disambiguation of lexico-semantic ambiguity.
C 73
EFFECTS OF CONFLICT AND GRAMMATICAL CLASS ON LIFG
ACTIVATION DURING ACTION AND OBJECT NAMING Hannah
Snyder1, Benjamin Greené2, Sharon
Thompson-Schill2; 1University of
Colorado, 2University of Pennsylvania — A current debate in cognitive neuroscience concerns domain-general versus domain-specific processing in
prefrontal cortex. One domain-specific hypothesis has posited a role for
the left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) in action naming. Previous research
has suggested that patients with prefrontal damage are selectively
impaired in verb, as compared to noun, picture naming (e.g. Tranel,
Damasio & Damasio, 2001). Likewise, imaging studies have reported
greater prefrontal activation for processing verbs than nouns (e.g. Etard
et al., 2000). However, others have failed to find a prefrontal specialization for verbs (e.g. Hillis, Tuffiash, Wityk & Barker, 2002). An alternative
account that reconciles these divergent findings is that LIFG plays a
domain-general role in cognitive control. Critically, studies that found a
verb advantage in prefrontal cortex used stimuli for action and object
naming which differed in response conflict. While action pictures often
depict agents and objects, object pictures generally included only single
objects. In the current study, participants underwent event-related fMRI
while naming high- and low-conflict pictures as nouns and verbs. We
show that controlling for cognitive control demands in picture naming
stimuli eliminates the putative verb advantage in prefrontal cortex. Our
results indicate that LIFG does not respond more to action naming compared to object naming, but instead to the level of conflict within stimuli.
The findings of this study support the hypothesis that LIFG functions in

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

multiple domains to resolve competition between conflicting representations of a stimulus.
C 74
DUAL-TASK-RELATED MODULATION OF ACTIVITY IN
POSTERIOR TASK-RELEVANT BRAIN REGIONS Christine Stelzel1,
Stefanie Kehrer1,2, Stephan A. Brandt2; Torsten Schubert1; 1HumboldtUniversity Berlin, 2Charité Berlin — Previous dual-task neuroimaging
studies indicate a crucial role the lateral Prefrontal Cortex in the simultaneous processing of two tasks. However, little is known about how neural activity in posterior task-relevant regions is regulated during
interference processing in dual tasks. We hypothesised that activity in
regions relevant for Task 1 processing depends (a) on the task relevance
of a second stimulus, i.e. the need to perform an action on that stimulus,
and (b) on the degree of temporal overlap between the stimuli of two
tasks. To investigate this, we manipulated both factors in a mixed
blocked and event-related fMRI study. In each trial, participants performed a manual choice reaction on male and female faces as Task 1. In
half of the blocks, participants were instructed to ignore a second visual
number stimulus (ignore-S2) presented at different stimulus onset asynchronies (SOA). In the other blocks, participants performed a manual
choice reaction task on the number stimuli as well (respond-S2). Task-relevant regions for face processing were determined with independent
localizer tasks. The behavioral results indicated RT2-slowing with
decreasing SOA - the effect of the Psychological Refractory Period. RT1
remained fairly constant across SOA but was significantly slowed in the
respond-S2 condition compared to the ignore-S2 condition. FMRI data:
Activity in the Fusiform Face Area was modulated by the SOA. Importantly, this SOA-effect depended on S2 relevance with stronger activity
changes for respond-S2 compared to ignore-S2 trials. This suggests that
modulation of posterior brain regions serves the protection of sensory
processes from dual-task interference.
C 75
EFFECTS OF EMOTIONAL DISTRACTION ON MAINTENANCE
OF RULE INFORMATION Sarah Hart1, Aysenil Belger1,2; 1University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2Duke-UNC Brain Imaging and Analysis
Center — Distracting emotional information has been found to divert
attentional resources away from active maintenance processes during
working memory tasks. However, the effects of emotional distraction on
maintenance of abstract rule information have remained unexplored.
The current study aimed to assess the effects of emotional distraction on
prefrontal activation patterns during active rule maintenance with fMRI.
We presented 15 healthy participants with either a blue or yellow colored
cue, which indicated the specific rule to be followed for that trial. Following a delay period, participants were presented with circles and triangles,
to which they responded according to the currently relevant rule. During
the delay period when the rules were being actively maintained, taskirrelevant emotional and neutral pictures were presented. The results
indicated that emotional distraction led to relatively greater activation in
the amygdala, orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, and ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex (vlPFC). Neutral distraction led to relatively greater
activation in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) and posterior
parietal cortex. Activation in the dlPFC indicated sustained delay-period
activation during neutral distraction, but it was reduced to below baseline levels during emotional distraction. In contrast, although clusters of
emotion-related activation were found in the vlPFC, the majority of
vlPFC activation showed sustained activation across the delay regardless
of distracter type. The results suggest that emotional interference may
disrupt executive processing in the dlPFC during rule maintenance. The
vlPFC, in contrast, may generally support active maintenance of rules in
the face of distraction, with some areas specifically supporting resistance
from emotional interference.

107

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

C 76
PREDICTION OF INTELLIGENCE FROM BRAIN STRUCTURE
AND FUNCTION Jeremy Gray1, Yu Yong Choi2, Noah Shamosh1, Colin
DeYoung1, Sunhee Cho2, Kyungjin Kim2, Kun Ho Lee2; 1Yale University,
2Seoul National University — How well can individual differences in complex psychological functions be predicted from the structure and function
of the human brain, as assessed with magnetic resonance (MR) images?
Intelligence provides an interesting test case because suggestive correlations are well-established—notably, of intelligence with brain volume,
regional structure, and activity within circumscribed regions. To our
knowledge, the prediction of intelligence from multiple MR-based measures simultaneously has not been attempted. More importantly, to avoid
conceptual circularity, a prediction model must be tested in a sample that
is statistically independent of the sample used to specify the model. We
identified regions in which gray matter thickness was correlated with IQ
(WAIS full scale; n = 120 healthy Koreans, age 18-27), and regions in
which activation during a reasoning task was correlated with IQ (n = 61).
In an independent group of subjects (n=48), IQ was predictable to an
impressive degree (r = .69 with no free parameters; R = .72 with six free
parameters) using a combination of brain volume, gray matter thickness,
and activation in the identified regions. This relation was significantly
stronger than prediction from brain volume alone (r = .35), and not significantly weaker than the correlation of IQ with performance on one of the
best single-measure tests of intelligence, Raven's Advanced Progressive
Matrices (r = .75). This proof-of-concept demonstration may help guide
neurobiological theories of intelligence and the development of neurometric measures of complex psychological functions.
C 77
THE CHOICE IS YOURS! CONTEXT-DEPENDENT VOLUNTARY
TASK SET SELECTION REVEALED BY FMRI Birte U. Forstmann1,
Uta Wolfensteller2, Jan Derrfuss3, Jane Neumann2, Marcel Brass2, K. Richard
Ridderinkhof1; 1Acacia, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands, 2Max
Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany,
3
Institute of Medicine, Juelich, Germany — The prefrontal cortex is thought
to play an important role especially for our ability to voluntarily select
among a set of alternatives in choice. Most importantly, is has been
shown that the frontomedian cortex (FMC) plays a crucial role for the
voluntary selection between movements, response sets, or task sets.
However, in most studies the participants are explicitly asked by the
experimenter to select among different alternatives. The present experiment was set out to investigate the role of the FMC when participants
themselves decided or were explicitly instructed by the experimenter to
choose or not to choose among different task sets. The fMRI results
revealed an activation in the rostral part of the FMC when participants
themselves decided to choose and when they were instructed by the
experimenter not to choose. This result indicates that it does not only
matter whether we have any options to choose from but also who is making the choice.
C 78
INVOLVEMENT OF THE BASAL GANGLIA IN ACTION
CONTROL: A STUDY WITH DEEP BRAIN STIMULATION OF THE
BASAL GANGLIA Torsten
Schubert1, Franziska Plessow1, Jens
2
2
1
Volkmann , Guenter Deuschl ; Humboldt-University, Berlin, Germany,
2
Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Germany — Recent monkey studies
suggest a role of the basal ganglia (BG) for the inhibition of motor actions.
However, unequivocal evidence supporting this assumption in humans
is still missing. The aim of the present study was to investigate the
involvement of the BG in different types of inhibitory mechanisms by
applying deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the nucleus subthalamicus in
patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD). Based on psychological models,
we distinguished between non-selective and selective inhibitory mechanisms. While non-selective inhibition is assumed to lead to a complete
interruption of all actually ongoing motor activity, selective inhibition
enables the fast activation of a specific overt motor response at the cost of

108

Higher Level Cognition: Executive Functions

inhibiting other alternatives. The first was required in a stopping paradigm, where PDs had to interrupt an action on the presentation of a stopping signal in stop-trials and to perform the action in go-trials. The
second was required in a Simon-interference task involving congruent
and incongruent conditions. DBS ON led to an increased congruency
effect in the Simon-task, which, moreover, disappeared in the DBS OFF
condition. In the stopping paradigm, DBS ON resulted in impaired stopping performance due to faster go reactions and due to increased stopping time compared to the DBS OFF condition. Together, the findings
suggest that the BG manipulation due to DBS led to an improved activation and execution of ongoing motor actions. This supports views assuming an involvement of the BG in selective inhibition and disconfirms
theories assuming an involvement of the BG in non-selective inhibition.
C 79
SPATIOTEMPORAL
DYNAMICS
UNDERLYING
THE
INTEGRATION OF PRIOR PROBABILITY INFORMATION IN
DECISION MAKING Christina
Scheibe1,2,3,
Markus Ullsperger4,5,
Werner Sommer3, Hauke Heekeren1,2,5; 1Charité University Hospital, Berlin,
Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany,
3Humboldt-University of Berlin, Institute for Psychology, Germany, 4Max
Planck Institute for Neurological Research, Cologne, Germany, 5Max Planck
Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — The
integration of prior probability of an event into the process of decision
making is essential for an efficient navigation through the external world
and the dynamic adjustment of behavior. In a previous EEG study we
found that the Contingent Negative Variation (CNV) was modulated
parametrically by prior probability suggesting an integration of prior
probability at a central processing stage. To investigate the spatiotemporal dynamics of the integration of prior probability, we collected simultaneous EEG and fMRI data. Subjects performed a number comparison task
with a precue providing probability information about the side of the
higher number which is the response side. We replicated the parametric
modulation of the CNV by prior probability in the noisy scanner environment. A conventional fMRI analysis revealed a network of prefrontal and
parietal areas being associated with the parametric modulation of prior
probability. Using an EEG-informed fMRI analysis, we related the CNV
amplitude and BOLD correlates at a single-trial level. With this approach
it is possible to combine the exploration of the temporal characteristics of
the integration of prior probability in the decision process with the investigation of the underlying brain structures.
C 80
FUNCTIONAL BRAIN CORRELATES OF RESPONSE TIME
VARIABILITY IN CHILDREN. Sunaina Fotedar1, Daniel Simmonds1, Stacy
Suskauer1,2, James Pekar1,2, Martha Denckla1,2, Stewart Mostofsky1,2; 1Kennedy
Krieger Institute, 2Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — Intra- individual response time (RT) variability has been shown to correlate with commission errors in Go/Nogo tasks. This study examined the correlation
between RT variability and Go/Nogo fMRI activation in children, to
determine regions important for efficient Go/Nogo task performance.
Thirty healthy children, ages 8-12 years, completed a Go/No-go task
with minimal cognitive demands. Stimuli were presented rapidly with a
Go:Nogo ratio of 3:1. RT variability was measured as: (standard deviation of RT)/(mean RT). Behaviorally, RT variability correlated with commission error rate (r=.46,p=.006). Individual voxel-wise contrast maps
were created for Go and No-go conditions. FMRI correlational analyses
revealed that lower RT variability was associated with Go-activation in
the anterior cerebellum (culmen) and with Nogo-activation in left supplementary motor area (SMA; BA6), right precentral gyrus (BA3/4) and left
culmen. Higher RT variability was associated with Go and Nogo activation in the right middle frontal gyrus (BA9/10) and the caudate. These
results reveal that for both Go and Nogo activation, lower RT variability
was associated with activation in premotor circuits, while higher RT variability was associated with prefrontal circuits. The findings suggest that
efficient Go/Nogo task performance relies upon automatic premotor cir-

Higher Level Cognition: Numerical Processing

cuits important for motor response selection (including selecting not to
respond); less efficient performers who cannot effectively utilize these
regions must alternatively rely on less automatic prefrontal circuits
involved in higher-order cognitive control.

Higher Level Cognition: Numerical
Processing
C 81
PROCESSING OF NON-SYMBOLIC NUMERICAL MAGNITUDES
AS INDEXED BY ERPS David Paulsen, Helen Neville; University of
Oregon — Priming effects have been documented using a variety of stimulus types, for example lexical semantic, pictorial, phonological, face, and
arithmetic stimuli. The present event-related potential (ERP) experiments were designed to test the hypothesis that non-symbolic numerical
stimuli generate negative ERP priming effects similar to those found
using other stimulus types. Experiment 1 identified ERP responses to the
target stimuli in pairs of dot stimuli comparing the same, a close, or a distant number of dots. Targets containing a different number of dots from
the prime elicited greater negativity than targets containing the same
number of dots as the prime. This effect was greater for targets that were
preceded by primes with a close than with a distant number of dots.
Experiment 2 was conducted to replicate the findings of Experiment 1
and furthermore ascertain that the effects found in Experiment 1 were
indices of numerical processing rather than differential task demands
across conditions. Using dot stimuli with colored backgrounds, ERPs
were recorded while participants performed either color or number discrimination tasks with the same stimuli. The ERP priming effects for the
number condition replicated the findings of Experiment 1. These effects
were clearly different from the ERP priming effects for the color condition, which showed positive priming effects. These results indicated that
the numerosity effects observed in Experiments 1 and 2 are not due to
differential task demands across conditions. In addition, number condition ERP priming effects are modulated by the accuracy of performance
in the task.
C 82
MENTAL LINES IN HEBREW SPEAKING HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS
AND NEGLECT PATIENTS Sharon Naparstek, Iftah Biran; Hadassah
Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel — Background: Numbers and other ordinal stimuli can be mentally represented through ordinal lines receiving spatial representation. These lines extend from left to
right. Spatial biases resulting from these representations were shown in
healthy subjects as well as in patients suffering from neglect. Most
research in this field was done with Latin languages speaking subjects,
ignoring the possible effect of language direction. Objective: To investigate the existence and nature of mental number and Hebrew alphabet
lines in Hebrew speaking subjects, a language extending from right to
left, in both healthy individuals and neglect patients. Method: Ten
healthy control subjects and two patients suffering from spatial neglect
participated in a stimuli comparison task, having to judge whether a presented stimuli (number or Hebrew letter) is larger or smaller than a reference one. The experiment was built using a graphic system for
experimental design and control (PsyScope). The response was obtained
by key presses, using reversed key assignments. Error rate and reaction
time were calculated for each stimulus. Results: In both numbers and
Hebrew letters, error rates were larger and reaction time slower, when
larger stimuli were assigned to a left key. This was true for both patients
and controls. Conclusion: These results imply the existence of both number and Hebrew alphabet mental lines extending from left to right and
suggest the existence of such a universal ordinal mental line. The results
also suggest that the abilities required in comparison tasks lay outside the
neglect-affected area of the brain.

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

C 83
SEMANTICALLY ELICITED SYNAESTHESIA: A NUMEROSITY
STROOP TASK Ilaria Berteletti1, Edward M. Hubbard2, Marco Zorzi1;
1University of Padova, Italy, 2INSERM Unit 562, Orsay, France — This
study contributes to the debate on synaesthesia whether the elicited
colour (photism) arises at the perceptual or semantic level. NM, a colour
synaesthete for single digits and letters, was tested with a numerosity
Stroop task. A personalized task was designed where dot patterns –
either canonical or non-canonical – were coloured either congruently or
incongruently with the photism of the corresponding digit. The task was
to name the colour of the dots as quickly and accurately as possible. Two
baseline control tasks were also administered: one assessed the automaticity of the numerical information (dot enumeration task) and the other
assessed colour naming reaction times. It was predicted that if the locus
of the phenomenon were at a perceptual level, only canonical patterns
(over-learned configurations) would generate Stroop interference. However, if the colour were elicited at a semantic level, interference would
also be expected for non-canonical configurations. The pattern of NM’s
results showed interference for both kinds of stimuli, although the effect
was significantly stronger for (canonical) dice patterns. This interference
suggests that numerosity is accessed automatically since NM’s photisms
are consciously elicited by digits but not by dot patterns. Moreover, enumerating the dice pattern resulted in shorter reaction times and a flat performance curve compared to the non-canonical patterns, consistent with
earlier findings concerning the automatic activation of numerical information from dice configurations. In conclusion, this data suggests that, at
least for NM, synaesthesia for numbers is evoked at a conceptual level.
C 84
ARE SINGLE-DIGIT NUMBERS ALWAYS REPRESENTED ON THE
MENTAL NUMBER LINE? Liat Goldfarb, Avishai Henik; Ben Gurion
University of the Negev — When participants decide if a right or a left digit
is numerically larger, response time increases as the numerical distance
between the digits decreases (e.g., Moyer & Landauer, 1967). It is argued
that this distance effect supports the existence of a mental number line
that reflects the representations of numbers. The current study examines
the role of spatial aspects of tasks in the emergence of a distance effect.
When task instructions were changed from indicating the side of the
larger digit (i.e., spatial task) to naming the larger digit (i.e., a non-spatial
task) (Experiments 1-2) or to deciding if two digits were the same (Experiments 3-4), no distance effect was found. These results show that: (a) The
conversion of single-digit numbers to a mental number line is not mandatory, but depends on task demands.(b) It appears that previous reports of
a distance effect for single-digit numbers with non-spatial tasks were due
to the inclusion of specific digits or the comparisons of specific distances.
C 85
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
MARKERS
OF
NUMBER
PROCESSING IN 7-MONTH-OLD INFANTS Melissa Libertus, Laura
Pruitt, Marty Woldorff, Elizabeth Brannon; Duke University — This study
examines the electrophysiological processes underlying numerical discrimination in 7-month-old infants. EEG was recorded continuously from
a 19-channel electrocap while infants were familiarized to one numerosity (8 or 16), and then tested with novel exemplars of the familiar and a
novel numerosity (8 and 16). ERPs were extracted by time-locking the
EEG to the onset of stimulus presentation and selectively averaging for
the first and second half of familiarization, and novel and familiar
numerosity test trials. ERPs elicited during familiarization revealed a significantly larger negativity for the first half of trials between 350-430 ms
post-stimulus that was broadly distributed over central areas and most
pronounced over the left hemisphere. Additionally, in the first half of
familiarization relative to the second half, ERPs showed a significantly
larger late positivity between 870-950 ms post-stimulus that was largest
over the central and parietal midline. In previous infant studies, the initial negativity and the late positivity ERP components have been linked
to the encoding of stimulus templates and the updating of working mem-

109

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

ory, thus suggesting that infants may be forming a template of the familiar numerosity. Moreover, and consistent with this hypothesis, a
comparison between novel and familiar test trials revealed a significantly
larger positivity for the novel numerosities between 910-960 ms poststimulus. Importantly, this novelty effect was strongest over left parietal
and frontal scalp sites suggesting that a fronto-parietal network previously implicated for number processing in humans may already be in
place by 7 months of age.
C 86
THE DISSOCIATION BETWEEN RETRIEVAL OF ARITHMETICAL
FACTS AND ESTIMATION ABILITIES: A SINGLE CASE STUDY
OF ACQUIRED DYSCALCULIA Sarit Ashkenazi, Avishai Henik; Ben
Gurion University of the Negev — This single case study presents D.A., a
67-year-old engineer who showed dysgraphia and dyscalculia resulting
from an infracted left intraprietal sulcus. We tested his numerical abilities
and found that he was able to retrieve numerical facts. In contrast, he
showed a severe difficulty in using numerical procedures, especially
multiplication and division. In addition, he frequently replaced a minus
sign with a plus sign. The comparison of estimation and exact calculations indicated longer reaction time for approximation trials, both for
small and larger numerical values. Performance in a numerical Strooplike paradigm was measured. The facilitation effect (the difference
between congruent trials and neutral trials) was absent. This is the first
study that examined the size congruency effect in a patient with acquired
dyscalculia. According to Rubinsten and Henik (2005), participants with
developmental dyscalculia (in contrast with non-dyscalculic participants)
showed a lack of facilitation in this task. The present study provides further evidence for the dissociation between abstract representation of
quantity and fact retrieval.
C 87
NUMERICAL AND SPATIAL NETWORKS UNDERLYING THE
MENTAL NUMBER LINE Edward Hubbard1, Philippe Pinel1, Manuela
Piazza1, Stanislas Dehaene1,2; 1INSERM Unit 562, 2College de France — Functional neuroimaging and patient studies have suggested that human
arithmetic abilities depend on a network of frontal and parietal regions,
including the bilateral intraparietal sulcus (IPS) and frontal regions
involved with eye movements, working memory and verbal processing.
These mathematical competencies may depend, in part, on a spatially
organized mental number line (Hubbard et al., 2005), which reaches conscious awareness in a minority of the population (number-form synesthetes).
To asses the role of these regions in numerical-spatial
interactions, and to clarify possible homologies with macaque parietal
regions, we used whole brain fMRI to measure BOLD signal change in
three tasks: mental arithmetic (addition and subtraction compared with a
letter naming baseline), a multisensory localizer (visual optic flow and
tactile stimulation of the face), and saccades. Random effects analyses
showed substantial overlap between calculation and multisensory
regions (putative human ventral intraparietal area, VIP) bilaterally, with
less overlap between calculation and saccade related regions in parietal
cortex (putative human lateral intraparietal area, LIP) and frontal eye
fields (FEF). Within regions of interest defined by these localizer tasks,
we are now more quantitatively examining activations to addition and
subtraction tasks in individual subjects. We are also testing a group of
number-form synesthetes to explore the hypothesis that number-form
synesthesia arises from similar, but stronger, interactions between
numerical and spatial regions than in non-synesthetes. These results
shed light not only on the neural correlates of numerical-spatial interactions, but also on why they become conscious in a minority of the population.
C 88
SUBITIZING REQUIRES VISUAL ATTENTION Petra
Vetter,
Bahador Bahrami, Brian Butterworth; Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
University College London — Subitizing, the fast and accurate enumeration
of up to 4 items, has traditionally been thought of as a pre-attentive and

110

Higher Level Cognition: Numerical Processing

parallel process. We employed a dual task paradigm in order to test the
effects of reduced attentional resources on subitizing. Subjects were
asked to perform a central detection task and, at the same time, to enumerate surrounding circularly arranged high-contrast gabor patches
(amongst low-contrast distractor patches). The central detection task
comprised two conditions, one of low attentional load (detecting a certain
colour) and one of high attentional load (detecting a certain colour-orientation conjunction). Introducing a secondary task, even requiring few
attentional resources (low load condition), already led to significantly
decreased enumeration accuracy in the subitizing range compared to the
single task condition. Subitizing accuracy was even more severely
reduced under conditions of high attentional load. These results show
that subitizing is severely impaired under conditions of reduced attentional resources which speaks against the traditionally held notion of a
pre-attentive subitizing mechanism.
C 89
MODIFIABLE NUMBER-SPACE CORRESPONDENCE UNDER
DIFFERENT CONTEXTS Rocco Y.C. Chiou1, Denise H. Wu2, Daisy L.
Hung1, Ovid J.L. Tzeng3; 1Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National
Central University, Taoyuan County, Taiwa, 3Institute of Linguistics,
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan — The correspondence between numbers
and space is subject to the influence of different spatial contexts. We
investigated such influence on the directionality of SNARC (SpatialNumerical Association of Response Codes) effect by introducing different inducer phases before bimanual parity judgment. Since prefixing a
numeral to the Chinese character “&#40670;” can refer to either the hour
on a clock-face or the number of dots on a dice, we employed these
ambiguous Chinese materials to examine whether the spatial mapping of
identical numerical items would demonstrate flexible mapping between
numbers and space. Our data indicated that when asked to make a parity
judgment on the numeral character in an ambiguous item, Chinese participants showed a typical SNARC effect. The same effect was also
detected when the same task was performed after an inducer phase
wherein the participants perceived the ambiguous stimuli as representing dots on a dice, and a left-to-right alignment between numbers and
space was encouraged. More importantly, a reverse (albeit insignificant)
SNARC effect was observed for the same task when it was performed
after the inducer phase wherein the participants perceived the ambiguous stimuli as representing hours on a clock-face and a right-to-left alignment was encouraged. In summary, the spatial mapping of numerical
words is flexibly modified by the specific context in which the words
appear, even when the spatial aspect of the context is irrelevant to the
task. The role of the parietal cortex in mediating such flexible mapping
between numbers and space is also discussed.
C 90
SUBITIZING AND COUNTING IN DYSCALCULIA Nitza
MarkZigdon1, Sarit Ashkenazi1, Gal Ifergan2, Illan Shelef2, Henik Avishai1; 1Ben
Gurion University of the Negev, 2Soroka Medical Center — Subitizing
and
counting abilities of third and forth grade dyscalculic and non-dyscalculic children were tested. The non-dyscalculic children showed a very
small change in reaction time (RT) when tested with quantities in the
range of 1 to 4 dots, and a linear increase in RT with quantities from 5 to
12 dots. In contrast, the dyscalculic chidren were able to process a smaller
subitizing range of only 3 dots. In addition, their RT function was nonlinear and showed a jump in RT when there were between 6 and 7 dots
presented. This pattern of results was achieved regardless of the organization of dots in the display (i.e., domino vs. random). A brain-injured
adult suffering from numerical processing deficits showed a pattern similar to the dyscalculic children for the random arrangements of dots but
not for the non-random (i.e., domino) arrangements. These results suggest that organization of the display may enable circumventing deficient
counting and subitizing due to brain injury. In addition, our results indicate that even processes that are considered basic and automatic (i.e., sub-

Higher Level Cognition: Numerical Processing

itizing) may be deficient in developmental as well as acquired
dyscalculia.subitizing abilities of third and forth grade dyscalculic and
non-dyscalculic children were tested. The non-dyscalculic children
showed a very small change in reaction time (RT) when tested with quantities in the range of 1 to 4 dots, and a linear increase in RT with quantities
from 5 to 12 dots. In contrast, the dyscalculic chidren were able to process
a smaller subitizing range of only 3 dots. In addition, their RT function
was non-linear and showed a jump in RT when there were between 6 and
7 dots presented. This pattern of results was achieved regardless of the
organization of dots in the display (i.e., domino vs. random). A braininjured adult suffering from numerical processing deficits showed a pattern similar to the dyscalculic children for the random arrangements of
dots but not for the non-random (i.e., domino) arrangements. These
results suggest that organization of the display may enable circumventing deficient counting and subitizing due to brain injury. In addition, our
results indicate that even processes that are considered basic and automatic (i.e., subitizing) may be deficient in developmental as well as
acquired dyscalculia.
C 91
ARE
ALL
NUMBERS
CREATED
EQUAL?
AN
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION OF SMALL AND
LARGE NUMBER REPRESENTATIONS Daniel C. Hyde, Elizabeth S.
Spelke; Harvard University — Behavioral studies of infants and of nonhuman primates provide evidence for two distinct systems of number
representations: a system for representing a small number of individuals
and a system for representing large approximate numerical magnitudes
(Feigenson et al., 2004). In contrast, behavioral studies of adults provide
only equivocal evidence for two distinct systems (Dehaene, 1997) and
neuroimaging fails to directly address the issue at all. To clarify the matter, we attempt to characterize the neural electrophysiology of small versus large number representations in adults using event-related potentials
(ERP). In an adaptation-type paradigm (Grill-Spector and Malach, 2001),
ERP’s were recorded as subjects passively viewed a continual stream of
novel dot arrays. A majority of the arrays contained the same number of
dots. Occasionally, a test array was presented containing either the same
or a different number of dots. Strict controls were employed to ensure
changes in brain electrophysiology were due to changes in the number of
dots and not changes in other continuous stimulus dimensions. As
observed in previous studies (Dehaene, 1996), comparisons of large number test conditions revealed modulation of a second posterior positivity
according to the distance between the base number and test number,
peaking around 250ms. Comparisons between small number test conditions revealed both similarities to and differences from established ERP
modulation in the large number range. These findings suggest that while
large and small number representations share similar neural resources,
the actual representation of these numbers might be different.
C 92
SYMBOLIC & NON-SYMBOLIC NUMBER IN THE DEVELOPING
BRAIN Jessica Cantlon, Melissa Libertus, Elizabeth Brannon, Kevin
Pelphrey; Duke University — Functional imaging and lesion studies of
adult humans have established neuro-cognitive links between number
processing and posterior parietal cortex, and specifically, the intraparietal
sulcus (IPS). Adults with lesions to areas of parietal cortex that encompass the IPS exhibit impaired performance on symbolic numerical tasks
but not on tasks that test knowledge of other semantic domains (e.g.,
Dehaene & Cohen, 1991). Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
studies have revealed number-specific activity in the adult IPS relative to
control tasks for non-symbolic numerical values (e.g., Ansari et al., 2006;
Cantlon et al., 2006; Piazza et al., 2004). Thus regions of posterior parietal
cortex in the adult brain respond to numerical values independent of
notation. How does this pattern of brain activity develop? We performed
fMRI while 7-y-old children chose the larger of two numerical values
from two arrays of dots (non-symbolic condition) or two Arabic numerals
(symbolic condition). The numerical comparisons were identical in both
conditions and were either easy (0.5 ratio between values) or difficult (0.8

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

ratio). We examined BOLD activity during the symbolic and non-symbolic conditions as a function of the ratio between the numerical values of
the comparisons. Adults exhibited a bilateral ratio effect in posterior
parietal cortex, whereas children only exhibited this numerical ratio
effect in the right hemisphere. The different patterns of brain activity
evoked by children and adults may be related to the development of precise, automatic representations of numerical values that has not yet
reached maturity by 7 years of age.
C 93
CHILDREN WITH AUTISM SHOW DIFFERENCES IN BRAIN
ACTIVATION, DESPITE SIMILAR BEHAVIORAL PERFORMANCE,
ON A MENTAL ARITHMETIC TASK Kami
Koldewyn1,2, Melissa
3
1
1,2 1
Henry , Lien Le , Susan Rivera ; University of California, Davis, 2UC
Davis M.I.N.D. Institute, 3Stanford Dept. of Psychology — Previous behavioral studies have indicated that high functioning children with strictly
defined autism perform as well as typically developing children on simple arithmetic calculation tasks. Evidence is rapidly accumulating, however, that those with autism may have general connectivity abnormalities
regardless of whether or not they are impaired on a particular task. In
this study, children with autism and their age, sex and IQ-matched typically developing peers performed simple two and three operand calculations while being scanned in a 1.5T MRI machine utilizing a single-shot
gradient echo, echoplanar imaging (EPI) sequence. Despite the fact that
the two groups did not differ in either their accuracy or reaction time,
participants with autism showed a markedly unusual pattern of neural
activation when compared to controls. Unaffected children showed activation in the expected network of prefrontal, parietal and cerebellar
regions. In contrast, participants with autism, as a group, showed greater
activation in prefrontal regions than controls but virtually no activation
in parietal or cerebellar regions. Additionally, activation patterns in
those with autism were much more variable than the activation seen in
control participants. While further research is needed to determine
whether these differences in brain activation patters stem from differences in task strategies or are indicative of a lack of long-range connectivity in those with autism, these findings support a growing body of
evidence that functional neural architecture differences exist in those
with autism independent of performance differences.
C 94
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MEASURES OF THE NUMERICAL
DISTANCE EFFECT Wido Nager, Anja Fellbrich, Thomas Frank Munte;
Otto von Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany — Recent findings indicate that humans represent numbers along a continuous mental line. Little is known about how automatic number magnitude activation is
attentionally used to select relevant information. Additionally, electrophysiological characterization of the mental number line and its impact
on target processing is missing. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were
recorded in 16 subjects, performing an Eriksen paradigm in a magnitude
comparison task with the standard 5. We report behavioral and electrophysiological findings of the numerical distance effect for attentional target processing. For the analysis of the numerical distance effect, we
collapsed the data acquired for each target number over all distractors.
The size of the distance effect was calculated by computing a linear trend
over the splits (i.e. the absolute distances between the target number and
the standard 5). ERPs were analyzed with regard to the P300. RT data
pointed to a highly significant common number magnitude effect as indicated by a linear trend: larger distances to the standard 5 produced faster
responses than smaller distances. The P300 amplitude was correlated to
the target numbers with increasing amplitudes for larger numerical distances. The numerical distance effect was observed for targets although
these targets were surrounded by task-irrelevant numerical distractors.
The current results underline the importance of the mental number line.
It seems to be used to facilitate correct responses when interfering attentional distractors are present. So, in this task, the spatial location of the
target on the mental number line determines the selection of numbers as
relevant stimuli.

111

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

Higher Level Cognition: Other
C 95
INFERRING DECEIT IN HIGH FUNCTIONING AUTISTIC AND
ASPERGER SUBJECTS: AN FMRI STUDY. Julie
Grezes1, Sylvie
Berthoz2, Bruno Wicker3; 1CNRS - Collège de France, Paris, France, 2Institut
Mutualiste Montsouris, Paris, France, 3Institut de Neurosciences Cognitives de
la Méditerranée - INCM, CNRS, Marseille, France — Social exchange is a
critical component of everyday life. It depends on an ability to predict
and infer the mental states of others, such as their desires, beliefs and
intentions. While interacting with others, it is important to judge accurately whether the person is honest or deceitful. We often use non-verbal
cues to infer whether others are trying to deceive us. Impaired social
communication and use of multiple nonverbal behaviours are core features in the autistic spectrum disorder. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we study subjects watching videos of actors lifting
a box, and judge 1) whether the box was light or heavy, 2) whether the
actors had a correct or a false expectation of the weight of the box, and 3)
whether the actors were trying to deceive them or not concerning the real
weight of the box. Adults with high-functioning autism or Asperger Syndrome (HFA/AS) and controls are scanned. Three groups of control subjects are selected on the basis of their low (n=12), intermediate (n=12) and
high (n=12) scores on the empathy quotient self-report questionnaire
(Baron-Cohen & Wheelwright 2004). Behaviorally, there is no difference
between the 3 groups of controls in the 3 tasks. The HFA/AS group show
greater performances in recognizing the weight of the box and lower performances in detecting expectations and deceit as compared to all control
groups. The common and specific neural networks associated to the 3
tasks and comparisons between controls and HFA/AS groups are discussed.
C 96
EFFECTS OF BASAL GANGLIA LESIONS ON REWARD-BASED
LEARNING IN HUMANS Christian Bellebaum1, Benno Koch2, Michael
Schwarz2, Irene Daum1; Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Ruhr-University
Bochum, 2Klinikum Dortmund — Studies of patients suffering from Parkinson’s Disease provided evidence for a crucial role of the basal ganglia in
reward-based learning. Applying functional imaging techniques,
attempts have been made to relate basal ganglia substructures to different learning processes. The present study aimed to elucidate the effects of
focal basal-ganglia lesions on reward-based learning in humans. Seven
patients with selective lesions affecting different regions of the basal-ganglia and seven healthy control subjects performed two probabilistic learning tasks in which abstract signs had to be associated with colours.
Acquisition, reversal, effects of reward value and cognitive transfer were
assessed. While patients and controls exhibited comparable learning
curves across blocks of trials and showed similar performance in cognitive transfer, controls learned significantly faster, as revealed by a lower
number of trials necessary to reach a learning criterion. Analysing the
performance of individual patients yielded significant impairments in
two patients with involvement of the right posterior putamen. Interestingly, one patient with a bilateral lesion of the putamen, which also
involved the left caudate nucleus, showed a significantly higher total
number of correct responses compared to controls. The results provide
further evidence for the involvement of the basal ganglia in reward-based
learning. Performance patterns in individual patients suggest that parts
of the putamen may play a crucial role, with the right putamen being
possibly more important. Enhanced learning in one patient may be
related to earlier reports of facilitated learning in unmedicated Parkinson’s Disease patients, but needs to be confirmed in a larger sample.

112

Higher Level Cognition: Other

C 97
MOTIVATIONAL
SIGNIFICANCE
OF
SOCIAL
STIMULI
CONTRIBUTES TO ACTIVATION IN MPFC Wouter van den Bos1,2,
Samuel M. McClure2, Lasana T. Harris2, Leigh E. Nystrom2, Susan T. Fiske2,
Jonathan D. Cohen2,3; 1University of Leiden, Leiden, the Netherlands,
2
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ , 3University of Pittsburgh, PA — In
recent studies an area in the medial prefrontal cortex, the paracingulate
cortex (pACC), has been implicated in potentially very different cognitive
functions: reasoning about the minds of other people and processing
reward related information. We hypothesize that the activation in this
area correlates with the reward value of the stimuli in general and is not
specifically limited to social cognition. In this study we sought to gain
further insight into the functional significance of the pACC by independently manipulating reward and social context. Neural activity was measured using fMRI while participants performed a time estimation task
with trial-to-trial feedback (in the form of small squirts of fluid delivered
orally). Social context was manipulated by instructing subjects that positive and negative feedback were determined either by a computer or
another person. Our analysis revealed a main effect of positive feedback,
but not of social context, in the PACC. This result suggests that this area
of the mPFC serves a more general cognitive function in representing
reward value, which can be modulated by social context. In addition,
activity in other sub-regions of the mPFC, particularly the subgenual cingulate cortex (SGC), showed a significant interaction between reward
value and social context: in these areas the social manipulation amplified
the effect of different types of reward feedback. This effect in the SGC is
especially interesting because of the implication of this area in severe
depression.
C 98
NEURAL DYNAMICS OF DECISION-MAKING AT DIFFERENT
LEVELS OF OUTCOME PREDICTABILITY. Florian S. Fischmeister,
Uta Sailer, Herbert Bauer; University of Vienna — The aim of the present
study was to characterise the neural dynamics of decision-making at different levels of outcome predictability using EEG. Slow cortical potentials
(SCP) were measured via 61 scalp electrodes while subjects were choosing between two alternatives displayed on either side of a fixation cross.
These alternatives were combined either to form true-decisions between
two different alternatives resulting in low predictability, dummy-decisions, between identical alternatives with intermediate predictability, or
nil-situations representing a high outcome predictability. After the
response, each alternative was associated with a gain or loss. SCP time
series were decomposed per subject into temporally independent but
spatially fixed components using an extended-infomax algorithm. Cluster analysis was applied to components that could directly be related to
brain activity using a robust k-means approach. Preliminary results
revealed decision related component clusters localised to the orbito-frontal cortex (OFC), the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and the dorsal prefrontal cortex (BA 8). The normalised activity time course of the BA 8
cluster showed distinct amplitude differences modulated by different
outcome predictability levels. The larger BA 8 activation found for truedecisions compared to dummy-decisions and to nil-situations might
reflect the decreasing degree of uncertainty or non-predictability. For the
ACC cluster a larger pronounced and longer lasting negative going
waveform was observed for the two decision types compared to nil-situations. This could indicate a faster and less demanding resolution of a conflict between the competing alternatives in nil-situations.
C 99
HOW WE DECIDE SOMETHING IS MORALLY WRONG: AN FMRI
STUDY OF MORAL JUDGMENT. Jana Schaich Borg1,2, Walter SinnottArmstrong3, Kent A. Kiehl1,4; 1Institute of Living, Hartford, CT, 2Neuroscience
Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, 3Dartmouth College, 4The
MIND Institute, University of New Mexico — Is moral condemnation an
outcome of "reason" or "emotion"? In the present study, we use fMRI to
investigate the neurological networks involved in judging a concept or an

Emotion

act to be morally wrong. Participants were scanned while viewing fifty
short phrases describing things most people judge to be morally wrong,
fifty short phrases describing things most people judge to be morally not
wrong, and fifty short phrases describing controversial issues about
which people have disparate moral opinions. Participants indicated
whether each phrase described something morally "wrong" or morally
"not wrong" while in the scanner. Brain regions in affective networks
(including the bilateral insula) as well as working memory networks
(including the middle/superior frontal gyrus) were more active during
judgments that concepts or acts were morally "wrong" than when concepts or acts were appraised as "not wrong" as long as the concepts or
acts were non-controversial. However, for controversial moral concepts
or acts, regions in a distinct (but overlapping) brain network involved in
emotional appraisal and control (including the anterior cingulate and
orbitofrontal cortex) were more active during judgments condemning
concepts or acts to be "wrong" than when concepts or acts were judged to
be "not wrong". There was no difference in regional activity during judgments that concepts or acts were morally "not wrong" versus morally
"wrong", regardless of how controversial the concepts or acts described
were. These results suggest that negative moral judgments are associated
with neural activity in both "cognitive" and “emotional” brain systems.
C 100
HUMAN EMBODIMENT IN TIME Shahar
Arzy, Istvan MolnarSzakacs, Olaf Blanke; Brain Mind Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland — Embodiment, the sense of being spatially
localized within one’s own body, is a fundamental character of the self.
However, the self is embodied not only spatially in the body, but also
temporally in the present. To investigate functional and neural mechanisms of human embodiment in time, we asked individuals to make
judgements about future (Forward in time) and past (Backwards in time)
events after having imagined to be at three different time-points: Now
(present time), Past (-10 years) or Future (+10 years). Reaction-times and
error-rates measures were significantly higher for Past and Future than
Now time-point. In addition, across all time-points, reaction-times and
error-rates were significantly higher for Backward than Forward events.
These results were reflected by brain activation (as measured by electrical
neuroimaging of 192 channel EEG) at ~500ms after stimulus presentation,
as activations in anterior temporal lobe (predominantly left) and extrastriate cortex (predominantly right) were significantly longer in Past and
Future than in Now time-point, as well as longer for Backward than Forward events independent of time-point. In addition, Future time-point
was also processed earlier (~300ms) and lead to prolonged activation at
the same brain regions. These data were confirmed and extended by
intracranial LFP recordings. Collectively, these data suggest that distributed brain activity at the anterior temporal and extrastriate cortex as well
as its timing is crucial for the coding of the self as embodied and temporally located within the present and for the ability to mentally “travel” to
past and future locations in time.
C 101
IN THE EYE OF THE BEHOLDER: POINTING OUT OBJECTS IN A
HETEROCENTRIC REFERENCE FRAME Laurent Cleret de Langavant,
Philippe Remy, Joe McIntyre, Iris Trinkler, Emmanuel Dupoux, Alain
Berthoz, Anne-Catherine Bachoud-Lévi; INSERM — Communicative pointing (CP) is a gesture addressed to another person to communicate about
an object. This social capacity seems to be specific to humans, emerging at
the end of the first year. It seems to be lacking in autism.The acquisition
of communicative pointing might represent a key step in cognitive development and form an essential basis for social cognition. In order to share
information, the subject who points should possess some knowledge
about the addressee's visual perspective on the target object. Thus, the
ability to represent the addressee's perspective would be expected to be
an essential prerequisite for CP. Previous studies on pointing gestures
did not address this issue, since they focused on the goal-directed component of pointing, leaving aside its communicative function. They studied
non communicative pointing (NCP), and no communicative intention

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

directed toward an addressee was set. In our study, we compared pointing gestures addressed (CP) or not (NCP) to another person, using a
behavioral and a PET paradigm in healthy subjects. We found that endpoint variability of pointing was spatially shaped according to whether
there was a communicative interaction with an addressee and depending
on the addressee's location. Furthermore, we found activation in the right
posterior superior temporal sulcus to be specific to CP versus NCP. This
area is known to be involved in social perception/interpretation and
third-person visual perspective. We propose that communication
through pointing takes place in a heterocentric reference frame which
incorporates the addressee's visual perspective.
C 102
THIS HAND IS YOUR HAND, THIS HAND IS MY HAND:
EVIDENCE FOR A VISUAL BODY-PART OWNERSHIP
HOMUNCULUS Istvan Molnar-Szakacs1,2, Sebastian Dieguez Falcon1,
Olaf Blanke1; 1Brain Mind Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne,
Switzerland, 2Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, UCLA,
Los Angeles — The capacities of agency and ownership secure our sense
of identity, allowing us to distinguish the self from others. Evidently, the
face plays a special role in self-identification, however it remains
unknown how knowledge of other body parts may contribute to selfother distinction. To address this question 13 normal right-handed subjects made ‘self’-‘non-self’ responses to pictures of their own or another
person’s body parts, including the arms, hands, legs, feet, chest and
upper back, torso and lower back. Reaction times and accuracy rates
were measured. We found that overall subjects were significantly faster
at responding to pictures of their own than to a stranger’s body parts,
confirming the salience of ‘self’ stimuli. Analysis of error rates yielded an
interaction effect of body part and self-other. This effect was mostly due
to a significant pattern for other people’s hands to be perceived as one’s
own. Self-hands, however, were not perceived as other’s hands more
often than any other body part. A significant pattern was also found for
other people’s distal parts (hands and feet) to be perceived as one’s own
and self proximal parts (arm and leg) to be perceived as someone else’s.
Our results may be explained by the special role of hands in daily social
exchanges, leading to the self-attribution of those body parts of others
that most often share the same visual field with one's own. These results
also allow us to propose an homuncular representation of visual ownership gradients of the human body surface.

Emotion
C 103
THE AMYGDALA IN THE EXPERIENCE OF AFFECT Seth Duncan1,
Lisa Barrett1, Eliza Bliss-Moreau1, Scott Rauch2, Chris Wright2; 1Boston College,
2
Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital — The current study
was designed to test the hypothesis that amygdala activation serves as a
neural precondition that allows for negative affective experience by modulating visual sensitivity to evocative objects in the environment. Participants’ affective experience was measured by asking them to report on
their momentary experiences several times a day over the course of a
month using an electronic experience-sampling procedure. One year
later, participants viewed backwardly masked depictions of fear while
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to measure their
amygdala and fusiform gyrus activation. Negative affect, as measured
during the experience-sampling procedure one-year prior, was positively
correlated with amygdala activation in response to these brief presentations of fear depictions. Furthermore, descriptive analyses indicated that
fusiform gyrus activation and negative affective experience in the scanner were associated for participants reporting increased nervousness
during the imaging procedure. The results suggest that the amygdala
contributes to negative affective experience by increasing perceptual sensitivity for negative stimuli.

113

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

C 104
AUTISM AND EMOTIONAL COMMUNICATION THROUGH
MUSIC Anjali Bhatara1, Anna Tirovolas2, Daniel Levitin1; 1McGill
University, 2Harvard University — Autism is characterized by impairments in empathy and in social and emotional communication. Deficits
have been observed in understanding the emotional undertones of spoken conversation, many of which are communicated through variations
in timing, loudness, and intonation. Music has similar prosodic aspects,
so this study was to examine the role of timing and loudness variation on
the ability of children and adolescents with autism to understand emotional communication through music. Previous experiments on unimpaired adults have shown that people can reliably judge the difference
between an expressive music performance (one with all variation intact)
and a “mechanical” performance (one in which all variation has been
removed), as well as versions spanning these two extremes. We included
a control condition of “random” expressiveness which contained full
variability, but with timing and loudness variation randomly distributed
across the notes. Adults and typically developing children (ages 7 - 17)
rated the expressive version as most emotional and the mechanical and
random versions as least emotional. The goal of the present study is to
explore whether children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) rate
these excerpts the same as controls. Preliminary results indicate that
they rate them differently; children with ASD tend to rate the random
version as being equally as emotional as the expressive version, implying
that they are making judgments based on complexity and not on musical
conventions of expressive performance. This further suggests that the
attraction that individuals with ASD have for music is based on structural features, rather than emotional ones.
C 105
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS REVEAL TEMPORAL STAGING
OF DYNAMIC FACIAL EXPRESSION AND GAZE SHIFT EFFECTS
ON ATTENTIONAL ORIENTING Harlan
Fichtenholtz1, Joseph
Hopfinger2, Reiko Graham3, Jacqueline Detwiler1, Kevin LaBar1; 1Duke
University, 2University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill — Multiple sources of information from the face
guide attention during social interaction. The present study modified the
Posner cueing paradigm to investigate how dynamic changes in emotional expression and eye gaze in faces affect the neural processing of
subsequent target stimuli. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded
while participants viewed centrally-presented face displays in which
gaze direction (Left, Direct, Right) and facial expression (Fearful, Neutral)
co-varied in a fully crossed design. Gaze direction was not predictive of
peripheral target location. ERP analysis revealed several sequential
effects, including: (1) an early enhancement of target processing following fearful faces (P1); (2) an interaction between expression and gaze
(N1), with enhanced target processing following fearful faces with rightward gaze; and (3) an interaction between gaze and target location (P3),
with enhanced processing for invalidly-cued left visual field targets.
Behaviorally, participants responded faster to targets following fearful
faces and targets presented in the right visual field, in concordance with
the P1 and N1 effects, respectively. The findings indicate that two nonverbal social cues – facial expression and gaze direction -- modulate
attentional orienting across different temporal stages of processing.
Results have implications for understanding the mental chronometry of
shared attention and social referencing.
C 106
NEURAL CIRCUITRY FOR DETECTION OF THREAT RESPONDS
TO SIMPLE GEOMETRIC SHAPES Christine
Larson, Joel Aronoff,
David Zhu; Michigan State University — The rapid detection of threat is a
fundamental task for survival and so the recognition of potential danger
in visual stimuli is thought to be preferentially processed by dedicated
neural circuitry, including the amygdala. Our past work on threat detection suggests that simple geometric shapes containing downward-pointing V angles, similar to the shapes that are produced by the movement of

114

Emotion

the human face when forming an angry facial expression in point-light
experiments, are perceived as being more aversive, even when presented
devoid of other contextual cues. We used functional magnetic resonance
imaging (N= 17), in a block design, to investigate neural responses to the
simplest possible form of this shape, a downward-pointing triangle, compared to the same triangle with the vertex pointing upward. We also
compared the neural response to the downward triangle to that recruited
by a circle. The downward-pointing V elicited activation of the
amygdala, subgenual anterior cingulate cortex, and an area of the fusiform gyrus known to respond to faces and facial expression of emotion.
Importantly, activation of this affect-related circuitry was orientationspecific; downward-pointing triangles elicited greater activation in these
regions than the identical triangle inverted. Thus, this very simple shape
is capable of activating neural networks instantiating detection of threat
and negative affect. These results suggest that the meaning of threat may
be conveyed by very simple stimulus configurations containing a downward V angle without other cues representative of context or affect.
C 107
MODELING PERITRAUMATIC AMNESIA BY AGONISTIC
NORADRENERGIC AND GLUCOCORTICOID EFFECTS Rene
Hurlemann1, Andreas Matusch2, Dietrich Klingmuller1, Barbara Hawellek1,
Heike Kolsch1, Wolfgang Maier1, Raymond J. Dolan3; 1University of Bonn,
Germany, 2Institute of Medicine, Research Center Juelich, Germany, 3Institute
of Neurology, University College London, United Kingdom — Persistent peritraumatic dissociation, including amnesia, represents a robust predictive
risk factor for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). We used the strategy
of challenging noradrenergic (norepinephrine, NE) and cortisol (CORT)
signaling to probe the neurochemical substrates of persistent peritraumatic amnesia in a cohort of 54 volunteer subjects. Within an experimental context of an established emotion-induced amnesia paradigm, we
tested the amnesic potential of hydrocortisone (30 mg p.o.) in the presence or absence of the NE-reuptake inhibitor reboxetine (4 mg p.o.), thus
modeling two levels of an aroused emotional state. Under dual challenge
conditions, we observed a linear dose-response relationship in the magnitude of emotion-induced amnesia, consistent with a phenotypic expression of emotion-induced amnesia that varies as a function of NE and
CORT co-activation during emotional memory encoding. These findings
suggest that the magnitude of NE and CORT release in the immediate
aftermath of emotional trauma provides an early vulnerability marker of
persistent peritraumatic dissocation and PTSD. Blocking NE and CORT
signaling at this initial pathological stage may constitute a feasible pharmacological approach for secondary prevention of persistent peritraumatic dissocation and PTSD.
C 108
PARENTAL BRAINS ACTIVATE TO OWN BABY CRIES AND
PICTURES ACCORDING TO PSYCHOLOGY, EXPERIENCE,
TIMING AND DYADIC RELATIONSHIP James
Swain1,
James
Leckman1, Linda Mayes1, Ruth Feldman2, Elizabeth Hoyt1, Hannah Kang3,
Pilyoung Kim4, Robert Schultz1; 1Yale University, 2Bar Illan University,
3
Stanford University ,4Cornell University — Objective: With childbirth,
genetic and epigenetic processes reorganize hypothalamic, limbic, and
cortical circuits. We hypothesize that these parenting circuits, which
modulate a range of adaptive parental thoughts and behaviors, may be
related to empathy, reward, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Methods: We have studied parental attachment in 45+ sets of parents in several ways: with interviews, self-report forms, brief videos of parent-infant
interactions, and functional magnetic resonance brain imaging during
exposure to baby cries and pictures at two time-points within the first
four months postpartum. Results and Discussion: A baby-cry response
circuit, stable over the first 4 months postpartum and common to mothers and fathers, includes superior temporal, insula and cingulate regions
plus frontal mirror-neuron, reward and emotion areas. Responses to own
baby-cry develop over the first four months postpartum to include
amygdala, midbrain and thalamus. Correlating baby-cry brain activa-

Emotion

tions in parent subgroups with psychometric parenting measures, indicates parenting brain areas in the insula, amygdala, midbrain, frontal
cortex and basal ganglia – regions critical for empathy, anxiety, arousal
and OCD. Mothers and first-time parents activate anxiety centers more
robustly than fathers, and experienced parents. Experienced parents activate more reward circuits. Parents at 4 months postpartum correlate activations to own baby face with a measure of dyadic interaction.
Conclusions: Human parenting involves empathy, reward, and habitrelated brain circuits. Activation in these circuits follows a postpartum
time-course, and varies by gender, experience and postpartum timing.
Our results fit with animal literature on affiliative behaviors, suggest the
feasibility of further research with depressed parents.
C 109
WHAT'S THAT? SOCIAL ORIENTATION INCREASES THE
SENSITIVITY TO UNATTENDED CHANGES IN SPEAKER
EMOTION Annett Schirmer1, Nicoals Escoffier1, Stefan Zysset2, Dirk
Koester3, Tricia Striano4, D. Yves von Cramon2, Angela D. Friedericie2;
1National University of Singapore, 2Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences, 3Maastricht University, 4Leipzig University — Previous
work indicates that women are more sensitive than men to unattended
changes in speaker emotion. The present study aimed at specifying the
neurofunctional underpinnings of these effects as well as their dependency on social orientation as measured with a questionnaire. Participants listened passively to a sequence of syllables that contained rare
changes in tone of voice that could be emotional or neutral. Change in
tone of voice activated the auditory cortex regardless of emotional
valence. Moreover, in women, high social orientation was associated
with increased activity in areas related to top-down regulation of processing resources and visual search. A contrast between emotional and
neutral change elicited increased activity in a number of structures
including the posterior superior temporal sulcus and the amygdala.
While these latter activations showed independently of social orientation
in women, they showed only as a function of social orientation in men.
These results indicate that social orientation enhances sensitivity to
changes in speaker emotion in a gender specific way. In women, social
orientation facilitates more general responses to changes in tone of voice
regardless of valence, whereas in men, social orientation facilitates differential responses to unattended emotional as compared to neutral change
and thus makes processing more comparable to women.
C 110
WOLF DOWN A BUCKET OF LETTUCE? BEHAVIORAL AND
NEURAL INTERACTIONS BETWEEN HUNGER AND FOOD
PREFERENCE. Richard M. Piech1, Jade Lewis1, Adrian M. Owen2, Angela
C. Roberts3, Paul E. Downing1, Caroline H. Parkinson1, John A. Parkinson1;
1University of Wales Bangor, UK, 2MRC Cognition and Brain Unit,
Cambridge, UK, 3University of Cambridge, UK — The attractiveness of food
and the anticipation of its palatability (incentive value) are crucial for
choices and eating behavior. Previous research has indicated the involvement of the amygdala, the insular cortex and areas in the prefrontal cortex in the assessment of incentive value. In this functional magnetic
resonance imaging study, we investigated the neural basis of changes in
subjective ratings of incentive value brought about by interactions
between physiological state and food type. Participants rated the anticipated palatability of restaurant menu items in two experimental sessions,
while hungry and while sated. We hypothesized that hunger would not
simply produce a general increase of perceived incentive value, but
instead the change would depend on the type of food, with sensory and
cognitive characteristics mediating behavior in sated subjects, and energy
content in hungry participants. Our study confirmed that certain food
items were rated as more palatable when participants were hungry and
others while they were sated. To explore the neural basis of the change,
we contrasted the BOLD signal of items with unchanged ratings with
items that were considered more, or less, palatable with an increase in
hunger. On the cortical level, the overall increase in palatability was asso-

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

ciated with activity in the subgenual anterior cingulate. More complex
patterns of activation were identified for specific increases associated
with hunger and increases associated with satiety.
C 111
EMOTIONAL PROSODY PROCESSING IN PATIENTS WITH
LESIONS IN ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX: THE POINT IN TIME
MAKES THE DIFFERENCE Silke Paulmann, Sonja A. Kotz; Max Planck
Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences — It is well established
that lesions of the human orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) lead to large-scale
changes in emotional behaviour. For example, it has been shown that
patients with orbitofrontal lesions have impaired emotional face and
voice expression recognition (e.g. Hornak et al., 1996; 2003). However, to
our knowledge, previous studies have failed to acknowledge that emotional perception is a multi-level process, i.e. studies have not investigated different stages of emotional processing (early vs. late) in the same
patient group. Therefore, the current study investigated emotional prosody processing in an on-line ERP-experiment (using an implicit emotional prosody processing task) and an off-line behavioural experiment
(using an explicit emotional prosody processing task). We tested emotional prosody perception in OFC-lesion patients using vocal expressions
(with and without lexical content) of anger, fear, disgust, and happiness
compared to a neutral baseline. In line with previous evidence (Paulmann & Kotz, 2005), results show that early emotional prosody processing of different emotional prosodies elicit a similar P200 in the ERP in
both OFC-patients and healthy controls. However, at later processing
stages, i.e. decision and evaluation stages, healthy listeners show better
emotional prosody recognition rates than OFC-patients. The current data
serve as first preliminary evidence that emotional prosody perception is
impaired only at later processing stages in OFC-patients.
C 112
ERP MARKERS FOR THE AFFECTIVE RECRUITMENT OF
COGNITIVE CONTROL: IMPLICATIONS FOR ATTENTION AND
EMOTION REGULATION Tracy A. Dennis, Chao-Cheng Chen; Hunter
College, City University of New York — The behavioral approach (BAS)
and behavioral inhibition (BIS) systems are dimensions of reactivity
thought to influence the self-regulation of attention and emotion via the
recruitment of cognitive control; the conditions under which reactivity
competes with or enhances control, however, are poorly understood. Participants were 36 healthy adults (26 females) who self-reported on BAS
and BIS sensitivity and on subjective arousal. Electroencephalographic
recordings were made from 64 scalp electrodes while participants viewed
fearful, sad, and happy faces for 50 msec prior to an attention task. ERPs
reflecting early (P100) and later (medial frontal negativity; MFN) mechanisms in cognitive control, attention processing (N100), and affective processing (P200) were measured. Attention regulation was measured
during a visual conflict resolution task, and emotion regulation was measured as self-report of reappraisal and expressive suppression. Those
reporting high BIS reactivity showed increased recruitment of cognitive
control and affective processing. Enhanced BAS and BIS reactivity was
associated with improved attention regulation, but only when recruitment of cognitive control was high. Increased BAS was associated with
reduced expressive suppression for those participants who also showed
reduced MFN while processing sad and happy faces. Relatively reactive
participants showed patterns consistent with affective enhancement of
control. Results suggest distinct implications of BAS and BIS for the selfregulation of attention and emotion and risk for psychopathology.
C 113
EFFECT OF EMOTIONAL CONTENT ON WORKING MEMORY
Keely Muscatell, Elizabeth Kensinger; Boston College — Prior research has
demonstrated enhanced long-term memory for emotional information
over neutral information. Relatively little is known, however, about the
effect of emotional valence on working memory. To investigate this latter
effect, forty young adults completed two versions of a 2-back task, each
using emotionally valenced (surprised, happy, fearful, sad, angry) and

115

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

neutral faces. In one version of the 2-back task, participants were asked
to view a series of valenced and neutral faces and, for each face, to indicate whether the expression on the face was the same expression that was
presented 2-faces prior (expression match condition). In the other version of the 2-back task, participants also viewed a series of valenced and
neutral faces, but they were asked to ignore the facial expression and
instead to indicate whether the person was the same as was presented 2faces prior (identity match condition). During the expression match condition, participants were faster and more accurate at responding to emotional expressions (particularly fearful ones) relative to neutral
expressions. However, during the identity match condition, participants
were slower to identify emotional faces than neutral faces. These findings
suggest that attention may be drawn to emotional (and particularly to
fearful) facial expressions, enhancing working memory when identification of emotionality is essential to task success, but detracting from working memory when ignoring emotional content facilitates task success.
C 114
PASSIVE AVOIDANCE LEARNING IN INDIVIDUALS WITH
GENERALIZED SOCIAL PHOBIA (GSP). Pamela
Ng,
Karina
Peschardt, Marilla Geraci, Daniel Pine, James Blair; National Institutes of
Mental Health — Generalized social phobia (GSP) is characterized by fear
of social interactions and sensitivity to disapproval by others. Conditioning processes have been suggested to play a role in the generation and
maintenance of the condition. However, this suggestion has received little empirical investigation. In this study we examine whether there is
any systemic impairment in the ability to form stimulus-reward and
stimulus-punishment associations in individuals with GSP. Twenty-five
unmedicated individuals with GSP and fifteen healthy comparison individuals were given a passive avoidance learning task. In this task, participants learn to approach stimuli predictive of reward ('good' numbers)
and avoid stimuli predictive of punishment ('bad' numbers). Individuals
with GSP made more omission errors (failure to respond to a rewarded
stimulus/CS+) but significantly less passive avoidance errors (inappropriate responding to punished stimuli/CS-) than comparison subjects.
Such data are inconsistent with any impairment or superiority in basic
stimulus-reinforcement learning. Instead, it suggests that the individuals
with GSP had a bias towards omitting responses.
C 115
AFFECTIVE FACE PROCESSING AND EMPATHY: EFFECTS ON
THE ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC (EEG) MU RHYTHM
Adrienne Moore, Jaime Pineda; UC San Diego — Comprehension of facial
expressions gives access to the inner worlds of others, facilitating theory
of mind and empathy. Simulation Theory (ST) maintains that when viewing an emotional face we infer what the observed person feels by activating motor representations we’d use to generate the observed expression
ourselves. The EEG mu rhythm is believed to reflect activity of a “mirroring system” for comprehending others by sensorimotor simulation. This
study had three goals: to investigate whether the mu rhythm is modulated by viewing facial affect as ST predicts, to contrast particular categories of facial affect with reference to mu rhythm response, and to
determine whether the simulation mechanism involved is largely automatic or voluntary. Subjects viewed images of faces expressing disgust
and happiness, both with and without empathizing with the faces, and
images of buildings as a control. Subjects’ moods after empathizing with
faces of each type was reported. EEG was recorded for 2 second epochs
following the presentation of each image and the 11-13 Hz mu integrated
power at electrodes C3/C4 was calculated. Increased mu power when
viewing faces expressing disgust was demonstrated, occurring regardless
of whether subjects deliberately intended to empathize. Particular
expressions differed in power; a simulation mechanism was revealed for
disgust but not happiness. Mood change while empathizing with disgust
was correlated with mu power, suggesting that individual differences in
mu reactivity are primarily cognitive not physiological in origin. This

116

Emotion

confirms that the mu rhythm indexes a “mirroring” system for automatically processing social stimuli (disgusted faces) via simulation.
C 116
INTERFACE
BETWEEN
COGNITIVE
AND
AFFECTIVE
CIRCUITRY IN PEDIATRIC BIPOLAR DISORDER Mani Pavuluri,
Megan Marlow O'Connor, Erin Harral, John Sweeney; University of Illinois at
Chicago — In this study, we investigated the impact of affective challenge
on cognitive function in pediatric bipolar disorder, given the close anatomic and functional connectivity between affective fronto-limbic (orbitofrontal cortex (OFC); ventral cingulum; amygdala) and cognitive frontostriatal systems (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC); posterior cingulate; caudate; putamen). Methods: In an fMRI study, ten unmedicated
euthymic bipolar type I subjects were compared with ten age (12-18
years) and gender matched healthy controls (HC). The task consisted of
an affective Stroop paradigm, aiming to recruit attention under emotional challenge. Results: In the negative word condition, relative to the
neutral word condition, bipolar subjects displayed increased activation in
the amygdala, ventral anterior cingulate gyrus, insula and caudate. In
comparison, HC showed increased activation in posterior cingulate gyrus
and DLPFC. In the positive word condition, bipolar patients showed activation in the nucleus accumbens, while the HC displayed activation in
DLPFC, posterior cingulate gyrus, and putamen. Discussion: Our findings suggest that matching negative affect in bipolar individuals leads to
over activation of affective circuitry at the expense of attentional systems,
while HC are less affected by emotional challenge and were able to better
engage cognitive circuitry in the context of emotional arousal. When
matching positive words, the reward based nucleus accumbens was
engaged in bipolar subjects while HC have differentially recruited the
cognitive system. These findings have direct clinical implications for
pediatric bipolar disorder in suggesting that emotional disturbances may
contribute to cognitive processing deficits in the disorder.
C 117
DISTINCT NEURAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING ALTERED
MESOLIMBIC REWARD PROCESSING IN NORMAL AGING AND
EARLY-STAGE PARKINSON'S DISEASE Björn H. Schott1, Ludwig
Niehaus2, Bianca C. Wittmann3, Hartmut Schütze2, Constanze I.
Seidenbecher1, Hans-Jochen Heinze2, Emrah Düzel3; 1Lebniz Institute for
Neurobiology, Magdeburg, 2University of Magdeburg, 3Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, University College London — The ventral striatum is a key
structure in human reward processing, and one of its most prominent
roles is predicting rewards in response to dopaminergic stimulation from
the midbrain. Reduced activity of the dopaminergic midbrain occurs,
physiologically, in aging and, pathologically, in Parkinsonism. Here we
used event-related fMRI to investigate mesolimbic processing of rewardpredicting cues and reward outcomes in young and elderly healthy
adults and in patients with early-stage idiopathic Parkinson's disease. In
young adults, pictures of object drawings that predicted monetary
reward were associated with stronger fMRI activity in the ventral striatum and in the dopaminergic midbrain, while positive reward outcome
was associated with activation in anterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex. In contrast, both healthy elderly subjects and patients showed
activation of the ventral striatum only in response to positive reward outcome, but not during reward anticipation. Patients additionally showed
disrupted functional connectivity of the midbrain and ventral striatum.
The striatal response difference between reward anticipation and outcome and the functional connectivity of the midbrain and ventral striatum were independently correlated with reward-related reaction time
advantages. These results suggest that age-related alterations in the
mesolimbic reward system might lead to a reduced ability to predict
rewards, while the response to positive reward outcome is preserved in
healthy elderly. Moreover, alterations of reward processing in Parkinson's disease appear to differ qualitatively from those found in healthy
aging, thereby suggesting that Parkinson-related changes in the mesolimbic dopamine system do not simply reflect accelerated aging.

Emotion

C 118
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN MEDIAL PREFRONTAL
ACTIVATION IN RESPONSE TO EMOTIONAL IMAGES Christina
Leclerc, Elizabeth Kensinger; Boston College — Previous research has indicated preferential processing for emotional stimuli in our environment
(i.e., stimuli that elicit physiological activation, goal-directed behavior,
and subjective experience/feelings). Past research has begun to establish
the neural mechanisms of emotional processing in younger adults, but
little is known about the processing of emotional information in older
adults. Moreover, even less research has attempted to distinguish the
neural processes that younger and older adults use to process emotional
information. Recent behavioral research has suggested a positivity effect
(Carstensen & Mikels, 2005) in which older adults demonstrate increased
processing of positive emotional material and decreased processing of
negative emotional material. It has been hypothesized that this positivity
effect is the result of the changing motivational goals discussed in Socioemotional Selectivity Theory in which time is perceived as limited and
emotion regulation becomes a primary goal. The present fMRI study
examined the underlying neural networks supporting the processing of
emotional information in younger (ages 18-28) and older (ages 60-80)
adults. Participants viewed positive, negative, and neutral images (e.g.,
sundae, snake, canoe) and were asked to indicate whether each would fit
inside of a file cabinet drawer. More medial prefrontal activation was
observed in younger adults for negative compared to positive images. In
contrast, older adults showed more medial prefrontal activity when
viewing positive compared to negative images. This pattern of results is
consistent with the hypothesis that older adults may devote more
resources toward processing positive information, whereas younger
adults may be biased to process negative information.
C 119
A BITTER PILL TO SWALLOW: ORIGINS OF DISGUST IN THE
ORAL REJECTION OF BITTER TASTES Hanah Chapman1, Marine
Sutrisno1, Adam Anderson1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research
Institute — Emotions are widely thought to have originated as evolutionary adaptations that assist organisms in responding to events that may
have a significant impact on survival or reproduction. Since evolution
can only build new adaptations out of pre-existing ones, differentiated
human emotions such as anger, fear and surprise must have arisen from
earlier motivational processes. For example, it has been proposed that
disgust, a response to physical or ideational contamination, may have
arisen from distaste, an oral rejection response to ingesting bitter substances, many of which are toxic. We tested this idea by comparing the
facial expressions associated with distaste and disgust. Expressions were
assessed by measuring facial skeletomotor activity via electromyography
(EMG) of the brow, upper lip and cheek regions. In Study 1 we recorded
facial EMG while subjects posed expressions of disgust, distaste, anger
and happiness. Disgust and distaste were uniquely characterized by
strong activation of the upper lip and brow regions. In Study 2 EMG was
recorded while subjects sampled bitter (quinine), sweet (sucrose) and
neutral (water) liquids. Compared to other liquids, bitter stimulation
resulted in strong activation of the upper lip, brow and cheek regions.
Thus, disgust and distaste both involve movements of the face that may
facilitate expulsion of ingested material from the mouth. Since facial
expressions have been the best evidence for distinct emotion classes, our
demonstration of continuity between disgust and distaste in terms of
facial expression provides evidence for their association.
C 120
SENSITIVITY TO AFFECTIVE DIMENSIONS OF EMOTIONAL
PROSODY IN PATIENTS WITH PARKINSON’S DISEASE
Chinar Dara, Laura Monetta, Marc D. Pell; School of Communication Sciences
& Disorders, McGill University — There is recurring evidence that patients
with Parkinson’s disease (PD) are impaired for evaluating emotional
speech prosody, suggesting that the basal ganglia are involved in processing vocal cues to emotion. These impairments may arise from an

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

inability to process prosodic cues per se, or to interpret specific affective
dimensions of vocal cues in PD patients. To better understand the role of
the basal ganglia in processing emotional prosody, this investigation
evaluated whether PD patients can judge specific affective properties of
sentences, such as valence and arousal, in addition to specific emotional
meanings of the stimuli. In three separate tasks, 16 PD patients and 17
healthy controls (HC) each listened to pseudo-utterances spoken in six
emotional intonations (happy, pleasant surprise, sad, angry, fear, disgust). For each utterance, participants classified the emotional category
of the prosody (identification task), rated how positive or negative the
stimulus sounded (valence rating task), or rated how intense the emotion
was expressed (intensity rating task). Results indicated that PD patients
were impaired as compared to HC for categorizing the emotional meaning of prosody, and in addition, showed reduced sensitivity to valence
(but not arousal) properties of the same emotional expressions. Findings
imply that the basal ganglia play a role in integrating certain aspects of
emotional information which refer to valence when processing prosodic
cues in speech.
C 121
EXPLICIT AND IMPLICIT DETECTION OF VOCAL EMOTIONS
BY ADULTS WITH PARKINSON’S DISEASE Marc Pell, Chinar Dara;
McGill University, School of Communication Sciences and Disorders — The basal
ganglia have been ascribed a role in the processing of sequential information, including the ability to assign meaning to vocal cue sequences
which encode emotions in speech. However, present data do not specify
whether contributions of the basal ganglia to vocal emotion recognition
are more pronounced at stages of explicit or implicit processing of representative cues. Using Parkinson’s disease (PD) as a context for understanding basal ganglia contributions to vocal emotion decoding, this
study compared matched groups of adults with and without PD on tasks
of explicit and implicit comprehension of vocally-expressed emotions.
Participants were presented pseudo-utterances which unambiguously
conveyed different emotions through the voice in an explicit and implicit
processing task. In the explicit task (forced-choice recognition), participants were required to categorize the emotion conveyed by each utterance and the accuracy and direction of their errors were examined
between groups. In the implicit task (emotional priming paradigm), participants made facial affect decisions about a series of emotional target
faces which were preceded by an emotionally related or unrelated
pseudo-utterance. For the implicit task, the presence of emotion congruency effects was examined between groups, indicating whether participants with or without PD varied in the ability to implicitly associate
emotional meanings of vocal cues with corresponding features in the
face. Results were examined for each task separately and then compared
between explicit and implicit contexts to infer whether basal ganglia contributions to vocal emotion decoding are mandatory across tasks, or alternatively, are tied to specific processing environments.
C 122
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EMOTIONS: A COMPUTATIONAL
ANALYSIS OF FACIAL EXPRESSION STRUCTURE AND
MEANING Joshua Susskind1, Javier Movellan2, Marian Bartlett2, Gwen
Littlewort2, Adam Anderson1; 1University of Toronto, 2 UC San Diego,
Institute for Neural Computation — Computer models of facial expression
judgments indicate that physical feature overlap in between expressions
determines similarity amongst expression types (c.f., Adolphs, 2002; Susskind et al, in press). Using a Support Vector Machine based computer
model trained to accurately discriminate amongst six basic emotional
facial expressions (happiness, sadness, anger, disgust, surprise, and fear),
we demonstrated that expressions the model was trained to discriminate
were confused by the model in a systematic manner matching human ratings of emotion similarity, which is consistent with the claim that overlap
in physical features explains subjective similarity (Susskind et al, in
press). Here, we investigate the computer model’s generalization performance on shame and contempt expressions, which have been conceptual-

117

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

ized as blends of basic emotion categories (Plutchik, 1980). We first show
that human observers consistently rate shame expressions as similar to
sadness, and contempt expressions as similar to anger and disgust. If
these similarity relations for shame and contempt are due to feature overlap with sadness and anger/disgust, respectively, computer model predictions should parallel human judgments. The computer model’s
generalization for shame and contempt was not systematic and did not
resemble the human similarity ratings, thus providing evidence against
the claim that human similarity ratings for these expressions are due to
overlapping visual features. Rather, this finding suggests that whereas
basic emotions are related to each other based on structural similarity,
shame and contempt rating patterns are due to similarity in associated
knowledge representations of emotion concepts or feeling states.
C 123
BRAIN REGIONS INVOLVED IN LEARNING AND APPLICATION
OF REWARD RULES IN A 2-DECK GAMBLING TASK Eveline
Crone1, Egbert Hartstra1, Jonne Oldenburg1, Serge Rombouts2; 1Leiden
University, the Netherlands, 2Leiden Institute for Brain & Cognition, Leiden
University, the Netherlands — Decision-making involves the ability to
choose between competing actions that are associated with uncertain
benefits and penalties. The Iowa Gambling Task (IGT), which mimics
real-life decision-making, involves learning a reward –punishment rule
over multiple trials, and patients with damage to ventromedial (VM) prefrontal (PFC) cortex show deficits learning these rules. In this study, we
used functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging to study the role of PFC
regions involved in rule learning and rule application in healthy adults
using an experimental version of the Iowa Gambling Task. Participants
were asked to infer rules over 16 trials in a 2-deck card game. Reward
was given on each trial and punishment was unpredictable. For half of
the rules, those decks that gave high rewards were also the better decks,
for the other half those decks that gave low reward were the better decks.
Behaviorally, participants learned to find the advantageous rule after
approximately 5-7 trials, and this learning occurred faster for decks
where high reward was the better choice. Dorsolateral (DL) PFC cortex
and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) were most active during rule learning, whereas VMPFC was most active during rule application. These
results suggest that DLPFC and ACC are important when directing
behavior towards long-term goals, whereas VMPFC represents reward
values.
C 124
EMOTIONAL MODULATION OF STRATEGY USE IN A
PROBABILISTIC CLASSIFICATION LEARNING TASK. Laura
Thomas, Kevin LaBar; Duke University — We investigated the influence of
emotional outcomes on strategy use during probabilistic classification
learning. Two groups of participants saw cue cards that predicted outcomes in a probabilistic manner. One group received neutral outcomes
(flowers/mushrooms) while the other group received emotional outcomes (snakes/spiders). A subgroup of participants who exhibited phobic levels of fearfulness to the emotional outcomes were analyzed
separately. Subjects completed 100 trials in Session 1, and returned 24
hours later for 100 additional trials in Session 2. Performance in Session 1
was equivalent between neutral and emotional control subjects, while
phobic subjects performed worse than the emotional controls. In Session
2, however, there were no performance differences across groups. Strategy analyses were based on Meeter et al. (2006), and parsed intervals of
each subject’s performance as following one of five strategy types: no
identifiable strategy, singleton, single-cue, intermediate, and optimal. At
the end of Session 2, more subjects in the neutral condition were using an
optimal strategy as compared to emotional control and phobic subjects.
Additionally, there were more emotional controls and phobics using
strategies not identified by the current analyses at the end of Session 2
than neutral subjects. Neutral and emotional control subjects employed
differing types of simple strategies, with a greater number of neutral subjects using the singleton strategy and emotional control subjects prefer-

118

Emotion

ring the single-cue strategy. Our study demonstrates that emotional
outcomes alter strategy use in a probabilistic classification learning task.
C 125
TRAIT EMPATHY AND SENSITIVITY TO MORPHED EMOTIONAL
FACES Heidi S. Blocker, Orquidea Morales, Roque Mendez, Reiko Graham;
Texas State University — Facial expressions of emotion are important indicators of the emotional states of others. According to neurological studies, viewing a facial expression appears to activate the same brain areas
involved in the personal experience of that emotion. This may be related
to the construct of empathy: the notion of a participation in the thoughts
and feelings of others, commonly measured using a questionnaire. We
examined the relationship between trait empathy scores and the ability to
detect and interpret morphed facial expressions of fear and anger. Subjects made judgments about morphed facial expressions while their
response times and sensitivity to changes in emotional expression were
measured. While there was no relationship between the ability to detect
the presence or intensity of fear or anger alone, particular empathy subscales were significant predictors of how individuals interpreted blends
of fear and anger. Greater empathic concern was associated with
increased likelihood of endorsing an ambiguous blend as angry, while
greater perspective taking in real and imagined situations was associated
with an increased likelihood of endorsing a blend as fearful. We conclude
that trait empathy can have an influence on how individuals decode
facial expressions, most notably under conditions of emotional uncertainty. However, the ability to decode facial expressions is just one facet
of the complex emotional and cognitive construct of empathy.
C 126
PERCEIVING WHOLE BODY EXPRESSIONS OF FEAR IN HIGH
FUNCTIONING AUTISTIC AND ASPERGER SUBJECTS Beatrice
de Gelder1, Bruno Wicker2, Sylvie Berthoz3, Julie Grezes4; 1Donders
Laboratory for Cognitive and Affective Neurosciences, Tilburg, The Netherlands
and FC Donders Centre for cognitive brain-imaging, Nijmegen The
Netherlands, 2Institut de Neurosciences Cognitives de la Méditerranée, CNRS,
Marseille, France, 3Institut Mutualiste Montsouris, Paris, France, 4CNRS Collège de France, Paris, France — Impaired use of multiple nonverbal
behaviours is a core feature in autistic spectrum disorder. There are currently many lines of research on the possible origin of these problems in
social communication and deficits in the processing of emotional information. Some authors think that the social deficit could be a consequence
of amygdala dysfunction leading to functional abnormalities that impair
the ability to detect socially relevant visual cues. Another model speculates that this impairment could be the consequence of a malfunctioning
mirror system generating a deficit in the ability to represent the actions of
others. Using event-related fMRI in humans, we investigate how fear signals from dynamic whole bodies are perceived. A factorial design allows
us to investigate brain activity induced by viewing dynamic actions and
bodily expressions of fear. Twelve adults with high-functioning autism
or Asperger Syndrome (HFA/AS) and 12 matched controls are scanned.
Our critical findings are threefold. First, we show that the motor mirror
system (STS, parietal and premotor cortex) is activated both in controls
and autistic subjects when viewing dynamic actions. Second, when perceiving fearful bodies, typical subjects show greater activations in the
amygdala, temporal cortex, inferior frontal gyrus and premotor cortex,
possibly reflecting the affective evaluation of the stimuli and preparation
for motor responses related to defensive behaviors. These activations
were absent in the HFA/AS, who show greater activation in the medial
superior frontal cortex. Altogether, these results may suggest that in the
HFA/AS, the motor mirror system, while functional, may be dissociated
from socio-affective capabilities.
C 127
CATEGORICAL PROCESSING OF AUDITORY EMOTIONS AS
REVEALED BY THE MISMATCH NEGATIVITY Katja
N.
Spreckelmeyer1,2, Eckart Altenmüller2, Thomas F.
Münte3; 1Aachen

Emotion

University, 2Institute of Music Physiology and Musicians' Medicine, Hanover
University of Music and Drama, 3Magdeburg University — Specific acoustical patterns have been identified to reliably express prototypical emotions such as happiness and sadness in verbal and non-verbal
expressions. However, the neural basis of auditory emotion recognition is
still unclear. Given that the evaluation of emotionally expressive sounds
typically happens fast and effortless, even cross-culturally, it has been
suggested that it is based on pre-wired representations of emotion-specific acoustical cues. Since many different utterances may express the
same emotion a number of different cue-combinations need to exist for
each emotion-category. To test for a neural basis of such a schema-based
processing of emotionally expressive non-verbal sounds event-related
brain potentials (ERP) were recorded in a passive oddball paradigm in 16
participants (8 women). Three happy sounding tones of different perceptual structure were randomly presented as standard tones in condition
one, three different sad tones in condition two. One of the standards in
each condition also served as deviant in the respective other condition
(25% probability of occurrence). Presenting a happy tone in a series of sad
tones resulted in a mismatch negativity (MMN) that was larger in amplitude than the ERP to the same happy tone functioning as standard in the
opposite condition. In contrast, no difference was found for the sad tone
presented in a train of differing happy tones. The results indicate that the
brain built a common sensory memory trace of the standard tones based
on their emotional similarity despite the structural heterogeneity of the
individual tones, though only for the sad tones.
C 128
EMOTION MODULATES EPISODIC RECALL THROUGH IMPLICIT
PROCESSES Magali Seassau1, Richard Levy2, Pascale Gisquet-Verrier3;
1
INSERM U610; CNRS UMR 8620, Paris, France, 2INSERM U610, Paris,
France, 3CNRS UMR 8620, Orsay, France — In a novel paradigm, we
investigated whether emotion may exert a direct influence on the efficacy
of memory retrieval. Thirty normal subjects were submitted to an unexpected recognition test of affective pictures (emotional and neutral) one
week after an encoding phase during which these pictures were associated with neutral background pictures. At the recognition phase, the
background pictures were used as primes under implicit or explicit condition. Each background picture can be the one associated with the target
affective picture at the encoding phase or different (a novel background
or a background associated with another affective picture at the encoding
phase). Under implicit conditions, and in contrast to explicit conditions,
reaction times were only reduced when the emotional picture was
primed either by the associated background or by a background initially
associated with an emotional picture sharing the same valence. This
effect was restricted to backgrounds initially associated with emotional
pictures. These results demonstrate that, in specific conditions, the
valence of a given emotion associated to a relevant stimulus can be transferred to a neutral context, which may subsequently serve as an efficient
cue for recalling the specific stimulus but may also reactivate, in a nonspecific way, episodes sharing the same emotional valence. These results
may open new ways to evaluate tools for memory assessment and to
develop techniques to rehabilitate memory deficits using emotional content.
C 129
EMOTION PERCEPTION IN BORDERLINE PERSONALITY
DISORDER Miriam Dyck, Julia Slodczyk, Julia Schlummer, Volker Backes,
Thilo Kellermann, Ute Habel, Frank Schneider, Martina Reske; RWTH
Aachen University — The ability to decode emotional information in the
face is crucial for social interaction and communication. Individuals who
meet the criteria for borderline personality disorder (BPD) demonstrate
marked problems in interpersonal relationships and emotion regulation.
Surprisingly, empirical research on facial emotion recognition in BPD is
sparse until now and the few studies which have been published yielded
inconsistent results. With a novel set of facial stimuli the present study
investigated whether BPD patients in contrast to healthy subjects are

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

impaired in the perception of emotional and neutral facial expressions.
For this purpose 20 patients diagnosed with BPD and 20 healthy subjects
completed two different tasks targeting emotion recognition. In both
tasks subjects were asked to evaluate the emotional content of visually
presented stimuli (emotional and neutral faces). The first task required a
fast discrimination between negative and neutral facial expressions
whereas in the second task a precise decision regarding default basic
emotions (sadness, happiness, anger, fear) including neutral expressions
had to be achieved. Results indicate significant differences between
groups in the ability to discriminate negative and neutral facial expressions. In line with earlier findings, patients showed a negative bias in the
evaluation of neutral facial expressions. The ability of BPD patients to
recognize specific emotions within facial expressions was however not
impaired. In summary, results point to a selective deficit of BPD patients
in quick and direct discrimination of negative and neutral emotional
expressions. Follow-up studies should investigate the underlying neuropathological mechanisms with functional magnetic resonance imaging.
C 130
INSULA ACTIVATION TO DISGUST FACIAL EXPRESSIONS AND
PICTURES – A MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY (MEG) STUDY
Yu-Han Chen1, Jürgen Dammers2, Frank Boers2, Katrin Amunts2,1, Klaus
Mathiak1; 1RWTH Aachen University, University Hospital Aachen, 2Institute
of Medicine, Forschungszentrum Jülich — Insular cortices have been
reported as a key link between emotion and cognitive processes (Wager
& Feldman Barrett, 2004). This study focused on investigating the
dynamics of insula activation associated with the perception disgust.
MEG was recorded to investigate brain activity in an emotional task
using disgust facial expressions and pictures. Two presentation durations
for faces (100ms and 1000ms) were used to separate early processes of
emotional facial processing in the insula and other emotion-related cortical structures. Emotional faces/pictures (disgust, happy, neutral) were
randomly presented in three blocks: (1) face stimuli presented for
1000ms, (2) face stimuli presented for 100ms, and (3) IAPS pictures presented for 1000ms. Participants were asked to response to the picture/
face which displays the same emotional atmosphere/expression as the
previous image (one back). After the MEG recordings a recognition task
for facial expressions and valence/arousal rating of the pictures was performed. Magnetic Field Tomography (MFT) and MEG anatomy toolbox
(Dammers et al., in press) were combined to objectively localize insular
cortices. The results showed stronger activations for emotional compared
to neutral faces and emotional pictures. Neuromagnetic signals of the
processing of happy and disgust faces between 240-340ms after the stimulus onset were localized in accordance to insula activity. Interestingly,
the time courses of insula activation differentiated between happy and
disgust faces, and this underlies how important the analysis of the temporal aspects of brain activity is in gaining a comprehensive picture of
emotional processing.
C 131
ATYPICAL PATTERNS OF CORTICAL ACTIVATION IN
HEALTHY CHILDREN AND CHILDREN WITH ADHD WHILE
VIEWING EMOTIONAL FACIAL EXPRESSIONS Abigail
Marsh1,
Elizabeth Finger1, Derek Mitchell2, Daniel Pine1, RJR Blair1; 1National
Institute of Mental Health, 2University of Western Ontario — ADHD in children and adolescents is characterized by an impaired ability to modulate
behavior appropriately in response to environmental cues. Accordingly,
imaging studies in children with ADHD show atypical patterns of brain
activation relative to healthy children in regions associated with executive control and behavior modulation, particularly prefrontal regions and
cingulate cortex. Facial expressions of emotion are cues that serve to
modulate the behavior of others. Anger expressions in particular modulate or inhibit inappropriate behavior. Prior evidence suggests children
with ADHD to be impaired in processing emotional expressions, particularly anger expressions (Corbett & Glidden, 2000; Pelc et al, 2006). The
goal of this study was to compare neural responses to anger expressions

119

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

relative to fear and neutral expressions in healthy children and children
with ADHD. All children were assessed using the K-SADS. Children
were then scanned using event-related fMRI (1.5 Tesla) while viewing
neutral, fear, and anger expressions. These expressions were morphed
with neutral expressions such that they varied in intensity (50%, 100%,
and 150%). Participants indicated with button-presses the gender of each
face. Results indicated atypical patterns of activation in children with
ADHD relative to healthy children in ventral prefrontal cortex, superior
temporal gyrus, posterior cingulate cortex, fusiform gyrus, and caudate.
In particular, children with ADHD showed dysfunctional BOLD
responses to anger expressions in these regions relative to neutral expressions, and relative to healthy children. These results support the conclusion that children with ADHD are impaired in processing expressions
that demand the modification of behavior.
C 132
TOP-DOWN
ATTENTIONAL
CONTROL
UNDER
THE
INFLUENCE OF DISTRACTER EMOTIONALITY AND VISIBILITY:
AN EVENT-RELATED FMRI STUDY Qian Luo, Derek Mitchell, Meena
Vythilingam, Krystal Mondillo, Niveen Kamel, James Blair; Mood and Anxiety
Disorders Program, National Institute of Mental Health — In the presence of
a distracter, top-down attentional control is needed to suppress its influence and to ensure target processing. Here we investigated the effect of
distracter emotionality and visibility on top-down control. In the study,
subjects focused on the target that was either preceded by distracters (distracter types: subliminal-emotional, subliminal-neutral, supraliminalemotional, supraliminal-neutral) or nothing (control condition). Behavioral data showed that the presence of distracters significantly interfered
with target processing. FMRI results indicated that distracter valence and
visibility had a similar interfering effect in fronto-parietal cortical attentional network. This suggests that the more emotionally or visually
salient a distracter is, the more effort is needed to exert top-down control.
Such effect can be explained the neural input from sensory and subcortical attentional/emotional area. In the visual area, visibility was found,
which might contribute to the greater control need in cortical attentional
network for visible distracters. In the subcortical attentional areas (thalamic pulvinar and superior colliculus, areas associated with bottom-up
attention) and the amygdala (an area for emotional encoding and has
reciprocal connections with subcortical attentional areas), only valence
effect was obtained. Valence effect was also found in visual area. Presumably, the reason for valence effect in cortical attentional area might be a
result of stronger input from subcortical attentional areas and visual area
triggered by emotional versus neutral distracters. Interestingly, although
interfering effect in the subliminal condition was greatly reduced relative
to the supraliminal condition, it was still significant in the emotional condition (although not in the neutral condition).
C 133
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EMOTION & ATTENTION
PROCESSING IN POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER Jasmeet
Pannu-Hayes1, Christopher M. Petty1, Debra A. Cooper2, Kevin S. LaBar2,
Gregory McCarthy3,1, Rajendra A. Morey2,1; 1Durham VA Medical Center/
MIRECC, 2Duke University Medical Center/Brain Imaging & Analysis Center,
3
Yale University — It has been well established that patients with PTSD
preferentially allocate attentional resources to threatening stimuli (Vrana,
Roodman, & Beckham, 1995). However, the neural pattern reflecting the
influence of negative emotion on attention in PTSD has yet to be demonstrated. In the present study, subjects with PTSD symptomatology
engaged in an emotional oddball task, which has previously shown that
emotion and attention largely segregate into ventral (affective) and dorsal
(cognitive-attention) streams (Yamasaki, LaBar, & McCarthy, 2002).
Twenty-six subjects with a history of trauma were classified into a high
PTSD symptomatology group (patients) or low PTSD symptomatology
group (trauma control) based on their scores on the Davidson Trauma
Scale. Subjects discriminated infrequently presented target stimuli (circles) from frequently presented standards (squares) while emotional and

120

Emotion

neutral distracters were intermittently presented. Results show that the
patient group had greater neural activity than the trauma control group
for emotional stimuli in the right middle frontal gyrus, as well as in ventral regions such as the fusiform gyrus. By contrast, the trauma control
group showed greater activation in frontal regions during the attention
task. Differences also emerged between groups in the cingulate cortex, a
region implicated in the integration of the emotional and attentional processing streams. Finally, trauma control subjects showed greater medial
temporal lobe activation than patients during viewing of neutral stimuli.
These results provide evidence for emotional interference of attention in
PTSD on a neural level.
C 134
GAZE FIXATION PREDICTS BRAIN ACTIVATION DURING THE
VOLUNTARY REGULATION OF PICTURE-INDUCED NEGATIVE
EMOTION Carien van Reekum1, Tom Johnstone1, Heather L. Urry1,2,
Marchell E. Thurow1, Hillary S. Schaefer1, Andrew L. Alexander1, Richard J.
Davidson1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2Tufts University — A number of studies have identified a distributed network of brain regions
underlying emotion regulation in response to affective images, including
parieto-temporal regions and lateral/medial regions of prefrontal cortex
(PFC). Given the role of PFC in cognitive control, these areas are considered crucial in emotion regulation. However, a number of these commonly activated regions are thought to underlie visuospatial attention
and oculomotor control. Indeed, people use attentional deployment as
one of a number of strategies to regulate emotion. We predict that a significant portion of the observed variance in brain activation is due to differences in how participants visually scan the images while regulating
their emotions. We recorded brain activation using fMRI and quantified
patterns of gaze fixation while participants increased or decreased their
affective response to a set of affective images. FMRI results replicated
previous findings on emotion regulation. Our gaze fixation data revealed
that when regulating, individuals changed their gaze patterns, and this
variation in gaze fixation explains substantial amounts of variance in
brain activation, to the extent that for the decrease condition little additional variance is left explained by any other regulation process. While a
drop in the proportion of variance uniquely left explained by regulation
for the increase condition is observed in similar brain regions, the magnitude of this drop is not as dramatic as for the decrease condition. These
data point to the importance of gaze fixation as a regulatory strategy, and
have important methodological consequences.
C 135
SOPHIE’S CHOICE: NOT A PERSONAL DILEMMA FOR PATIENTS
WITH VENTROMEDIAL LESIONS Giuseppe di Pellegrino1,2, Elisa
Ciaramelli3, Michela Muccioli2, Elisabetta Ladavas1,2; 1Universita' di Bologna,
Italy, 2Centro Studi e Ricerche di Neuroscienze Cognitive, Cesena, Italy,
3
Rotman Research Institute, Toronto, Canada — Recent fMRI evidence has
detected increased medial prefrontal activation during contemplation of
personal moral dilemmas compared to impersonal (Greene et al., 2001),
which suggests that this brain area plays a role in personal moral judgment. However, it is not clear whether the medial prefrontal cortex
would be essential to oppose personal moral violations or whether its
activation would merely reflect processing of personal dilemmas. In the
present study, we tested 7 patients with lesions in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and 12 healthy individuals in personal moral dilemmas
(e.g., the footbridge dilemma) and impersonal moral dilemmas (e.g., the
trolley dilemma). Both types of dilemma require to judge whether it is
appropriate to incur in a moral violation in order to maximize overall
consequences. However, whereas personal moral violations involve
causing bodily harm to an individual through one’s own action, impersonal moral violations lack this sense of agency, and therefore may
induce a less intense emotional experience in individuals (Greene et al.,
2001). A set of dilemmas with no moral implication (i.e. nonmoral dilemmas) was also included for comparison purposes. Compared to normal
controls, patients were more willing to judge personal moral violations as

Emotion

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

acceptable behaviours in personal moral dilemmas, and they did so more
quickly. In contrast, their performance in impersonal and nonmoral
dilemmas was comparable to the controls. These results provide evidence
that the ventromedial prefrontal cortex is critical to oppose personal
moral violations. This area might be implicated in forecasting the longterm emotional outcomes of choice options during decision-making.

ple’s emotion correlated with brain activity in the FFA and MTG whereas
rating data of one’s own emotion correlated with brain activity in the
MPFC and ACC. These results suggest that different types of emotional
appraisal may share some common brain networks, but may recruit different brain networks specialized for specific types of appraisal of emotion.

C 136
THE
COMBINATION
OF
REDUCED
ACTIVITY
IN
VENTROMEDIAL AND DORSOMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX
PREDICTS THE COMBINATION OF REDUCED REWARD
RESPONSIVENESS AND ELEVATED ANHEDONIA Sharee
N.
Light1, Tom Johnstone1, Ned H. Kalin1, Heather L. Urry2, Carien M. van
Reekum1, Richard J. Davidson1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2Tufts
University — Anhedonia, a reduced ability to experience pleasure, is a
chief symptom of major depressive disorder (MDD). Functional magnetic resonance brain imaging was used to track prefrontal cortex (PFC)
activity in 21 MDD patients (mean age 33, 8 males) compared to 18 age
matched controls (7 males) as participants viewed a sequence of emotionally positive images taken from the International Affective Picture System.
MDD patients had significantly lower (p<.001) “reward
responsiveness” scores (Carver & White, 1994), and had significantly
higher (p<.001) “anhedonia” scores (Watson et al., 1995) compared to
controls. To determine whether PFC activity could account for these
observed differences in reward responsivity and anhedonia, a general
linear model was used to compare PFC activity exhibited by controls versus MDD patients. Controls showed greater activation in ventromedial
(VMPFC; p<.01) and dorsomedial (DMPFC; p<.001) PFC as they viewed
positive images compared to MDD patients. VMPFC activity correlated
with DMPFC activity (.67; p<.001). Activity in each region predicted
reward responsiveness/anhedonia level (p’s<.05). To determine whether
the combined activity of these two prefrontal regions constitute a PFC circuit that enables the experience of pleasure, VMPFC and DMPFC activity
was mathematically combined with a principal components analysis
(PCA). Reward responsiveness and anhedonia scores were also combined with a PCA. Variation in VMPFC/DMPFC activation accounted
for 28% (r=.52, p<.01) of the variance in reward responsiveness/anhedonia level. In sum, MDD patients did not potently recruit VMPFC/
DMPFC when presented with a positive stimulus, and this may be a neural marker of a reduced ability to generate pleasure.

C 138
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CORTISOL AND MEMORY:
PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS ON THE ROLE OF AFFECTIVE STATE
AND THE AMYGDALA Allison Jahn1, Simone Kern2, Richard Davidson1,
Jerry Halverson1, Clemens Kirschbaum2, Heather Abercrombie1; 1University of
Wisconsin, Madison, 2Technical University of Dresdeny — Research
suggests
that the beneficial effects of cortisol on memory depend on the emotional
state of the individual (Okuda et al., 2004; Abercrombie et al., 2006).
These studies suggest that negative emotional arousal plays a permissive
role in the effects of cortisol on memory. Animal data suggests that
amygdala activation, specifically noradrenergic activity in the basolateral
amygdala, is necessary for the beneficial effects of cortisol on memory.
We hypothesize that cortisol will interact with both amygdala activation
and emotional state to predict memory performance. Participants served
as their own controls. They received placebo or 15 mg hydrocortisone one
hour before a self-referent encoding task (two separate fMRI scans; order
counterbalanced). Participants completed recognition memory tests after
the scanning sessions. Preliminary analyses (n=14) of event-related fMRI
show increased brain activation in response to negative words vs. positive and neutral words in the left ventral amygdala after the administration of cortisol only in individuals with low positive affect (n = 7). Also,
we found an interaction between emotional state and cortisol in predicting memory performance, such that only individuals with low positive
affect show greater memory for negative words encoded during cortisol
compared to placebo administration (F(1,12) = 6.16, p < 0.05). Our data
are consistent with the hypothesis that the beneficial effects of cortisol on
memory depend on emotional state and amygdala activation. With additional participants we will test whether amygdala activation predicts
memory performance.

C 137
BRAIN NETWORKS INVOLVED IN DIFFERENT TYPES OF
EMOTIONAL APPRAISAL DURING MOVIE VIEWING Kyung Hwa
Lee1, Walter Schneider1,2, Maureen McHugo2, Greg Siegle1; 1Center for the
Neural Basis of Cognition, University of Pittsburgh, 2Learning Research and
Development Center, University of Pittsburgh — Several different types of
emotional appraisal may occur in response to emotional stimuli such as
evaluation of one’s own emotions, evaluation of other people’s emotions,
or evaluation of the positivity or negativity of the stimulus more generally (emotion identification). Neuroimaging studies have examined neural substrates underlying emotional appraisal by instructing participants
to engage in each of these types of appraisal. However, whether these different types of appraisal of emotion are associated with similar or different brain networks has not been examined. The present study
investigated how brain activity correlated with three different types of
appraisal of emotional information. We scanned 12 healthy participants
while they watched movie clips passively using 3T fMRI. Subsequently,
14 healthy volunteers watched the same movie clips passively first, and
then they were instructed to provide continuous retrospective appraisal
ratings of emotion with three different appraisal instructions while
repeatedly watching the same movie clips. Correlation analysis revealed
the DMPFC, PCC, and amygdala as overlapping brain networks correlated with all three types of appraisal of emotion. Partial correlation analysis also elucidated distinct brain networks correlated with each
individual appraisal type of emotion. For example, ratings of other peo-

C 139
AMYGDALA, NUCLEUS ACCUMBENS, AND VENTRAL ACC ARE
ENGAGED DURING ANTICIPATION OF SOCIAL FEEDBACK
AND ARE MODULATED BY INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN SELFESTEEM AND ANXIETY Leah Somerville, Todd Heatherton, William
Kelley; Dartmouth College — This study investigated the neural structures
involved in social information processing while anticipating social feedback from others. During two fMRI studies, participants (N=42) viewed
faces of strangers and formed a first impression (like/dislike) of each face
(Study 1), or predicted whether the pictured individual would like the
participant (Study 2). Following this decision period, subjects waited to
receive fictitious feedback indicating whether the pictured individual
accepted or rejected the participant. Of interest was the neural activity
that accompanied the anticipation period. The anticipation period
engaged bilateral regions of the nucleus accumbens and ventral
amygdala significantly above baseline. After scanning, we assessed individuals’ self-esteem, social anxiety, and rejection sensitivity using selfreport measures. A factor analysis identified a predominant factor comprising higher anxiety and rejection sensitivity and lower self-esteem.
Whole-brain regression analysis examining this putative rejection anxiety
factor score identified positive correlations with nucleus accumbens and
ventral anterior cingulate activity during the delay portions of trials.
Although the amygdala responded during the anticipation period,
amygdala activity was insensitive to individual differences in the rejection anxiety factor, suggesting a relatively stable engagement of this
region in anticipation of social evaluation across subjects. These findings
indicate that nucleus accumbens activity during reward anticipation can
be extended to situations involving social evaluation, and suggest that
the degree of this involvement varies based on individual differences.

121

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

C 140
CHOOSING THE LESSER OF TWO EVILS, THE BETTER OF TWO
GOODS:
THE ROLE OF 5-HTTLPR GENOTYPE AND
TRYPTOPHAN DEPLETION STATE IN OBJECT CHOICE Karina
Blair1, Elizabeth Finger1, Abigail Marsh1, John Morton2, Beata Buzas1, David
Goldman1, Wayne Drevets1, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH, James
Blair1; 1National Institute of Mental Health, NIH, 2Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, University College London — The serotonin (5-HT) system
has been considered important for both reward- and punishment-related
decision-making. However, work distinguishing its role in reward and
punishment processing has only just begun. One aspect of decision-making that has received little attention is that making the right choice often
translates to making the better choice. Thus, response choice often occurs
in situations where both options are desirable (e.g. choosing between
mousse au chocolat or crème caramel cheesecake from a menu), or alternatively in situations where both options are undesirable. Moreover,
response choice is easier when the reinforcements associated with the
objects are far apart, rather than close, in value. In this study, healthy volunteers underwent acute tryptophan depletion (ATD) or control procedures and genotyping of the 5-HTTLPR for long and short allele variants.
We then examined the effects and interactions of ATD and the serotonin
promoter polymorphism genotype on two aspects of decision-making:
(a) decision form; i.e., choosing between two objects to gain the greater
reward or lesser punishment; (b) between-object reinforcement distance;
i.e., the difference in reinforcements associated with two objects. ATD
and LL homozygosity had comparable interactions with decision form
and between-object reinforcement distance. Specifically, both disrupted
the effect of between-object reinforcement distance when deciding
between objects both associated with punishment. Moreover, ATD and
genotype interacted, with ATD disproportionately affecting the performance of the LL homozygous group. These results suggest that serotonin
is particularly associated with punishment, rather than reward-related
processing, and that individual sensitivity to punishment-related information, and tryptophan depletion varies.
C 141
EMOTION RECOGNITION EXPLORED THROUGH MUSIC IN
CHILDREN WITH AUTISTIC SPECTRUM DISORDERS Eve-Marie
Quintin1, Anjali K. Bhatara2, Éric Fombonne3, Hélène Poissant1, Daniel J.
Levitin2; 1Université du Québec à Montréal, 2McGill University, 3Montreal
Children's Hospital, McGill University Health Center — Musical abilities are
one of the strengths of individuals with autistic spectrum disorders
(ASD). They exhibit a heightened interest in music (Levitin et al., 2004)
and above average auditory processing abilities (Brown et al., 2003).
Baron-Cohen and colleagues (2000) believe that hypo-functioning of the
amygdala may explain the social and emotional deficits in autism such as
a diminished sensitivity to fear. The observation of strong musical interest and abilities, coupled with impaired emotion processing, presents a
paradox because the communication of emotion is generally regarded to
be a primary purpose or effect of music (Juslin & Sloboda, 2001). Thus,
we assessed recognition of happy, sad, scary and peaceful music in ASD.
It was expected that happy and sad music would be identified as such by
individuals with ASD (see Heaton et al., 1999) but that their recognition
of scary and peaceful music would be impaired, as observed in patients
with damage to the amygdala (Gosselin et al., 2005). Twenty adolescents
(12-17 yrs.) with ASD and 20 typically developing children and adolescents (9-17 yrs.) participated in the study. Groups were matched for
musical knowledge and aptitude using the SAMMI. Participants heard 20
musical clips and were asked to identify the emotion conveyed in the
music: happy, sad, scary or peaceful. They also judged how intensely
each emotion was conveyed and how confident they were that they had
selected the correct emotion. (M)ANOVAs will be performed to test for
main and interaction effects of diagnosis group and intended emotion.

122

Emotion

C 142
PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDIES OF EMOTIONAL AROUSAL
TO BILINGUAL SPEAKERS'
FIRST
AND
SECOND
LANGUAGES Catherine Caldwell-Harris1, Marianna Staroselsky, Nadya
Vasilyeva2, Victoria
Rukovets1; 1Boston University, 2Northeastern
University — The importance of studying the emotional concomitants of
cognitive abilities has become increasingly appreciated over the last
decade, yet no systematic empirical study of emotion and language has
been undertaken. The current study uses bilingualism as a method of
obtaining reliable differences in emotional report. Second language users
frequently report that concepts expressed in their first language have
greater emotional resonance than concepts expressed in their second language. Electrodermal recording was used to verify this psychophysiologically in English speakers who had grown up with Russian as their
first language, or who had acquired Russian as a foreign language in the
teen years or later. Stimuli included insults, childhood reprimands (e.g.,
"Shame on you!"), and positive emotional expressions (compliments,
endearments). Late learners of English showed stronger skin conductance responses (SCRs) to emotion words in their first language, Russian,
while late learners of Russian showed stronger responses to English.
Russian-Americans who grew up with both languages had more similar
responses to the two languages. SCRs of English monolingual speakers
varied for English phrases but not Russian, indicating that results are due
to the meaning of the phrases and not their emotional tone. Participants'
ratings of their emotional arousal to the endearments and reprimands
were almost as high as to the insults, but SCRs were elevated only for
insults. Reports of which language was generally experienced as more
emotional was generally the language of highest proficiency, except that
the bilingual-from-birth group varied in their report, suggesting that
both proficiency and age-of-acqusition are important for determining
emotional reactivity.
C 143
RECOGNITION AND PRODUCTION OF EMOTIONAL FACIAL
EXPRESSIONS IN HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE Iris Trinkler, AnneCatherine Bachoud-Lévi; Ecole Normale Supérieure, et INSERM équipe — It
has been shown numerously that patients with Huntington’s Disease
(HD) present with a recognition deficit for emotional facial expressions
(Sprengelmeyer et al 1997, 2006 ; Grey et al. 1997 ; Milders et al. 2003 ;
Hennenlotter et al. 2004 ; Montagne et al. 2006). The impairment consistently involves disgust but often also other emotions (Sprengelmeyer et
al. 1997; Milders et al. 2003; Montagne et al. 2006; De Gelder et al. subm).
Our interest is to establish how the recognition deficit is correlated to a
potential deficit in the production of emotional expressions, and how
both are correlated with measures of motor deficits (UHDRS motor). 15
early HD and 15 control subjects, matched for years of education, sex,
and age, take part in this experiment. Subjects perform a forced-choice
recognition test of emotional facial expressions (anger, disgust, fear, joy,
sadness, and surprise) using 60 images from the Karolinska Faces inventory (Lundqvist, D., et al. 1998) and the 60 Ekman faces (Ekman & Friesen 1976). Further, the subjects are filmed while they produce the six
emotional facial expressions repeatedly. The most salient still image of
each production is selected and given to two naïve rater(-neurologist)s as
a forced-choice recognition test. Recognition and production scores are
correlated and compared to aspects of the UHDRS motor. With this
study, we will for the first time illuminate the relationship between action
production and perception for emotional stimuli. This will advance our
understanding of social cognition deficits in HD (Snowden et al. 2003).
C 144
“I’M DOWN BUT I’M HAPPY” REMAPPING THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN NEURAL SIMULATIONS OF DIRECTION AND
VALENCE. Adele Pacini, Phil Barnard; MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences
Unit — Lakoff & Johnson (1999) argue that understanding valenced concepts requires neural simulations of the sensori-motor system, whereby
“happy is up” and “sad is down”. Meier and Robinson (2004) find posi-

Emotion

tive evaluations of words gave faster responses to spatial probes in an
upper region of space compared to lower regions of space, and vice versa
for negative evaluations. However, “She blew her top” or “He is falling
for her” are both common metaphors despite reversing the basic mapping. Using Meier & Robinson’s paradigm, we generated “negative-up”
and “positive-down” phrases. Data showed a cue location x phrase type
interaction where upper cues were responded to faster when preceded by
a negative-up phrase, and lower cues responded to faster when preceded
by a positive-down phrase. A materials analysis was also carried out,
providing RT’s for each phrase, and showing which phrases were contributing to the observed interaction. Phrases where the direction of the
subject was central to it being positive or negative contributed to the
interaction. For example “His blood pressure was elevated”. However,
phrases where the direction was secondary to the phrase’s valence did
not, for example “They fell about laughing”. These findings suggest
firstly that the connections between sensori-motor simulations and
valence are less rigid than Lakoff & Johnson (1999) propose. Secondly,
that the extent to which we use sensori-motor simulations in our comprehension of metaphor depends not simply on the existence of a direction
salient word, but how central that word is to understanding the meaning
of the entire phrase.
C 145
AWARE AND UNAWARE MECHANISMS FOR ANXIETY
RELATED THREAT BIAS: INSIGHTS FROM BINOCULAR
RIVALRY Talma
Hendler1, Neomi Singer1, Rebecca
Ebitz2, Leslie
Ungerleider2, Christian Grillon2; 1Tel Aviv University, 2NIMH, NIH — Anxious individuals are highly tuned for threat related content. It is yet
unclear if this effect emerges from biased unaware selection or increased
aware engagement with threat related stimuli. To address this issue we
applied a binocular rivalry (BR) paradigm in which either a neutral or
fearful face continuously competed for awareness with a house. We
assumed periods of dominant face to reflect aware engagement while
periods of suppressed face to represent unaware selection. Anxiety disorder patients (n=28) were compared to healthy individuals (n=17). The
BR paradigm consisted of 40 sec epochs of overlaid images of face (fearful
or neutral) and house presented to the subject via filtered glasses. Participants were asked to indicate whether they perceived a face (i.e. dominant
face) or a house (i.e. suppressed face). Healthy subjects had longer periods of dominant than suppressed face more so when it was fearful than
neutral (p<0.01). In contrast, anxiety disorder patients did not show this
emotion related difference in dominant face periods. Further, in patients
relative to healthy, the difference between fearful and neutral faces, was
diminished for dominant face (p<0.03) and increased for the suppressed
face (p<0.02). This effect was most evident among patients with the worst
clinical state. Our finding suggests two possible mechanisms for the
observed threat related bias among anxiety disorder patients: decreased
differential aware engagement with threat versus non-threat signals, and
excessive unaware selection processing of the threat signal. These mechanisms might differentially underlie clinical manifestations in anxiety disorder.

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

movement of the eyes either toward the subject or away from him/her.
The results showed that the perception of direct relative to averted gaze
evoked a greater, later and longer lasting N170, suggesting that gaze contact mobilized more resources than averted gaze in the early stage of gaze
processing. Moreover, the direction of gaze motion influenced the mean
ERP amplitude between 160-210 ms starting over centro-parietal electrodes and extending into occipito-temporal regions. These results were
significant whatever the head orientation. Source reconstruction of the
differential responses to gaze contact versus averted gaze in the 150-220
ms time window revealed a temporally and spatially structured brain
network implicated in this early dissociation. The network began in the
median prefrontal cortex regions and spread to the superior temporal
sulcus and the orbitofrontal regions. These regions are known to be
involved in biological motion perception and Theory-of-Mind processes.
Altogether, our findings show that gaze contact as compared to other
gaze directions recruits early specific processes in the social brain network.
C 147
DISSOCIATION IN THE INFLUENCE OF EMOTIONAL CONTENT
AND PERSONALITY ON WORKING AND LONG-TERM
RECOGNITION MEMORY Raliza
Stoyanova, Kirston Greenop;
University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa — The relationship between
working and long-term recognition memory for emotional content and
the extent to which individual differences in personality influence this
relationship is poorly understood. To address these questions, we
employed a delayed match-to-sample working memory task followed by
a surprise remember/know picture recognition task. Working memory
accuracy for arousal-matched positive and negative stimuli was lower
than that for neutral images. Despite similar levels of accuracy, participants were slower to respond to negative than to positive stimuli suggesting that negative images were processed less efficiently. Higher
degrees of Neuroticism tended to impede working memory accuracy for
negative stimuli while higher degrees of Extraversion tended to improve
performance. Using measures of recollection and familiarity to examine
the types of awareness that underlie long-term recognition of emotional
images, we found that overall, participants recalled the greatest number
of negative images, followed by positive and then neutral images with no
effect of valence on familiarity. However, individuals higher in Neuroticism were significantly more sensitive to differences in familiarity signals
for negative stimuli. These results suggest that while working memory
performance for emotional stimuli is worse than for neutral, negative
stimuli are more readily recalled over the long term. Our results also
indicate that differential effects of personality on emotional working
memory may be revealed only under relatively more demanding conditions and that while higher levels of Neuroticism may impede negative
working memory, they are also associated with greater sensitivity to previously studied as compared to unstudied negative items, over longer
time intervals.

C 146
EARLY DIFFERENTIATION OF BRAIN RESPONSES TO DIRECT
AND AVERTED GAZE DURING THE PERCEPTION OF EYE
MOTION: AN ERP STUDY WITH SOURCE RECONSTRUCTION
Laurence Conty1,2, Karim N'Diaye1,3, Charles Tijus2, Nathalie George1;
1
CNRS UPR 640/Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, 2Cognition et
Usages, Université PARIS VIII, Saint-Denis, France, 3University of Geneva,
Switzerland — Direct gaze or eye contact is a particular configuration of
gaze direction. It is a strong signal to mutual social attention, which often
precedes interindividual interactions and can have various meanings
depending on the context. In order to examine the processing of gaze
contact relative to averted gaze, we studied evoked potentials in response
to the apparent motion of gaze in 14 human adults. Deviated and frontal
faces were presented with a fixed gaze direction, followed by an apparent

123

Sunday, May 6, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

124

Emotion

Poster Session D
Attentional Processes: Auditory
D1
GETTING BACK ON TRACK IN AUDITORY ATTENTION Sophia
Barrett1,2, Martin Duff1,2, Hilary Gomes2; 1Graduate School and University
Center (CUNY), 2City College of New York (CUNY) — In recent years, there
has been a growing interest in the reorienting of attention. We have been
studying attention and distraction using an auditory distraction paradigm
developed by Schröger and colleagues (1998; 2000) that embeds task relevant information into the same perceptual object as task irrelevant/distracting information.
Participants have to discriminate between
equiprobable long and short tones. Infrequent task-irrelevant frequency
deviations have reliably caused behavioral distraction in the form of prolonged reaction times. However, a crucial question to be answered is the
length of time it takes a person to get back on track after the occurrence of
a distracting event. The aim of the present study was to investigate how
much time was required after a distracting event to fully reorient to the
primary task. Twenty undergraduate participants performed an auditory
forced choice duration discrimination task in which the preceding ISI
(1300, 1100, 1000, 900, 800, 700, 600, or 500) was varied from trial to trial.
We compared performance measures (accuracy and reaction time) following each of the preceding ISIs to determine the time interval required to
recover from the distracting event and return to performing at a predistraction level. Preliminary behavioral research indicates that most adults
require 500 – 800 ms to reorient after the occurrence of a distracting auditory event. Establishing the time frame of reorientation has implications
for fully understanding the impact of and recovery from distraction.
D2
ERP PREDICTORS OF AUDITORY DEVIANCE AWARENESS
Merav Sabri, Michael Ellingson, Colin Humphries, Jeffrey Binder, Einat
Liebenthal; Medical College of Wisconsin — We used event-related potentials
(ERPs) to study the differences between neural responses to detected and
undetected auditory irregularities during a divided attention task. In one
ear, participants (n=16) performed a difficult duration judgment task to a
sequence of short (50 ms) and long (60 ms) sinusoidal tones (1000 Hz;
ISI=1500 ms) of equal probability. In the other ear, participants monitored
a second auditory sequence, indicating whether a frequency change (deviant) had occurred within a train of repetitive standard tones (1000 Hz, 110
ms; ISI=500 ms). The frequency change was determined individually and
set to a value between 8 and 20 Hz that produced detection rates of
approximately 50%. Group average performance on the primary task
reached 80% accuracy, and the detection rate on the secondary task was
50% (SD=11%; false alarm rate=12%). ERP responses to deviants revealed
a larger frontal positivity at 150 ms latency --the P2 component-- and a
larger prolonged frontocentral negativity from 200 to 500 ms for detected
compared with undetected change. The broad negativity may reflect a
combination of the N2 component associated with increased attention and
stimulus categorization, and the contingent negative variation (CNV) component implicated in preparation for active target detection and response,
which in this study was delayed until the end of the tone sequences. The
dissociation of responses to detected and undetected change as early as
150 ms latency, suggests that awareness of auditory irregularity is triggered and maintained within this time frame.

D3
RESTING WITH INSTRUCTIONS: ACTIVELY IGNORING OR
ATTENDING TO SCANNER BACKGROUND NOISE DURING
REST PERIODS CAN ALTER DEFAULT MODE OF BRAIN
FUNCTIONS Nadine Gaab, Noa Ofen, John D.E. Gabrieli; Brain and
Cognitive Science, MIT — Many studies have identified specific brain
regions that are activated during rest and deactivated during attentiondemanding goal-directed tasks, the so called ‘default mode of brain functions” (DMBF). We recently showed that the scanner background noise
(SBN) can suppress the DMBF by adding an attentional component to the
resting period (Gaab et al., HBM2006 abstract). However, at least one
study reports no deactivation of the DMBF during passive stimulation.
The goal of this study was to examine whether activation during the resting state can be altered by different attention modulating instructions during resting periods. During a baseline phase, 20 subjects were instructed to
relax in the 3T MR scanner and to focus on a fixation cross. Following that,
subjects were instructed to change their attention towards the SBN
depending on a visual cue, either carefully attend to SBN or ignore SBN.
Ignoring the noise relative to the uninstructed baseline led to activation of
medial, middle and inferior frontal gyrus. Ignoring the noise, relative to
attending to it revealed increased activation in various brain regions that
have been frequently reported to be part of the DMBF, including medial
frontal regions and anterior cingulate. Attending to SBN compared to
ignoring SBN resulted in increased activation of bilateral primary and secondary auditory cortices. These results suggest that attention modulating
instruction changes can lead to alterations of the resting state activation.
Clear instructions on ‘how to rest’ seem to be crucial in studies that compare healthy fMRI-experienced controls and impaired subjects, children or
naïve subjects.
D4
INTENSE MEDITATION TRAINING ENHANCES THE EFFECTS OF
SELECTIVE
ATTENTION
ON
ELECTRICAL
EVOKED
POTENTIALS Antoine Lutz, Heleen Slagter, Zachary Moran, Nancy
Rawlings, Richard Davidson; Waisman Laboratory for Brain Imaging and
Behavior, University of Wisconsin — Previously, we reported electroencephalogram differences between expert meditators and novices, suggesting
that meditation may, over time, lead to long-term changes in the brain and
its functions. Here, for the first time, we explicitly tested this assumption
by studying the changes in attentional processes before and after a 3
month intensive meditation training (~ 1000 hours total). A standard
dichotic listening task was used to probe the impact of meditation training
on sustained attention and attentional control. We collected data from seventeen participants, referred to as practitioners, (7 male; median age 41
years, range 22-64 years, median education = 18 years) and twenty-three
matched controls, without prior meditation experience, referred to as novices. Novices took part in meditation training sessions and practiced daily
for a week prior to the pre- and post-data collections (3 months apart). The
practitioners’ performance (reaction time, standard deviation of the reaction time, and sensitivity d) increased from pre- to post-time points and
this increase was higher than that of the novices. Intensive meditation
training also was shown to enhance the difference between attended and
unattended event related potentials (ERP) as early as the early frontal positive component (40-55ms). This increase suggests attention training may
enhance the early gating of auditory transmission. Finally, the P200
showed a strong time by group interaction in both the attended and unattended conditions (increase for the practitioners after the retreat). Together
these results suggest that intensive meditation training affects attentional
processes.

125

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

D5
FUNCTION AND TOPOGRAPHY OF MISMATCH VS. LATE
NEGATIVITY AND THE ROLE OF ATTENTION IN VOWEL
PERCEPTION Miwako Hisagi, Marcin Wroblewski, Carol Tessel, Hia
Datta, Valerie Shafer; City University of New York (CUNY) - Graduate
Center — Attentional mechanisms are hypothesized to play an important
role in second language processing (Strange and Shafer, 2006). To explore
this, modulation of the Mismatch and Late Negativity (MMN/LN) discriminative components were examined in English listeners under different attentional conditions. The MMN is shown to be preattentive,
although it can be modulated by attention (Woldorff & Hillyard, 1991).
The functional significance of LN remains unclear but it has been related
to discrimination and attentional processes (e.g., Shestakova 2003). We
compared voltage and current source density (CSD) maps to determine
whether these components might share underlying neural sources and
whether attention influences the topography. Stimuli were /I/ (as nontarget deviant) and /E/ (as non-target standard). The three tasks were: a)
ignore stimuli and attend to a silent movie (Passive Task), b) press a button to the higher frequency of two tones (Tone Task) and, c) press a button to the /ba/ target (Speech Task). MMN showed a slightly right,
fronto-central topography. In the Passive and Tone Tasks, inversion was
greatest at the right mastoid whereas in the Speech Task inversion was
greatest at the left mastoid. The LN showed more frontal topography
than the MMN. At inferior sites inversion of the LN was largest at the
right mastoid for the Passive and the left for the Speech, with no LN for
the Tone Task. The topographical analysis suggests that MMN and LN
do not have identical sources, and attention to different aspects of the
auditory information leads to differences in topography.
D6
UNILATERAL
NEGLECT
AND
TASK-DEPENDENT
MODULATION OF SPATIAL BIAS IN AUDITORY SEARCH
Ranmalee Eramudugolla1, Jason Mattingley1, Dexter Irvine2; 1University of
Melbourne, 2Monash University — Efficient detection of a target object in a
cluttered visual display requires intact visuospatial attentional mechanisms. This is evident in individuals with unilateral spatial neglect.
Neglect patients’ lateralized bias in spatial attention leads to spatially
asymmetric performance on visual search tasks, such that they are slower
to, or fail to, detect targets located on the contralesional relative to ipsilesional side of space. This is consistent with recent reports that detection
of visual targets embedded in arrays of multiple distracter stimuli relies
predominantly on selective attention to spatial rather than object features
of stimuli. As with vision, unilateral neglect can also result in a spatial
bias in detecting lateralized auditory stimuli (e.g., auditory extinction).
However, it is not clear whether spatial attention plays a role in guiding
selective attention across auditory scenes composed of concurrent spatialized and spectro-temporally varying sound streams. If auditory and
visual search both rely on spatial attention, we predicted that neglect
patients would display a spatial bias in target detection on auditory as
well as visual search tasks. The detection of contralesional visual or auditory stimuli in neglect can also be modulated by the stimulus properties
to which the patients’ attention is directed. In the present study, we also
investigated whether neglect patients’ auditory and visual search skills
varied depending on the task required of them: target detection vs target
localization. The findings have implications for current models of attentional modulation of spatial and object processing, and the similarity of
auditory and visual systems in this regard.

Attentional Processes: Visual

Attentional Processes: Visual
D7
AGING AND CULTURAL DIFFERENCES IN EYE-MOVEMENTS
DURING COMPLEX PICTURE VIEWING Joshua
Goh1, Michael
Chee2, Jiat Chow Tan2, Denise Park1; 1University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, 2Singhealth Research — East Asians have been shown to
engage more holistic perceptual processing of visual information compared to Westerners. Recently, we found fMRI evidence (Goh et al., in
press) that suggests aging might modulate these differences possibly due
to prolonged experience in the cultural environment. In this study, we
tracked eye movements to verify these imaging findings concerning cultural and age differences in visual attention. We evaluated how bottomup salient changes in object and background information interact with
top-down attention biases due to cultural influences. 61 subjects (15
young and 14 old East Asians; 16 young and 16 old Westerners) passively
viewed naturalistic pictures of objects with background scenes in an
identical manner to our previous fMRI study. Quartets of pictures were
presented in each condition: a) 4 repeated objects and backgrounds, b) 4
repeated objects with changing backgrounds, c) 4 changing objects with
repeated backgrounds, and d) 4 changing objects and backgrounds. Compared to young adults, older adults had longer peak latencies for proportion of object gazes over time per picture suggesting slower visual
processing with age. Across all picture change conditions, East Asians
spent more time fixating on backgrounds elements, had longer gaze distances per picture but shorter fixation durations compared to Westerners.
In addition, older East Asians made the most number of fixations per picture. These data buttress prior neuroimaging findings and suggest that
East Asians engage more holistic and context-based visual scanning strategies compared to an object-based strategy in Westerners.
D8
ARE OLD ADULTS MORE CONTEXTUAL? AN EYE TRACKING
STUDY Wenjing Wang1, Adrian Imfeld2, Denise Park1; 1University of
Illinois at Urbana Champaign, 2University of Zurich, Switzerland — When
viewing complex scenes, functional imaging data have suggested that
older adults evidence robust activations in the parahippocampus, reflecting attention to the background scene, but that old adults show reduced
activations compared to young in the lateral occipital complex, an area
specialized for object recognition (Chee et al., 2006). In the present study,
we investigated whether old adults spend more time viewing background compared to object areas in complex scenes using eye tracking
technology to measure fixation time. We tested 19 young and 16 old subjects while they viewed naturalistic scenes at encoding and recognition.
At encoding, all stimuli were comprised of a focal object presented
against a complex, naturalistic background (e.g., moose grazing near a
lake). At recognition, subjects judged their memory for the focal object in
the picture which was presented in the context of either the same background at encoding or against a novel background. Results indicated
that at encoding, young and older adults showed similar patterns of gaze
to backgrounds and objects. However, during recognition, older adults
showed more attention to the background compared to young adults.
Moreover, when either the object or background of the recognition stimulus was novel, older adults spent disproportionally more time than
young gazing at the background, suggesting context was more important
for them in making a difficult recognition decision. Overall, these findings suggest that when making memory judgments older adults are more
likely to rely on contextual information, whereas young adults have sufficient information based on the central object.
D9
WHEN THE EYES LOSE FACE IN SOCIAL ATTENTION Imran
Ansari, Chris Blais, Derek Besner; University of Waterloo — There are a
number of reports that subjects are faster to respond to a target that
appears at a location validly cued by the gaze direction of a schematic
face than they are to a target that appears at an invalidly cued location.

126

Attentional Processes: Visual

The standard interpretation of this spatial cueing effect is that (a) it demonstrates a reflexive shift of attention driven by the social and/or biological significance of face, and (b) having attention at the right location
speeds processing. However, most of these studies ignore the fact that the
pupils of the schematic face appear as an abrupt onset, producing apparent motion. By hypothesis, apparent motion per se is sufficient to cue
attention to a location. The present experiment distinguishes between
these two hypotheses by pitting eye gaze direction against apparent
motion of features other than the eyes. The results are consistent with the
conclusion that apparent motion is sufficient to account for the spatial
cueing effect observed with schematic faces in the context of this paradigm.
D 10
INATTENTIONAL BLINDNESS IS MEDIATED BY ATTENTIONAL
INHIBITION UNDER HIGH TASK LOAD Preston P. Thakral, Scott D.
Slotnick; Boston College — Salient stimuli presented at unattended locations are not always perceived, a phenomenon termed inattentional
blindness (IB). We hypothesized that IB may be mediated through attentional inhibition. Studies investigating the spatial distribution of attention
have shown that attentional inhibition has its maximal effect near the
locus of attention. If our hypothesis is correct, IB effects should be maximal near an attended location. A central fixation cross was presented on a
white background along with rapidly presented colored digits at an
eccentric location (3.2° of visual angle from fixation). A black circle
served as the unexpected critical stimulus. Participants were instructed to
maintain central fixation and say each color/digit aloud, requiring
focused attention at that location. In three groups of participants, the critical stimulus was presented at central fixation (control group), 1.5° of
visual angle from the attended location, or 3° of visual angle from the
attended location (distances were based on previous work showing maximal attentional inhibition effects at 1.5°). Results illustrated that IB
effects mirrored attentional inhibition effects, maximal adjacent to the
attended location. However, these effects were only observed when the
task was sufficiently difficult (high task load/low accuracy), consistent
with previous findings (Cartwright & Lavie, 2006). In a second experiment, we directly manipulated task load by varying the colored digit
interstimulus interval. The results confirmed that IB effects only occur
during high task load. Our evidence suggests that attentional inhibition
mediates inattentional blindness, specifically under high task load conditions. The neural mechanisms underlying these effects are also considered.
D 11
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN CEREBRAL WHITE MATTER
INTEGRITY: FIBER TRACKING FROM DTI Matthew C.
Costello1,
David J. Madden1, Leslie Crandell Dawes1, Leonard E. White1, Roberto
Cabeza2, James M. Provenzale1, Scott Huettel1; 1Duke University Medical
Center, 2Duke University — Previous research has established an agerelated decline in cerebral white matter integrity, especially in anterior
brain regions. Yet it is unknown whether specific fiber tracks contribute
differentially to this decline. We used diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)
fiber tracking to investigate age-related differences in regions relevant to
the frontoparietal cortical network: the genu and splenium of the corpus
callosum, and the superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF). Fiber tracks
were derived from tensor images using target and seed regions defined
on high resolution T1-weighted images. We divided splenium tracts into
occipital and parietal components. We hypothesized that in addition to
an expected age-related decline in fractional anisotropy (FA) for the
genu, there would be decline in FA for posterior regions that support bottom-up sensory processing. We conducted 15-direction DTI at 3T, collecting 52 slices with voxel size of 1 x 1 x 2.4 mm. Analyses of 12 younger
adults (18-27 years of age) and 12 older adults (64-85 years of age) indicated significant age-related decline in FA throughout each region of
interest. Regression analyses indicated a highly linear (r2 = .94) relation
between younger and older adults’ FA values, yet with an overall decline

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

in older subjects suggesting a general age-related decline in white matter
integrity throughout the frontoparietal network. Only within the genu
did the magnitude of decline significantly exceed the generalized effect.
We conclude that although age-related decline in white matter integrity
is differentially greater for the genu, decline occurs generally throughout
the frontoparietal network, including posterior regions mediating sensory processing.
D 12
SENSORY COMPETITION AND RESPONSE COMPETITION:
HOW THESE PROCESSES INFLUENCE THE FILTERING OF
IRRELEVANT INFORMATION Ana Torralbo1,2, Paige Scalf2, Diane
Beck2, Arthur Kramer2; 1Universidad Autonóma of Madrid, Spain, 2Beckman
Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Stimuli presented
simultaneously in the visual field are not processed independently, but
instead interact in a mutually suppressive way that suggests a competition for neural representation in early stages of processing at the level of
visual cortex. It has also been shown that interference due to competing
response tendencies produces conflict at later stages of processing,
closely related to adjustments in cognitive control to prevent subsequent
conflict. We are interested in how these two systems of competing tendencies interact. We manipulated a flanker design where the flanker can
be response compatible or incompatible with respect to the target. At the
same time, the flankers were either surrounded by irrelevant letters (i.e.
the sensory competition condition) or not. Our preliminary results show
that flanker interference effects (incompatible – compatible RTs) can be
modulated by sensory competition in peripheral locations. Results are
discussed in terms of attenuated representation of target and distractors
due to sensory competition.
D 13
AN INDEPENDENT RESOURCE OF EACH HEMISPHERE
MODULATES SELECTIVE ATTENTION Kazuhito Yoshizaki, Ritsuko
Nishimura; Aichi Shukutoku University — The aim of this study was to
investigate the relationship between selective attention and interhemispheric interaction. Based on both the load theory (Lavie, 1995, 2005) and
the assumption in which each hemisphere has an independent attentional
resource, we examined the effects of perceptual load in each hemisphere
on compatibility effects. In the present experiments, two letter-strings
(target “X” or “N”, and noise stimuli) as the task-relevant stimuli were
briefly presented to left and right visual-fields in parallel with a distracter
(“X”, “N”), which was presented on the center of the screen. Righthanded participants were asked to identify the target among the two letter-strings during ignoring the distracter. In Experiment 1, the perceptual
load (“HIGH” or “LOW”) of the letter-string without a target was manipulated and the perceptual load with a target was invariant. The results
showed that the size of the compatibility effects was larger in the LOW
condition than in the HIGH condition. In Experiment 2, the task-relevant
stimuli consisted of the high and low perceptual load-strings. The target
was included in either letter-string. The results showed that the size of
compatibility effects was larger when the target was not included in the
LOW perceptual load-string. These the consistent results of the two
experiments were due to that the more residual resource of the hemisphere where the target was not projected would facilitate processing the
distracter. Our findings suggested that selective attention would be modulated by an independent resource of each hemisphere.
D 14
TIME-SPACE SYNESTHESIA: AN EVENT-RELATED BRAIN
POTENTIAL (ERP) STUDY Ursina
Teuscher, David Brang, Lee
Edwards, Marguerite
McQuire, Seana
Coulson; Cognitive Science
Department, University of California, San Diego — In one type of synesthesia, people report that they associate time events, such as months of the
year, with specific spatial locations. The present study assessed the extent
to which time-space associations in synesthesia impact visuospatial attention via a symbolic cuing paradigm. Cues consisted of arrows pointing
left or right, direction words "left" or "right", and the names of months

127

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

that were on either the left or the right side of the synesthete's mental calendar (e.g., "October" and "May"). After each cue, a probe stimulus
appeared in the correctly cued location 75% of the time, and in the
uncued location 25%. Half of the probes required a response (targets),
and half did not (non-targets). ERPs were recorded from 3 time-space
synesthetes and 6 age-matched control subjects as they performed this
target detection task. In the time-space synesthetes, a comparison of ERPs
to probes cued by months revealed effects of cue validity on the P2 component (larger for valid probes) and the late positive complex (LPC)
observed 400-1000ms post-onset (larger for invalid probes). In the control
subjects, effects of cue validity were apparent on ERPs to probes cued by
arrows and direction words, but not on ERPs to probes cued by months.
These data suggest that relative to age-matched controls, time-space synesthetes can more effectively utilize words referring to temporal events to
direct their attention in space.
D 15
DISTRACTIBILITY IN THE AGING AND PARKINSONIAN
BRAIN Liana Machado, Amy Devine, Natalie Wyatt; University of
Otago — Using a modified flanker task in young adults, we previously
found that when a distractor and a target appear in close temporal proximity, response latencies are faster when the two stimuli are associated
with the same response compared to different responses (i.e., a positive
compatibility effect). In contrast, when a distractor precedes a target by
more than a few hundred milliseconds, responses are delayed when the
two stimuli are associated with the same response (i.e., a negative compatibility effect). We interpreted the negative compatibility effect that
emerged at longer distractor-target stimulus onset asynchronies (SOAs)
as reflecting inhibition of the neural representation of the distractor,
which may function to prevent unwarranted action plans from being executed inadvertently. The current research investigated the impact of
aging and Parkinson’s disease on distractibility and the use of inhibition
to minimize distraction. Compared to young adults, elderly adults
showed substantially larger positive compatibility effects at the shorter
SOAs and reduced or absent negative compatibility effects at the longer
SOAs. These findings suggest that the neural changes that occur with
normal aging lead to both increased distractibility and a faulty inhibitory
mechanism of selective attention. Removing the distractor prior to the
appearance of the target attenuated these effects of aging. Parkinson’s
disease further disrupted the function of the inhibitory mechanism that
reduces the positive compatibility effect as the SOA increases. Interestingly, decreased distractor inhibition was not necessarily accompanied
by increased distractibility, suggesting that the two effects may have
resulted from the disruption of two separate mechanisms.
D 16
EXAMINATION OF THE CONTINUUM OF ENGAGEMENT AND
ADDICTION TO GAMBLING, COMPUTER/VIDEO GAMES AND
THE INTERNET AS INDEXED BY P300 Naomi
Thomas, Frances
Martin; School of Psychology, University of Tasmania — Recent advances in
the field of addiction have given greater emphasis to subjective experience and compulsive behaviour, signifying a paradigmatic shift to conceptualise behavioural addiction as sharing similarities with substance
dependency. Research suggests addiction and engagement in behaviours
exist on a continuum of severity. This study was the first to employ a psychophysiological measure, the P300 event-related potential, to examine
whether engagement and addiction to behaviours exists along a continuum ranging from non-disordered engagement to addiction, characterised by neuronal adaptation and negative psychological and social
consequences. Eighty participants aged 17-28 were classified according to
their involvement in gambling, computer games, video-arcade games
and the Internet. The P3b component was elicited while subjects
responded to a visual three-stimulus oddball task. Three continuum
hypotheses were investigated; progression of engagement to addiction,
progression of engagement and addictive symptoms, and continuum of
addictive experience from no clinical symptoms to addiction. It was

128

Attentional Processes: Visual

hypothesised that P3b amplitude, which indexes the cognitive resources
used to process a task, would be sequentially reduced in participants
with progressively greater engagement and addictive symptoms. Findings indicate that P3b amplitude discriminated between levels of engagement, progression of addictive symptoms and engagement, and
continuum of addictive symptoms, particularly at midline sites. Consistent with reduced cognitive processing reported for substance dependency, the current findings suggest that participants with lower levels of
engagement in these behaviours and no addictive symptoms had more
resources available to perform the task than subjects with either a subclinical level of addictive symptoms or a diagnosis of addiction.
D 17
THE NUMBER DISTANCE EFFECT IS ENHANCED IN THE
ATTENTIONAL BLINK PERIOD Tsu-Yu Hsu1,2, Jiun-Liang Chyan2,3,
Shih-Kuen Cheng1,2, Daisy L. Hung1,2, Ovid J.- L. Tzeng1,2, Chi-Hung
Juan1,2; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central university,
2National Yang-Ming university, 3Computer Science and Information
Engineering National Central university — The number distance effect indicates that the mental number line is accessed in a number comparison
task. However, the relationship between the number distance effect and
visual attention remains unclear. In this study, we use a rapid serial
visual presentation (RSVP) task to probe the fate of the number distance
effect in the attentional blink (AB) period. In the RSVP task, twenty-one
subjects were required to identify a double-digits number (served as T1)
then compared whether the second double-digits number (served as T2)
was larger or smaller than T1. The numerical distance between T1 and T2
were systematically manipulated in the task. The behavioral data indicated that the phenomenon of attentional blink was seen in the numerical
task. Subjects’ performance was poor when T2 was presented 160~240 ms
after the display of T1. Intriguingly, their performance was deteriorated
with the decrement of the numerical distance between T1 and T2 in the
attentional blink period. The pattern of the data suggests that the judgment of magnitude is highly affected by the resources of attention.
Accordingly, it also suggests that AB is not an all-or-none effect and it can
be modulated by the context set by the T1. We are currently using ERPs
to explore whether the number distance effect can be reflected by ERPs
waveforms (e.g. Dehaene, 1996) despite that they cannot be correctly
reported in the attentional blink period. Together with Luck et al’s finding (1996) that semantic information can be processed and be reflected
with N400 components in the AB period. Our study may shed some light
on the debate whether an asemantic route exists in the numerical processing (e.g. Fias, 2001).
D 18
DISSOCIATING
VISUAL
SELECTION
AND
SACCADE
PROGRAMMING IN TIME Wen-Yen Hsu1,2, Jia-Rong Liu1,2, Daisy L.
Hung1,2,3, Ovid J.- L. Tzeng1,2, Chi-Hung Juan1,2; 1Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, National Central university, National Yang-Ming university,
3Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming university — The
relationship between covert attention and saccadic eye movement has been the
long-standing issue in attentional research. The premotor theory of attention proposes that “the mechanisms responsible for spatial attention and
the mechanisms involved in programming ocular saccades are basically
the same” (Sheliga et al. 1994). Juan et al. (2004) challenged this prevailed
theory by showing the allocation of visual attention and saccade programming can be dissociated in time. (see also Hunt and Kingstone,
2003). In this study, following the same logic in Juan et al’s study, we
used the abrupt onset paradigm ( e.g.Theeuwes et al.1998) and manipulated the onset time of abrupt onset in visual search task to probe the
functional dissociability of the oculomotor and the attentional systems in
human. Eye movement data were collected while subjects performed a
pro-saccade task. Subjects’ saccade latency and saccade curvature were
measured. In the trials with early AO onset time (SOA: 0, 100 ms), the AO
prolonged saccade latency significantly but saccade curvatures were not
affected. However, when AO was presented on late onset time points

Attentional Processes: Visual

(SOA: 200, 300 ms), the trajectories of saccades curve away from abrupt
onset location significantly but saccade latencies were not changed. In
other words, AO can differently affect the length of saccade latency and
the amplitude of saccade curvature with different AO onset time points.
The pattern of results may indicate that the mechanisms underlying
visual attention (measured by saccade latency) and saccade programming (measured by saccade curvature) can be dissociated in time.
D 19
PROBING THE FUNCTIONAL ROLES OF THE FRONTAL EYE
FIELDS AND THE TEMPOROPARIETAL JUNCTION IN THE
INTERPLAY BETWEEN VOLUNTARY AND STIMULUS-DRIVEN
ATTENTION WITH TMS Chi-Fu Chang1, Hui-Yuan Shiao2, Yi-Chin
Lin1, Daisy L. Hung3, Ovid J.- L. Tzeng2, Chi-Hung Juan1; 1Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central university, 2National Yang-Ming
university, 3Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming university — The
interaction between goal-directed and stimulus-driven attentional control is vital for the deployment of visual attention. Serences and colleagues (2005) have demonstrated that the temporoparietal junction (TPJ)
and ventral frontal cortex may serve the function for the transition
between two modes of the attentional processes. It has also been shown
that the frontal eye fields (FEF) play a critical role on the voluntary
deployment of visual attention (e.g. Schall., 2002; Muggleton et al., 2003;
Juan et al., 2004). In the present study, we used the contingent attentional
capture task (e.g. Folk et al., 1992) and repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation (rTMS) to investigate the causal roles of FEF and TPJ in these
attentional processes. rTMS (10Hz, 300ms) was applied over FEF and TPJ
either 300ms before or simultaneously with the onset of the visual search
array. Our preliminary data indicate that the attentional capture effects
caused by the task were both affected by the application of FEF-rTMS and
TPJ-rTMS. However, the functional involvement of FEF in the processes
seems earlier than that of TPJ. The pattern of data suggests that FEF may
engage in monitoring and in maintaining the attentional settings and TPJ
may involve in redeploying attention to accommodate changes of the settings.
D 20
SPATIAL ATTENTION AND REPETITION PRIMING IN FACE
RECOGNITION: BEHAVIOURAL AND ERP RESULTS Markus
F.
Neumann1, Stefan R. Schweinberger1, Holger Wiese1, A. Mike Burton2;
1Friedrich-Schiller University of Jena, Germany, 2University of Glasgow,
UK — Several studies suggest that faces capture attention and are particularly difficult to ignore. While task-irrelevant distractor faces seem to be
processed to a certain extent when observers attend to another visual
object, distractor face processing is extinguished when observers attend
to another face. Capacity limits for faces have recently been proposed,
allowing processing of only one face at a time (Bindemann, Burton, &
Jenkins, 2005, Cognition). We investigated repetition priming by
attended faces or unattended distractor faces, assessing reaction times
(RTs) and event related potentials (ERPs). In a priming phase, participants performed speeded gender judgements for central famous faces or
symbols which were flanked by famous distractor faces. During subsequent testing, participants performed speeded fame decisions for primed
or new faces. In Experiment 1, RTs revealed priming for target faces
primed by attended central faces, but no priming from distractor faces
irrespective of central item type (symbol/face). Relative to an unprimed
condition, ERPs revealed a larger parietal positivity (450-600 ms) for target faces primed by attended faces, but no evidence for priming by distractor faces. In Experiment 2, we equated the difficulty of face and
symbol gender judgements and reduced the time interval between priming and test. We replicated the results for attended primes. While RT
priming from distractor faces remained absent, ERPs provided tentative
evidence for distractor priming. Results suggest that although ERP correlates of priming may be found, distractor faces outside the focus of spatial
attention were not processed sufficiently to cause behavioural repetition
priming.

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

D 21
VISUAL PERCEPTUAL LEARNING IN DOUBLE-FEATURE
CONJUNCTION SEARCH Yulong Ding, Department of Psychology, Zhe
Qu, Yunpeng Lai; Wei Tan, Sun Yet-Sen University — The present study
aimed to investigate the mechanism of fast perceptual learning in doublefeature conjunction search. Adult subjects with normal vision participated in this study. Each subject was given 480 trails’ training in colorshape conjunction search task within 1 hour. In order to measure the
learning effect and its specificity, the training task and 1~2 transfer tasks
were tested just before and after training. In transfer tasks, the target was
different in one or both features while the distractors remained same as
those in the training task. The results showed that training of color-shape
conjunction search induced significant improvement in response accuracy. Such improvement could “not” transfer to target with different
color and different shape, as well as to that with same shape but different
color. However, the learning effect could “partly” transfer to target with
same color but different shape. These results indicated that short-term
training of color-shape conjunction search could induce learning of
“color-shape” conjunction and “color” feature, but not “shape” feature.
We suggested that the different learning effects of color and shape features may be due to the asymmetry in processing of the two features;
learning of color-shape conjunction may involve activation of conjunctively tuned channels, and/or enhancement of temporal synchrony in the
processing of color and shape features.
D 22
NETWORKS FOR SPATIAL ATTENTION IN THE HUMAN LEFT
HEMISPHERE:
EVIDENCE
FROM
INTRAOPERATIVE
STIMULATION Michel Thiebaut de Schotten, Marika Urbanski, Hugues
Duffau, Emanuelle Volle, Bruno Dubois, Richard Levy, Paolo Bartolomeo;
INSERM, Paris — Right-sided neglect is less frequent, severe and persistent than left neglect. The frequent association with language impairments makes right neglect difficult to explore, and its lesional correlates
within the left hemisphere are poorly known (Beis & al, Neurology 63:
1600-05, 2004). Intra-operative electrical stimulation, which temporarily
inactivates small brain regions, has better spatio-temporal resolution than
lesion overlapping methods. Previous results using this technique in the
right hemisphere have identified the caudal portion of the superior temporal gyrus (STG), the supra-marginal gyrus (SMG) and the second
branch of the superior longitudinal fasciculus as crucial regions whose
inactivation leads to rightwards shifts in line bisection. Does the left
hemisphere contain mirror-image networks for spatial processing? Two
right-handed patients with low-grade gliomas in the left temporo-parietal region bisected with their right, dominant hand 20-cm horizontal
lines during direct cortical and subcortical electrical stimulation. Stimulation of the caudal STG, but neither of its middle/rostral portions, nor of
the SMG, determined leftwards deviations on line bisection. However,
the most dramatic shifts occurred with subcortical stimulation. Using
fiber-tracking on post-operative magnetic resonance imaging scans, we
identified the subcortical stimulated site as the posterior segment of the
arcuate fasciculus, linking the caudal STG to the inferior parietal lobule.
Left-hemisphere networks for spatial processing are similar, but not identical to right-hemisphere ones.
D 23
MIXED SIGNALS: STIMULUS-RESPONSE COMPATIBILITY IN
THE REAL WORLD Andrew Bayliss, Steven Tipper; School of Psychology,
University of Wales, Bangor, UK — It is often important to apply the findings of cognitive psychology to meaningful scenarios in the real world.
For example, the amber indicator lights on cars are designed to enable
road users to efficiently predict the driver's next manoeuvre. Among
other factors (e.g. luminance), the spatial configuration of these lights
facilitates their interpretation (e.g. the _right_ indicator flashes for _right_
turns). However, several modern models of car confound this intuitive
relationship by placing indicators medially relative to the headlights.
Hence, the left indicator is placed to the right of the left headlight, for

129

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

example. In two experiments, the object-based incompatibility that arises
from this latter configuration resulted in slower, more erroneous
responses to the indicated direction than for the standard configuration.
These data act as a reminder to car designers that indicators, which are
inherently a safety feature, should be designed with the fundamental
properties of the human visual system in mind, and not just for aesthetic
appeal. Furthermore, this is a demonstration of how an oft-studied paradigm in visual cognitive science can have a real-world application.
D 24
EFFECT OF CHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS ON PARIETAL
LOBE ACTIVATION DURING A SPATIAL ATTENTION TASK IN
MCI Ananth Narayanan1, Catherine White1, Namhee Kim1, Madalina
Tivarus2, Ashleigh Hillier3, Petra Schmalbrock1, Maria Kataki1, Doug
Scharre1, David Beversdorf1; 1The Ohio State University, 2University of
Rochester, 3University of Massachusetts-Lowell — Recent fMRI studies have
demonstrated increased activation in MCI patients on memory tasks with
cholinesterase inhibitor treatment. However, as memory is impaired in
MCI, the question remains as to how these drugs affect activation for
tasks that are relatively preserved in MCI. Therefore, we examined the
effect of cholinesterase inhibitor treatment on a spatial attention task for
which cholinergic function is known to be critical. MCI patients were
imaged twice. The first prior to initiation of treatment, and the second 3
months after initiation of treatment. As expected, performance remained
at ceiling for both sessions. However, parietal lobe activation significantly decreased after initiation of the drug. Unlike what is observed for
memory, where treatment increases activation in fMRI, a decrease is
observed for visuospatial attention tasks. Whereas memory is impaired
in MCI, performance on this attentional task is preserved. As no impairment is present with this task, this imaging result may represent
improved efficiency of neural processing in order to carry out this task
with cholinesterase inhibitor treatment.
D 25
EARLY EVOKED GAMMA BAND RESPONSES IN THE VISUAL
ODDBALL TASK OF HEALTHY MALE ADULT SUBJECTS. Niklas
Manz, Madhavi Rangaswami, Chella Kamarajan, David B. Chorlian, Bernice
Porjesz; SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Henri Begleiter Neurodynamics
Laboratory, Brooklyn, NY — We report new results of early evoked gamma
band activity during a visual oddball task with target, non-target, and
novel stimuli with a focus on the latter case. The sample consisted of 104
healthy, right-handed, substance-abuse free males with an age range of
20-40 years (24.91 ± 4.59 yr). Gamma rhythms are important functional
building blocks of brain electrical activity. In humans, gamma band activity has been observed in a variety of cognitive tasks. Event related oscillations in the gamma band can be found as phase-locked (evoked) or nonphase locked (induced) responses to the onset of the experimental stimuli. Studies with novel stimuli have shown that they evoke frontal
responses. Using S-Transform analysis, a time-frequency representation
method was applied to EEG data and was analyzed in order to obtain
stimulus related early evoked gamma band activity (29-45 Hz) and was
analyzed within the first 150 ms after stimulus. Target and novel stimuli
evoke significantly higher gamma responses than the non-target. The
topography of these case differences will be demonstrated. The findings
will be discussed in the context of early cognitive and attentional processes.
D 26
RESPONSE INHIBITION IN ADULTS WITH ATTENTION
DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER: AN ERP STUDY Robert
Melara1,2, Huijun Wang3; 1City College, 2City University of New York,
3
Purdue University — Aims: The present study used event-related potentials to examine the temporal course of deficient response inhibition associated with adult ADHD, either with (Experiment 2) or without
(Experiment 1) the added requirement of interference control. Method:
Two experiments recruited different adult ADHD and control groups. A
stop task and a simple choice reaction time task constituted Experiment 1;
a stop task and a more difficult flanker task constituted Experiment 2.

130

Attentional Processes: Visual

Results: First, a consistent ERP pattern of response inhibition was demonstrated across the two experiments during successful inhibition trials,
consisting of an earlier N1, greater P2, smaller N2, greater and earlier P3.
Second, in both experiments adults with ADHD performed worse than
controls in response inhibition, as evidenced by a delayed SSRT. This
delay was accompanied by an ERP pattern of poor response inhibition,
which consisted of a smaller N1, delayed N2, smaller and delayed P3 in
Experiment 1 and of a delayed N1, P2, N2, and P3 in Experiment 2.
Third, ADHD adults showed no additional difficulties in response inhibition as interference control was introduced as the primary response execution task. Conclusions: Response inhibition is revealed at multiple
temporal points of processing. Adults with ADHD display inferior inhibitory processing of responses at each of these processing stages. However, their poor response inhibition is not further deteriorated by the
added requirement of interference control, a finding that may have
important clinical implications.
D 27
SUSTAINED SELECTIVE VISUAL ATTENTION TO FEATURE
CONJUNCTIONS IN HUMAN EEG Søren
Andersen, Matthias M.
Müller; University of Leipzig — We used an electrophysiological measure
of selective stimulus processing (the steady-state visual evoked potential,
SSVEP) to investigate concurrent attentional selection of two features.
Participants viewed a display consisting of 300 spatially intermingled
bars that continually shifted their positions at random. Four different
types of bars were presented, each corresponding to a specific conjunction of color (blue/red) and orientation (horizontal/vertical). Each type
of bar flickered at a specific frequency, thereby eliciting distinguishable
SSVEP signals. Participants were instructed to detect short intervals of
coherent motion of a cued bar-type, while ignoring similar coherent
motion of the unattended other three bar-types. The analysis of SSVEP
amplitudes showed that 1) attending the bars of one type enhanced the
amplitude of their frequency-tagged SSVEP. 2) bar-types sharing one feature (either color or orientation) with the attended bar-type elicited
higher SSVEP-amplitudes compared to the bar-type which differed on
both dimensions and 3) there was no interaction between the attentional
effects of color and orientation. Theses findings are in accordance with
the feature-similarity gain model. The observed signal amplification provides a neurophysiological basis for the rapid identification of feature
conjunctions during visual search, as proposed by “guided search” models.
D 28
FIXATION ON EYES IS REDUCED IN A CASE WITH RIGHT
SUPERIOR TEMPORAL GYRUS LESION Tomoko
Akiyama1,
Motoichiro Kato2, Fumie Saito2, Haruo Kashima2; 1Komagino Hospital, 2Keio
University School of Medicine — Disorders with social impairments, such
as autism and schizophrenia, have been demonstrated with reduced fixation on the eye region when viewing faces. Interestingly, a similar
decrease in fixation on eyes has been recently reported in a case with
lesions to the bilateral amygdala, a most prominent social brain component. Another notable component of the social brain is the superior temporal sulcus (STS) region, which is known to be involved in processing
biological motion. In this report, we have studied the visual scanning pattern when viewing faces, in a case with a lesion confined to the right
superior temporal gyrus (which covers the upper half of the STS region).
Compared to age-matched normal controls, this case fixated the eye
region in an extremely small proportion (2.2% of total fixation, compared
to the controls’ 32.7%), and fixated off -face in an extremely large proportion (24.4% compared to 4.3%). Results show a robust decrease of fixation
on eyes in this STS-lesion case, similar to that reported previously for the
amygdala-lesion case. These findings implicate that social brain components such as the amygdala and the STS might work in concert to realize
normal gaze behavior such as eye-contact, a critical social function. Additionally, these findings offer implications for the neural basis of disorders
such as autism and schizophrenia, whose lack of eye-contact is one of the
cardinal manifestations.

Attentional Processes: Visual

D 29
POINT PROCESS MODELING OF EYE-MOVEMENTS Christopher
Kovach1, Hiroto Kawasaki2, Ralph Adolphs3; 1University of Iowa, 2University
of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, 3California Institute of Technology — The probability of fixing gaze on any region in a scene is governed by multiple
simultaneous influences including low level visual information, topdown effects, and inhibition of return. Common techniques for testing
hypotheses on the distribution of fixations rely on the frequency with
which regions are fixed. Tests on raw fixation frequency, however, may
not reliably or efficiently distinguish the independent contributions of
multiple effects and otherwise depend on the invalid assumption that the
modeled events are statistically independent of each other. Such tests are
likely to miss important effects in some cases and produce false significance in others. We demonstrate an approach to modeling eye-movements using generalized linear multiple regression for point process data.
Estimates of regression coefficients, representing the influence of some
scene related measure on the log odds of fixation, permit a statistically
well founded operationalization of the concept of visual salience. Violations of the assumption of independent sampling, which invalidate tests
on raw fixation frequency, can be accommodated within nuisance parameters. The approach may serve as a highly adaptable basis for testing
hypotheses on fixation probability, constructing parametric as well as
non-parametric empirical salience maps, and predicting and simulating
visual scanpaths. Its application is demonstrated with data on the scanning of faces and in visual search for upright and inverted faces.
D 30
POSTERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX RESPONDS TO SET SIZE IN
PERCEPTUAL AS WELL AS WORKING MEMORY TASKS. Daniel
Mitchell, Rhodri Cusack; MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit — It
has
recently been shown using fMRI that activity in the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) correlates with the limited number of objects that can be held in
visual short term memory (VSTM) (Todd & Marois, 2004; Todd & Marois
2005; Xu & Chun, 2006). Here we replicate this finding (using set sizes of
1, 4 and 8 objects) and extend it to three other tasks that use a similar
stimulus set but have no explicit memory requirement. The tasks were
designed to manipulate attentional demands across space and time. In
PPC we find a capacity-limited set-size effect in the VSTM task, but also
in two of three other tasks which do not tax VSTM. In an anterior cingulate region we find a similar effect but only in the memory task. In occipital regions, a capacity-limited effect is again seen in the VSTM task and
one of the perceptual tasks, along with a linear effect of set-size in some
of the perceptual tasks. These findings cannot easily be explained by
behavioural performance measures or memory demands alone, and suggest a possible role of the PPC in segregating and maintaining distinct,
task-relevant object representations, whether in short-term memory or
the current perceptual scene. This is consistent with the idea that working
memory is an emergent property of attention being flexibly allocated to
internal representations (Postle, 2006).
D 31
TIME COURSE OF AFFECTIVE BIAS IN VISUAL ATTENTION:
CONVERGENT EVIDENCE FROM STEADY-STATE VISUAL
EVOKED POTENTIALS AND BEHAVIORAL DATA Catherine Hindi
Attar, Søren Andersen, Matthias M. Müller; University of Leipzig — Recent
studies emphasize the competitive interaction of attention and emotion in
early visual cortex. It remains however unclear to what extent the processing of affective stimuli are dependent on attentional resources. The
present study investigated the impact of task-irrelevant affective stimuli
(pleasant, unpleasant and neutral pictures) on the concurrent processing
of an attentionally demanding foreground task. In order to trace the time
course of this competition, steady-state visual evoked potentials
(SSVEPs) to a flickering display of moving random dots were recorded.
These dots were superimposed upon pictures from the International
Affective Picture System. Subjects were required to attend the dots and to
detect short intervals of coherent motions while ignoring the background

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

pictures. Presenting highly arousing pictures (pleasant and unpleasant)
in the background induced stronger competition with the foreground
task compared to neutral pictures, as reflected in reduced SSVEP amplitudes at central occipital sites. This effect extended over several hundred
miliseconds and was strongest for unpleasant pictures. In close temporal
relationship with the electrocortical responses, target detection rates
showed a stronger decrease when highly arousing pictures were presented in the background. These results clearly indicate that affective
stimuli modulate the early stages of attentional processing even though
attentional resources are sparse.
D 32
A PERCEPTUAL SHORTCUT: RESPONSE DEMANDS MODULATE
EARLY VISUAL PROCESSING Ingo Fründ1, INiko A. Busch1, Jeanette
Schadow1, Thomas Gruber2, Ursula Körner3, Christoph S. Herrmann1;
1Institute of Psychology, Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany,
2
Institute of Psychology I, University of Leipzig, Germany, 3Honda Research
Institute Europe, Offenbach, Germany — The present study investigated,
whether physiological markers of early visual perception are influenced
by response demands. Seventeen healthy volunteers watched images of
known objects and unknown object-like patterns under two response
demands: In the first case participants classified known and unknown
objects by a speeded button press, in the second case participants performed the same classification task, but did not have time pressure in
performing the button press. This task was performed with abstract line
drawings as well as colored natural images with a broad range of spatial
frequencies. Early, stimulus locked gamma oscillations discriminated
known from unknown objects only for speeded responses irrespective of
the complexity of the stimulus set. Later, induced gamma oscillations discriminated known from unknown objects only for natural images, irrespective of response demands. These results suggest that evoked gamma
oscillations might be relevant to quickly transform visual stimuli into
motor responses, while induced gamma oscillations might be relevant for
more detailed analyses.
D 33
ADAPTIVE VISUAL ATTENTION MECHANISMS REDUCE
SENSORY CONFLICT EFFECTS WITH INCREASING TASK
DEMANDS: AN ERP-STUDY Stefanie Kehrer1,2, Antje Kra1,2, Kerstin
Irlbacher1, Stefan P. Koch1, Herbert Hagendorf2, Norbert Kathmann2, Stephan
A. Brandt1; 1Charité, Berlin, 2Institute of Psychology, Humboldt University,
Berlin — Recent studies provide evidence for the concept that attentional
resources are focused on task-relevant stimuli to resolve conflicts from
distracting events (Weissman 2004). We hypothesize that more difficult
target selection conditions lead to stronger attentional top-down control
reducing the effects of arising conflicts. We investigated the role of these
mechanisms on the location negative priming (NP) effect with eventrelated potentials (ERP). Selection difficulty was manipulated by comparing an easy and a difficult task as described by Tipper (1990) and by Vink
(2005). For each subject (N=27) ERPs were recorded from 64 electrodes. A
significantly delayed reaction time (RT) for NP- as compared to controltrials, i.e. NP-effect, was only evident in the easy task. However, ERP
analysis revealed a reduced parieto-occipital N1-amplitude of NP-trials
compared to control-trials, both in the easy and the difficult task. In contradistinction, differences between the easy and difficult task were found
in the P3-latency, which was significantly delayed for NP-trials only in
the easy task. We suggest that the RT and N1-effect for NP-trials in the
easy task reflect an inhibitory mechanism modulation early sensory processing associated with a slowing of stimulus evaluation. Since the NPeffect was found in the difficult task for the N1-amplitude but not in the
RT, we assume that early sensory inhibition occurs also in the difficult
task. However, the P3-latency results indicate that additional attention
mechanisms are involved in processing of the complex task, suggesting
that the NP-effect on the early sensory stage is abolished at a later stimulus evaluation stage.

131

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

D 34
CONTRASTING ERP PATTERNS LINKED TO FACE PROCESSING
AND RECOGNITION IN WILLIAMS SYNDROME AND AUTISM
Anna Yam1, Debra Mills2, Alan Lincoln3, Debbie Rull3, Allan Reiss4, Albert
Galaburda5, Julie Korenberg6, Ursula Bellugi1; 1The Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, 2Emory University, 3Alliant International University,
4Stanford University, 3Alliant International University, 5Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, 6Cedars-Sinai Medical Center — Individuals with Williams
syndrome (WS) frequently display heightened attention to faces while
individuals with Autism are socially avoidant and avoid looking at faces.
The current study compared ERP effects to face stimuli across three
groups of participants: WS, Autism and typical controls (TC). It was
hypothesized that ERP patterns of activation would reflect social attentional tendencies in these groups. Participants, 10 adults from each
group, viewed 38 photographic pairs of upright or inverted faces and
indicated if the second face matched or did not match the first. Results
indicated that the amplitude of the N100 was significantly smaller for the
WS group compared to individuals with Autism and TC. The N200
amplitude in WS was significantly larger than the other groups. For both
upright and inverted faces, a larger negative amplitude to the mismatch
was observed at 320 ms post stimulus for the WS group but not for
Autism. This mismatch pattern in WS was similar to the TC pattern for
upright faces. The Autism group showed a mismatch positivity which
resembled the TC pattern for inverted faces. The smaller N100 in WS relative to other groups may be indicative of lower efficiency in early visual
processing. The N200 amplitudes possibly reflect contrasting attention
patterns to human faces in these groups. The presence or absence of a 320
ms mismatch may be related to group-specific processing strategies and
proficiencies. Activation patterns suggest that individuals with AD and
WS process faces in a qualitatively different manner which may be
expressed behaviorally.
D 35
BEYOND THE CONTROL OF VISUAL ATTENTION: NEW
INSIGHTS FROM THE SPATIAL CUEING PARADIGM Evan
F.
Risko, Chris Blais, Jennifer A. Stolz, Derek Besner; University of Waterloo — In
the context of the spatial cueing paradigm, an increase in the proportion
of valid trials is associated with an increase in the magnitude of the spatial cueing effect. This proportion valid effect is widely understood as
reflecting a form of control. Indeed, numerous researchers have used the
proportion valid effect in special populations (e.g., schizophrenic, Alzheimer's and neglect patients) to index the endogenous control of visual
attention. The present experiment identifies a component of the proportion valid effect that has nothing to do with “control.” A new framework
is discussed that is able to accommodate these results. Discussion focuses
on this new framework and the implications of it and the present results
for existing work on the control of visual attention.
D 36
REMAPPING OF SPATIAL POSITION ACROSS SACCADES IN
PATIENTS SUFFERING FROM CONSTRUCTIONAL APRAXIA
AFTER RIGHT PARIETAL INJURY Charlotte
Russell1,
Cristiana
1
2
2
1
Deidda , Paresh Malhotra , Masud Husain ; Fondazione Santa Lucia, IRCCS,
Rome, Italy, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology,
University College London, London, UK — Constructional Apraxia (CA) is
revealed through the inability of patients to complete accurate copies of
drawings or three-dimensional constructions. Striking characteristics of
their copying performance are a lack of accurate spatial relations among
parts of objects and a ‘piecemeal’ quality to the copy. This is a common
apraxia after right parietal stroke, often remaining after initial problems
such as visuo-spatial neglect have resolved. To investigate the underlying malfunction, we examined whether a central problem might be failure to correctly integrate visual information from one fixation to the next.
More specifically, whether this difficulty predominantly concerns remapping of spatial information as the right parietal lobe has an important role
in the maintenance of a stable representation of locations across saccades.
The experiment compared a group of patients suffering from CA, a group

132

Attentional Processes: Visual

of patients without constructional problems and a group of neurologically healthy controls. Participants were required to judge whether a pattern changed in form (non-spatial information) or whether it shifted
position (spatial information) either with an intervening two-saccade
sequence or with a pause. Results revealed that the CA patients, in contrast to the other groups, were specifically impaired when judging
whether the pattern had shifted position in the saccade condition. Furthermore, the direction of the two-saccade sequence was important, as
performance was greatly inferior when the first saccade of the two-saccade sequence was to the right. The results suggest a role for trans-saccadic spatial remapping deficits in Constructional Apraxia following
right parietal damage.
D 37
HOW MUSIC DECREASES THE ATTENTIONAL BLINK: AN EEG
STUDY Merel M.
Pannebakker1, Guido P. H. Band1, K. Richard
Ridderinkhof2, Bernhard
Hommel1; 1Leiden University, Leiden, the
2
Netherlands,
Acacia, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands — In a behavioral experiment, Olivers and Nieuwenhuis
(2005) have shown that concurrent task-irrelevant mental activity like listening to music reduced the Attentional Blink (AB). They argued that this
improved performance may be caused by diffused attention or an altered
mental state during music. These changes may be related to the Locus
Coeruleus - NorEpinephrine (LC-NE) system responsivity, important for
the regulation of cognitive performance. Furthermore, during the music
condition relative to the control condition, less attention may be allocated
to processing the first target (T1), which makes it easier to subsequently
allocate attention to the second target (T2). The question is therefore
whether music has an overall beneficial effect on attention, or affects the
allocation policy. In this experiment, we elaborated the influence of listening to music on T1- as well as T2-performance using electrophysiological measurements. Our behavioral results showed improved
performance (less blink) in the music condition compared to the control
condition. Our ERP-data focused on P3 as an index of phasic LC-NE
activity. As expected, attenuated P3 activation was measured for T2 in
blink trials compared to no-blink trials. Furthermore, the P3 on T2 was
higher in the music condition showing the increased attention available
for T2. No difference between P3 peaks on T1 was found suggesting that
improved allocation of attention to T2 is not the result of allocating less
attention to T1. Instead, music seems to benefit the recovery of attention
after processing T1.
D 38
DISSOCIABLE EFFECTS OF UNILATERAL DAMAGE TO THE
HUMAN RIGHT SUPERIOR COLLICULUS ON VISUO-SPATIAL
PROCESSING Nadia Lucas1, Gilles Pourtois2, Sophie Schwartz2, Patrik
Vuilleumier1; 1Dept. of Neurology (HUG) & Neuroscience (CMU), Geneva,
2
Dept. of Neuroscience (CMU), Geneva — Neurophysiological studies suggest a critical role of the superior colliculus (SC) in different aspects of
visuo-spatial attention, but few data exist in humans. We investigated a
unique patient (45 year-old right-handed male) with a unilateral ischemic
lesion restricted to the right SC. The patient showed transient visual
symptoms but no persistent clinical neurological deficits in the chronic
stage. However, tests of visuo-spatial functions classically imputed to SC
revealed selective deficits in his contralesional left hemifield. In a Posner
spatial cueing task, the patient showed slower responses to left than right
visual targets, with inhibition of return (IOR) found on the right but not
left side. These data support a role of the SC in generating contralateral
IOR, consistent with similar observations by Sapir et al. 99. In a redundant target detection task, the patient showed faster responses to double
targets presented across both hemifields, relative to single targets, with
evidence for neural rather than probabilistic summation effects. However, he showed redundancy gain for double targets within the right/
ipsilesional field but not left/contralesional field. These data do not support a role of the SC in target redundancy effects across, but rather within
hemifields. Taken together, these findings reveal selective effects of unilateral damage to the superior colliculus in humans.

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing
D 39
HEMISPHERIC ASYMMETRIES IN SPEECH PERCEPTION:
STIMULUS-DRIVEN VERSUS TASK-SPECIFIC EFFECTS Paul
T.
Fillmore, Kenneth I. Vaden, A. Lisette Isenberg, Nicole M. Gage, Gregory S.
Hickok; University of California, Irvine — Several recent neuroimaging
studies have found a left-hemisphere bias for activations in speech perception tasks when compared with non-speech stimuli. A prevalent
hypothesis regarding the basis of this asymmetry is that the left auditory
cortex is relatively specialized for the perception of fast temporal transitions, which are common in speech (e.g. formant transitions in stop consonants). However, lesion data exist which suggest that lateralization
patterns in speech perception can be task dependent: left hemisphere
lesion patients who are greatly impaired in sublexical speech perception
tasks (i.e. phoneme discrimination) can perform speech comprehension
tasks (which require correct phonemic perception) fairly well. In the
present study, we investigate this task dependence further. Using functional MRI, we compared words with and without stop consonants to
examine stimulus-based effects, across both sublexical and comprehension-level tasks. We expected that any existing left hemisphere bias
towards fast temporal processing would manifest itself in both tasks, but
that if task type modulates hemispheric asymmetry, such a bias might
only show up in a sublexical task, with a comprehension-level task showing activation more bilaterally. We found regions in the superior temporal gyrus, bilaterally, that were activated to a greater extent by words
containing stop consonants, with slightly higher levels of activation in the
left hemisphere. Task-specific effects were greater for words containing
stops, and seemed to be greater in the left hemisphere. Thus it appears
that hemispheric biases, while present, may be more subtle than is often
assumed, and that task may play a role in their modulation.
D 40
PITCH MEMORY FOR MUSIC PLAYED BACKWARD: A
PERCEPTUAL LEARNING STUDY Nestor Matthews, Kristin Cox,
Megan Loveland; Denison University — We investigated pitch memory for
music played forward and backward in three experiments. Experiment
one indicated significantly greater pitch memory for forward than for
backward excerpts of popular songs. Nevertheless, pitch memory significantly exceeded chance even for backward excerpts that were pitchshifted by just one or two semitones. Experiment 2 indicated that pitch
memory was comparable for forward and backward recordings of single
piano notes –a finding that contradicts a sensory explanation of the forward superiority effect for popular songs. In experiment 3 we explored
the acquisition of pitch memory using a perceptual learning procedure
and novel piano melodies. Participants learned to reliably distinguish the
original keys of two melodies that differed from each other by just a single note. Additionally, an acoustical backward superiority effect followed
training on backward versions of the melodies, despite their ecological
atypicality. Overall, the data reveal remarkable precision and flexibility
in human pitch memory.
D 41
N1, P2 COMPONENTS, AND REPETITION POSITIVITY IN THE
AUDITORY EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL OF YOUNG AND
OLDER ADULTS Rowena Cooper, Pat Michie, Juanita Todd; University of
Newcastle — In a previous event-related potential (ERP) study (Cooper,
Todd, McGill, & Michie, 2006), we reported amplitude differences in the
auditory N1 and P2 components between a young and older group that
could have contributed to the between group difference seen in mismatch
negativity (MMN) amplitude. In the present study we examined the
recovery cycle of the N1 and P2 components in young (mean age = 20.7
years) and older (mean age = 64.8 years) adults by delivering pure tones
(800 Hz, 50 ms, 55 dB above threshold) at five different stimulus onset
asynchronies (SOAs): 500 ms, 1 s, 3 s, 6 s, and 9 s. We found a Group x
SOA interaction (p<.05) in peak and mean amplitude measures of the N1

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

component at Cz. The older group tended to show larger N1 amplitude
than the young group at the shorter SOAs and smaller amplitude than
the young at the longer SOAs. There was also a significant Group x SOA
interaction (p<.05) at Cz in peak P2 amplitude with the older group
showing a tendency for reduced amplitude relative to the young especially at the longer SOAs. The study shows that there are age-associated
changes in sound processing that are dependent on the interval at which
sounds are delivered. We will also present findings from an ongoing
aging study examining the repetition positivity (RP). The RP is a relatively newly described auditory ERP that overlaps the latency period of
N1 and P2 components in MMN paradigms with a roving standard.
D 42
IMPACT OF TASK REQUIREMENT AND STIMULUS TYPE IN
HEMISPHERIC INTERACTION. Teow-Chong Sim, Carolyn Martinez;
Sam Houston State University — Two experiments investigated interhemispheric interaction in processing dichotic signals. In Experiment 1, 60
right-handed participants listened to 12 blocks of dichotic stimuli consisting of environmental sounds on one ear and a verbal descriptor on the
other ear. Verbal descriptors on one ear were congruent or incongruent
with the environmental sounds on the other ear. They were instructed to
judge if the verbal descriptor on one ear corresponded to the environmental sound on the other ear. There was a right ear advantage (REA) in
judging the accuracy of the verbal descriptor — the mean reaction time
was significantly faster when the verbal descriptor was on the right ear,
and corresponded to the environmental sound. The results show a lateralization effect and a Stroop-like interference. In Experiment 2, 60 participants listened to dichotic signals that consist of dissimilar environmental
sounds in each ear. Each dichotic pair was synchronized with the onset
of a verbal descriptor that was presented on a monitor, and the subject
was instructed to press a key if the verbal descriptor corresponded to a
stimulus in the dichotic pair. The subject was instructed to press a different key if there was no correspondence to either stimulus in the dichotic
pair. A left ear advantage (LEA) was observed. Reaction times were
faster, and there were more hits for stimuli presented to the left ear. An
understanding of interhemispheric interaction must take into account the
type of stimulus present and the task required of the perceiver.
D 43
THE CONTINUITY ILLUSION AND VOWEL PERCEPTION: AN
FMRI STUDY Antje Heinrich1,2, Robert P. Carlyon2, Matthew H. Davis2,
Ingrid S. Johnsrude1; 1Queen’s University, Kingston, Canada, 2MRC-CBU,
Cambridge, UK — Intermittent sounds can be perceived as continuous if
the silent gaps between them are filled with a masking sound. This “Continuity Illusion” (CI) is one example of closure, a principle of auditory
perceptual organization that is critical for speech perception. The neural
bases of auditory perceptual closure are largely unknown. We used fMRI
to study CI in speech perception. We used two-formant vowels in which
the formants alternated in time, and where the silent gaps in each formant frequency region were filled with noise. In the “Illusion” condition,
the formant level, relative to that of the noise, was low enough for the formants to be perceived as continuous, and subjects heard the stimuli as
vowels. When the formant levels were increased and the noise levels
decreased so that the noise bursts were ineffective maskers, the CI broke
down, and stimuli were perceived as less speechlike (Illusion-Break condition). We collected whole-brain echo-planar imaging data from 19 listeners using sparse imaging (Hall et al., 1999) with 8.4 sec stimulus
sequences and 2-second data-acquisition periods (TR=11 seconds). Compared to Illusion-Break, the Illusion stimuli elicited activation in left posterior middle temporal gyrus, demonstrating one neural correlate of CI,
possibly related to the speechlikeness of the resultant percept; this region
was also preferentially activated by intact vowels compared to nonspeech stimuli (alternating formants with no noise, and noise alone). In
contrast, Illusion-Break stimuli produced greater activation in areas close
to primary auditory cortex, possibly as a result of the increased number
of perceived onsets in these stimuli.

133

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

D 44
NEURAL CORRELATES OF AUDIO-VOCAL FEEDBACK Akira
Toyomura1, Sachiko Koyama2, Tamaki Miyamoto3, Shinya Kuriki2; 1Japan
Science and Technology Agency/Research Institute for Electronic Science,
Hokkaido University, 2Research Institute for Electronic Science, Hokkaido
University, 3Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine — Perception
of one’s own speech plays an important role in fluent speech production.
In this study, we conducted a functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) experiments to delineate the neural mechanism for auditory feedback control of pitch, using a transformed auditory feedback (TAF). Right
handed subjects were required to vocalize /a/ for 5 s while hearing their
own voice through headphones. In the TAF condition, the feedback voice
pitch was shifted up or down from the original pitch two or three times in
each period. The subjects were required to hold the pitch of the feedback
voice constant by changing the pitch of the original voice. In the non-TAF
condition, the pitch of feedback voice was not modulated and the subjects merely vocalized /a/ continuously. In the first experiment (n=12),
the pitch of feedback voice was randomly shifted up or down within the
range of 2-halftones in the TAF condition. The supramarginal gyrus, the
prefrontal area, the anterior insula, the superior temporal gyrus and the
intraparietal sulcus showed significantly stronger activation in the right
hemisphere for TAF than for non-TAF condition. In the second experiment (n=10), an amount of the pitch shift (one, two and four halftones)
was fixed in the TAF condition. The activation of the left insula increased
as an amount of pitch shift increased. Previous studies have shown that
the insula is related to speech production (Dronkers, 1996). Thus these
findings conceivably suggested that the left and the right insula play different roles for pitch control of vocalization.
D 45
AUDITORY PERCEPTION OF SPECTRAL AND TEMPORAL
VARIATIONS IN SPEECH AND NONSPEECH SOUNDS - A
SPARSE-FMRI STUDY Tino Zaehle1, Lutz Jancke1, Martin Meyer2;
1University of Zurich, Switzerland, 2Institute of Neuroradiology, University
Hospital of Zurich, Switzerland — In the present study we investigated the
neurofunctional organisation of sub-lexical auditory perception with specific emphasis on auditory spectro-temporal processing in speech and
nonspeech sounds. We presented participants with verbal and nonverbal
auditory stimuli with systematic variations of the spectral or temporal
acoustic characteristics in the context of a sparse event-related functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study. Based on models of lateralized hemispheric processing we hypothesized a left hemispheric dominance for the processing of rapid changing temporal characteristics and a
right hemispheric dominance for spectral modulations of the auditory
signal for both, speech and nonspeech stimuli. In agreement with our
hypothesis results show a left hemisphere involvement during the processing of rapidly changing temporal characteristics regardless of the
speechness of the sounds. In particular, when participants had to attend
to subtle temporal modulations within speech and nonspeech stimuli we
observed significant responses in the parietal operculum and the inferior
frontal gyrus on the left hemisphere. In contrast, we revealed no lateralisation effects for spectral processing. When participants listened to
changes in the frequency content of speech and nonspeech stimuli, we
observed activations of the medial temporal gyrus und superior temporal
sulcus bilaterally. The present data support the assumption of an asymmetric functional organisation within the auditory domain with the left
hemisphere being more specialized for the processing of rapidly changing acoustic information within both speech and nonspeech signals.
D 46
THE BRAIN AUTOMATICALLY DIFFERENTIATES BETWEEN
VOCAL AND NON VOCAL STIMULI Maude Beauchemin1,2, Isabelle
Pelletier1,2, Maryse Lassonde1,2, Pascal Belin3,2; 1Centre de Recherche, CHU
Sainte-Justine, 2Neuropsychologie et Cognition (CERNEC), Université de
Montréal, 3University of Glasgow — Humans are remarkably social beings,
but the underlying neural mechanisms that permit such socialization are

134

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing

still not well-known. Neuroimaging studies have provided evidence for
localized processing specificity for human voice stimuli, paralleling the
specificity for human faces (Belin et al., 2000). Using ERPs, Levy and collaborators (2001) reported that human voices evoked a positive eventrelated potential at 320 ms, distinctive from that elicited by instrumental
tones, which they termed the Voice Specific Response (VSR). The present
study investigated if voice selectivity could be observed at a pre-attentive
level. ERPs were measured during an oddball paradigm in which the
standard stimulus was a pure tone (85% occurrence) and two infrequent
stimuli with natural timbre were either a human voice (7.5%) or a nonvocal piano tone (7.5%). All stimuli were matched for their fundamental
frequency. The mismatch negativity elicited by the vocal deviants was
found to differ from the one elicited by the piano tone as early as 122
msec after onset, both at electrode sites AFz (F = 8.042, p = 0.013) and Fz
(F = 8.205, p = 0.012). To confirm that this effect was not specific to the
voice and instrument timbre used, a second study was conducted in
which several exemplars of each timbre category were used. Preliminary
data corroborate the observed trend. These results provide the first evidence that the brain can differentiate voice from non-voice auditory stimuli much earlier (122 msec) than previously reported (320 msec)
suggesting a time course similar to that of face processing.
D 47
CONTRALATERAL DOMINANCE VS. RIGHT HEMISPHERE
PREDOMINANCE FOR SOUND LOCATION PROCESSING IN THE
HUMAN BRAIN: AN EEG-STUDY IN FREE-FIELD Nicole Richter1,
Sandra Hasse1, Erich Schröger2, Rudolf Rübsamen1; 1Institute of Biology II,
University of Leipzig, Germany, 2Institute of Psychology I, University of
Leipzig, Germany — The aim of the present electroencephalographic
(EEG) study was to test the putative contralateral and/or right hemisphere dominance in spatial auditory processing in a realistic spatial
environment. A semi-natural acoustic environment was achieved by presenting stimuli through a circular array of loudspeakers situated around
the subject. Using different stimulation designs with systematic changes
of the laterality of sound sources we measured the N1 and the mismatch
negativity (MMN). The N1 was elicited by stationary sound sources as
well as by moving sound sources (simulated by successive pulsed acoustic emissions from five loudspeakers spanning 20° in azimuth). By use of
an oddball paradigm, the location MMN was evoked by different standard and deviant stimuli from varying sound sources. For stationary and
moving sound sources, the N1-amplitudes were more prominent over
the hemisphere contralateral to the stimulation side; for centered stimulation, left- and right-hemispheric N1-amplitudes were equal. MMNamplitudes were generally higher over the right rather than over the left
hemisphere, irrespective of ipsi- or contralateral stimulation side. Furthermore, the modulation of the MMN-amplitude, which indicates differences in the processing of distinct spatial information, was more
pronounced in the right than in the left hemisphere. These results provide evidence for both contralateral and right-hemisphere dominance in
cortical processing of auditory space. At the level of the N1-component,
the spatial information of stationary as well as of moving sound sources
are processed primarily in the contralateral hemisphere. At the level of
preattentive discrimination (MMN) there is a right hemisphere predominance in auditory spatial processing.
D 48
JUDGMENT OF TEMPORAL ORDER IN PATIENTS WITH
AQUIRED UNILATERAL BRAIN LESIONS SUFFERING FROM
AUDITORY EXTINCTION: A FREE-FIELD STUDY. Claudia
Schubert1, Manon Grube1,2, D. Yves von Cramon3, Rudolf Rübsamen1;
1
Institute of Biology II, University of Leipzig, Germany, 2Auditory Group,
Medical School, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Day
Clinic of Cognitive Neurology, University of Leipzig, German — Central auditory space processing and representation in the human brain is far from
being understood. Studies with patients suffering from auditory extinction, a specific deficit in auditory space processing can help to shed light

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing

on this topic. The present free-field study specifically examined how
extinction is modified by presenting bilateral stimuli in the right and left
acoustic hemifield with a temporal onset asynchrony. Patients with
lesions in the left or right hemisphere (LH, RH, each group 17 subjects)
were studied. All had participated in a previous study investigating auditory extinction (Grube et al. in prep). Bilateral recognition was impaired
in both patient groups, but more frequent in RH (n=13) than in LH
patients (n=6). A systematic reduction of extinction was achieved with
increasing temporal onset of the stimulus on either side. Still, for patient
in both groups showing extinction, a higher incidence of failures were
observed with the leading stimulus coming from the ipsilesional hemifield. Additionally, the ability to recognize the temporal order of the successive onset of the stimuli was tested. For that, LH patients more often
showed misjudgements though without a clear bias towards either of the
two hemifields. In RH patients there is a shift in the representation of
acoustic space towards the contralesional side. The results support the
notion of extinction being an impairment of the perception of stimuli in
the contralesional acoustic space. In LH patients, the impaired perception
of temporal order can be linked to the putative role of the left-hemisphere
in temporal processing.
D 49
AGING AND MUSICAL EXPERTISE ON MELODIC ENCODING IN
AUDITORY CORTEX Takako
Fujioka1, Laurel Trainor2,1, Terence
Picton1, Bernhard Ross1; 1Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, University of
Toronto, Canada, 2McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada — Our
recent
studies recording the mismatch negativity (MMN) and its magnetic
counterparts, MMNm, demonstrated that young adults with no formal
music education process the interval information of melodies in the auditory cortex automatically, and that musical experience enhances this
melodic encoding mechanism. In general, age-related declines of auditory encoding capability have been reported in MMN literature. The
present research addressed the question of how the enhancement seen in
younger musicians holds as they get older while continuing musical
practice. The MMNm response from musicians over 60 years of age was
obtained using two stimulus paradigms from our previous MEG studies
of young musicians. The Interval paradigm contained one five-note standard melody transposed to eight keys from trial to trial and another deviant melody similarly transposed, but with the last note raised to another
pitch (presented on 20% of the trials). The Control paradigm consisted
with a standard and a deviant tone (990.7 and 1111.0 Hz). The MMNm
response to the interval change was significantly present bilaterally in the
older musicians. Although the amplitude of the MMNm was smaller
than in young musicians, it was larger than in young non-musicians, suggesting that the superior automatic encoding system in musicians sustains over their later life if they keep musically active. MMNm in the
control paradigm in older musicians was also smaller than in young
musicians. MMNm in the left hemisphere was larger than in the right in
older musicians, indicating that they may recruit more analytic strategies
for encoding.
D 50
IS P50 SENSORY GATING ASSOCIATED WITH BEHAVIORAL
MEASURES OF INHIBITION? Carly A. Yadon1, Julie M. Bugg2,
Kathleen M. K1, Aubrey J. Anthony1, Michael A. Kisley3, Deana B. Davalos1;
1Colorado State University, 2Washington University, 3University of Colorado
at Colorado Springs — The P50 auditory event-related potential (ERP)
component is conceptualized as a measure of inhibition and represents
the ability to suppress the neuronal response to an auditory stimulus presented just after an identical stimulus. This type of sensory gating is of
particular interest because many clinical populations (such as schizophrenia) are impaired on this measure. P50 deficits in individuals with
schizophrenia have been replicated numerous times and have also been
found in first-degree relatives and in related psychotic disorders.
Although the P50 component has been the focus of many studies, the
behavioral correlates remain understudied and thus relatively unknown.
In the present study we investigated whether the P50 ERP component
was related to a battery of common measures of behavioral inhibition. To

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

test this question, ERPs were recorded (Cz) from introductory psychology students who also completed the behavioral section of the experiment in a within subjects, counterbalanced design. Partial correlations
controlling for baseline measures of processing speed, indicate a relationship between P50 suppression and behavioral inhibition. The findings
suggest that while there may be common mechanisms involved in both
neurophysiological inhibition and behavioral indices of inhibition, only
select types of inhibitory tasks reveal this relationship. Further results
and implications will be discussed.
D 51
AGE-RELATED INCREASED IN AUDITORY EVOKED FIELDS: A
CENTRAL OR PERIPHERAL PROBLEM? Jessica Quan, Claude Alain;
Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre Geriatric Care, Toronto, Canada — Neuroelectric and neuromagnetic studies have revealed age-related increases
in the amplitude of auditory evoked responses. These findings are
thought to reflect deficits in inhibitory control mediated by the prefrontal
cortex. Alternatively, age-related changes in the peripheral system and/
or ascending auditory pathways (e.g., loudness recruitment, frequency
selectivity) could also account for increases in sensory evoked responses
in older adults. We tested this hypothesis by presenting young and older
adults with low and high frequency sounds against no, low or high background white noise while auditory evoked fields (AEFs) were recorded
using a whole head MEG system. During the recordings, participants
were asked to ignore the stimuli and watch a muted subtitled movie of
their choice. For each participant, the AEFs were modeled with a pair of
dipoles in the superior temporal plane and the effects of noise and age on
the amplitude and latency of the resulting source waveforms were examined. We found a significant interaction between age and noise on the P1
amplitude, with the effect of age decreasing as the intensity of the background noise increased. The effects of broadband masking noise on the
age-related difference in P1 amplitude may be related to changes in frequency selectivity and thus appear more consistent with a peripheral origin. Moreover, there was a significant decreased in P1 latency and an
increased in N1 amplitude when the stimuli were presented against low
background noise relative either the no or high noise conditions. This
suggests that low-level noise can be beneficial in sensory processing.
D 52
EFFECTS OF LONG-TERM TRAINING ON TEMPORAL
AUDITORY
PERCEPTION
AS
EVIDENCED
BY
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL RECORDINGS Eveline
Geiser1, Lutz
Jancke1, Martin Meyer2,3; 1University of Zurich, Switzerland, 2University
Hospital of Zurich, 3Institute of Neuroradiology — The present experiment
aimed to detect long-term plasticity effects in the auditory system by
investigating the electrophysiological correlate of auditory meter and
rhythm processing in music perception with a focus on unattended processing. In an event-related brain potential study an auditory rhythm on
one tone was presented repetitively to subjects. The stimulus material
included metrical and rhythmical changes as well as pitch changes. Subjects were to detect and categorize either temporal changes (attended
condition) or pitch changes (unattended condition). Furthermore, a
group of trained subjects (musicians) was compared to a group of
untrained subjects.As expected, trained subjects performed significantly
better than untrained subjects. And within the untrained group subjects
performed worse on the meter as compared to the rhythm detection.
These behavioral results were well reflected by the amplitude of the auditory N1 component. Furthermore, in untrained subjects the N1 amplitude
differed between attended and unattended processing conditions for
meter and rhythm changes, showing enhanced amplitudes in the
attended condition. In contrast, trained subjects showed similar amplitude differences between the attended and unattended processing for the
meter changes only, while rhythm changes did not elicit different amplitudes in the two conditions. Our data provide evidence for trainingdependent changes in auditory temporal processing as reflected by the
N1 in unattended processing conditions and more specifically, this effect
is evident in rhythmic changes.

135

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

Perceptual Processes: Multisensory
Processing
D 53
AUDITORY STIMULI ALTER SOMATOSENSORY DEVIANTDETECTION: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Kirsten
Hoetting, Claudia K. Friedrich, Brigitte Roeder; Biological Psychology and
Neuropsychology, University of Hamburg — When a single tactile stimulus
is presented together with two tones, participants often report perceiving
two touches. It is a matter of debate whether this crossmodal effect of
audition on touch reflects an interaction between modalities at early perceptual or at later integration stages. The present study used an oddball
paradigm together with event-related brain potential (ERP) recordings to
investigate the neuronal correlates of this multisensory illusion. Tactile
double stimuli accompanied by two tones were presented as frequent
standard stimuli. Rare single tactile stimuli accompanied by one or two
tones were interspersed. Although participants were instructed to ignore
the tones, they often failed to detect single tactile stimuli as deviants
when they were presented together with two tones (“illusory standards”). ERP differences between "illusory standards" and "real standards" were calculated to test whether illusory trials were processed by
the brain as standard or as deviant stimuli. Results were compared to the
difference between ERPs to one vs. two touches presented without tones
("real deviants" vs. "real standards"). A mismatch negativity was
observed between 100 and 200 ms for "real deviants" in the unimodal, but
not for "illusory standards" in the multimodal condition. Therefore, preattentive, deviant-detection mechanisms of the somatosensory system
seem to be influenced by auditory stimuli. Nevertheless, ERPs to “illusory standards” differed from ERPs to "real standards" in an enhanced
negativity starting around 250 ms that continued for several hundred
milliseconds at frontal leads. We speculate that this negativity reflects the
subliminally detection of incongruent multimodal input.
D 54
AUDITORY AREAS ARE ACTIVATED DURING A VISUO-MOTOR
TASK Roberto Martuzzi1,2, Micah Murray1,3, Philippe Maeder1, Eleonora
Fornari1, Jean-Philippe Thiran2, Stephanie Clarke3, Christoph Michel3, Reto
Meuli1; 1Radiology Service, University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland,
2Signal Processing Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland, 3University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland — Evidence is accumulating that brain regions traditionally considered as
unisensory contribute to multisensory interactions. In this study, we
investigated the BOLD response within auditory areas during a visuomotor task. Subjects performed a simple reaction-time task in response to
lateralized visual stimuli. Stimuli were randomly presented either at the
right or at the left visual field, and subjects were asked to respond upon
simple detection, irrespectively of the visual field stimulated. Stimuli
were presented for 125ms with and inter-trial interval varying from
14.125 to 17.875s in steps of 125ms. In addition to activations within
visual- and motor- related areas, we identified frank bilateral activations
within auditory areas, with a clear predominance (both in size and in
intensity) on the side contralateral to the responding hand. These results
suggest that the signal intensity is primarily modulated by the responding hand and/or by the somatosensory stimulation generated during the
motor response, while the visual field stimulated did not demonstrably
affect the response laterality or its intensity and/or size within auditory
cortices. The collective findings raise the possibility that activations in
auditory cortices during visuo-motor tasks may receive an important
contribution from auditory-somatosensory interactions and that such
effects must be accounted for in experimental designs investigating multisensory phenomena.

136

Perceptual Processes: Multisensory Processing

D 55
THE TIMING OF LOC INVOLVEMENT IN TACTILE OBJECT
RECOGNITION: AN EEG STUDY Joshua Lucan1, John Fo1, Valerie
Weisser2, Krish Sathian2, Sophie Molholm3; 1City College of New York,
2Emory University School of Medicine, 3Nathan Kline Institute — Recently,
human functional neuroimaging studies have identified activity in the
occipital lobes during touch perception. In particular, the recruitment of
the lateral occipital complex has been demonstrated during tactile shape
discrimination tasks. Further elaboration of the timing of this activation,
however, is needed to establish whether it reflects early sensory and perceptual processing or later postperceptual events such as imagery. To
this end we recorded high density EEG and examined the timing of activity over posterior scalp regions, comparing evoked potentials from a tactile shape discrimination task to a control condition. Participants (N=11)
were blindfolded while either an inverted “T” or “V” shape was presented to their right finger pad. They were asked to discriminate
between “shape 1” and “shape 2” or to sit passively while receiving the
same stimuli. Results showed differences over posterior scalp regions
beginning at ~230ms. LAURA based modeling attributed these changes
to increased activity in occipital and temporal regions with activity in the
lateral occipital complex peaking at ~330ms. Differential processing in
the lateral occipital complex at this latency may reflect tactile object recognition processes in areas traditionally associated with visual object processing.
D 56
THE NEUROPHYSIOLOGY OF MULTISENSORY INTEGRATION
IN OLDER AND YOUNGER TYPICALLY DEVELOPING
CHILDREN. Alice Brown; Queens College of the City, University of New
York — Multisensory integration is fundamental to basic perceptions
(such as orienting) as well as to complex behaviors (such as learning language or driving a car). For some clinical populations, it is thought that
the apparently natural, effortless ability to integrate sensory information
is deficient. Yet neurophysiological support for such multisensory deficits has yet to be demonstrated. Moreover, little is known about where
and when the integration of multisensory information occurs in the brain
of typically-developing children. As a first step, in a high-density electrical mapping study, we investigated how the brain of typically-developing (TD) children responds to and integrates multisensory stimuli. Basic
auditory (a simple tone) and visual (a red circle) stimuli were presented
to TD children ranging in age from 5-15 years. Multisensory interactions
were studied by comparing the responses to multisensory audiovisual
(AV) stimulation with the linear summation (A+V) of the unisensory constituents presented alone. Data from two groups, younger and older children, suggest that there are developmental changes in multisensory
integration. The spatio-temporal dynamics of multisensory integration
for these two age groups are reported and compared.
D 57
EFFECT OF ATTENTION ON CORTICAL PROCESSES
UNDERLYING THE SOUND INDUCED EXTRA FLASH
ILLUSION Jyoti Mishra1, Antigona Martinez1,2, Terrence Sejnowski1,3,
Steven
Hillyard1; 1UCSD, 2Nathan Kline Institute New York, 3Salk
Institute — When a single flash of light is presented interposed between
two brief auditory stimuli separated by 60-100 msec, subjects typically
report perceiving two flashes (Shams et al., 2000, 2002). We have recently
demonstrated that perception of the illusory extra flash is based on a very
rapid dynamic interplay between auditory and visual cortical areas that
is triggered by the second sound (Mishra et al., 2006). This interaction
included an early modulation of visual cortex within 30-60 ms after the
second sound, identified as the PD120 ERP (event related potential) component. In the current study we investigated the effect of attention on the
ERP correlates of the illusory flash and found the PD120 component that
localizes to visual cortex to be manipulable by attention. Changes in the
ERP associated with the illusory flash as a function of the visual field of
stimulus presentation will also be discussed.

Perceptual Processes: Multisensory Processing

D 58
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF MULTISENSORY
INTEGRATION DURING THE VENTRILOQUIST ILLUSION: A
HIGH-DENSITY STUDY Jeannette R. Mahoney1,2, Sophie Molholm1,3,
Daniel Senkowski4, Manuel Gomez-Ramirez1,3, Jennifer Montesi1,3, Walter
Ritter1, John J. Foxe1,3; 1Nathan Kline Institute, 2Ferkauf Graduate School of
Psychology, 3The City College of the City University of New York, 4University
of Hamburg — The direction of auditory apparent motion can be profoundly affected by the direction of concurrently presented visual apparent motion. We investigated the electrophysiological processes
underlying this multisensory illusion, to assess the time-course and
underlying brain regions. Participants were presented with AV stimulus
pairs to different locations in close succession (i.e., AV1-AV2), giving the
impression of movement. The auditory and visual elements were either
spatially congruent or spatially incongruent. On each trial participants
judged the direction of the stimuli as: 1) rightward congruent motion, 2)
leftward congruent motion, or 3) incongruent motion/no motion. Participants perceived a high percentage of AV1-AV2 congruent pairs as congruous (90%). Demonstrating a strong multisensory motion illusion,
they also perceived 87% of AV1-AV2 incongruent pairs as congruous
(i.e., illusory trials), going in the direction of the visual apparent motion.
Electrophysiological data revealed a difference between real and illusory
responses at ~300 ms (i.e., 180 ms following the onset of the second stimulus in the pair of apparent motion stimuli) that was biggest over parietal
scalp regions.
D 59
NEURAL
CORRELATES
OF
LEARNING
CROSS-MODAL
ASSOCIATIONS Aaron Heller1, Petr Janata2, Charan Ranganath2;
1University of Wisconsin, Madison, 2University of California, Davis — Learning associations between auditory and visual stimuli is an important way
we learn about objects in our world. Little is known, however, about the
neural mechanisms that support gradual learning of cross-modal associations. Indeed, during the initial stages of associative learning, certain neural structures may support cross-modal binding, whereas a distinct
network of regions may support the reactivation of learned associations.
Here, we addressed this question by scanning participants over two days
as they learned (Day 1) and retrieved (Day 2) arbitrary associations
between faces and synthesized instrument sounds. On each trial, a delay
of eight seconds was inserted between the two stimuli to allow for the
dissociation of stimulus-driven and delay-period activity. Subjects separately performed auditory and visual localizer tasks in order to identify
subject-specific regions of interest (ROIs) in auditory cortex and the fusiform gyrus. Map-wise results showed a posterior shift in activation with
learning, such that prefrontal regions were activated early in learning,
but dropped out as learning peaked. In contrast, posterior cortical
regions, including sensory-specific and lateral parietal areas exhibited
increasing activation over the course of learning. Auditory and fusiform
ROIs revealed shifts in the temporal pattern of activity over the course of
learning, such that activation in response to a cue stimulus eventually
elicited activation of the ROI corresponding to the associate (the modality
of the upcoming probe). These results suggest that prefrontal regions
may support initial binding of cross-modal associations in order to support the eventual formation of associative links between sensory-specific
cortical regions.
D 60
BOLD AND FREQUENCY RESPONSES TO MULTISENSORY
SOCIAL SIGNALS: DIFFERENT RULES FOR DIFFERENT
SENSORY SYSTEMS Gemma A. Calvert1, Thomas Thesen2; 1University
of Bath, 2New York University — Human speech is an inherently multisensory phenomenon as a speaker’s articulatory mouth movements are
intrinsically correlated with the produced sound. A large body of
research shows that sensory integration of auditory-visual (AV) speech
signals affords many behavioral advantages. In an effort to investigate
the neurophysiological basis of such audio-visual convergence in the

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

human brain, we have used a combination of imaging techniques. With
event-related fMRI, we found evidence for crossmodal recruitment of
primary sensory areas in both auditory and visual cortex. Visually presented dynamic mouth movements activated auditory cortex robustly
starting at the presentation of the first stimuli. In visual cortex, however,
responses to voice stimuli developed much later after prolonged pairing
of the auditory-visual signals. MEG Beamformer signals from primary
visual and auditory cortices also revealed a systematic difference in the
pattern of cortical oscillatory responses. Crossmodal recruitment of
visual cortex was mediated primarily by activity in the 8-20 Hz frequency
band (alpha/low beta), whereas auditory cortex showed an additional
event-related desynchronization in the 25-40 Hz frequency range (high
beta/gamma). Results from both imaging modalities support an involvement of primary auditory and visual cortex in the convergence of AV
speech signals. Results also show that the crossmodal activation pattern
varies between sensory systems, and that these effects are likely to be
mediated by different oscillatory neuronal mechanisms.
D 61
NEURAL MECHANISMS IN FIRST LANGUAGE ATTRITION Hia
Datta, Valerie L. Shafer, Loraine K. Obler; The Graduate Center, CUNY — The
current study is designed to investigate the underlying neurolinguistic
mechanisms of attrition in the first language L1, in Bengali(L1)English(L2) bilinguals living in their L2 environment. Our research questions include: (1) Is attrition in the first language an effect of L1-disuse or
L2-interference? To examine the attrition mechanism we employ two
sets of lexical items; one set varies in familiarity across L1 and L2 and
another does not. We predict that if interference from L2 mediates attrition, then the differences in word-familiarity across languages will influence the amount of attrition in L1. Alternately, if disuse is the major
factor, all L1 lexical items will be attritted irrespective of how familiar
they are within or across languages. Our participants include BengaliEnglish bilingual individuals, aged 20-45 years, who have arrived in the
United States at the age of 12 years or later and lived here for one to
thirty-three years in an English-speaking community. A cross-modal
priming paradigm (Jeschnicak 2000) enables us to use event related
potentials, specifically the N400 component, as a neurophysiological
measure of amount of attrition. Reaction time serves as the behavioral
measure of the same process. Preliminary results indicate that attrition is
apparent as early as six years of stay in the L2 environment. In addition
the differences in the different word categories in Bengali, suggesting
that interference from L2 plays a greater role than disuse in the attrition
process.
D 62
CONTEXTUAL PRIMING IN GRAPHEME-COLOR SYNESTHESIA AN EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIAL STUDY David
Brang,
Vilayanur S. Ramachandran, Seana Coulson; University of California, San
Diego — In grapheme-color synesthesia, individuals experience vivid
color perception upon the presentation of ordinary text, such that each
letter/number (grapheme) elicits a highly specific and consistent color.
This study examined the differential brain activity generated by synesthetes and normal controls in a modified sentence-priming paradigm.
Subjects were presented with sentences ending in one of three forms. For
example, in TEXT blocks, sentences such as "The sky is" ended with a
color word ("blue"). In COLOR blocks, sentences ended with a rectangular color patch. In GRAPHEME blocks, sentences ended with a grapheme
matched to each synesthete's perceived color (e.g. "The sky is 7"). Half of
the sentences (40) in each block were congruous, half incongruous. Participants viewed two blocks of each type. ERPs were recorded from 5
grapheme-color synesthetes and 3 matched controls. In control subjects,
sentence-final words in the TEXT conditions elicited a broadly distributed N400 sentence congruity effect; congruity effects for the COLOR
condition involved an anteriorly distributed N400 component and a posteriorly distributed P2 component; the GRAPHEME blocks showed no
effects. In synesthetes, ERPs in response the TEXT condition showed

137

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

broadly distributed N400 effects; the color-patch condition elicited a posteriorly distributed N400 and an anteriorly distributed P2 component; the
GRAPHEME condition showed a posteriorly distributed N400 component as well as an anteriorly distributed P2 component. Results suggest
that synesthesia-based perception occurs early in the processing stream,
consistent with theories that synesthesia is a perceptually based phenomenon.
D 63
AUDIOVISUAL FEEDBACK IMPROVES MOTOR LEARNING AND
PITCH RECOGNITION Amir
Lahav1, Marcus Eldridge2, Elliot
2
1
1
Saltzman , Gottfried Schlaug ; Harvard Medical School, Boston, 2Boston
University, Boston — This study investigates the effect of audiovisual
feedback on motor learning and pitch recognition. We trained 56 nonmusicians subjects to play a short tune on a piano keyboard. Learning was
accomplished by ear with no sight reading involved. In addition, we
measured the subjects’ ability to identify piano notes with the corresponding piano keys before and after they learned the piece (pitch recognition task). We varied learning conditions across two groups of subjects:
the Audiovisual Group received both auditory and visual feedback during learning, whereas the Auditory Group received only auditory feedback. Interestingly, subjects of Audiovisual Group showed improved
performance not only in terms of learning the piece faster and with fewer
mistakes, but also in their performance on the pitch recognition task.
These results indicate that locally blocking visual information during the
acquisition of manual actions disrupts motor performance and impairs
auditory learning. We further showed that when visual feedback is
deprived previous kinesthetic experience may become particular handy;
for example, strong typing habits on a computer keyboard (blind typing)
are transferred to support finger accuracy also at the piano. In summary,
this study shows that multisensory learning experience (in this case,
audiovisual) improves performance even on a unisensory (auditory)
memory recognition task, suggesting the potential use of multisensory
stimulation to facilitate learning procedures in other domains.
D 64
WHAT YOU SEE IS NOT (ALWAYS) WHAT YOU HEAR:
INDUCED GAMMA BAND RESPONSES REFLECT CROSSMODAL
INTERACTIONS
IN
FAMILIAR
OBJECT
RECOGNITION Shlomit Yuval-Greenberg, Leon Y. Deouell; The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem — Gamma-band responses (GBR) are hypothesized to reflect neuronal synchronous activity related to activation of
object representations. However, it is not known whether synchrony in
the gamma range is also related to multisensory object processing. We
investigated the effect of semantic congruity between auditory and visual
information on the human GBR. The paradigm consisted of a simultaneous presentation of pictures and vocalizations of animals, which were
either congruent or incongruent. EEG was measured in seventeen students while they attended either the auditory or the visual stimulus and
performed a recognition task. Behavioral results showed a congruity
effect, indicating that information from the unattended modality affected
behavior. Irrelevant visual information affected auditory recognition
more than irrelevant auditory information affected visual recognition,
suggesting a bias towards reliance on visual information in object recognition. While the evoked (phase-locked) GBR was unaffected by congruity, the induced (non phase-locked) GBR was increased for congruent
compared to incongruent stimuli. This effect was independent of the
attended modality. The results show that integration of information
across modalities, based on semantic congruity, is associated with
enhanced synchronized oscillations at the gamma band. This suggests
that gamma band oscillations are related not only to low level unimodal
integration but also to the formation of object representations at conceptual multisensory levels.

138

Perceptual Processes: High-Level Vision

D 65
‘BRIDGING THE SENSES:’ AN EEG AND FMRI COREGISTRATION STUDY OF AUDITORY, SOMATOSENSORY
AND VISUAL MULTISENSORY PROCESSES Manuel
GomezRamirez1, Simon Kelly2, Marina Shpaner1, Glenn Wylie2, Pejman Sehatpour2,
John Foxe1; 1The Cognitive Neuroscience Program of The City College of the
City University of New York, 2Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric
Research — The integration of information from multiple sensory inputs
is fundamental to perception and cognition. In recent years, many electrophysiological (EEG) and hemodynamic human and non-human primate studies have identified a number of cortical and sub-cortical regions
involved in the merging of inputs from different sensory modalities.
Regrettably, all of these studies have been restricted to two sensory
modalities. This scenario precludes the direct comparison of the spatial
and temporal multisensory integration (MI) effects across different pairs
of sensory modalities. To this end, we conducted an EEG and fMRI study
where subjects were presented with auditory, somatosensory and visual
stimuli. The stimuli were presented alone or in pairs. Co-registration of
the EEG and fMRI data revealed distinct temporal and spatial MI effects
exist across the different modalities. In particular, the behavioral and
EEG data suggest that the earliest coupling exists between auditory and
visual inputs, which start approximately 60 ms after stimuli onset over
posterior cortices. Other MI effects were observed during the time frame
of the visual P1, auditory N1 and visual N1 response for audio-visual,
audio-somatosensory, and audio-visual / visual-somatosensory couplings, respectively. The data show that the auditory and visual modalities have the earliest and perhaps, the strongest coupling across the three
major senses in humans. Furthermore, the present study strongly contradicts the traditional dogma of MI processing, and clearly shows that MI
can occur at ‘very early levels’ of stimulus processing.
D 66
LONG TERM TOOL-USE EXPERIENCE SHAPES SPACE
REPRESENTATION. Andrea Serino1,2, Michela Bassolino2,3, Alessandro
Farnè1,4, Elisabetta Làdavas1,2; 1Università di Bologna, 2Centro studi e ricerche
in Neuroscienze Cognitive, Italy, 3Cesena & Istituto David Chiassone, Genova,
Italy, 4INSERM, Lyon — In the present work, we investigated whether an
auditory peripersonal space exists around hand and whether such a
space might be extended following a brief tool-use experience or by long
term experience of using a tool in everyday life. To this aim, audio-tactile
integration was studied in the space around the hand and in far space in
blind subjects regularly using a cane to navigate and in sighted subjects,
before and after a short training with the cane. In sighted subjects, before
tool-use, auditory peripersonal space was limited around the hand, then
it expanded after tool-use and contracted backwards after a resting
period. On the contrary, in blind subjects, peri-hand space was immediately expanded when holding the cane but limited around the hand
when holding a short handle. This suggests that long term experience
with the cane induces a durably extension of the peri-personal space.

Perceptual Processes: High-Level Vision
D 67
HOW
DO
WE
CONSTRUCT
MEANINGFUL
OBJECT
REPRESENTATIONS? THE INFLUENCE OF PERCEPTUAL AND
SEMANTIC FACTORS IN THE VENTRAL OBJECT PROCESSING
STREAM Kadia Acres, Emmanuel A. Stamatakis, Kirsten I. Taylor,
Lorraine K. Tyler; Centre for Speech, Language and the Brain, University of
Cambridge — Object identification requires processing of both form and
meaning. This processing occurs in a hierarchical stream in ventral temporal cortex, with visual processing in posterior regions and semantic
processing in more anterior regions (Tyler et al, 2004; Moss et al, 2005;
Taylor et al, 2006). We tested this hypothesis by contrasting the effects of
form and meaning in these areas, using Haxby et al (2001)’s statistical

Perceptual Processes: High-Level Vision

approach. Twelve participants were scanned while viewing blocks of
colour photographs and performing a one-back same/different task. We
chose object-types to produce four relationships. Objects were either: a)
semantically but not perceptually similar (red apples and bananas); b)
perceptually but not semantically similar (red apples and cricket balls); c)
both perceptually and semantically similar (same object type); d) neither
perceptually nor semantically similar (red apples and sharks). We used
the General Linear Model (SPM5) to model voxel-level responses to the
odd and even blocks of each object type. Parameter estimates for significantly object-selective voxels (i.e., voxels responding differently to one
object-type compared to all others) were extracted for each of the anatomically defined VOIs in ventral temporal cortex. These values were used to
calculate correlation coefficients as indices of similarity. In each VOI we
compared the similarity of activation patterns for the four kinds of object
relationships. Our findings suggest that object form and meaning differ
in their relative contributions to processing along the ventral stream. We
discuss these findings in the context of neural models of object identification.
D 68
USING BACKWARD MASKING TO INVESTIGATE AGE-RELATED
DEDIFFERENTIATION. Meredith Minear, Ari Moskowitz, Sandra Hale;
Washington University — We present data from a backward masking paradigm designed to provide a behavioral test of possible age-related
decreases in the specificity of the ventral visual cortex with age. Similarity effects in backward masking have been reported in younger adults in
which a face is a very effective mask for another face, but other complex
objects such as a house are no more effective than a simple noise mask
(Loffler et al., 2005). Based on the results of Park et al. (2004) which
reported less category specific activity in the ventral visual cortex of older
adults compared to young, we hypothesized that older adults would
show less specificity in masking (i.e., a house mask would lead to greater
disruption to face processing than a noise mask). However, we failed to
find evidence to support this hypothesis. We did find that face masking
another face was highly disruptive for both younger and older adults
with a substantial decrease in accuracy on a face recognition task and an
increase in the total exposure time of the target face needed to escape the
effect of the mask. However, although older adults were both less accurate in discriminating faces and needed a longer exposure to escape a
mask, this did not interact with mask type. For both younger and older
adults, there was no difference between houses and a random noise mask
in terms of their effects on face processing. These findings are inconsistent with a hypothesized reduction in neural specialization with age.
D 69
THE TIME COURSE OF OBJECT-SENSITIVE CORTICAL
ACTIVITY: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Lisa
C.
Lucia1, Emily A. Slocombe1, Haline E. Schendan1,2,3; 1Tufts University,
2
Massachusetts General Hospital, 3Boston University — While object-sensitive cortical activation has been well-defined using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), the time course of this neural activation is
largely unknown. We have previously found modulation of event-related
brain potentials (ERPs) to objects during diverse categorization and
memory tasks: The frontocentral P150 and polarity reversed occipitotemporal N170, the frontocentral object-sensitive negativities referred to as
the N200 and N350, and the centroposterior late positive complex (LPC)
encompassing N400 and P600 components. To investigate whether the
standard methods used to activate object-sensitive cortex in fMRI studies
also modulate these neurophysiological potentials, 64-channel ERPs
(N=23) were recorded to intact photographs of real objects and scrambled
images of the same objects but with the phases of the spatial frequencies
scrambled completely to yield an unidentifiable texture-like image. Participants performed an object classification task on each image, pressing
one button (index finger) as soon as they could identify the object or
another button (middle finger) if the image was not an object but instead
a scrambled nonsense picture. Preliminary results show near perfect task

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

accuracy, and significant differences between intact and scrambled
images for all ERPs that were predicted to be object-sensitive. The ERP
time course suggests cortical processing is object-sensitive at multiple
times after seeing an object.
D 70
CORTICAL RESPONSES TO INVISIBLE HAND GESTURES
WITHIN THE HUMAN MIRROR SYSTEM Ross Cunnington1, Anton
Lion2, Trevor Chong2, Jason Mattingley2; 1Howard Florey Institute,
University of Melbourne, 2School of Behavioural Science, University of
Melbourne — The human “mirror” system is thought to underlie action
perception and imitation by directly mapping observed actions onto an
observer’s own motor repertoire. Passive recognition of hand gestures
activates inferior parietal, superior temporal and ventral premotor areas,
and is hypothesised to proceed automatically without the need for voluntary control. In this study we examined the extent to which observed
hand gestures can be processed in the absence of conscious perception.
We used a binocular rivalry paradigm during fMRI to compare patterns
of neural activation in response to hand gestures that were either visible
or rendered invisible via interocular suppression. We also presented neutral face images as biologically-relevant control stimuli. A forced-choice
test confirmed the effectiveness of the binocular rivalry paradigm to suppress conscious perception of the hand gestures and faces. The observation of visible hand gestures elicited extensive bilateral activation within
the inferior and superior parietal cortex and angular gyrus, as well as
activation specifically in the left ventral premotor cortex/pars opercularis. Crucially, unseen hand gestures also elicited significant activation
bilaterally within the inferior parietal lobes, centred around the angular
gyrus. In contrast, unseen face images did not elicit significant parietal
activation, but involved occipital activation around the calcarine sulcus
and lingual gyrus. These results suggest that areas of the human mirror
system, specifically the inferior parietal lobes, are able to process hand
gestures in the absence of conscious perception, and may support the
automatic and direct matching of observed actions onto an observer’s
motor repertoire.
D 71
EQUISALIENCE FUNCTION ANALYSIS: DEVELOPMENT AND
APPLICATIONS TO CHARACTERIZE THE VENTRAL/DORSAL
DISTINCTION IN VISUAL PROCESSING Alissa Winkler, Charles E.
Wright, Charlie Chubb; University of California, Irvine — Equisalience function analysis (EFA) combines an experimental design and a data analysis
procedure to investigate basic questions about human functional architecture in the areas of cognition and perception by testing hypotheses
about whether cognitive processes have similar access to different sorts
of information in the sensory input stream. The motivation for developing EFA will be illustrated using examples from our research studying
the ventral-dorsal streams of visual processing. Specifically, we model
tasks’ differential access to color and luminance information, supporting
the hypothesis that visual processes underlying shape identification, allocentric spatial identification, and pointing tasks rely differentially on
visual stream resources.
D 72
UPPER AND LOWER VISUAL FIELD DIFFERENCES IN SELF-FACE
RECOGNITION Yuan Hang Li1, Eran Zaidel2; 1UCLA, 2Brain Research
Institute, UCLA — INTRODUCTION: Self recognition is central to consciousness, and Self-Face Recognition (SFR) is central to self recognition.
Is SFR part of a general face recognition (GFR) system or is it modular? In
a previous experiment, we found that SFR was poorer when the self-face
was tachistoscopically presented 2 visual degrees below than above fixation. In contrast, recognition of a stranger’s face or a scrambled face was
the same above or below fixation. However, this dissociation may be due
to the increased familiarity of self-faces. Thus, the present study examined SFR using familiar, rather than strangers’, faces as foils. METHODS:
Experimental variables included: Face Type (self, familiar) x Location
(above, below) x Visual Field (left, right). Stimuli consisted of photos of

139

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

the subject and a gender-matched familiar friend (known for > 1 year).
RESULTS: The data was consistent with the previous findings. SFR was
worse below than above fixation, whereas recognition of familiar-faces
was the same above and below fixation. CONCLUSIONS: We suggest
that SFR relies on a different recognition strategy than GFR. The lower
facial features of self-faces may be more informative than the upper features, hence self-faces are recognized more effectively above than below
fixation. This asymmetry does not occur for recognition of familiar or
strangers’ faces.
D 73
SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE SHAPES THE EARLY VISUAL
PERCEPTION AND LATER IDENTIFICATION OF OBJECTS: AN
ERP STUDY Rasha Abdel Rahman, Werner Sommer; Humboldt University
Berlin — Experts in object recognition differ from novices in two aspects:
intense perceptual experience and advanced knowledge in the domain of
expertise. While perceptual expertise has been shown to strongly affect
the perception, discrimination and identification of objects (e.g. Tanaka &
Curran, 2001; Gauthier et al 1999), little is known about the influence of
advanced semantic background knowledge (i.e. semantic expertise) on
these processes. Here we used a learning paradigm to manipulate the
amount of acquired background knowledge about initially unfamiliar
objects while keeping perceptual factors constant. In a separate test session 2 to 3 days after learning participants performed several tests on the
objects that did not relate to the background knowledge. Enhanced
knowledge resulted in an amplitude reduction of the P100, a component
that is associated with early stages of perceptual analysis. This effect
could reflect facilitated visual perception and/or integration of object features as a result of advanced knowledge about the object. Furthermore,
the amount of acquired knowledge was reflected in an amplitude
increase of an N400-like component that is associated with the effort or
depth of semantic processing of meaningful stimuli. Both effects were
present across a range of tasks from perceptual classification to naming,
and despite the fact that the additional information was irrelevant for
correct task performance. These findings suggest that first, semantic
background knowledge about objects changes the way in which we perceive these objects early on and that second, advanced knowledge
enhances the depth of semantic processing irrespective of specific task
demands.
D 74
BRAIN ACTIVITY IN HUMAN ALBINISM DURING A VISUOMOTOR INTEGRATION TASK Barbara Wolynski, Martin Kanowski,
Michael Hoffmann; Magdeburg University — Purpose: In albinism the ipsilateral visual field is abnormally represented in the early visual cortex. Is
the representation abnormality also evident in higher-tier areas involved
in visuo-motor tasks? Methods: With event-related fMRI brain activity
was determined (3T, Siemens TRIO; SPM5) for a visuo-motor memory
task in six albinotic subjects and three controls: While the subjects fixated
a central point monocularly, a coloured target embedded in an array (6.5°
x 6.5°; centred at 5.5° left or right from fixation) of grey distractors was
presented for 250 ms either in the left or right visual hemi-field. After a
delay subjects were prompted to press the upper or lower response buttons for targets in the upper or lower visual field, respectively, either
with the left thumb (blue targets) or with the right thumb (red targets).
Results: (1) Controls: Motor activity was dominant in the motor cortex
contralateral to the responding thumb, visual activity was dominant in
the visual cortex contralateral to the stimulated hemi-field, and parietal
activity was evident both bilateral and contralateral to the visual stimulus. (2) Albinism: For all subjects the same lateralisation of motor-activity
as in the controls was observed. Visual activity patterns were heterogeneous corresponding to previous reports [1]. Abnormal representations
in the early visual cortex tended to coincide with parietal abnormalities.
This suggests that, despite a normal motor-representation, the abnormal
visual representation is relayed from early to higher visually driven
areas.

140

Perceptual Processes: High-Level Vision

D 75
PERCEPTUAL RELEVANCE OF ABNORMAL VISUAL FIELD
REPRESENTATIONS – STATIC VISUAL FIELD PERIMETRY IN
HUMAN ALBINISM Michael
Hoffmann1, Petra Seufert2, Linda
Schmidtborn2; 1Magdeburg University, 2Freiburg University — Aim:
In
human albinism the plasticity of the visual system is challenged, as part
of the temporal retina projects abnormally to the contralateral hemisphere. Is the sensitivity of the abnormally projecting temporal retina
preserved? Methods: In 15 subjects with albinism and electrophysiologically determined extent of the retinal projection abnormality [1], and in 6
control subjects, we assessed the light spot detection sensitivities in the
central 20° of visual field. The sensitivities were determined monocularly
with static white-on-white perimetry using ‘Octopus 101’. Results: In the
subjects with albinism, the sensitivity of the abnormally projecting part of
the temporal retina is not selectively reduced: Apart from the vicinity of
the papilla, there was no significant sensitivity difference between nasal
and temporal retina in both the subjects with albinism and in the controls.
No correlation between visual field sensitivities differences of nasal and
temporal retina and the extent of the projection abnormality was
detected. Conclusions: While the papilla-induced scotoma can be
detected in the subjects with albinism tested, there is no indication of a
selective visual field defect induced by the projection abnormality. This
contrasts with the selective visual field defects observed in some animal
models of albinism and indicates that in humans, mechanisms of cortical
self-organisation make the abnormal representation available for visual
perception and visuo-motor integration.
D 76
FAMILY RESEMBLANCE:
TEN PROSOPAGNOSICS IN A
FAMILY Brad Duchaine1, Laura Germine1, Lucia Garrido1, Ken Nakayama2;
1University College London, 2Harvard University — We report on neuropsychological testing done with a family in which many members report
severe face recognition impairments. These ten individuals are high
functioning in everyday life and performed normally on tests of low-level
vision and high-level cognition. In contrast, they showed clear deficits
with tests requiring face memory and judgments of facial similarity.
They do not show deficits with all aspects of higher level visual processing as all tested performed normally on a challenging facial emotion recognition task and on a global-local letter identification task. On object
memory tasks requiring recognition of particular cars and guns, they
showed significant deficits so their recognition impairments are not
restricted to facial identity. These results strongly suggest the existence
of a genetic condition leading to a selective deficit of visual recognition.
D 77
DISENTANGLING VISUAL ATTENTION AND PERCEPTUAL
AWARENESS IN HUMANS: THE ROLE OF GAMMA
OSCILLATIONS Valentin Wyart, Catherine Tallon-Baudry; CNRS /
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France — It is difficult to imagine
being aware of a visual stimulus without attending to it. Does it mean
that visual attention and perceptual awareness are confounded, or just
entangled? Gamma (30-120 Hz) oscillatory synchrony, a potential neural
cooperativity mechanism, has been proposed as a neural correlate of both
attention and awareness. We designed a paradigm in which attention
and awareness were manipulated independently. 12 subjects were cued
by a central arrow to covertly attend either left or right visual fields. A
grating at contrast threshold for awareness could appear at the attended
or unattended side. Subjects had to report stimulus orientation and
whether they consciously perceived the stimulus or not. The same physical stimulus could thus be attended or not, and consciously perceived or
not. Behaviorally, subjects consciously perceived 50 % of the stimuli.
They were able to discriminate correctly the orientation of 80 % of the
consciously perceived stimuli, and were at chance level for unperceived
stimuli. As expected, subjects consciously perceived the stimulus more
often when it appeared at the attended side. However, more than 40 % of
the stimuli appearing at the unattended side were nevertheless con-

Methodological Issues: Electrophysiology

sciously perceived. Magneto-encephalographic recordings showed that
induced gamma oscillations within 50-60 Hz over contralateral occipital
sensors were significantly larger when the stimulus was consciously perceived (p < 0.0001), but were unaffected by attention (p > 0.5). These
gamma oscillations could therefore be a specific neural correlate of
awareness, independent of attention.

Methodological Issues: Electrophysiology
D 78
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
MEASURES
OF
METAPHOR
PROCESSING BY THE TWO CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES Miriam
Faust, Abraham Goldstein, Yossi Arzouan; Bar-Ilan University — There
is
some evidence for a unique contribution of the RH in processing figurative language. However, brain imaging studies of metaphor comprehension have reported contradictory findings. Our aim was to define the
specific contribution of the RH in processing metaphoric language, and
its timing, using electrophysiological measures. We compared the patterns of brain electrical activity elicited by processing two-word expressions denoting literal, conventional metaphoric, and novel metaphoric
meaning, as well as unrelated word pairs. Participants performed a
semantic judgment task in which they decided whether each word pair
conveyed a meaningful expression. In order to estimate the neural
sources of the waveforms for each condition, the average ERPs were subjected to LORETA. We compared the number of voxels in each hemisphere that were significantly different from a prestimulus baseline for
each of the expression types. Novel metaphors elicited prominent activity
in the RH at various times (peaking at 425, 600 and 710ms). Conventional
metaphors showed relative greater LH activity at those times. Next, we
used SPM and cluster analysis to compare our electrophysiological data
to those of fMRI studies. Cluster analysis yielded four clusters for the
conventional metaphors, three of them located in the LH (temporo-parietal, frontal, posterior) and one on the RH (temporo-parietal). Novel metaphors recruited two clusters, one on each hemisphere. The RH cluster
included temporal, frontal and parietal areas, whereas the LH cluster
consisted of mainly frontal areas. These findings are consistent with the
claim that processing novel metaphors, compared to conventional ones,
involves RH mechanisms.
D 79
TEST-RETEST
RELIABILITY
OF
NEUROPHYSIOLOGIC
RESPONSES TO ACOUSTIC CHANGE WITHIN VOWELS Brett
Martin, Karen Kushla; Graduate Center of CUNY, New York, NY — The purpose was to examine, in adults with normal hearing, the amplitude,
latency, and scalp distribution of the cortical auditory evoked potentials
P1, N1, and P2 elicited by formant change within a vowel. In addition,
test-retest reliability of these evoked potentials was assessed. There were
three stimuli (/ua/, /ui/, and /uU/) produced in three conditions (natural, synthetic, and tonal). Significant effects of stimulus, condition, and
their interaction were obtained, and reflected differences in the acoustic
content and complexity of the stimuli. High test-retest reliability was
obtained across test session using both intraclass correlations on the
waveforms and dependent samples t-tests on the waveform peaks. These
results have implications for evoked potential studies of speech processing as well as potential clinical application of P1-N1-P2.
D 80
EXAMINING THE EQUIVALENCY OF VISUAL DESIGNS ON
FACE PROCESSING:
AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL
STUDY Bernadette Sibuma, John Black, Karen Froud; Columbia University,
Teachers College — To date, the electrophysiology research is mixed in
regards to whether or not differences in the N170 event-related potential
(ERP) component exist in processing emotional expressions (e.g., Batty &
Taylor, 2003; Eimer & Holmes, 2002). In addition, little is known about
the effect of the design modality on the time course of face processing. In

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

this study, we examined the N170 as it presents in the processing of cartoon, computerized, and photographs of faces with neutral and fearful
expressions. Preliminary results of a facial expression decision-making
task showed a significant effect of design, i.e. cartoons and photographs
of neutral faces both elicited significantly larger N170 amplitudes compared to computerized faces. Secondly, we found that, in computerized
faces, emotion (fear) significantly enhanced the N170 amplitude. Since
variance in the amplitude of a component has often been associated with
the degree to which the associated cognitive process is engaged (e.g.,
Donchin & Coles 1988; Otten & Rugg, 2005), we hypothesize that the
increase in N170 amplitude reflects an increase in engagement with cartoons, photographs, and emotional computerized faces more than with
neutral computerized faces. Our findings have implications for the selection and equivalency of facial stimuli used within and across neurocognitive experiments.
D 81
CROSS-CORTICAL COMMUNICATION IN HEALTHY HUMAN
AGING: A MUTUAL INFORMATION ANALYSIS OF EEG Sidney
Segalowitz, William Marshall, Karen Mathewson, William Tays, Jane Dywan;
Brock University — EEG coherence should reflect cross-cortical communication changes due to human aging but has not provided consistent
results, possibly because coherence reflects only linear relations between
sites. A potential solution is the application of Mutual Information (MI)
Analysis, a nonlinear measure of cross-cortical communication. Predictions: Age-related losses in frontal white matter and a decline in frontally-based executive functions suggests regional frontal decline in
information transfer. Tasks: High density EEG was recorded while 14
young and 12 older adults engaged in a stimulus discrimination letter
flanker task and a source monitoring word memory task. Analyses: EEG
data were collected from dorsal-parietal, ventral-frontal and dorsal-frontal sites at 500 Hz (filtered at 1-50 Hz). MI and EEG coherence were calculated for ipsihemispheric combinations of sites based on 250 ms of EEG
time-locked to stimulus onset for correct trials in each task with an MI lag
of 100 ms for each combination. Results: EEG coherence did not differentiate the groups and there were no differences in EEG information
(entropy) between groups. Maximum MI values were higher in younger
adults (p=.003). Ventral-dorsal frontal sites showed greater MI than the
other combinations (p<.001), an effect that was significantly greater in the
younger adults due to greater frontal MI (p<.01). This interaction was
mirrored in the analysis of slope MI drop over the epoch (p=.001). MI at
any of the frontal sites succeeded in discriminating the groups 100%.Conclusions: Mutual Information Analysis captures changes in cortical communication in the aging human brain during complex task performance.
D 82
AUTOMATIC COMPONENT DETECTION OF EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS USING FUNCTIONAL DATA ANALYSIS JeanPhilippe Thivierge1, Natalie Phillips2; 1Universite de Montreal, 2Concordia
University — By capturing the stimulus-dependent fluctuations in neuroelectric activity on the surface of the scalp, event-related potentials (ERPs)
allow a wealth of information to be collected on cognitive and perceptual
processes. However, they also raise difficult challenges in analysis and
interpretation, which is partly due to poor signal-to-noise ratios. Our
research provides a novel approach for extracting and quantifying the
main characteristics of ERP signals. This approach is divided in two
parts. First, nonlinear b-spline smoothing of the raw EEG (electroencephalographic) data is performed based on Functional Data Analysis (FDA).
Then, a novel technique termed automatic components detection (ACD)
is applied that identifies the distinct peaks and troughs (i.e., components)
in the smoothed signals, based on their derivatives. A key advantage of
ACD is that it assumes no a priori knowledge of the distribution of components. The combined FDA-ACD approach was successful at replicating
findings of an empirical study on the effect of healthy aging on language
processing. A central finding was that this approach employed only half
the number of trials required by the original averaging approach to

141

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

obtain the same results. Analyses showed that older participants
obtained N400 components with lower amplitudes, longer durations, and
increased latencies compared to younger participants.
D 83
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL CORRELATES OF SWITCHING
BETWEEN TRUTHFUL AND DECEPTIVE RESPONSES Michelle
Phillips, Scott Meek, Veena Nair, Carmen Sanchez, Adam Craig, Yuliya
Komarova, Laura Smarandescu, Deepa Vijayakumar, Jennifer Vendemia;
University of South Carolina — The influence of deception and stimulus
congruity on brain event-related potentials (ERP) was examined in a twostimulus sentence verification task. In the current study, 20 college-aged
participants viewed questions to which they were randomly prompted to
respond with two levels of deception and congruity. The resulting ERPs
were analyzed with two strategies: 1) a spatial principal components
analysis, and 2) an independent components analysis. Although the ability of these two analysis techniques to recover dipoles from simulated
data has been established (Richards, 2003), the current study examines
the benefits and costs of these strategies in a less controlled data set.
Dipole models for both solutions were calculated for components related
to the early positive wave (P3a), a late positive wave (P3b), and a late
anterior negativity (N4). Research using the two-stimulus paradigm, has
identified distinct potentials related to each of these waveforms using
standard peak analysis approaches (Vendemia et al., 2005). The dipole
models were calculated using both a 4-shell and realistic head model.
The comparison of these techniques and their relationship to a theory of
deception that involves early and late processing is discussed.
D 84
TOPOGRAPHICAL VARIABILITY OF ERP RESPONSE IN OLDER
ADULTS IS INVERSELY RELATED TO INTERFERENCE IN A
WORKING MEMORY TASK William Tays, Sidney Segalowitz, Karen
Mathewson, Jane Dywan; Brock University — Prefrontal cortex (PFC) activity tends to be less differentiated in older adults than younger adults
(HAROLD model). This reduction in cortical specificity may reflect agerelated difficulties in recruiting specialized neural mechanisms (dedifferentiation hypothesis) or it may represent recruitment of additional cognitive resources to maintain performance (compensation hypothesis). We
investigated changes in the topographic variability of ERP responses in
younger and older adults during a working memory task that varied the
degree and kind of proactive interference effects. Predictions: We
hypothesized that, as the demands on executive control in working memory increased, older adults would show reduced selectivity of neural
responses at recording sites over PFC (i.e. greater variability of N450
responses) compared to younger adults. Results: In younger adults, the
N450 amplitude was sensitive to interference manipulations, but not in
older adults. However, both younger adults and older adults showed
sensitivity to interference effects in the topographic variability of their
N450 response. As the level of interference increased, the variability of
the N450 topography decreased in both groups, such that older adults’
neural response became more similar to younger adults as difficulty
increased. Therefore, older adults showed evidence of increased neural
specificity that may mark MORE efficient information processing under
greater task interference, a finding not anticipated on the basis of the
compensation or dedifferentiation hypotheses. Conclusions: The analysis
of topographical ERP response variability represents a novel means of
identifying individual differences in PFC function and may constrain
hypotheses based on age differences in the ERP components themselves.
D 85
AN ERP STUDY OF PROSODICALLY DRIVEN PRONOMINAL
(DIS)AGREEMENT Efrat Pauker, Inbal Itzhak, Karsten Steinhauer, John
Drury, Shari Baum; McGill University — Manipulations of the prosodic
properties of auditorily presented sentences were studied with eventrelated potentials (ERPs) to probe the mechanisms supporting the on-line
establishment of co-reference between pronouns and antecedents. Sentences such as "Whenever John calls (#A) his mother (#B) HE is happy"

142

Methodological Issues: Neuroimaging

were presented with either one prosodic break or two (i.e., at position #B
or at both #A and #B). In the single break (B) conditions, the pronoun HE
is construed as co-referential with the subject of the preposed adverbial
clause (John). However when there are two such breaks (A&B), we
hypothesized that the tendency might be for the pronoun to link with the
immediately prior nominal expression (“his mother”), thereby creating a
gender mismatch (cf. "His mother, SHE/*HE is happy"). Previous ERP
studies of the processing of pronominal (co)reference have contrasted different target words, for example "The aunt heard that *HE/SHE had won
the lottery" (Osterhout & Mobley 1995; see also King & Kutas 1997;
Schmitt et al. 2002; Hammer et al. 2005). Results have been mixed and
reported either N400 or P600 like effects, or both. We found that prosodic
boundary information determined the pronoun co-reference, and that the
resulting gender mismatch yielded an N400 type effect - in contrast to
control conditions involving no such mismatch. Implications for models
of prosodic processing and co-referential relationships will be discussed.
D 86
A TWO-STATE ANALYSIS OF EVENT-RELATED SCALP
POTENTIAL DATA RELEVANT TO THE DETECTION OF
DECEPTION Michael Schillaci, Jennifer Vendemia, Robert Buzan, Eric
Green, Scott Meek; University of South Carolina — We present our recent
efforts in the development of a theory of deception using both eeg/erp
and mri/fmri correlates attained during several two-stimulus experiments. In particular our early work on autobigraphical information has
been expanded to refine our model of workload dependence and pilot
findings from a misinformation paradigm show that up-front modulation
occurs. In addition to conventional waveform peak and latency analyses
we also present an energy-based analysis that allows for a detailed temporal description of the possible "neural circuits" involved in the process
of deception. We show that while these processes are similar to thos of
truth telling the relative timing of cognitive workload in anterior and
posterior regions of the cortex differ with deception taking longer.

Methodological Issues: Neuroimaging
D 87
NEURAL ADAPTATION REVEALS STATE-DEPENDENT EFFECTS
OF TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION Juha Silvanto1,
Neil Muggleton2, Alan Cowey3, Vincent Walsh2; 1Harvard Medical School,
2University College London, 3University of Oxford — Transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) is now widely used as a “virtual” lesion paradigm to
investigate behavioural functions, but the mechanisms through which it
influences neural processing are unclear. To understand the differential
effects of TMS on spatially overlapping populations of neurons we
manipulated the relative activity levels of visual neurons by adapting
subjects to a range of visual stimuli. By applying TMS to the visual cortex
representing the central visual field, we show in two experiments that the
behavioural effects of TMS depend on the state of adaptation of the neural population stimulated by TMS. Specifically, we demonstrate that
within the stimulated area TMS stimulates the adapted, and therefore
less active, neural population relatively more than an unadapted population. We demonstrate the generality of this principle for both suprathreshold and subthreshold TMS as well as for color and orientationcontingent colour using both subjective reports and psychophsyical measures. These findings can explain how TMS disrupts cognitive functions
and therefore have implications for all studies which use TMS to disrupt
behaviour.
D 88
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN REGIONAL BRAIN VOLUMES:
MANUAL VOLUMETRY VS. VOXEL-BASED MORPHOMETRY
Kristen M. Kennedy1,2, Kirk I. Erickson3,4, Karen M. Rodrigue1,2, Michelle
Voss3,4, Arthur F. Kramer3,4, Naftali Raz1,2; 1Wayne State University,

Methodological Issues: Neuroimaging

2

Institute of Gerontology, 3University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Institute — Regional manual volumetry from structural MRI is
the current gold standard of in vivo neuroanatomy in the studies of the
aging brain and cognition. Recently, voxel-based morphometry (VBM)
has become readily available and widely used. As popularity of VBM
increases there is a need to systematically evaluate its performance vis-avis manual volumetry. To date, such comparisons have been limited to
small number of regions, small samples, and less than optimal VBM techniques. We present a study designed to overcome these limitations, by
applying an optimized VBM approach to a sample of 199 adults spanning
the ages from 18 to 80 for which highly reliable manual volumetric measures have been previously obtained (Raz et al., 2004, Neurobiol Aging,
25, 377-396). Although we observed qualitative similarities in the pattern
of regional effects of age, a quantitative evaluation of the differences
revealed discrepancies between the methods. Specifically, the greatest
differences emerged in the regions that showed extreme (high and low)
effects of age. Relatively low correlations between the results obtained by
volumetry and VBM (age-volume r = .56 for dorsolateral prefrontal to .01 for the inferior parietal white matter) suggest that the techniques may
not be measuring the same thing. Possible reasons for the discrepancies
will be discussed, including problems of registration, segmentation,
smoothing, and underlying assumptions of VBM as well as individual
variability of anatomical structures.
4Beckman

D 89
HIPPOCAMPAL ATROPHY IS THE CRITICAL BRAIN CHANGE IN
PATIENTS WITH MEMORY DISORDER RESULTING FROM
ANOXIC EPISODE. Margherita Di Paola1, Lucia Fadda2, Laura Serra1,
Carlo Caltagirone2,1, Giovanni Augusto Carlesimo2,1; 1IRCCS Santa Lucia
Foundation, Rome, Italy, 2University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Italy — Anoxia
is considered a good model to study amnesia, nevertheless not all individuals who experience anoxic events develop memory problems. Moreover is still unresolved the question whether in patients with amnesia
and without significant other cognitive, after anoxia, the damage is limited to hippocampi. Here we investigated the brain damage in a selected
sample of adults affected by exclusively amnesic syndrome after an
anoxic episode, applying the Voxel-Based Morphometry. We studied five
anoxic patients and thirty-three well-matched healthy subjects. Our aim
was: a) to quantify regional gray and white matter changes associated
with chronic anoxic damage compared to control subjects; b) to identify
regions of common abnormality across all patients; c) to investigate
whether measures of regional gray matter volume correlate with memory
scores. When we compared anoxic patients to healthy subjects (Group
Comparison Analysis), we found a significant reduction of gray matter
volume in the hippocampus bilaterally. When we looked at the significant gray matter atrophy common to all patients (Conjunction Analysis),
we found a gray matter reduction in the hippocampus bilaterally. When
we performed correlation analysis we found just a trend between the
Prose immediate free recall test and the left hippocampus. Findings from
the present study indicate that the hippocampus is the elective target of
cerebral damage in adults with amnesic deficit after anoxia. Each patient
may present damage to other brain regions, but the results of the conjunction analysis point to the hippocampal atrophy as the critical damage for
the rise of the memory disorder.
D 90
INVESTIGATION OF SENSITIVITY OF NOVEL MRI TECHNIQUES
IN DETECTING WHITE MATTER CHANGES IN NORMAL
AGEING Francesca Schiavone1, Rebecca Charlton1, Thomas Barrick1, Robin
Morris2, Hugh Markus1; 1St. George's University of London, 2Institute of
Psychiatry, Kings College London — White matter damage has been identified as one of the main of age-related changes. Diffusion Tensor Imaging
(DTI) and Magnetization Transfer (MT) have been demonstrated to be
sensitive techniques in detecting white matter damage. We performed
both DTI and MT in an elderly population (age-range 54-85 years) to
assess whether MT added additional information to that obtained by

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

DTI. Histograms were generated for Mean Diffusivity (MD), Fractional
Anisotropy (FA) and Magnetization Transfer Ratio (MTR) for white matter. Peak Height Normalized Frequency was derived from each histogram and used in subsequent correlation and regression analyses
between MRI parameters, age and cognitive functions. There were significant correlations between all MR measures and age, but the correlations
were stronger with the DTI parameters (FA r = .737, p = < 0.01; MD r = .646 p= < 0.01, MTR r = -.456, p= < 0.01). As indicated by regression, DTI
parameters explained 40% of the variance of Information Processing
Speed measures (MD and FA Adjusted R square = .400, Sig F change =
.003); whether MT did not contribute significantly to the model (MTR
Adjusted R square = .413, Sig F change = .123). In addition, Beta coefficients demonstrated the only FA contributed significantly to the model
(Beta coefficient = -.435 p < 0.05). DTI, and particularly FA, appears to be
the most sensitive measure to assess age related white matter damage.
The stronger relationships may reflect the fact that FA gives a direct measure of white matter changes observed in ageing.
D 91
TRACKING THE CONCENTRATIONS OF OXYGENATED AND
DEOXYGENATED BLOOD IN THE VISUAL CORTEX WITH
NEAR-INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY Glenn Wylie, Gerald Voelbel, John
DeLuca; Kessler Medical Rehabilitation Research & Education Corp., and
UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School — The primary purpose of this study
was to use functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) to plot the timecourse of changes in the concentration of oxygenated blood (oxyHb) in
primary visual cortex, using what is known about this time-course from
the fMRI literature as a benchmark. A secondary aim was to plot the
time-course of the concentration of deoxygenated blood (deoxyHb) in
primary visual cortex, since this information is not independently available in the BOLD signal. Subjects were fitted with an array of 30 fNIRS
source/detector ‘optodes’, positioned over the occipital lobe. The room
was darkened and, after a 5 minute baseline period, subjects viewed 120
presentations of a large, white square, with 10-20 sec between each successive presentation. This slow event-related design allowed us to
extract the response to each stimulus from the time-series and average
across the 120 presentations. This provided a ‘model-free’ assessment of
the oxyHb and deoxyHb concentrations across time. We also analyzed
the data using standard fMRI statistical methodology. The two
approaches—averaging and modeling—yielded qualitatively similar
results. The analyses of the oxyHb accord well with the extant fMRI literature. The analyses of the deoxyHb show the concentration of deoxygenated blood increases far more quickly than the concentration of oxyHb.
The wider implications of these results will be discussed.
D 92
NOUN-VERB PROCESSING IN ITALIAN ACROSS THREE
PRODUCTION TASKS: AN FMRI STUDY OF PICTURE-NAMING,
READING AND REPETITION Analía
Arévalo1, Daniela Perani2,
Stefano Cappa2, Frederic Dick3, Pasquale Della Rosa2, Elizabeth Bates4, Nina
Dronker1; 1VA Northern California Health Care System, Martinez, CA,
University of California, Davis, CA, 2Università Vita Salute San Raffaele,
Milan, Italy, Milan, Italy, 3School of Psychology, Birkbeck College, London, UK,
4
University of California, San Diego, CA — The aim of this study was to
evaluate the neural correlates of noun versus verb processing across three
tasks (and two modalities) -- picture-naming (PN), word reading (WR)
and word repetition (WRP) -- in healthy native speakers of Italian. Different brain areas have been implicated in the processing of the two word
categories as well as these three different tasks, yet to date none of these
comparisons have been run within individual participants. Here, participants viewed alternating blocks of PN, WR and WRP noun-verb stimuli
(black-and-white line drawings, written and aurally-presented words,
respectively) and were required to overtly name the pictures, read or
repeat the words, depending on the run. As previously reported (e.g.,
Perani et al., 1999), we mostly observed areas more strongly activated for
verbs relative to nouns (L middle frontal gyrus, L and R middle temporal

143

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

gyrus, and R fusiform gyrus and cerebellum, FDR corrected level of
p<.05, min. of 100-voxel clusters), but not the reverse. In other words,
nouns and verbs activated similar networks but verbs activated additional areas, which does not support the notion of anatomically distinct
noun and verb areas. Also, this noun-verb difference reached significance
in PN and WRP (and not in WR), and was significantly larger in PN relative to WRP. For WRP, significant ‘verb activation’ was seen in the right
middle temporal gyrus. We discuss theories of noun-verb processing,
brain organization for tasks and word classes, as well as cross-linguistic
perspectives.
D 93
USING FUNCTIONAL NEAR INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY TO
STUDY VERBAL FLUENCY IN HEALTHY ADULTS Jeannie
Lengenfelder, Gerald Voelbel, Glenn Wylie, Neal Nadkani, Angela Smith, John
DeLuca; KMRREC — The objective of this study was to examine the use of
functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS) to investigate the pattern
of cerebral activation in the frontal lobes of healthy adults during a verbal
fluency task. Participants were 9 right-handed, healthy adults (6 females,
3 males) between the ages of 20 and 51 without any history of neurological disease or psychiatric disorders. Participants were seated comfortably
and 30 fNIRS source/ detector optodes were placed on their foreheads.
Following a 60 second baseline period the verbal fluency task was administered according to standard administration. Participants produced
words starting with the letters F, A, and S with a 60 second time limit for
each letter. Across the 9 participants, there was significantly elevated
oxyhemoglobin (OxyHb) detected in the left inferior frontal gyrus
(Broadman Areas 45 & 46), between the left dorsal and ventral lateral prefrontal cortex, during the verbal fluency task when compared to the baseline period.
This study demonstrates that fNIRS, a new functional
neuroimaging technique, can be used to detect changes in OxyHb within
the frontal lobe during a verbal fluency task in healthy adults. The
increase in the left inferior frontal gyrus is consistent with prior functional imaging studies of verbal fluency tasks. The findings will be discussed in the context of the utility of fNIRS to measure functional
changes in cerebral oxygenation due to cognitive activity in healthy
adults.
D 94
NOVELTY/FAMILIARITY OF REWARD-PREDICTING CUES
MODULATES THE REWARD ANTICIPATION RESPONSE IN
HUMAN NUCLEUS ACCUMBENS AND MEDIAL MIDBRAIN Ruth
M. Krebs1, Björn H. Schott2,1, Hartmut Schütze1, Georg Salloum1, Hans-Jochen
Heinze1, Emrah Düzel3,1; 1Otto von Guericke University, Magdeburg,
Germany, 2Leipniz Institute for Neurobiology,
Magdeburg, Germany,
3
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, United
Kingdom — Reward anticipation in humans is associated with activation
of the mesolimbic reward system, particularly the nucleus accumbens
and the midbrain. Little is known, though, about the influence of rewardirrelevant cue features, such as novelty and familiarity. In the present
event-related fMRI study we investigated whether novel and familiar
reward-predicting cues are processed differently, using a 2x2-factorial
design (rewarding/neutral x novel/familiar) in a sample of 24 healthy
volunteers. Photographs of complex scenes served as reward-predicting
cues, and subjects had been familiarized with half of the pictures the day
before scanning. During the experiment subjects made an explicit novelty/familiarity judgment for each picture, followed by a number comparison task. Novelty/familiarity was irrelevant for the rewardprediction, whereas the reward-predicting quality of the pictures was
carried by their content (indoor/outdoor). In rewarded trials, correct
responses in the task were followed by a positive feedback indicating
monetary gain, whereas incorrect responses led to a negative feedback
indicating loss. As expected, both accumbens and medial midbrain
showed an increased activation during reward anticipation, and this
response was significantly stronger for familiar relative to novel cues.
However, during positive feedback, activation in accumbens and mid-

144

Methodological Issues: Neuroimaging

brain was stronger after the presentation of novel relative to familiar
reward-predicting cues. These results suggest that explicit novelty detection is associated with reduced reward prediction and an increased prediction error, whereas familiarity of reward-predicting cues facilitates
anticipation processes due to a more efficient cue encoding. We currently
investigate whether this response pattern also occurs when novelty/
familiarity judgement is not explicitly required.
D 95
EFFECTS OF DURATION OF AUDITORY SPEECH VERSUS NONSPEECH SIGNALS ON BRAIN ACTIVATION Helen Chen1, Einar
Men1, Saudamini Roy2, Doug Whalen3; 1Haskins Laboratories, 2Carnegie Mellon
University, 3Haskins Laboratories & National Science Foundation — The
purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of auditory stimulus
duration on brain activation using fMRI. Natural speech and non-speech
auditory stimuli with 5 levels of duration ranging from 400ms to 1000 ms
were presented to 20 subjects in an event-related design. A passive listening task with catch trials requiring a button press was used. Speech stimuli were pseudowords with consonant-vowel-consonant structure, nonspeech stimuli were sequences of three musical chords, and catch trials
were single piano notes. Direct comparison of speech and non-speech
stimuli showed greater activation for non-speech stimuli in the anterior
part of the superior temporal gyrus (STG) in both hemispheres, while
activation induced by the speech stimuli was greater than that of the nonspeech stimuli only in the left posterior part of the STG. Further, a positive linear correlation between stimulus duration and activation level
was found for the non-speech condition in areas spread across the bilateral primary and secondary auditory cortex, but was largely restricted to
the right STG for the speech condition. These results suggest that stimulus duration has a stronger effect across various parts of the auditory processing system for non-speech stimuli compared to that of the speech
stimuli and provides reference data for when researchers need to carefully control stimulus duration in neuroimaging experiments.
D 96
AN INVESTIGATION OF PERFUSION IN STROKE SURVIVORS
Kathleen Brumm1, Thomas Liu2, Joanna Perthen2, Frank Haist2, Tracy
Love2,3; 1SDSU/ UCSD Joint Doctoral Program in Language and
Communicative Disorders, 2University of California, San Diego, 3San Diego
State University — Magnetic Resonance Perfusion Imaging is used to
measure regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF), which has been reported to
be reduced in some neural areas of aphasic patients (Hillis et al., 2005).
Prior research has shown that reduced rCBF, or hypoperfusion, in
patients with aphasia is correlated with suboptimal neural functioning in
areas that appear to be structurally intact (Love et al., 2002). Hypoperfusion may therefore lead to “functional lesions” that would not be
revealed via structural imaging. These “functional lesions” may help to
account for cognitive deficits that are not correlated with structural imaging results. Given the prior research indicating hypoperfusion in aphasia, we examined perfusion maps of aphasic patients in order to
determine the time-course and localization of hypoperfusion. Arterial
Spin Labeling (ASL) was used, in which radiofrequency pulses are used
to magnetically tag aterial blood water. Images are then acquired following a post-labeling delay, across 8 total time delays, ranging from 300 ms
to 3 seconds, in order to measure cerebral perfusion. Among aphasic
patients relative to age-matched and young unimpaired controls we not
only found hypoperfusion, but also uncovered a longer transit delay
between the arterial tagging region and the imaging region. These results
add to the growing body of literature regarding hypoperfusion in aphasia and also propose new avenues of research related to transit delays in
cerebral perfusion. Implications of this study extending to aphasia
research and neuroimaging methods will be discussed.

Methodological Issues: Neuroimaging

D 97
INFEROTEMPORAL
REGIONS
CRITICAL
FOR
NAMING
CONCRETE ENTITIES REVEALED BY INFERENTIAL STATISTICS
FOR LESION OVERLAP DIFFERENCE MAPS Thomas
Grabowski1,
David Rudrau1, Sonya Mehta1, Joel Bruss1, Daniel Tranel1, Hanna Damasio2;
1
University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, 2Brain and Creativity
Institute, University of Southern California, LA, CA — Maxima in lesionoverlap difference maps have been used to support anatomical-functional hypotheses regarding the brain substrates of naming (Damasio et
al, 2004), but precise inferential statistical methods have not been used for
thresholding. We derived exact statistics characterizing, voxelwise, the
statistical behavior of lesion overlap difference maps when the null
hypothesis of no association between lesion and deficit is true. We
applied the method to 137 subjects with focal brain damage previously
included in Damasio et al (2004), tested for deficits in naming in five conceptual categories of concrete entities (persons, animals, fruits and vegetables, tools, musical instruments). The results affirm some spatial
segregation between regions involved in naming different classes of concrete entities. Deficits in naming nonunique entites were associated with
lesions in the left temporal-occipital-parietal junction and inferior temporal lobe, whereas, for persons, lesions mostly concentrated in the left temporal pole. Lesions associated with deficits in naming natural (animals,
fruits and vegetables) but not manmade (tools, musical instruments) entities, included the left inferior frontal gyrus. Also, the results reveal previously undetected regions involved in naming, independent of categories.
Conjunction analyses showed loci in left IT and insula where significant
lesion-naming deficit relationships were found for all five categories of
stimuli. Subsequent logistic regressions showed that the likelihood of
having a lesion in those regions significantly increases with the number
of categories for which subjects manifest a naming deficit, and this effect
was especially significant for IT. These findings emphasize the importance of inferential statistics in lesion-overlap difference map analyses.
D 98
ON THE ROBUSTNESS AND ATOMICITY OF NETWORKS OF
ACTIVATION, AN FMRI STUDY Alessandro
Gagliardi, Catherine
Hanson, Stephen Hanson; Rutgers University — In this study, we examine
the network of brain activity indicated by fMRI while a participant
watches a normal video of an intentional human activity (i.e., building a
chair, making coffee), a degraded version of the same, and random geometric motion (i.e., a circle moving randomly on the screen). We develop
graphs of these networks using dynamic causal modeling (DCM) and
compare these against results from structural equation modeling (SEM)
and Bayesian methods. We find that these methods reveal subgraphs of
activity indicative of elementary processes associated with these tasks
(i.e., vigilance, theory of mind, etc.). We further demonstrate the robustness (and limitations) of these methods by perturbing our criteria of how
we define a node of activation.
D 99
EFFECTS OF HYPERCAPNIA ON EVOKED HUMAN BRAIN
ACTIVITY MEASURED WITH MEG Eric Halgren1, Thomas Thesen2,
Oleg Leontiev1, Mingxiong Huang1, Tao Song1, Nima Dehghani3, Don
Hagler1, Anders
Dale1, Richard Buxton1; 1UCSD, 2NYU, 3Brown
University — Low to moderate levels of inhaled CO2 (hypercapnia)
induce large increases in cerebral blood flow (CBF). The influence of such
baseline changes upon the phasic effects of functional stimulation is one
important method for examining quantitative models of the BOLD
response. A common simplifying assumption is that neural activity is not
affected by hypercapnia. However, evoked activity in rodent hippocampal slices is strongly decreased by hypercapnia, via a presynaptic mechanism involving adenosine receptors. We examined the effects of
hypercapnia on the MEG response to auditory, visual and cognitive stimulation. Six normal subjects breathed 5%CO2 - 21%O2, through a mask
for 210s, followed by a 240s period of normocapnic breathing. During
repeated cycles of hypercapnic and normocapnic periods with steady-

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

state endtidal CO2 levels, subjects were tested on auditory pattern monitoring and visual word recognition. Across both tasks, hypercapnia
induced statistically highly significant decreases in event-related fields
(ERFs). Decreases were observed in early sensory components in both
auditory and visual modalities, as well as later cognitive components
related to memory and language. Effects were approximately equal in all
cortical regions. These results indicate that hypercapnia induces clear
decreases in the neuronal response in various sensory systems and in
higher-level cognitive processing areas in the brain. Considering that low
cerebral pH would arise when CBF is unable to keep pace with neuronal
activity, the results observed in the present study may reflect a homeostatic mechanism by which neuronal activity is adjusted to a level that
can be sustained by available blood flow.
D 100
DYNAMIC CAUSAL MODELLING OF FMRI WITH NEURAL MASS
MODELS A. C. Marreiros, S. J. Kiebel, K. E. Stephan, C. C. Chen, L. M.
Harrison, K. J. Friston; Wellcome Trust Functional Imaging Laboratory, UCL,
UK — INTRODUCTION The aim of this work was to endow dynamic
causal models (DCM) for fMRI time series with a greater biological realism. This extension involves the explicit modelling of neuronal activity
in each voxel or region and coupling different regions at the neuronal
level. Current causal models for fMRI consider only one neuronal state
per region. In this work we adopt a more biologically constrained and
plausible model, using multiple neuronal sources or subpopulations per
region. Critically, this allows us to incorporate multiple sources within
each region so that we can model changes in both extrinsic and intrinsic
connectivity. METHODS Current DCMs for fMRI are based upon a bilinear approximation to neuronal dynamics with one state per region. In
this work we extend this model to cover two states per region. These
states model the activity of an inhibitory and excitatory subpopulation.
This has a number of key advantages. First, we can relax the shrinkage
priors used to enforce stability in single-sate DCMs. Second, we can
model both extrinsic and intrinsic connections. Third, we can enforce
positivity constraints on the extrinsic connections. Finally, this re-parameterisation enables one to model the effect of context or experimental
changes, on the coupling as a proportional increase or decrease in connection strength. CONCLUSION Preliminary results indicate that it is
possible to adjudicate between changed in intrinsic and extrinsic connections using fMRI. This analysis demonstrates the utility of adopting generative or causal models of biological time-series that are informed by
anatomic and physiological principles.
D 101
CORTICAL SURFACE-BASED ANALYSES IN FUNCTIONAL
NEUROIMAGING: FOCUS ON WORKING MEMORY IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA Alan Anticevic, Donna Dierker, Sarah Gillespie, David
Van Essen, John Csernansky, Deanna Barch; Washington University in St.
Louis — A consistent problem in functional neuroimaging is accurate
alignment of structural as well as functional data. Many approaches have
been used, however most analyses of cortical activation still center on a
volume-based representation of the data. Consequently, spatial smoothing as well as alignment is done in the volume domain. This approach
can have limitations. Spatial smoothing in the volume domain does not
respect spatial topography and cortical organization. Additionally, alignment can be inadequate if inappropriate target atlases are used. Although
these issues might present themselves in healthy participants, they can
possibly emerge as even bigger problems when examining different
patient populations (i.e. movement issues as well as potential structural
cortical abnormalities). We attempt to address these limitations through
surface-based group analyses in a study of working memory (WM) in
patients with schizophrenia. Mounting evidence points to WM deficits
and abnormal patterns of dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) activation as key features of schizophrenia. We administered a ‘2-back’ version
of the n-back WM task while participants underwent scans on a 1.5T Siemens VISION system. Each participant’s structural scan was used for cor-

145

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

tical surface reconstruction using the SureFit method. Participants’ fMRI
data were mapped directly onto their cortical surface models. Six standard landmarks were used for alignment of cortical surface models to the
population-average PALS-B12 atlas. We compared statistical results
obtained from the surface-based methodology to results obtained from
volume-based analyses in both patients and healthy participants. Furthermore, we demonstrate the importance of spatial topography when
performing spatial smoothing of fMRI data.
D 102
IMAGING CORRELATES OF COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN
TREATED VERSUS UNTREATED HYPERTENSION Kristin
Hannesdottir1,2, Arani Nitkunan1, Rebecca Charlton1, Thomas Barrick1,
Graham MacGregor1, Hugh Markus1; 1St. Georges University of London,
2Landspitali University Hospital — Hypertension, especially if untreated, is
an important risk factor for cognitive decline and dementia. This may
partly be due to white matter hyperintensities possibly representing
asymptomatic cerebral small vessel disease. The aim was to assess
whether white matter abnormalities could be detected by diffusion tensor
imaging (DTI; a recent MRI technique sensitive to white matter damage)
in treated versus untreated hypertension and determine whether these
correlated with neuropsychological performance. Forty patients with
treated hypertension (mean age=69.3±11.3), 30 age-matched controls
(mean age=68.2±8.5) and 10 patients with untreated hypertension (mean
age=58.1±6.1) were recruited. Neuropsychological testing included measures of attention, executive function, memory and psychomotor speed.
Both conventional MRI and DTI were conducted to assess white matter
damage. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) was performed in the
white matter to assess cerebral metabolite changes and to explore possible abnormalities in N-acetylaspartate (NAA) as a marker of neuronal
dysfunction. Cognitive performance was worse in untreated compared
to treated hypertension on tests of executive functioning and psychomotor speed. There was no significant correlation between cognition and
imaging in treated hypertension. In untreated hypertension there was a
correlation between an executive functioning and attention component
and DTI mean diffusivity values (r=0.805, p=0.016) and between psychomotor speed and MRS NAA/Cr levels (r=0.853, p=0.015). This confirms
previous reports that there is cognitive impairment in untreated hypertension. The specific anatomical mechanisms underlying this impairment are yet unknown. The correlation between speed and NAA would
suggest neuronal dysfunction may play a role in the impaired psychomotor speed found in untreated hypertension.

Methodological Issues: Other
D 103
ESTABLISHING PATIENT REGISTRIES FOR COGNITIVE
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: ADVANTAGES, CHALLENGES,
AND PRACTICAL ADVICE BASED ON THE EXPERIENCE AT
TWO CENTERS Lesley Fellows1, Marianna Stark2, Arlene Berg1, Anjan
Chatterjee2; 1McGill University, 2University of Pennsylvania — Neuropsychological studies continue to be an important source of evidence in cognitive neuroscience, complementing newer methods for investigating
brain structure-function relationships in humans. Advances in neuroimaging, statistics, and information management now provide potentially
powerful tools to support neuropsychological research. At the same time,
changing ethical requirements and privacy concerns impose increasingly
high standards on the procedures used to recruit research participants,
and on subsequent data management. Shared, centrally-administered
research registries provide a framework for addressing ethical considerations, streamlining recruitment and screening, and co-ordinating subsequent research contacts and data storage. The existence of such a resource
can make patient-based research accessible to more investigators, and
allows a priori determination of an experiment’s feasibility. We report the

146

Methodological Issues: Other

experience of two such registries: the patient database of the Center for
Cognitive Neuroscience at the University of Pennsylvania, and the Cognitive Neuroscience Research Registry at McGill University. Both are run
by dedicated database managers, who act as the liaison between
researchers and participants. The UPenn database has been operating
since June 1999, and currently includes 171 patients, who have participated in 1013 research visits. The McGill registry recruited 59 patients in
its first full year of operation, leading to 77 research visits. The long-term
experience at UPenn indicates excellent retention, with only 15 participants withdrawing or lost to follow-up. Methods found to be effective for
participant recruitment and retention at both sites will be reviewed. Practical approaches to consent, data access, and meeting the needs of multiple investigators will also be presented.
D 104
EEG BANDS AS PREDICTORS OF TMS INDUCED MOTOR
EVOKED POTENTIAL (MEP) AMPLITUDE: PRELIMINARY
FINDINGS Jean-Francois Lepage, Dave Saint-Amour, Hugo Theoret;
Universite de Montreal — Transcranial magnetic stimulation is a powerful
tool in the study of causal relationships between brain and behavior.
However, the important variability observed in studies measuring excitability of the motor cortex through TMS-induced motor evoked potentials subjects suggests that the effects of single TMS pulses may also
fluctuate in studies of cognition. One explanation to this phenomenon
may reside in the ongoing, oscillatory activity of the brain. Here, we
recorded EEG activity during the administration of 80 single TMS pulses.
Coil position was held constant throughout the experiment via a neuronavigation system. EEG segments preceding the TMS pulse were averaged and submitted to FFT and wavelet analysis. Preliminary analysis
suggests that the alpha band has a modulatory effect on the amplitude of
the TMS-induced MEP. Indeed, in comparison to MEP of weaker amplitude, the EEG segments of strong MEP show a variation of spectral
power as early as 400 ms prior to the pulse. These results might bear significant implications for the interpretation of TMS induced MEP in cognitive studies.
D 105
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY AND INFORMATION FLOW IN
THE HUMAN BRAIN DURING LANGUAGE PROCESSING:
EVIDENCE FROM ECOG DATA Galit Fuhrmann Alpert1, Tim Mullen1,
Sundari Suppiah1, Erik Edwards1, Ryan Canolty1, Sarang Dalal2, Maryam
Soltani1, Heidi Kirsch2, Nick Barbaro2, Robert T. Knight1; 1Helen Wills
Neuroscience Institute, UC Berkeley, 2UCSF — We study how information
propagates between functionally segregated regions in the human brain
during the performance of a cognitive task. To address this goal, we
developed an approach to explore functional connectivity and information flow using multi-channel subdural electrocortigoram (ECoG) data
recorded from patients undergoing neurosurgery for epilepsy. The 64channel grid is implanted for 4-7 days, during which experimental
recording is performed. We first determine the all-to-all connectivity pattern, by considering for each pair of channels both mutual information
(MI) and cross-correlation (CC) between shifted versions of the two timeseries for various time-delays. The optimal time-delay between the channels is the delay maximizing MI (CC) at this connection. The degree of
connectivity is set as the maximal MI (CC) value. Next, functional brain
regions are defined using clustering analysis. The degree of connectivity
and time delay are both considered, such that channels with high connectivity and short delays are functionally grouped. Finally, we study information flow between those functionally defined clusters and determine
optimal delays between regions of interest. We applied this analysis to
data recorded from a patient performing a simple language task. Analysis of functional connectivity between pairs of channels suggests a complex pattern of connectivity, including bidirectional connections.
Clustering analysis resulted in several functional clusters including classically known language areas, e.g Broca and Wernicke regions. The analysis of information flow between these functional regions supports signal

Motor Control

propagation from Broca to Wernicke, with a delay matching a theoretically computed conduction delay via the arcuate fasciculus. Supported
by NINDS-NS-21135.

Motor Control
D 106
YOUR TASK IS ALWAYS ON MY MIND: SHARED STIMULUSRESPONSE MAPPING IN CO-ACTING INDIVIDUALS Chia-Chin
Tsai1, Wen-Jui Kuo1, Jung-Tai Jing1, Daisy L. Hung1, Ovid J.-L. Tzeng2,1;
1Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan,
2Academic Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan — Mirror-neurons activating when taking an action and perceiving similar actions made by others mediate a
direct matching mechanism, a match between representations of
observed actions onto internal motor commands. One fascinating capacity in humans is to represent infinite actions of others in the social world,
and match them onto our limited behavioral repertoire, suggesting that
not only the outcome of observed actions per se but also the knowledge
about “when” and “how” of the actions evokes the representations activated. To test this hypothesis, paired-individuals were instructed to perceive the same perceptual event but co-act with different stimulusresponse mappings by responding to different stimulus attributes (i.e.
color of the stimulus and direction of a particular feature of the stimulus).
Results showed that RTs were slower when perceiving a stimulus which
also required other’s response (double response trial) than only required
one’s response (single response trial). The neurophysiological evidence
(Go and NoGo-P3) extends our knowledge that, we also anticipate and
evaluate another’s stimulus-response mapping even we didn’t have overt
responses. Such co-representation process may thus occur at the stimulus
evaluation rather than response selection level.
D 107
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY (EEG) REVEALS AGE-RELATED
CHANGES OF THE VOICE-RELATED-CORTICAL-POTENTIAL
(VRCP) DURING PHONATION. Jessica
Galgano, Karen Froud;
Columbia University, Teachers College — Purpose: To examine with EEG
the VRCP’s time course, distribution, and morphology during phonation
in older adults. Design/method: The time course, distribution, and morphology of the Voice-Related Cortical Potential (VRCP) were characterized in 25 healthy adults (age range 45-75 years) and 25 younger controls
(age range 18-28 years). We implemented a stimulus-induced voluntary
movement paradigm in which trials of volitional exhalation and vocalization were presented in subject-specific randomized orders, and electroencephalography was concurrently recorded. Physiological measurements
of vocal fold movement and respiration onset were integrated with the
simultaneously-sampled brain data. Analysis: EEG data were digitally
low-pass filtered at 30Hz. The continuous recording was segmented from
3000 milliseconds prior to movement onset, and epochs were corrected to
a 200 msec baseline. Trials containing EOG and other artifact were
rejected. Source localization was applied to estimate generator sources of
all VRCP components. Results: VRCP properties in healthy older adults,
compared to young control subjects, were significantly different in: (a)
the degree of activation of brain areas involved in voice planning and
production; (b) timing and sequencing of activations. Source localization
demonstrated that premotor, primary motor, sensorimotor, and auditory
regions were involved in voice planning and production. Significant positive correlations were found between VRCP parameters and data
obtained using acoustic and lung function measures. Conclusion: These
findings provide valuable information about the neural mechanisms for
voice planning and production in healthy young and older populations.
They also have potential for providing valuable information about cortical reorganization to voice disorders and their therapies.

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

D 108
GRASPING THE SAME OBJECT FOR DIFFERENT END-GOALS:
EFFECTS ON HAND SHAPING Caterina Ansuini, Livia Giosa, Luca
Turella, Umberto Castiello; Università di Padova — Introduction. Manipulative hand movements are choreographed on the supposition that the
intended activity determines what type of hand configuration is used for
any given action (for example, grasping a bottle to pour may involve a
different grip than grasping it to throw it). An untested question is
whether fingers’ shaping towards the same object changes depending on
end-goal. Methods. Each subject (N=20) reached towards and grasped a
bottle filled with water and either simply grasp it; lift and throw it; pour
the water within a container; place it on a base matching the diameter of
the bottle; pass it to the experimenter. Joints’ angular excursions for all
digits and abduction angles between digits were recorded by means of a
CyberGlove. Results. Principal component analysis showed that the first
three components (PCs) could account for >80% of variance implying a
reduction from 10 recorded degrees of freedom for all actions. However,
the weighting coefficients for each joint differed depending on end-goal.
In particular, the degree of independence across digits increased when
the end-goal required a greater level of accuracy. Conclusions. When
intending to grasp an object the functional goal modulates hand shaping.
In particular, when the end goal implies a high level of accuracy, each
digits’ joints is more independent than when the level of accuracy is low.
This may be indicative of a control strategy in which the level of independence is determined by the need for fine adjustments.
D 109
KNOWING WHAT YOU DO IS LIKE DOING IT MYSELF:
BOUNDARY CONDITIONS OF TASK CO-REPRESENTATION IN
THE FLANKER PARADIGM Silke Atmaca, Natalie Sebanz, Guenther
Knoblich; Rutgers Newark — Humans perform most of their actions in
social context. Previous research demonstrated that individuals' action
performance is influenced by others' future actions, even when coordination is not required (Sebanz et al., 2003). The present study examined
whether knowing another person’s task also affects one’s own task performance. Using the Flanker paradigm (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974), pairs of
participants performed a go-nogo task in response to target letters arbitrarily linked to two response keys, with each participant being responsible for one key (joint condition). The results resembled results of single
participants in charge of both responses (two-choice setting), but differed
from results of participants performing the same go-nogo task in isolation (individual condition). In a further study, we tested whether the
mere belief that a co-actor is performing the complementary task is sufficient for such effects of task co-representation to occur. For this purpose,
we seated the co-actors in two different rooms. Finally, we tested whether
the co-actor's actions need to be intentional in order for their task to be corepresented. We compared a condition in which participants were co-acting with a confederate performing intentional actions with a passive
movement condition in which the co-actor’s finger was pulled down by a
magnet. Our results suggest that task co-representation is a cornerstone
of social cognition.
D 110
THE CASE OF DR. JEKYLL AND MR. HYDE: A KINEMATIC STUDY
ON SOCIAL INTENTION Luisa Sartori1, Cristina Becchio2, Umberto
Castiello1; 1Università di Padova, Italy, 2Università di Torino, Italy — Introduction. What is a social action? Intention mechanisms modulate motor
activation (Edwards, Humphreys & Castiello, 2003) and kinematic patterns for cooperative and competitive behaviour are distinct from those
performed in isolation (Georgiou et al., 2006). We focused on the kinematics of social intended actions to investigate whether social intentions
affect kinematics. Methods. Participants (N = 13) were requested to reach
towards, grasp an object, and either pass it to another person (social condition) or put it on a small platform (single agent condition). Movements’ kinematics were recorded using a 3-D motion analysis system.
Results. Results revealed specific motor patterns for actions motivated by

147

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

social intentions. In particular, the wrist pathway was longer, the point of
maximum wrist trajectory height was higher, the amplitude and time of
peak velocity were lower and earlier, respectively, for the ‘social’ than for
the ‘single agent’ condition. These results are suggestive of a more careful
honing phase when the goal is nested within a social interaction: a longer
deceleration phase is applied to perform a more careful action. Conclusions. Differences in intentions are reflected in kinematics: specific kinematic patterns connote and distinguish actions executed with social
goals from actions motivated by individual goals. These differences may
be used by the motor system to discriminate between actions serving different intentions. If intentions shape kinematics – as the present results
show – then simulating an action may enable the observer to represent
the agent’s intentions.
D 111
ACOUSTIC ANALYSIS OF FIRST AND SECOND LANGUAGE
DYSARTHRIA IN PATIENTS WITH TRAUMATIC BRAIN
INJURY Monika Polczynska-Fiszer; School of English, Adam Mickiewicz
University — Post-traumatic dysarthria is an articulatory impairment
caused by damage to the nervous system that leads to the disruption of
motor speech execution. The present study investigates the characteristics of first and second language speech of 6 Polish patients with traumatic brain injury (TBI) who knew English to various degrees before
trauma and 10 control subjects. According to standarized scales used in
Polish clinics, there were 3 individuals with mild and 3 with moderate
dysarthria. A detailed acoustic analysis of the speech was carried out, following recovery from coma. The following observations of TBI dysarthria
were been made: (1) vowels were less distorted than consonants, (2) single phonemes were more intelligible than longer phrases, (3) speech fluency was 47% lower than in the control group, (4) maximum pitch
variation (intonation) was smaller by 128 Hz, (5) there was impairment
problems with phonation and resonance (nasality). TBI individuals did
not have sufficient motor control to articulate sounds. In order to communicate, they simplified sounds by the use of processes that appear in
first language acquisition. However, there were considerable differences
in the frequency and occurrence of phoneme modifications used by the
post-coma population and children. The patients favored processes
which helped them overcome weakness of the tongue, lips, lower jaw,
velum and the vocal folds- processes are uncommon in child language
development. Dysarthria in English was more severe than in Polish and
the subjects performed more radical processes of pathological speech
(e.g. phoneme omissions) in their foreign language.
D 112
NEGATIVE BOLD ACROSS AGE GROUPS Keith McGregor, Michelle
Benjamin, Benzi Kluger, Valeria Drago, Kenneth Heilman, Keith White, Tomoyuki
Mizuno, Anastasia Ford, Zvinka Zlatar; University of Florida — Objectives:
This event-related fMRI investigation was concerned with age-related
differences in levels of negative BOLD during a tactile-cued, simple
motor response task. Methods: Eighteen (9 older; 9 younger) righthanded individuals performed a simple unimanual hand raise in two
response conditions(Uncrossed; Crossed). During Uncrossed trials, subjects were to move the hand receiving tactile stimulation (computer-controlled air puff). In Crossed trials, subjects were asked to move the hand
opposite of tactile stimulation. Subjects performed a total of 200 counterbalanced response executions (50 per hand per condition). A three-factor
analysis of variance (ANOVA: Age x Response Condition x Handedness)
for the whole brain was completed using area under the curve of the estimated hemodynamic response functions obtained from a deconvolution
procedure. A region of interest (ROI) analysis was also performed for
primary motor cortices (Left & Right M1). Hemodynamic response function estimates for maximally active voxels in selected ROI for each subject
and response condition were subsequently compared using repeated
measures ANOVA. Results: Relative to the movement laterality and
regardless of response condition, both age groups displayed negative
BOLD in ipsilateral M1 and positive BOLD in contralateral M1. ANOVA
analysis indicated younger adults displayed greater response amplitude

148

Motor Control

in both positive and negative BOLD as compared to older adults regardless of movement laterality. Conclusions: These preliminary results
indicate age-related differences in response patterns during the tested
movements. Results are compared with a previous investigation using a
learned, complex response sequence comparing negative BOLD across
age groups.
D 113
THE MODULATION OF CORTICOSPINAL EXCITABILITY AND
INTRACORTICAL INHIBITION BY VISUAL FEEDBACK AND
PERFORMANCE GOAL Richard H.S. Thomson, Michael I. Garry, Jeffery
J. Summers; University of Tasmania — Motor practice can induce changes
in corticospinal excitability (plasticity) thought to be important for motor
learning. However, there remains uncertainty as to what aspects of the
task and its performance are important. While most studies have examined corticospinal excitability before and after practice, we concentrated
on how excitability is affected during motor practice. To investigate the
aspects of the task that contribute to plasticity, we examined the effect on
corticospinal excitability of visual feedback and a performance-goal. In
session 1, subjects were instructed to perform simple finger abduction
movements briskly, and with moderate force without visual feedback or
a target. In the second session, we supplied concurrent visual feedback of
force output and a target force level that was yoked to the force produced
in the first session. This enabled us to manipulate the task goal and visual
feedback across sessions, while controlling for motor output. Corticospinal excitability and intracortical inhibition (ICI) of the hand were
assessed during the period of relaxation between successive responses.
Force output did not differ between the two sessions. Cortical excitability
progressively declined across blocks during session 1 (no feedback, no
goal), but remained nearly constant during session 2 (visual feedback,
force goal) and ICI was significantly lower during session 2. Variations of
corticospinal excitability and ICI during task performance appear to
depend on the presence of visual feedback and a task goal, and not solely
on motor output. This may have implications for motor practice paradigms aimed at promoting cortical plasticity and motor learning.
D 114
CHILDREN WITH AUTISM SHOW IMPAIRED MOTOR
SEQUENCE LEARNING BUT SPARED MOTOR ADAPTATION
Jennifer Gidley Larson1, Amy Bastian1,2, Opher Donchin2, Reza Shadmehr2,
Stewart Mostofsky1; 1Kennedy Krieger Institute, 2Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine — Deficits in motor learning might help to explain
impaired acquisition of motor skills commonly observed in autism. To
investigate this hypothesis, motor learning was examined in twelve highfunctioning children with autism (HFA) and thirteen typically-developing children, ages 8-13 years, using both tests of motor adaptation and of
motor sequence learning. Motor sequence learning was assessed using a
Rotary Pursuit task consisting of four blocks of four 20-second trials, with
learning measured as change in time-on-target across successive blocks
of trials. Motor adaptation was assessed using: 1) Prism Adaptation, in
which subjects were instructed to throw a ball while wearing prism goggles, and 2) Reaching Adaptation in which subjects moved a planar twojoint manipulandum to a visually-displayed target, with either a force or
visual perturbation applied. For all adaptation tasks, dependent measures included adaptation rates, learning indices, and post-adaptation
after-effects. For Rotary Pursuit, repeated measure ANOVA indicated a
significant “diagnosis x block” interaction (p=0.05) with the HFA group
showing less improvement across successive blocks than did controls;
furthermore, this effect was stronger in a larger sample of subjects who
completed Rotary Pursuit (37 children with HFA and 37 controls;
p=0.005). No significant group differences were found on the tasks of
motor adaptation. The results suggest that children with autism have
intact ability to adapt their movements but are impaired in learning complex motor sequences. These findings may explain autism-associated difficulties with acquiring complex motor skills, including social/
communicative gestures, and the tendency to instead display more stereotyped patterns of behavior.

Motor Control

D 115
THE HYBRID NEURAL SYSTEM TO GENERATE THE RULEBASED DYNAMIC MOTOR SEQUENCE: AN FMRI STUDY Chiaki
Hirata1,2, Ryota Horie1, Ken Ueno1, Roy Waggoner1, Keiji Tanaka1, Kang
Cheng1, Jun Tani1; 1RIKEN, 2Jumonji University — Neural correlates of the
generation of the dynamic motor sequence were detected. Participants
received the intensive training of the point prediction task in which the
trajectory of the flashing target followed the dynamic logistic equation.
The probe experiment suggested that the participants acquired the
dynamic rule not in the form of the ”one-to-one mapping”, but that they
registered the several preceding timesteps as the context. Then, fMRI
images were acquired with the fixed repeating motor sequence as the
control condition. The first class of the brain region was found active both
when generating the control sequence and when generating the various
sequence according to the dynamic equation while showing the higher
activation in the latter task. Those were, multiple parietal areas, the lingual gyrus, the caudate nucleus, and the cerebellar lobe IV. These areas
may be responsible to preserving the acquired rule and enable the forward prediction. Another class of regions was active only when participants made the dynamic motor sequences. Those were, bilateral middle
frontal gyrus and the anterior part of the left supplemental motor area.
These brain regions may register the prediction error and may bring the
internal context back to the coherent state. This process may be realized
by the regression of the several preceding timesteps. The mechanisms for
the dynamic sequence generation will be discussed in relation to the neural network model with the context unit, namely, the recurrent neural
network.
D 116
MOTOR BEHAVIORAL AND NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS
OF UNEXPECTED PERTURBATIONS TO ANKLE MOVEMENTS
Lewis Wheaton, Timothy Judkins, Chris Mizelle, Richard Macko, Larry
Forrester; University of Maryland School of Medicine — Effects of unexpected perturbations with sensory feedback have been clearly evaluated
in upper, but not lower extremities. Cortical physiology and motor
behavior were evaluated while subjects performed an ankle targeting
task with an ankle-robot. The robot constrained the ankle to move in a
constant stiffness field while subjects were cued to make plantarflexion
movements to a target displayed on a computer screen repeated 100
times. Randomly, the stiffness field was removed (catch trial, c) to induce
error. Visual feedback of ankle motion on the screen (vision and proprioception V=P), or proprioception only with no visual feedback (PO) conditions were evaluated. Electroencephalography (EEG) was recorded to
evaluate sensorimotor and parietal activations relative to the motor task.
End-point target accuracy was determined for each movement. EEG and
behavioral analyses were performed on the trial before the catch (c-1), c,
and the two trials after (c+1, c+2). Results showed significant overshoots
were made in the c trial, relative to the c-1 trial for both V=P and PO.
Movement related cortical potentials (MRCPs) showed significant
decreases in the bilateral parietal areas for c compared to the other trials
in both V=P and PO, but not at the sensorimotor cortex. This suggests
that unexpected deviations in motor control can be corrected in ankle
movements, and that the posterior parietal cortex is a main source of
activity related to this correction in both V=P and PO conditions. Further
work will evaluate how vision and proprioception information are
weighted to affect targeting tasks.
D 117
DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN MOTOR SKILL LEARNING Tal
Savion-Lemieux, Jennifer A. Bailey, Virginia B. Penhune; Concordia
University — Recent evidence suggests that maturational changes in the
brain coincide with and underlie changes in cognitive and motor abilities.
A developmental model has been proposed suggesting that implicit
learning develops early and is relatively invariant across childhood,
whereas explicit learning shows greater changes over time. The present
study examined performance on a multi-finger-sequence-task (MFST) in

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

terms of two indices of learning: percent correct key presses, a more
explicit measure, and response synchronization, a more motoric/procedural measure. We collected three samples of healthy right-handed children between 6 and 10, and a sample of young adults. On the MFST,
participants reproduce a sequence of key-presses on an electronic keyboard. Testing occurred on two consecutive days. Participants received
three blocks of practice on Day1 and two blocks on Day2. Across blocks
of learning on Day1, Adults & 10Y.O. were significantly more accurate
than 8Y.O. (p < .03); Adults & 10Y.O. did not differ. For response synchronization, adults were significantly more synchronous than children
on the first two blocks of learning (p < .01), but by the third block 10Y.O.
reached adult performance, whereas 8Y.O. did not. When comparing the
last block on Day1 to the first block on Day2, only the 8Y.O. showed significant improvements on the more explicit measure of learning (p < .01).
In contrast, for response synchronization all groups showed significant
improvements between Days 1 and 2 (p < .01). These preliminary findings provide partial support for the developmental invariance model.
Additional analyses will include data from the 6Y.O. sample.
D 118
DO BEHAVIORALLY INHIBITED RESPONSES PRODUCE
SPECIFIC OR GENERIC INHIBITION OF THE MOTOR SYSTEM?
Jing Xu1, Julie Duque1, Adam Aron2, Richard Ivry1; 1University of California,
Berkeley, 2University of California, San Diego — The Stop-Signal task has
been used to study control processes required to inhibit a planned movement. By applying TMS to primary motor cortex (M1), it has been shown
that the excitability of a muscle associated with the planned movement is
inhibited following successful stops. The degree of specificity of this
inhibition is unknown. It may be specific to the aborted movement,
extend to all task-relevant muscles, or be generic, affecting muscles independent of task relevance. Participants performed a 2-choice RT task,
responding with either the index or pinkie finger of the right hand. On
some trials, the go signal was followed by a stop signal. The timing
between the go and stop signals was adjusted, such that participants succeeded in aborting the planned response on 50% of the trials. By applying TMS over the right or left hemispheres, we measured motor evoked
potentials (MEPs) in muscles associated with the task (left hemisphere) or
homologous muscles irrelevant to the task (right hemisphere). Preliminary results (n=4) indicate that successful stopping is associated with
some degree of generic inhibition. MEPs were decreased in the muscle
involved in the response as well as in both the homologous and nonhomologous muscle in the non-responding hand.
D 119
FUNCTIONAL ROLE OF INHIBITORY PROCESSES DURING
HAND SELECTION Julie Duque, Tim Verstynen, Richard Ivry; UC
Berkeley — In many situations, we can choose to use either hand to
accomplish an action. Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) studies
have shown that during unimanual movements, inhibition is observed in
muscles of the non-responding hand. Inhibition could result from hand
selection processes, attenuating mirror-related activity in homologous
muscles. To test this hypothesis, we measured motor evoked potentials
(MEPs) in left first dorsal interosseous (FDI) elicited by TMS over the
right motor cortex during a choice reaction time task involving left or
right index finger abductions. Prior to an imperative signal, a cue was
presented which was either informative, indicating the hand to be used
in the forthcoming response, or uninformative. The imperative signal
always indicated the required response. Prior to the imperative signal,
left FDI MEPs were consistently inhibited, an effect more prominent
when the cue indicated that this muscle could be required for the forthcoming response (all conditions except pre-cued right responses). Following the imperative signal, MEPs became larger when it signalled a left
hand response, but remained inhibited preceding right hand responses,
regardless of the type of cue. Interestingly, mirror activity was frequently
observed in the homologous FDI. This effect was more prominent in the
informative condition, perhaps due to reduced pre-imperative inhibition

149

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

in that condition. These results fail to support the idea that inhibition of
the non-responding hand reflects mechanisms that facilitate the selection
of the appropriate response hand. As an alternative hypothesis, we propose that inhibition may be essential for preventing premature responses
in the selected hand.
D 120
INFLUENCE OF ENDOGENOUS AND EXOGENOUS FACTORS
ON PERISACCADIC MISLOCALIZATION Florian Ostendorf, Hendrik
Puhlmann, Carsten Finke, CHristoph J. Ploner; Charité, Berlin — Perisaccadically flashed stimuli appear systematically distorted in space. Two components of perisaccadic mislocalization have been identified: first, a
uniform shift of apparent stimulus positions in saccade direction and second, a compression of visual space, centered at saccade target position.
Perisaccadic mislocalization has been assumed to reflect the spatio-temporal dynamics of an extraretinal eye position signal that is not perfectly
aligned with the corresponding saccade. Respective underlying extraretinal signals could originate somewhere along the oculomotor pathway
from prefrontal cortex down to superior colliculus and brainstem. Here,
we probed perisaccadic mislocalization in normal subjects while we
intended to modulate endogenous and exogenous contributions to oculomotor activity. By insertion of a temporal gap between fixation offset and
saccade target onset we modulated an exogenous factor in comparison to
a saccadic step-task. In a second experiment we varied the predictability
of saccade direction as an endogenous factor. The modulation of both the
endogenous and exogenous factor resulted in modulations of the shift
component of perisaccadic mislocalization while the compression component remained largely unaffected. However, modulations of the shift
component in the gap-task occurred in a very restricted perisaccadic time
window, while predictability-dependent differences in perisaccadic mislocalization occurred in a longer time window of hundreds of milliseconds before and after the saccade. These results point towards a
differential influence of endogenous and exogenous factors on perisaccadic mislocalization. Besides signals directly associated with the actual
saccadic motor command, higher cognitive factors such as attention and
prediction may influence perceptual mislocalization around saccades on
a different time-scale.
D 121
THE EFFECT OF VIEWING ACTIONS AND GRASPABLE
OBJECTS IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Ellen Poliakoff1, Adam Galpin1,
Steven Tipper2; 1University of Manchester, 2University of Wales, Bangor — In
Parkinson’s disease (PD), external stimuli can hinder movement and produce ‘freezing’, yet visual cues can sometimes facilitate movements. We
asked whether two classes of action relevant stimuli, which are known to
activate sensorimotor brain areas in healthy controls, would also implicitly evoke action in patients. We compared the influence of both action
observation and action-relevant objects on movement execution in PD
patients and age-matched controls. In experiment 1, participants viewed
a moving finger (action-relevant) or object (baseline), and subsequently
performed a finger response to a target. Responses were faster if the executed and observed movements had compatible directions. The controls
showed a larger effect for the finger than object movements, but the
patients showed the reverse trend. In experiment 2, participants
responded to the shape of a door handle (action-relevant object) or an
abstract bar stimulus (baseline) that could be oriented toward or away
from the response hand. Responses were faster when response hand and
object were spatially compatible. In both experiments, controls showed a
larger effect for the action-relevant object over baseline, whereas the
patients did not. Thus, our results revealed that whilst low-level spatial
or directional cueing were unaffected by PD, the patients did not show an
additional effect of action-relevance. This suggests that in Parkinson’s
disease, external cues exert their influence through lower-level visual
processes and that the influence of action-relevant stimuli on the motor
system is disrupted.

150

Motor Control

D 122
SPEECH PRODUCTION: DISSOCIATIONS WITHIN PREMOTOR
AREAS RELATED TO RHYTHM Novraj Dhanjal, Jane Warren, Richard
Wise; Imperial College London — ‘Rhythmic mandible-generated closeopen alternations of the mouth’ account for speech production based on a
simple alternation between vowels and consonants (MacNeilage and
Davis, 2001). However, although some languages have a simple CVCV
word structure, e.g. Japanese, most permit a more complex structure,
such as the word ‘strength’ (CCCVCCC) in English. Further, cognitive
and linguistic constraints result in a continuous need to alter amplitude,
stress and rate of production during normal speech production. An
exception is the recitation of sequences, such as counting, which more
closely approximates to CVCV speech production and is produced at a
simple rhythmic rate. In a PET study (n=24 subjects) the contrast of propositional speech with counting demonstrated that the motor control of
normal speech depended on neural systems within the left pre-SMA and
dorsolateral premotor/prefrontal cortex. The reverse contrast demonstrated that counting activated the SMA proper; and that the rhythm of
counting was expressed through modulation of activity within bilateral
ventral premotor and primary motor cortex. Activity in these medial and
lateral areas was significantly greater during counting than during propositional speech. Based on single cell recordings in non-human primates,
the ventral motor region controls jaw opening and closure. Therefore,
although speech early in the evolution of language may have developed
from the same neural system that controls rhythmic jaw movements used
in chewing (MacNeilage and Davis, 2001), propositional speech has come
to depend on higher order premotor systems, anatomically situated
between ‘cognitive’ prefrontal cortex and lower order premotor cortex
directly connected to motor cortex.
D 123
RESPONSE/EFFECT CONGRUITY AND DISRUPTION OF TIMING
BY DELAYED AUDITORY FEEDBACK DURING SEQUENCE
PRODUCTION Peter Pfordresher; University at Buffalo, The State
University of New York — It is well known that delayed auditory feedback
(DAF) slows timing and can disrupt accuracy during sequence production. Some have suggested that the effect of DAF results from the timing
of perceived event onsets relative to movement timing, regardless of
whether the informational content in auditory feedback (e.g., the pitch
classes one hears when playing music) matches the expected outcomes of
actions (Howell et al., 1983). However, no research has varied independently the type of sequence one executes and the degree to which feedback contents match the expected outcomes of actions. An experiment
was conducted in which musically untrained participants produced
rhythmically isochronous sequences at a prescribed rate (500ms interresponse intervals). Production tasks included tapping and the production of simple melodies on a keyboard (designed such that untrained persons could produce them). Auditory feedback was presented in
synchrony with actions, or at delays scaled to production rate that ranged
from 13 – 138% of inter-response intervals. In addition, auditory feedback
pitch could either match the actions that were produced (e.g., hearing a
monotone sequence in response to taps), or the alternate type of action
sequence (e.g., hearing a melody in response to taps). Results suggest that
slowing of production by DAF is enhanced when information in auditory
feedback matches the kind of sequence one tries to produce. These findings suggest that neural systems regulating the timing of perception and
production are sensitive to factors beyond the timing of onsets themselves and may incorporate goal-related information.
D 124
MOVEMENT IS MORE STRONGLY ATTRACTED TO MUSIC
THAN TO SPEECH Simone Dalla Bella, Anita Bialunska; University of
Finance and Management in Warsaw — People often move in synchrony
with musical beats whereas synchronization of movement with speech
accents is rare. To examine whether movement is more likely to be captured by music than by speech, 33 nonmusicians tapped their finger in

Motor Control

synchrony with an isochronous auditory Target sequence (i.e. tones with
600-ms IOIs) while a Distractor sequence was presented (i.e. well-known
musical excerpts or fragments of children poetry). Distractors were presented at one of various phase relationships with respect to the target.
The analysis of the asynchronies and of their variability showed that
musical distractors attracted movement more strongly than speech distractors. The attraction was larger when distractors preceded the target
tones than when they followed them. This effect was replicated when
controlling for potential confounding variables which may account for
the differences between music and speech, such as distractors’ average
pitch and temporal variability, and the timbre of the Target sequence.
Differences between speech and music in attracting participants’ taps
were attenuated by these manipulations, but still significant. In addition,
similar results were obtained in a further experiment where a continue
measure of the force participants exerted during synchronization with
the Target sequence was recorded with a force transducer. In sum, there
is converging evidence that musical rhythms attract movement more
than stress structure in speech. Music, because of the regularity of its metrical structure, may be particularly well-suited to engage brain mechanisms underlying sensorimotor synchronization and motor entrainment
(e.g. the cerebellum and the basal ganglia).
D 125
EFFECTS
OF
PALLIDOTOMY
ON
SENSORIMOTOR
SYNCHRONIZATION IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Ilona
Laskowska1, Simone Dalla Bella2, Paulina Rolinska2, Aleksander Litwinowicz3,
Edward Jacek Gorzelanczyk1, Marek Harat3; 1Kazimierz Wielki University,
Poland, 2University of Finance and Management in Warsaw, Poland, 3Military
Hospital, Poland — When we listen to rhythmic auditory stimuli (e.g.
music) we often spontaneously or deliberately move in sync with their
beat (e.g. by foot tapping). Sensorimotor synchronization (SMS) has been
linked to the activity of the basal ganglia and of the cerebellum. To clarify
the contribution of the basal ganglia to SMS, we examined SMS in 10 nondemented patients suffering from intractable Parkinson’s disease (Experimental group) 2 days before, 3 months, and 6 months after pallidotomy
(i.e. surgical treatment consisting in the ablation of the postero-ventral
portion of the Gpi). The Experimental group was compared to 2 matched
control groups: 10 nondemented medicated Parkinson’s disease patients
and 10 healthy participants. Patients and controls were asked to tap their
finger/hand along with 1) a sequence of nonmusical stimuli (i.e. a metronome), 2) familiar music, and 3) amplitude-modulated noise. Moreover,
perceptual tests (i.e. detection of anisochrony) were performed. The
patients in the Experimental group exhibited impaired SMS before surgery as compared to controls. Only very few patients in the Experimental
group showed improved synchronization (i.e. a larger number of synchronized taps and smaller variability) 3 and 6 months after the surgery.
Most patients either maintained the initial performance or exhibited
worse synchronization accuracy. In contrast, pallidotomy had a positive
effect on time perception: in several cases the performance in the anysochrony detection tests improved 3 and 6 months after the surgery. These
findings suggest that SMS and the detection of anysochrony may be supported by partly independent neuronal substrates.
D 126
MOTOR CORTICAL AREA ACTIVATION DURING MOTOR
SEQUENCE LEARNING: A FMRI STUDY. Sharleen
Sakai, Rudy
Bernard, Jie Huang, Elizabeth Hendriks; Michigan State University — The
present fMRI study investigated the role of the motor cortices [primary
motor area (MI), supplementary motor area (SMA) and presupplementary motor area (pre-SMA)] during a serial reaction time motor sequence
learning task. Subjects were scanned on a 3.0 T General Electric magnet
using a standard block design during which the subjects were presented
with 10 iterations of a task which required them to alternate between
pressing 1 of 4 buttons corresponding to the location of a red circle for 12
sec and watching a fixation point for 24 sec. The stimuli were presented
under a random condition (R1) first, followed by the sequence learning

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

condition (S1). This was followed by a practice period of 18 min after
which the subjects were scanned again in the sequence learning condition
(S2) and the random condition (R2). Overall a decrease in activation was
found in SMA, pre-SMA and MI between S1 and S2 in most subjects.
Comparison between R1 and R2 revealed a decrease in activation in MI
and SMA but not in pre-SMA. While these results suggest an overall
decrease in signal change across the conditions, they also indicate variation in activation levels across individuals. Learning was confirmed by
shorter latencies and reduced error rates. Although previous studies have
reported activation in the pre-SMA during initial learning and a shift in
activation to the SMA when a motor sequence becomes well learned, activation in both SMA and pre-SMA generally decreased during sequential
learning in the present study.
D 127
INVESTIGATING NEURAL MECHANISMS INVOLVED IN
INTENTION
ATTRIBUTION
UNDER
CONDITIONS
OF
PHYSICAL RESTRAINT Roman Liepelt, D. Yves von Cramon, Marcel
Brass; Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Science – MPI
CBS — Converging evidence has shown that action observation and
action execution are strongly linked. The mere observation of an action
directly activates the internal motor representation in the observer (direct
matching). Although direct matching is a very simple and automatic
mechanism it might be the underlying mechanism of higher order cognitive processes, as for example reading the intention of an observed action
(Iacoboni, et al., 2005). In a series of behavioural experiments we tested
whether direct matching is modulated by intention attribution. We compared motor priming effects for small (incomplete) finger lifting movements under two conditions. In the unrestrained condition the intention
of the observed action was ambiguous. In the other condition, we added
a physical restraint to the observed movement, allowing the attribution of
intention to the observed action. Our results indicate that attributed
intentions modulate direct matching effects. Based on these findings we
used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to test whether the
neural circuits usually involved in direct matching of observed movements (the so-called "mirror system") are also involved in the attribution
of intention. Our data suggest that the superior temporal sulcus, a region
which was previously found to be involved in mentalizing tasks (Frith &
Frith, 1999), seems to be crucial for the attribution of intention under conditions of physical restraint.
D 128
DISRUPTED VISUOMOTOR TRANSFORMATIONS INTO HEADAND BODY-CENTERED COORDINATES IN OPTIC ATAXIA
Steven Jax1,2, H. Branch Coslett2, Eunhui Lie2, Laurel Buxbaum1,3; 1Moss
Rehabilitation Research Institute, 2University of Pennsylvania Medical School,
3Thomas Jefferson University — Many theories of motor control propose
that visually-guided reaching involves multiple coordinate frame transformations of the retinal target location into limb-centered coordinates.
We have previously suggested that reaching errors in optic ataxia (OA), a
disorder of visually-guided reaching, may be caused by inaccuracies in
these transformations (Buxbaum & Coslett, 1998). Two recent studies
(Dijkerman et al., 2006; Khan et al., 2005) report that patients with OA
produce errors that depend on the gaze-relative, but not head- or bodyrelative, target position. These findings suggest that OA results from the
disruption of early transformations of retinal target information into
gaze-centered coordinates but not later transformations of gaze-dependent information into head- and body-centered coordinates. Because evidence for this proposal comes from a small number of patients, we
attempted to replicate this finding by testing KE, a patient with OA following bilateral parietal lesions (and significant non-specific white matter disease), on a reaching task in which we systematically varied the
position of his head and torso while holding the gaze-relative position of
the target constant across trials (always foveated). In contrast to previous
reports that reaching accuracy in OA depends only on the gaze-relative
target location, we observed that rotating the head or body away from

151

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

the midline led to both increased average end point error (constant error)
and increased end point variability (variable error). These results suggest
that disrupted transformations into other, non-gaze-centered, coordinates may be observed in OA.
D 129
DO YOUNGER AND OLDER ADULTS DIFFER IN THEIR IMPLICIT
LEARNING AND CONSOLIDATION OF A FINE MOTOR
SEQUENCE? Sarah Fraser, Tal Savion-Lemieux, Caroline Doramajian,
Karen Li, Virginia Penhune; Concordia University — Age differences in the
implicit learning and consolidation of a fine motor sequence was evaluated using a multi-finger-sequence-task (MFST) with 17 younger (YA)
and 14 older (OA) adults. On two consecutive days of testing, participants reproduced sequences of key presses on an electronic keyboard.
Within a block participants tapped to learn trials which contained ten
repetitions of a ten-element fixed pattern sequence interspersed with four
random trials of scrambled ten-element sequences. Participants were not
informed of any pattern in the sequences presented to them. They
received three blocks on Day1 and two blocks on Day2. Learning was
assessed with percent correct key presses (accuracy) and response synchronization (a reaction time measure). Improvements on learn relative
to random sequences, served as measures of implicit learning. Improvements from the last block of Day1 to the 1st block of Day2, without additional practice, served as a measure of consolidation. Both groups were
very accurate (MYO = 95%), with YA slightly more accurate than OA
overall (p < .04) and with YA showing greater learning on learn versus
random trials than OA (p < .02). YA were faster at response synchronization than OA (p <.001), and no age-related differences were found in
implicit learning such that both age groups were faster on learn trials
compared to random (p < .001). Across both age groups accuracy (p <
.009) and response synchrony (p < .001) data revealed consolidation.
Results demonstrate that implicit learning and consolidation of fine
motor sequences may be preserved in aging.
D 130
LINKING CONTROL OF IMITATION AND SOCIAL COGNITION:
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FROM PREFRONTAL AND
TEMPORO-PARIETAL LESIONS Stephanie Spengler, Marcel Brass, D.
Yves von Cramon; Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences — In this study we argue that the intentional control of imitation
shares common underlying computational mechanisms (the capacity for
self-other differentiation and building of intentional states) with social
cognitive abilities such as mentalizing, perspective-taking and empathy.
Several recent theories have proposed a relationship between imitation
and ‘Theory of Mind’ (ToM) but have not yet provided strong empirical
evidence. We therefore focus on the ability to regulate overt imitative
behavior, as previous neuroimaging studies showed that the inhibition of
imitation draws on regions (anterior fronto-median cortex and the temporo-parietal junction) implicated in higher-level social cognitive processing. This study investigates whether there is a functional association
between the inhibition of imitation and tasks assessing perspective-taking/ ToM by computing correlations between these two groups of tasks
in a sample of 28 brain-damaged patients (15 patients with prefrontal
lesions, 13 patients with lesions around the temporo-parietal-junction).
Supporting our hypothesis a highly significant correlation can be found
between a ToM-task (‘Strange Stories’) and the imitation-inhibition task
in the group with frontal lesions, whereas posterior lesioned patients
show a highly significant correlation between cognitive perspective-taking abilities (Interpersonal Reactivity Index) and the imitation-inhibition
task. Even after controlling for the performance in tests on executive
functions and the control condition of the ToM-task the results remain
significant. Similar correlations in a group of adults with autistic spectrum disorders support these findings. These results confirm our hypothesis and provide the first empirical evidence for a link between the
control of imitation and social cognitive abilities.

152

Motor Control

D 131
BRAIN ACTIVITY DURING SACCADE INITIATION AND
INHIBITION: AN EVENT-RELATED FMRI STUDY Benedikt Reuter,
Christian Kaufmann, Julia
Bender, Norbert
Kathmann; HumboldtUniversitaet zu Berlin — Pro- and antisaccades are gaze shifts toward and
away from visual target stimuli respectively. In antisaccades, task preparation (preparing for the saccade type before onset of a target stimulus)
recruits more brain activity in well-known oculomotor areas, such as the
frontal eye fields (FEFs) and the supplementary eye fields (SEFs), and in
brain areas that are more generally involved in action control, such as the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. It is not clear, however, whether the same
brain areas are involved in antisaccade execution, which implies suppression of a reflexive glance toward the target stimulus and initiating a volitional saccade in the opposite direction. To disentangle these two
response components we used functional magnetic resonance imaging to
measure blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal changes following
different oculomotor responses. 19 healthy participants had to inhibit
reflexive glances toward peripheral stimuli both with and without simultaneous saccade initiation. The experimental procedure prevented task
specific preparation. Saccade initiation activated FEFs and SEFs bilaterally. Inhibition related brain activity did not include FEFs and SEFs, but
rather involved a more anterior part of the superior frontal gyrus and
inferior parietal regions. The results suggest that dissociable neural networks are involved in saccade initiation and inhibition.
D 132
ACTIVITY IN HUMAN POSTERIOR PARIETAL AND PRE-MOTOR
CORTEX DURING VISUALLY GUIDED REACHING AND
SACCADIC EYE MOVEMENTS: A MEG STUDY. Leighton Hinkley1,
Sarang Dalal2, Adrian Guggisberg2, Srikantan Nagarajan2, Elizabeth Disbrow1;
1University of California, Davis, 2University of California, San Francisco — Areas
in posterior parietal cortex (PPC) are part of a network involved in translating information from the retina into a reference frame anchored to a
particular body part or effector, in order to guide motor behavior. Currently, it is unclear at what stage of response preparation these areas
interact during visually guided movement. Using magnetoencephalography, we examined activity in humans during reaching and saccades to
peripherally presented visual targets. Data was collected using a wholehead 275-channel biomagnetometer (VSM MedTech, Coquitlam, BC) and
analyzed using the NUTMEG time-frequency analysis toolkit (http://
bil.ucsf.edu). Subjects prepared either an eye or arm movement based on
a peripheral cue, and executed that response when a target appeared at
the same spatial location. During movement preparation, bilateral desynchronization in the beta (12-35Hz) range peaked at about 400ms over the
caudal regions of PPC in the putative lateral intraparietal area and parietal reach region. For visually guided reaching, greater desynchronization in the beta band was observed in ventral pre-motor cortex (PMC;
225ms) and over the rostral intraparietal sulcus (600ms) in the hemisphere contralateral to the responding arm. At saccade onset, we
observed activity in the beta band over the frontal eye fields, while at
reach onset the pattern of activity in PMC and PPC became bilateral.
These findings suggest that information in the visual domain representing the destination of an eye or arm movement is processed in the caudal
regions of PPC and then selectively fed forward to effector-specific
regions of PFC and PPC for movement execution.
D 133
UNDERSTANDING ACTION UNDERSTANDING Marcel
Brass1,
2
2
3
1
Ruth Schmitt , Stephanie Spengler , György Gergely ; Ghent University,
2
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 3Hungarian
Academy of Sciences — Despite the important role of action understanding
in our social life, the underlying functional and neural mechanisms are
still poorly understood. Currently, there are two opposing views on
action understanding. The mirror neuron approach suggests that action
understanding is achieved by motor simulation of the observed action in
the mirror system. The alternative approach suggests that functional

Motor Control

mechanisms such as mentalizing are involved in action understanding. In
the present study we investigated the neural mechanisms underlying
action understanding by adapting a paradigm pioneered in developmental psychology. In this paradigm participants observe an actor executing
a very common action in an unusual way (i.e. operating a light switch
with the knee). In one condition the hands of the actor are occupied with
very heavy folders, making the unusually action very plausible (hands
occupied condition). In some trials, however, the hands of the actor are
not occupied, which makes the action very implausible (hands free condition). Finally, we also included a condition where the hands were
implausibly occupied. The crucial contrast for investigating action understanding is the contrast of the hands free condition (implausible action)
and the hands occupied condition (plausible action). This contrast
revealed brain activation in the superior temporal sulcus (STS),the temporo-parietal junction (TPJ) and the anterior fronto-median cortex. Since
all three regions have no mirror properties, our data seem to support the
view that action understanding in terms of its reasons is primarily mediated by functional mechanisms other than motor simulation.
D 134
PROPRIOCEPTIVE FEEDBACK AIDS TIMING ACCURACY IN
COMPLEX FINGER SEQUENCES Werner
Goebl, Caroline Palmer;
McGill University, Montreal — Sequential actions such as playing a piano
or tapping in synchrony to an external signal put high cognitive and
motor demands on producers, including the generation of precise timing.
It has been proposed that movement accelerations are useful landmarks
for proprioceptive regulation of timing (Balasubramaniam, 2006). We
addressed the hypothesis that reduction of timing errors at higher movement frequencies or shorter time intervals (Aschersleben & Prinz, 1995)
might be related to movement accelerations in piano performance. 12
professional pianists performed melodies on a digital piano at 4 rates
ranging from fast (143 ms inter-onset interval, IOI) to slow (500 ms IOI) in
a synchronization-continuation paradigm. The motions of their finger
tips were recorded with a three-dimensional motion capture system. Pianists’ timing errors (expected versus observed IOI) were smaller at fastest
(1.7 ms) than at slowest rates (12.1 ms). Some keypresses included fingerkey contact, marked by an increased acceleration (peak accelerations
larger than 35 m/s/s) when a finger made contact with a piano key surface; other keypresses occurred after the finger was already resting on the
key surface. Significantly more finger-key contacts were observed in keypresses at the fastest rates (94% of keystrokes) than at slowest rates (41%).
Most important, timing errors decreased as the magnitude of the fingerkey contact accelerations increased (r = -.51, p < .01), across participants,
fingers, and rates. These findings suggest that proprioceptive information
that is available at finger-key contact enhances the timing accuracy of finger movements in piano performance.
D 135
EFFECTS OF RATE AND FINGER INDEPENDENCE ON TIMING
AND MOTION IN TAPPING SEQUENCES Janeen
Loehr, Caroline
Palmer; McGill University — Information processing approaches to the
neural processes underlying movement timing suggest that timing is represented independently of the movements used to generate it, whereas
dynamical systems approaches suggest that timing is an emergent property of those movements. We tested whether finger motion and timing
precision during tapping were similarly affected by rate and degree of
finger independence. Twelve experienced pianists tapped repeating 4finger sequences on a table at rates ranging from slow (550 ms interonset
intervals, IOIs) to fast (250 ms IOIs) in a synchronization-continuation
task. Finger 2 (least coupled finger) and Finger 4 (most coupled finger)
were preceded by a physically adjacent (coupled) or non-adjacent (less
coupled) finger’s tap. Fingertip motion was recorded using a threedimensional motion capture system. Finger 4’s timing accuracy differed
when a physically adjacent (coupled) or nonadjacent finger produced a
preceding tap at fast rates. In contrast, Finger 2’s timing accuracy was
unaffected by the preceding finger across all rates. Motion trajectories

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

showed a similar pattern: Finger 4’s motion (velocity and acceleration)
during taps at faster rates was reduced when a coupled finger produced a
preceding tap, whereas Finger 2’s motion was unaffected by coupling to
the preceding finger across all rates. These findings indicate that finger
coupling and tapping rate influence individual finger motions in tapping
sequences, and that timing is not independent of the movements
required to generate the timing.
D 136
SENSORIMOTOR COMPLEXITY DIFFERENTIALLY AFFECTS
CORTICAL ACTIVITY DURING KNEE MOVEMENT J.C.
Mizelle,
Lewis A. Wheaton, Richard F. Macko, Larry Forrester; University of Maryland
School of Medicine — This study evaluated how sensorimotor task complexity affects brain activation related to knee movement. Thirty-two
channel electroencephalography (EEG) was recorded during knee extension under four conditions of sensorimotor complexity: no weight, no
visual target (NWNT); ankle weight without visual target (WNT); no
weight, visual target (NWT); and combined weight and target (WT).
Quadriceps surface electromyography (EMG) was used to epoch EEG
from -4.5s before to 1s after EMG onset. Epochs were averaged to derive
cortical potentials (MRCPs) for each condition. MRCP amplitude from 2s to EMG onset was evaluated at electrodes over motor, sensory, frontal,
and parietal areas. MRCPs were subjected to Condition*Time ANOVA
and Bonferroni corrected post-hoc comparisons (p<0.05 for all differences). Motor cortex MRCPs differed by the number, but not type, of
modalities added (NWNT < WNT = NWT < WT). Posterior parietal
MRCPs differed according to the type of modality, but were not sensitive
to the number of modalities (NWNT = WNT < NWT = WT). Mesial frontal and parietal MRCPs differed by absolute cortical demand (NWNT =
WNT = NWT < WT). These results suggest that selective cortical activation in lower extremity movement may be achieved through sensory
manipulation. Specifically, information processing related to sensorimotor demand can be differentially affected in motor and parietal cortices
according to the number and type of added sensorimotor modality.
Manipulating sensorimotor demand by increasing both the number and
type of movement constraints can induce activity in multiple cortical sensorimotor regions, which may have implications for developing neurological rehabilitative therapies.
D 137
VISUAL
AND
PROPRIOCEPTIVE
FEEDBACK
AFFECTS
ADAPTATION TO PERTURBED ANKLE MOVEMENTS Timothy
Judkins, Lewis Wheaton, J.C. Mizelle, Richard Macko, Larry Forrester;
University of Maryland School of Medicine — We sought to evaluate behavior and cortical physiology while subjects performed targeted ankle
movements. Subjects wore an ankle-robot on the left foot, which constrained the foot in a stiffness field. Subjects were cued to make ankle
plantarflexion movements to a target displayed on a computer screen.
Ankle position was indicated on the screen by a cursor. The stiffness field
varied unpredictably for each movement. Movements were repeated 100
times for three conditions: veridical vision and proprioception (V=P),
proprioception only (no cursor, PO), or stochastic vision (V&#8800;P).
During V&#8800;P, a virtual stiffness was applied to the cursor that varied randomly. An autoregressive model was used to determine the contribution of prior trial movement error and current and prior stiffness on
current movement error. Prior movement error was weighted more during the PO condition compared to V&#8800;P (p<0.05) while the V=P did
not differ statistically from PO and V&#8800;P. Prior stiffness was
weighted more during PO and V=P compared to V&#8800;P (p<0.05).
Current stiffness contributions did not differ statistically among conditions. Electroencephalography (EEG) was recorded to evaluate sensorimotor and parietal activations relative to the motor task. Movement
related cortical potentials (MRCPs) showed significant decreases in
amplitude in bilateral parietal areas and mesial sensorimotor cortex for
PO compared to the other conditions. These results suggest that ankle
motor control is influenced by the availability and reliability of sensory

153

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

information during targeted movements. Further work will investigate
sensory contributions in patients with sensory deficits such as peripheral
neuropathy and stroke.
D 138
NEURAL CORRELATES OF TRIAL-BY-TRIAL VARIABILITY IN
REACTION TIME: A META-ANALYSIS Tal Yarkoni, Deanna Barch,
Thomas Conturo, Todd Braver; Washington University — Functional neuroimaging studies increasingly complement analyses based on experimental manipulations with correlational approaches that seek to identify
neural activity associated with trial-by-trial variability in specific behavioral parameters. To date, most studies that have analyzed overt behavioral measures have focused on differences in response accuracy.
Relatively few studies have explicitly analyzed neural activity in relation
to trial-by-trial reaction time (RT) variation. Here we report the results of
a systematic meta-analysis of RT effects across several reanalyzed fMRI
datasets. The samples studied spanned a broad range of experimental
tasks (working memory, decision-making, and affect ratings), fMRI
designs (event-related, blocked, and mixed), populations (young adults,
older adults, and schizophrenics), and scanners (1.5T vs. 3T). Despite this
variability, we found a remarkable consistency in RT-related activation,
with trial-by-trial increases in RT predicting increased activation in motor
cortex, medial and lateral PFC, and inferior parietal cortex in all samples.
A dissociable set of regions showed the opposite effect, with increased
activation reliably predicting shorter RTs. Subsequent analyses indicated
that these effects did not vary substantially as a function of gender, population, or stimulus modality. The results supplement previous studies
implicating frontoparietal regions in domain-general cognitive control
functions. Since the exercise of top-down control is time-consuming,
greater recruitment of frontoparietal regions is likely to introduce a significant source of variance in behavioral response latencies. The robustness of the observed effects also highlights the importance of considering
RT as a potential confound in functional neuroimaging studies where
mean RTs differ systematically across experimental conditions.
D 139
REPRESENTING EFFECTOR LOCATION : CONTRIBUTIONS OF
PREDICTED STATE AND SENSORY STATE INFORMATION
Jared Medina1, Steven A. Jax2, H. Branch Coslett1; 1University of
Pennsylvania, 2Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute — Many models of
motor control suggest that both sensory state information (sensory feedback) and the predicted state of the effector (derived from the “forward
model”) are important in generating an on-line representation of effector
location. We developed a task to separate the contributions of predicted
state and sensory state information. A central tactile marker and four
peripheral tactile markers were placed on the underside of an opaque
digitizing board. During the ACTIVE condition, subjects with unilateral
stroke moved their (unseen) contralesional hand from the central marker
to one of the four peripheral markers; after locating the designated
peripheral marker, subjects then moved their ipsilesional hand located on
top of the digitizing board to match the position of the contralesional
hand. The PASSIVE condition was identical except that the experimenter
moved the subject's contralesional hand to a peripheral target. On
ACTIVE trials, the location of the contralesional hand is informed both by
proprioception and the predicted state. However, on passive trials subjects rely solely on proprioception to localize the contralesional hand.
Subjects with damage to the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) were significantly less accurate on passive versus active trials when compared to subjects with damage to the cerebellum and lateral frontal lobe. These data
suggest that the PPC is critical for updating the on-line representation of
effector location but that information regarding the predicted state of the
effector derived from the forward model can compensate for this deficiency.

154

Neuroanatomy

D 140
THE ACCURACY OF SACCADIC EYE MOVEMENTS PLANNED IN
OBJECT-CENTERED AND WORLD-CENTERED REFERENCE
FRAMES Paul K. Mitchell, Jay A. Edelman; City College of New York — We
examined the saccadic system’s ability to use information encoded in an
object-centered or world-centered reference frame. Saccade endpoint
error was measured in a visually-guided (VG), memory-guided (MG)
and a novel reinforcer-guided (RG) saccade task in which the target location is fixed across a block of trials with respect to a reference object, but
in which the target is invisible before the saccade. In separate blocks of
trials, saccade target locations were fixed relative to a reference object of
particular radius (3.25°, 6.5°, 13° or 26°), which could appear at a fixed
location or shift locations trial-to-trial. In certain blocks of trials, no reference object was present, with the target location fixed with respect to the
display. EMs of 3 Ss was recorded at 500 Hz using EyelinkII. When the
position of the reference object (and thus target position) shifted across
trials object size had little effect on VG and MG endpoint error. However,
RG endpoint error increased substantially with increasing object size.
When reference object position was fixed with respect to the visual display, RG endpoint error was low and independent of object size, as was
also the case when no reference object was present. Shifting head position
in between trials had little effect on endpoint error, suggesting that a
head-centered reference frame was not used. These results suggest that
small objects or a visually sparse, but stable, visual world can serve as
landmarks for saccade programming, but that large shifting objects cannot.

Neuroanatomy
D 141
ABNORMAL CEREBRAL CORTEX STRUCTURE IN CHILDREN
WITH ATTENTION-DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER Sasha
Wolosin1, Marin Richardson1, Martha Denckla1,2, Stewart Mostofsky1,2;
1
Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, 2Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD — OBJECTIVE: Findings from previous studies suggest
that attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is associated with
reduced cerebral gray matter volume. In this study, ADHD-associated
differences in cerebral cortical gray matter structure were examined in
detail using an automated surface-based analysis technique. METHODS:
Anatomic magnetic resonance images were acquired from 34 children
with ADHD (13 girls) and 41 typically developing controls (16 girls),
aged 8-12 years. Full-brain thickness maps were produced for each subject and statistical difference maps were generated by conducting t-test
comparisons between the two groups at every point along the surface.
Cortical volume, surface area, mean thickness and folding were measured for the entire hemispheres and frontal, temporal, parietal and
occipital lobes within each hemisphere. RESULTS: Children with ADHD
showed significantly reduced cortical gray matter volume compared to
controls (p < .001); volume reduction was diffusely distributed bilaterally
throughout all four lobes. No group differences in mean cortical thickness were detected in the statistical difference maps (threshold of corrected p < .05). The ADHD group, however, showed an overall decrease
in surface area of more than 7% within each hemisphere (p < .001) with
decreased cortical folding in both the right (p = .002) and left (p = .012)
hemispheres. CONCLUSIONS: Decreased cortical gray matter volume in
ADHD appears to be related to differences in surface area and not thickness. Decreased cortical folding may account for the reduced surface
area; this could help to identify neurodevelopmental mechanisms that
contribute to ADHD.

Neuroanatomy

D 142
AN MR VOLUMETRIC STUDY OF THE MOTOR HAND REGION
AND INSULA IN DEAF, HEARING, AND HEARING-SIGNING
INDIVIDUALS John S. Allen1, Karen Emmorey2, Joel Bruss3, Hanna
Damasio1; 1University of Southern California, 2San Diego State University,
3
University of Iowa — We used high-resolution MRI to examine the effects
of auditory deprivation and experience with sign language from birth on
gray and white matter volumes in the motor hand region (handknob) of
the precentral gyrus and the insula. We predicted that the bimanual
requirements of signing would result in differences in handknob anatomy between hearing non-signers and deaf/hearing signers. Given the
role of the insula in auditory-speech processing, we also predicted that
insular anatomy would differ between deaf and hearing individuals.
Subjects included 25 hearing non-signers (14F, 11M), 25 deaf signers (14F,
11M), and 16 hearing signers (10F, 6M); all were right-handed. Regions of
interest were manually traced on contiguous MR image slices (1.5mm).
ROIs included: all of the major lobes; a parcellation of the frontal lobe
including the precentral gyrus and handknob; and the insula. Gray and
white matter volumes and GM/WM ratio were calculated following
automated segmentation of the MR images. Preliminary results indicate
that hearing non-signers have a strong rightward asymmetry in the GM
and WM volumes of the handknob; deaf signers are significantly less
rightwardly asymmetric for both tissues and hearing signers are significantly less asymmetric for the WM compared to non-signers. Significant
differences in insular anatomy were also found between deaf and hearing
individuals. However, the surrounding frontal and parietal lobes show
no differences between groups. These results indicate that both deafness
and life-long signing can result in macroscopic changes in neuroanatomy.
Research supported by NIH DC06708.
D 143
ANATOMICAL CONNECTIVITY OF THE POSTERIOR FUSIFORM
GYRUS Joseph T. Devlin1, Cathy J. Price2; 1University of Oxford,
2Wellcome Centre for Imaging Neuroscience — Very little is known about
the anatomical connectivity of the ventral occipito-temporal region in
humans, partly due to differences in regional morphology between
humans and macaques. Here we investigated the cortico-cortical connectivity of the posterior fusiform gyrus directly in humans using probabilistic DTI tractography and observed three different patterns of
connectivity, depending on the rostro-caudal position along the gyrus.
The most posterior zone (approximately Y = –70 to –65) demonstrated
strong links with the lingual gyrus, middle occipital gyrus, and posterior
superior temporal sulcus as well as long range connections with ventral
and lateral regions of anterior temporal lobe. In the middle zone (Y= –60
to –50) there was a short path linking with lateral infero-temporal cortex
while a longer path connected with the ventral anterior temporal lobe.
The rostral most zone (Y= –45 to –40) also showed local connections with
lateral infero-temporal cortex and with the rostral tip of the occipito-temporal sulcus (OTS). Finally, between adjacent fusiform zones we
observed reciprocal local connections, particularly along the medial bank
of the OTS. These results suggest a possible anatomical pathway underlying the so-called “semantic” route to reading: namely, a poly-synaptic
path first linking posterior fusiform gyrus with anterior temporal cortex
via the inferior longitudinal fasciculus and then continuing onto ventral
regions of Broca’s complex via the uncinate fasciculus. In contrast, we
were unable to identify an anatomical path linking the posterior fusiform
with the “non-semantic” reading route through the inferior parietal lobe.
D 144
ASSESSMENT OF AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN WHITE-MATTER
STRUCTURES
USING
DTI
AND
TENSOR-BASED
TRACTOGRAPHY Simon W. Davis, Nancy A. Dennis, Vanessa A.
Thomas, Matthew R. Emery, Amber B. Tarter, Leonard E. White, David J.
Madden, Roberto Cabeza; Duke University — Previous studies using volumetric methods to assess neuronal white matter found greater agerelated decline in fractional anisotrophy (FA) in frontal compared to pos-

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

terior cortices. Degradation of white matter can have a significant impact
on the functional interactions between cortical regions and measures of
cognitive performance which rely on these interactions. In order to assess
age-related differences in white matter integrity we used diffusion tensor
imaging (DTI) and tensor-based tractography to analyze 6 major white
matter tracts in vivo: the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum, the
uncinate fasciculus, superior longitudinal fasciculus, inferior lateral fasciculus, and cingulum. By using tensor-based tractography the current
study expands upon previous work in that it assesses age-relate differences in FA along the length of each tract. Additionally, we investigated
the relationship between white matter integrity with behavioral performance measures from the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery. Results revealed significant age-related differences in FA
within all tracts and greater age-related decline associated with anterior
compared to posterior sections of each tract. This finding augments previous studies by showing that age-related differences are present within
frontal sections of individual tracts as well as within volumetric analyses
of frontal volumes. Furthermore, FA in discrete tract sections was found
to correlate with several measures of cognitive performance, including
working memory, strategic processing, and reaction time. Taken together
results reveal a consistent frontal pattern of age-related decline in axonal
integrity within white matter tracts and indicate that this decline is associated with cognition in older adults.
D 145
GENDER DIFFERENCES IN BRAIN STRUCTURE ASSESSED
USING MRI Locke Welborn, William Schmidt, Suzanne Bloise, Deidre Reis,
Lisa Marchiondo, Xenophon Papademetris, Nallakkandi Rajeevan, Jeremy
Gray; Yale University — We examined sex differences in brain structure in
121 healthy young right-handed adults, controlling statistically for multiple other sources of individual variation. We used BET (FSL) to estimate
grey, white, and total brain volume for each individual, and BioImage
Suite (www.bioimagesuite.org) to register each individual's brain to a reference subject. For each subject, we computed a b-spline based, nonlinear
transformation to the reference subject. Information about localized differences in local brain volume are reflected in the resulting transformation images. The determinant of the jacobian of the nonlinear-only
portion of the image transformation indexes local (voxel-level) differences in brain volume and is insensitive to linear, global effects (including overall differences in total brain volume). As expected, total brain
volume was greater for male than female subjects, r = .64, and so we
focused on the nonlinear-only component of the transformation. In an
ANCOVA, with age and intelligence (Raven’s Advanced Progressive
Matrices) as covariates, we found strong sex differences in the anterior
left striatum contiguous with differences in nearby white matter tracts of
the coronal radiation (MNI -25 -7 18; p<.000001; all p's uncorrected). More
posteriorly, sex differences were observed in right temporal lobe white
matter (MNI 27 -20 10; p<.000001) and the cerebellum (MNI 6 -52 -6;
p<.0001). Weaker but potentially very interesting sex differences were
observed in ventromedial PFC (MNI 3 34 -15; p<.0001) and right orbitofrontal cortex (MNI 30 47 -6; p<.001).
D 146
PERSONALITY MARKERS OF LEADERSHIP COVARY WITH THE
VOLUME OF THE RIGHT MEDIAL PFC Lisa
Marchiondo,
Noah
Shamosh, Deidre Reis, Xenophon Papademetris, Nallakkandi Rajeevan, Jeremy
Gray; Yale University — Most MRI studies of personality to date have
examined the neural correlates of single personality dimensions in isolation, such as extraversion or neuroticism. While useful, this strategy
neglects complex but important traits that depend on several dimensions
simultaneously. One such cluster of personality (high Extraversion,
Agreeableness, Openness, and low Neuroticism) is widely hypothesized
to be associated with transformational leadership (TL; also known as
charismatic leadership). To investigate the potential neural substrates of
TL, we assessed personality (five-factor NEO-PI-R) and brain structure
using MRI (MPRAGE) in 117 healthy right-handed adults. We correlated

155

Sunday, May 6, 5:30 - 7:30 PM

a measure of TL (E + A + O – N) with voxel-level variation in regional
brain volume (as estimated using BioImage Suite, www.bioimagesuite.org). When holding sex, age, and intelligence constant, TL correlated
positively (pr=0.38) with brain volume in right medial prefrontal cortex
(PFC) / Brodmann Area 10 (MNI 10 34 40; p<.0001) and effectively no
other area, even at low threshold. These data suggest that examining differences in brain structure in relation to complex personality traits may
be fruitful as a research strategy. More speculatively, the findings may
have implications for understanding the effectiveness of different people
in their social and professional roles.
D 147
THE BIG FIVE PERSONALITY TRAITS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH
BRAIN VOLUME IN DISTINCT REGIONS Colin G.
DeYoung,
Xenophon Papademetris, Nallakkandi Rajeevan, Jeremy R. Gray; Yale
University — Personality research is beginning to connect personality
traits with specific brain systems. To further this project we examined the
independent associations of the Big Five personality traits with local
brain volume in 117 subjects, using structural MRI and controlling for age
and sex. We used BioImage Suite (www.bioimagesuite.org) to register
each individual's brain to a reference subject and compute a nonlinear
transformation to the reference subject. The determinant of the jacobian
of the nonlinear portion of the image transformation indexes local
(voxel-level) differences in brain volume and is insensitive to linear, global effects (including differences in total brain volume). We then
regressed this determinant on the Big Five, age, and sex simultaneously,
in an exploratory analysis using uncorrected p-values because of difficulty in anticipating effect sizes. Neuroticism was associated with volume in a region of right dorsomedial PFC (p<.0001) and in a region of left
medial temporal lobe including amygdala (p<.0005). The latter association is consistent with the involvement of both Neuroticism and
amygdala in negative emotions like fear and anxiety. Extraversion was
associated with volume in the medial orbitofrontal cortex (p<.0005), a
region involved in the coding of reward that Depue and Collins (1999)
identified as a likely substrate of Extraversion. Agreeableness, which
reflects empathy and prosociality, was associated with volume in a
region near the right temporo-parietal junction, an area associated with
social cognition and theory of mind (p<.001). Conscientiousness and
Openness/Intellect showed weaker associations (p<.004) with left dorsolateral PFC and right superior parietal cortex, respectively.
D 148
SEX DIFFERENCES IN BRAIN STRUCTURE AND ASYMMETRY IN
HEALTHY COLLEGE STUDENTS Christiana
Leonard1, Stephen
Towler1, Suzanne Welcome2, Laura Halderman2, Christine Chiarello2;
1
University of Florida, 2University of California, Riverside, — The Biological
Substrates for Language project presents an opportunity to study sex differences in brain structure and asymmetry in a large normative sample
unselected for hand preference (55 women, 55 men, mean VIQ = 110+/11, PIQ = 110,+/- 11, age = 22.0 +/- 3.64 years). Although there were no
sex differences in IQ, age, or hand preference, there were the expected
highly significant sex differences in gray matter [t (left) = 4.65; t (right) =
5.68] and white matter volumes [t (left) = 8.22, t (right) = 8.6] as well as
white matter proportion [t (left) = 4.58, t (right) = 5.38]. Women also had a
larger corpus callosum relative to total white matter (t = 2.46, p < .02).
White matter volumes explained about 10% of the variance in PIQ and
VIQ in women but were not related to IQ scores in men. It was surprising
to find that the only significant sex difference in asymmetry was in the
opposite direction from expected. The women had a more asymmetrical
planum temporale coefficient of asymmetry (.39 +/- .74) than the men
(.22 +/- .94), t = 2.04, p < .05, due entirely to differences in the size of the
right planum temporale. There were no sex differences in the asymmetry
of pars triangularis, pars opercularis or the ascending and descending
branches of the Sylvian fissure. In the poster we will report data on the
complete sample of 200.

156

Neuroanatomy

Poster Session E
Cognitive And Brain Development
E1
MMN IN INFANTS EXPOSED TO PRENATAL MATERNAL DEPRESSION Deana Davalos, Carly Yadon; Colorado State University — Maternal depression during the prenatal period is a potentially devastating condition for women often accompanied by difficult decisions regarding
pharmacological intervention options and the possible consequences for
both mother and baby. Despite research suggesting that almost one in ten
women meet diagnostic criteria for depression during pregnancy, prepartum maternal depression is a condition that has been historically understudied and is poorly understood in terms of the possible effects on the
developing fetus. To date, limited research suggests that physiological
deficits may be present in infants of mothers diagnosed with prepartum
depression. However, research has not been conducted to assess whether
the use of antidepressants may ameliorate these deficits or lead to less
optimal physiological activity. The aim of our study is to determine the
effects of prenatal maternal depression on synaptic development using a
neurophysiologic measure, mismatch negativity (MMN).
MMN is
thought to be related to later developing higher order cognitive processes
(e.g. learning and memory) and is ideal for use with neonates. To address
the effects of prepartum depression, two groups of mother/infant dyads
are included: (1) mothers diagnosed with depression during the prepartum period and their infants and (2) mothers with no psychiatric history
and their infants. The prepartum depression group includes mothers
either medicated or unmedicated during the prepartum period. Preliminary data suggests that the use of antidepressants during the prenatal
period may improve performance on at least one physiological index
(MMN) that is associated with development of higher order cognition.
E2
DO BREAKDOWNS IN INTERHEMISPHERIC PROCESSING
CONTRIBUTE
TO
AGE
DIFFERENCES
IN
EMOTION
RECOGNITION? Mary Askren1,David Bissig2, Cindy Lustig1, 1University
of Michigan, 2Wayne State University — The ability to recognize others’
emotions plays a critical role in social interaction. This ability is impaired
in both aging and Alzheimer’s disease (Phillips et al., 2002; Hargrave et al.,
2002). Age differences in emotion processing are often attributed to
reduced amygdale function, or to older adults’ use of controlled, strategic
processes for maintaining positive affect. We tested the hypothesis that
age differences in interhemisheric processing may also play a role. The
right hemisphere is preferentially involved in emotional expression and
recognition. This right hemisphere dominance results in a paradox: Information from the more expressive left side of a viewed individual’s face is
preferentially processed by the less emotionally-tuned left hemisphere of
the perceiver’s brain. Young adults may resolve this paradox via interhemispheric transfer of emotional information. Less efficient interhemispheric processing by older adults, possibly due to degradation of white
matter tracts, may thus contribute to age differences in facial emotion recognition. Young (18-30 years) and old (60+ years) adults judged the emotion of photographed faces that were normally positioned or mirrorreversed, such that information from the right side appeared on the left
and vice versa. Young adults performed equally well on both normal and
mirror-reversed photographs, but older adults’ performance was higher
on mirror-reversed photographs. These results indicate that age differences in processing of emotional faces may be due to decreased quality of
interhemispheric transfer of information in older adults.

E3
FEEDBACK MODULATION OF PROBABILISTIC LEARNING: A
DEVELOPMENTAL PERSPECTIVE Natasha Kirkham, Daphna Shohamy;
Stanford University — A central question in developmental research concerns unsupervised implicit learning. There remains, however, a dearth of
research examining feedback-based learning in childhood. In adults,
extensive evidence suggests that feedback-based incremental learning
depends on the basal ganglia and midbrain dopamine system. By contrast,
non-feedback observational learning depends on the medial temporal
lobe. Here, we examined feedback-based vs. observational learning in children. Given differential changes in these neural systems over development, one important question is what cognitive and neural strategies
children use in feedback-based vs. observational learning, and whether
these strategies change across development. To examine this question, we
tested children aged 3 to 6 on a probabilistic learning task under feedbackbased and observational conditions. Participants learned to associate
between Mr. Potatohead characters with distinct features (tie or glasses)
that were probabilistically associated with colored balloons (green or yellow). In feedback-based learning, participants saw a Potatohead on the
screen, guessed which balloon he prefers, and received feedback. In the
observational condition, participants saw a Potatohead holding a balloon,
guessed his favorite balloon, but received no feedback. Results indicate
that children were better at feedback-based than observational learning.
Performance improved with age for both conditions. In addition, we
found individual variability in learning strategies. Interestingly, children
tended to spontaneously verbalize about the potential pattern in both conditions, suggesting the use of explicit learning, at least in some cases. These
results provide insight into learning strategies used in early childhood and
give rise to theories about the neurological underpinnings of those strategies.
E4
DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN RESPONSE PREPARATION
MEDIATION OF VOLUNTARY RESPONSE INHIBITION Sarah
Ordaz, Emi Yasui, Beatriz Luna; University of Pittsburgh — Though cognitive control over behavior is known to improve over the course of childhood and adolescence, it remains unclear what factors may mediate this
improvement. The ability to voluntarily inhibit a response is crucial for
cognitive control of behavior and has been characterized extensively using
the antisaccade task. In this task, subjects are shown a fixation cross during a response preparation period indicating that they should suppress a
saccade toward an ensuing cue and look to the mirror location. Behaviorally, error rates as well as response latencies for correct antisaccades and
error prosaccades are known to decrease from childhood through adolescence and into adulthood. Monkey studies indicate that crucial to antisaccade performance is the early recruitment of the circuitry supporting
response inhibition during the instruction/preparation period. Given the
dramatic improvement in performance throughout childhood and adolescence, we manipulated the duration of response preparation time in order
to investigate developmental changes in preparatory time mediation of
response inhibition. Healthy children (n=56), adolescents (n=61), and
adults (n=47) performed an antisaccade task consisting of trials with variable response preparation times (500msec, 2000msec, 4000msec,
6000msec). Results indicate that subjects across all age groups improved
their ability to suppress responses with increasing preparation time. As
expected, latency to initiate responses decreased with increased preparatory time though children and adolescents did not show the same gains in
latency as adults in the longer preparatory times. These findings suggest

157

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

immaturities in response preparation are still present in adolescence,
reflecting limitations in retaining task rules for prolonged periods.
E5
DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN THE CIRCUITRY UNDERLYING
SUSTAINED WORKING MEMORY Charles
Geier, Krista Garver,
Beatriz Luna; University of Pittsburgh — The ability to sustain visual spatial working memory (VSWM) across delay periods continues to mature
into adolescence. However, relatively little is known about the brain
basis of this developmental change. Thirty-one subjects (16 adults, aged
18-30 years, 7 teens, aged 13-17 years, and 8 children, aged 8-12 years)
were scanned using fast, event-related fMRI as they performed the oculomotor delayed response task with “short” (2.5 seconds) and “long” (10
seconds) delay trials. Results indicated that a widely distributed circuitry
including frontal, parietal, and temporal regions were present in all age
groups, indicating a core working memory network. Age- and delayrelated differences were found in frontal regions (DLPFC, FEF, SEF) as
evidenced by comparing time courses from functionally defined regions
of interest as well as comparison of the extent of activation. These analysis strategies indicated that with maturity, more efficient use of core
regions is evident in working memory. Our results are discussed in
terms of how the maturation of cognitive abilities may involve refinement of processing in task-essential regions as well as the recruitment of
distal performance-enhancing regions.
E6
NEURAL CORRELATES OF REWARD ANTICIPATION AND
OUTCOME PROCESSING THROUGH ADOLESCENCE Linda Van
Leijenhorst, Kiki Zanolie, Katrien Van Meel, Michiel Westenberg, Serge
Rombouts, Eveline Crone; Leiden University — Adolescence is characterized by a normative increase in risk-taking, impulsivity and sensationseeking. It has been suggested that adolescent poor decision making
might be driven by immature motivational circuitry. The present study
uses functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to gain insight in
developmental changes in the neural substrate underlying reward anticipation and outcome processing during gambling from early adolescence
through early adulthood. Twenty older adolescents (14-16 years old) and
twenty young adults (18-25 years old) performed a modified version of
the “Slot-Machine” Task described by Donkers, Nieuwenhuis and van
Boxtel (2005). A unique feature of this task is that the outcome is unrelated to the participants’ behavior, allowing us to study brain activity
associated with monetary gains and losses that are not contingent on previous choices or actions. Participants were instructed to watch three pictures that appeared successively on a computer screen. Pictures were
presented in three possible orders 1) three different pictures (XYZ type),
or 2) two identical and one different picture (XXY type) or 3) three identical pictures (XXX). Participants were told that they would gain _ 0, 05 on
each XXX trial. In both adolescents and adults, anticipation of the last picture elicited enhanced activation in bilateral insula, inferior frontal gyrus,
and medial prefrontal cortex, but only on trials where the third picture
could indicate a potential gain (XXY trials) as compared to trials where
the second picture had already averted a gain (XYZ trials). Additional
data for twenty early adolescents (10-12 years old) are currently being
collected.
E7
PUBERTAL TIMING AND COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE Yemisi
Olagunju-Jones, Beatriz Luna; University of Pittsburgh — The ability to voluntarily suppress responses continues to improves into adolescence. The
antisaccade task, which requires the active inhibition of a prepotent
response to saccade towards a stimulus, and a voluntary saccade to an
empty space in the mirror location, is used to characterize the maturation
of voluntary response suppression. To characterize the contribution of
pubertal timing to cognitive development, pubertal stage was obtained in
157 healthy subjects, age 8 to 28 using self-report developmental questionnaires (Tanner and Petersen Pubertal Development Scales). As
expected, performance improved with age as well as pubertal stage, but

158

Cognitive And Brain Development

age was a better predictor of performance. Males compared to females
demonstrated a higher association between pubertal development and
age related improvements in response inhibition. Additionally, subjects
aged 8-17 were grouped intro three categories according to projected
Tanner stage for age as early maturers, on-time maturers, or late maturers. Early maturers consistently performed worse than on-time maturers
who performed worse than late maturers These results indicate that a
biological time table is more closely tied to determining cognitive development than pubertal timing. However, the duration of pubertal development is associated with the voluntary response suppression
performance suggesting that puberty may play an important role in the
level of cognitive maturity reached.
E8
AUDITORY EVOKED POTENTIALS DISCRIMINATE BETWEEN
ADULTS, AND CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT SENSORY
PROCESSING DISORDERS Patricia Davies, William Gavin, Wen-Pin
Chang; Colorado State University — This study examined auditory evoked
potentials (AEPs) of stimuli differing in frequency and intensity for
adults, and children with and without Sensory Processing Disorders
(SPD). While children with SPD display abnormal behaviors in response
to sensory stimuli, little evidence exists demonstrating that their brain
responses differ from typically developing children. Eighteen healthy
adults (9 males; age M=33.3; SD =11.35), 22 typical children (13 males; age
M=8.3; SD=1.88) and 26 children with SPD (22 males; age M=7.7;
SD=1.80) participated. Electroencephalography (EEG) was recorded
while 4 auditory stimuli (1kHz and 3kHz 50ms tones each presented at 50
and 70 dB SPL) were randomly presented in 4 blocks of 100 trials with an
ISI of 2 seconds. ANOVAs and post-hoc tests revealed differences
between groups at N1, P2, N2, and P3 of averaged AEPs at Cz and Fz
sites. The adult group demonstrated the largest amplitude shifts across
N1/P2 components for each stimulus, and typical children had slightly
larger amplitude shifts across N1/P2 than children with SPD. Children
with SPD displayed the largest amplitudes across N2/P3 components. A
discriminant analysis revealed 2 functions (Lambda=.107, p < .0005,
Lambda= .682, p =.010) that correctly classified 85% of all participants
(adults 100%, typical children 78.3% and children with SPD 81.5%). Summarizing, differences in the peak-to-peak amplitude of N1/P2 that separated the adults from the children may reflect maturation and differences
in the N2/P3 amplitude that separated the two child groups may reflect
increased attentional effort elicited in the children with SPD.
E9
INCREASED MOTOR CORTEX WHITE MATTER VOLUME
PREDICTS MOTOR DYSFUNCTION IN AUTISM Melanie
P.
Burgess1, Stewart H. Mostofsky1,2, Jennifer C. Gidley Larson1; 1Kennedy
Krieger Institute, 2Johns Hopkins School of Medicine — Correlations
of
motor signs with anatomic MRI measures offer an important means of
investigating brain abnormalities contributing to autism. Motor signs,
such as those documented in autism, are highly quantifiable and reproducible and can serve as markers for deficits in parallel systems important for socialization and communication. Correlations between motor
cortex white matter volumes and basic motor skill performance were
examined in 20 children with autism and 36 typically developing controls, ages 8-12 years. Regional tissue volumes were measured using
automated tissue classification and semi-automated parcellation techniques. Motor performance was assessed using the Physical and Neurologic Examination of Subtle Signs (PANESS). Children with autism
showed significant motor impairment, with higher total PANESS scores
compared with controls (p<0.0001). There were no significant group differences in motor cortex white matter volumes (right, left, total), which is
consistent with prior findings in this age range. Independent linear
regression analyses revealed that for controls there was a significant negative correlation between total PANESS score and left motor cortex white
matter volume (R2=0.15, p=0.02), such that increased volume predicted
better motor skill. In contrast, children with autism showed a robust pos-

Cognitive And Brain Development

itive correlation between total PANESS score and left motor cortex white
matter volume (R2=0.60, p<0.0001), such that increased volume predicted
poorer motor skill. The results suggest that overgrowth of localized connections contribute to impaired function in children with autism. These
findings provide insight into fundamental pathogenic mechanisms that
may also contribute to the social and communicative deficits that define
autism.
E 10
THE FUNCTIONAL MATURATION OF MENTALIZING DURING
COLLEGE Craig Bennett1, Carolyn Rabbitt1, Abigail Baird2; 2Vassar
College, 1Dartmouth College — The transition from late adolescence to
adulthood is a time of tremendous change. Dramatic shifts in romantic
relationships, risk taking behavior, insight, and worldviews have been
well documented during this time. Changes in brain structure have also
been noted, with areas of prefrontal and lateral temporal cortex continuing to mature well past the age of 18. This study sought to examine the
potential relationship between behavioral improvements in mentalizing
(Theory of Mind) and functional changes in the brain consequent to
structural maturation. Sixteen freshmen (mean age = 18.6, 7 female) and
thirteen seniors (mean age = 23.9, 6 female) participated in the fMRI
study. Subjects were shown a series of photographs depicting an individual in an emotional situation and asked to imagine what that person must
have been feeling. A multiple-choice question followed each photo to
verify that situation comprehension. We compared the regional brain
responses of the seniors and freshmen during the blocks of photos and
blocks of questions. In the photo condition a region of right anterior prefrontal cortex (BA10) was significantly more active in the senior group
(p<0.001, uncorrected). In the question condition a constellation of
regions were more active in the seniors, including anterior prefrontal cortex, left frontal operculum, STS, and somatosensory cortex (p<0.001,
uncorrected). No voxels were more active in the freshmen in either condition. The present study demonstrates that the ability to mentalize is not
static during late adolescence. Ongoing cortical maturation may contribute to observed changes in social cognition and functional activation.
E 11
WHITE MATTER DEVELOPMENT FROM CHILDHOOD TO
YOUNG ADULTHOOD CORRESPONDING TO COGNITIVE
DEVELOPMENT. Jae Woo, Robert Terwilliger, Miya Asato, Yemisi
Olagungu-Jones, Bea Luna; University of Pittsburgh — Cognitive development continues into adolescence and adulthood concurrent with brain
maturation processes such as myelination. Myelination supports the efficient integration of widely-distributed circuitry, which our previous
work has shown supports the development of cognitive function including response inhibition. We examine the contribution of myelination to
development using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) in 97 individuals (36
children, ages 8-13, 36 adolescents, ages 14-17, 25 adults, ages 18-25),
undergoing cognitive assessments including the antisaccade task and
fMRI. Results indicated that most of the white matter integrity is mature
by childhood however specific regions continue to mature into adolescence. From childhood to adulthood regions of the superior corona radiata and posterior limb of the internal capsule were the primary areas
showing age related changes. Stage-wise analyses revealed that from
childhood to adolescence the inferior longitudinal fasciculus and subcortical to prefrontal projections are the primary regions showing developmental improvements. In the following developmental stage of
adolescence to adulthood the inferior longitudinal fasciculus and thalamic projections, amongst others showed continued age related changes.
In addition, we found that age-related changes in FA were better predicted by chronological age than pubertal status suggesting a biological
timetable that may be less influenced by environmental factors. Finally,
results of region of interest analyses will be discussed depicting the association between cognitive development, brain function and age related
changes in FA. These results support the contribution of myelination par-

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

ticularly in tracts integrating frontal and subcortical regions to age
related improvement in cognitive control.
E 12
DOES ORIENTATION INFLUENCE THE PROCESSING OF
FAMILIAR AND UNFAMILIAR FACES IN INFANTS? EVIDENCE
FROM ERPS Alissa Westerlund1, Vanessa Vogel-Farley1, Dana Kuefner2,
Tracy DeBoer3, Venessa Pena4, Hannah Mandel5, Charles A. Nelson1,4;
1Children's Hospital Boston, 2Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca,
3MIND Institute, 4Harvard Medical School, 5Tufts University — de
Haan
and Nelson (1997) have demonstrated that 6-month-old infants show a
differential pattern of brain activity when viewing pictures of their
mother’s face compared to a female stranger’s face. Halit, de Haan and
Johnson (2003) have found that infants are sensitive to orientation when
viewing unfamiliar faces. The goal of this study was to investigate the
effect of orientation on the recognition of both familiar and unfamiliar
faces. Event-related potentials (ERPs) of six-month-old infants were
recorded from 63 scalp locations. Two groups of infants were tested
with pictures of faces in upright and inverted orientations. One group
saw pictures of their mother; the other saw pictures of a female stranger.
Artifact-free data were obtained from 14 infants in the stranger’s face
group and 17 infants in the mother’s face group. Analyses revealed that
latency to peak P400 response was faster in infants who viewed their
mother’s face compared to infants who viewed a stranger’s face (main
effect of GROUP, F(1,29) = 4.22, p < .05). An interaction revealed that
mother inverted elicited greater P400 amplitude than mother upright;
however, the stranger’s face elicited an equivalent response, regardless of
orientation. Analysis of the NC indicated that the inverted faces elicited a
larger response than upright faces (main effect of ORIENTATION,
F(1,29), p = .011). These results, as well as behavioral preferential looking
data, will be discussed within the framework of the developmental literature on the specialization of face processing skills during the first year of
life.
E 13
LOW FREQUENCY OSCILLATIONS IN RESPONSE TIME IN
CHILDREN WITH ATTENTION DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY
DISORDER Adriana Di Martino1,2, Manely Ghaffari1, Jocelyn Curchack1,
Chris Hyde3, F. Xavier Castellanos1; 1NYU Child Study Center, Child
Psychiatry, NY, 2University of Cagliari, Italy, 3BioAssessments, LLC, Elkton,
MD — Background. Greater intra-individual variability is a consistent
finding across a range of tasks in children and adults with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The amplitude of low frequency
oscillations (< 0.1 Hz) in reaction time (RT-LFO) is significantly higher in
children with ADHD compared to controls, and is normalized by methylphenidate. Similar LFO of regional cerebral blood flow have been used
to map functional neuronal connectivity, and are associated with “default
mode” functional brain networks observed during rest in healthy adults.
Default mode activity is related to intra-individual variability. Aims. This
study aims to characterize RT-LFO in children with ADHD, and to determine the relationship between these LFO and lapses in attention, as measured by errors. Methods. Data were continuously recorded during a 15
min Eriksen-flanker task. The main outcome variables are accuracy (percent correct) and RT-LFO spectral power. Thirty-one children with
ADHD (28 males, mean age 12 ± 3 years), and 24 controls (8 males, 12 ± 3)
participated. Results. Preliminary results show that 1) RT-LFO correlates
significantly with number of errors (r=0.37, p<.05, and r= 0.69, p<.01 for
directional errors and omissions, respectively), and 2) controlling for sex,
RT-LFO discriminates between children with ADHD and controls
(p=.04). Discussion. RT-LFO may represent a quantitative endophenotype linking the dynamic interplay of default-mode networks to attentional lapses in ADHD and related disorders. Ongoing studies are
exploring the relationships between LFO in RT and BOLD signal in
ADHD as well as Autism.

159

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

E 14
MATURATIONAL CHANGES IN PREFRONTAL AND CINGULATE
REGIONS DURING AN INHIBITORY-WORKING MEMORY TASK IN
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS Jennifer Realmuto1, Paul Eslinger1,
Clancy Blair2, Jianli Wang1, David Baker2, Steven Thorne2, David Gamson2,
Erin Zimmerman1, Qing Yang1, Lisa Rohrer3; 1Penn State College of Medicine,
2Pennsylvania State University, 3University of Minnesota — Introduction.
Inhibitory-working memory processes are important resources for a variety of behavioral domains, and particularly for acquisition of diverse cognitive abilities and self-regulatory expertise. We tested the hypothesis
that the neurodevelopmental bases of inhibition and working memory
are associated with maturational plasticity in prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate regions. Methods. Participants were healthy children and
adolescents 8 – 19 years of age who completed a visuospatial go no-go
task while being scanned in a Philips 3T magnet with visual display goggles. Images were processed with SPM2 software and analyzed for average activation as well as age regression effects. Results. Average
activation maps revealed significant clusters in right dorsolateral and
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and left anterior cingulate along with the
hippocampus and insula. Age regression analyses showed marked
developmental decreases in left and right prefrontal regions, mid-posterior cingulate, insula and hippocampus. In contrast, significant developmental increases in activity occurred in the right dorsolateral and
superior prefrontal cortex and the right mid-posterior cingulate. Conclusion. Findings suggest that with developmental expertise in inhibitionworking memory processes, there is a marked decrease in prefrontal cortex activity as well as in a larger network of cortical and subcortical structures, although right prefrontal activation remains evident. Anterior
cingulate activity also remains evident but there appears to be a dynamic
shift in the activity of mid and posterior cingulate regions. Neuromaturational changes for inhibition-working memory processes appear to
become more focal and physiologically efficient within cortical systems.
E 15
FRONTAL MIDLINE THETA ACTIVITY AS A CORRELATE OF
THE DEVELOPMENT OF RESPONSE MONITORING AND
COGNITIVE CONTROL IN ADOLESCENTS Kristin Sullwold, Paul
Collins, Noah Venables, Monica Luciana; University of Minnesota — Developmental studies have shown age-related differences in event-related
potential (ERP) components associated with response monitoring and
cognitive control. This study used ERP time and frequency analyses to
investigate response monitoring and inhibitory control during a go nogo/shift task performed by adolescents and young adults. As compared
to adults, adolescents produced theta activity that showed (a) greater
overall amplitude and (b) less discrimination between stimulus and
response categories. When presented with lower-probability stimuli signaling a requirement to withhold a prepotent response, or shift to an
alternate response, midline frontal theta activity increased substantially
in adults, but significantly less so in adolescents. Similarly, adolescents
produced less of an increase in frontal midline theta following response
errors, as compared to adults. These age-related theta effects were stronger than those observed for baseline-to-peak measures in the ERP time
domain (for N2 and event-related negativity [ERN] components, respectively). Behavioral data indicated that adolescents were less able to discriminate stimulus conditions associated with varying degrees of
response conflict (reduced d-prime values). The results will be interpreted in relation to developmental interactions between the anterior cingulate and the lateral prefrontal cortex during the period from early
adolescence to young adulthood.
E 16
DIFFERENTIAL RESPONSE TO AUDITORY AND VISUAL
STIMULI DURING SLEEP FMRI IN 3-4 YEAR OLD CHILDREN
Elizabeth Redcay1, Eric Courchesne1,2; 1University of California, San Diego,
2
Children's Hospital San Diego — The transition from infancy to the preschool years is a time of dramatic and dynamic neural and cognitive

160

Cognitive And Brain Development

change. However, very limited functional imaging data exist from infants
and young children due to the difficulty in acquiring such data. We utilized a relatively novel method in which fMRI data were collected during
natural sleep. Reliable fMRI data were collected from thirteen 3-4 year
old children during presentation of auditory stimuli in a block design.
Stimuli were presented in four 20-second blocks for each of the three conditions (tones (T), vocal sounds (V), and non-vocal environmental sounds
(NV)) alternating with ‘rest’ periods during which time no stimuli were
presented. Six of those children were additionally presented with eight
20-second blocks of visual flashing lights at 2.5 Hz alternating with 20second ‘rest’ blocks. An additional six were presented with the visual
stimuli alone. All auditory stimuli combined elicited activation within
bilateral superior temporal gyri/sulci (STG/S) and right cerebellum
(p<.05, corrected). Response to visual stimuli was localized to occipital
cortex. We found a significant difference between auditory stimulus
types (V, NV, T) within right STG. Specifically, a significantly greater
response was seen to nonvocal than to vocal sounds (p<.01). In sum, 3-4
year olds showed a differential response both between stimulus modalities and between stimuli in the auditory modality. These findings provide evidence that neural discrimination capabilities are present in very
young children during natural sleep. We conclude that sleep fMRI is a
valuable tool for examining functional brain development in young children.
E 17
DEVELOPMENTAL
CHANGES
IN
BRAIN
FUNCTION
SUPPORTING VOLUNTARY RESPONSE SUPPRESSION IN HIGHFUNCTIONING AUTISTIC INDIVIDUALS Ran Liu1, Krista E.
Garver2, Charles Geier2, Nancy Minshew2, John A. Sweeney3, Beatriz Luna2;
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2University of Pittsburgh, 3University of Illinois,
Chicago — Autism is disorder characterized by limitations in social processing and communication as well as executive processing. Our past
studies have indicated compromised prefrontal circuitry underlying limitations in executive processing in adult autistic subjects. Developmental
studies on executive function indicate that while individuals with autism
are impaired in the development of voluntary response inhibition, they
do show some improvements in performance throughout late childhood
and adolescence that is similar to normal individuals. We performed a
fast event related fMRI (3T) study on 22 high-functioning autistic subjects
and 22 healthy control volunteers 14-33 years of age during the antisaccade task, where BOLD activity during correct trials were examined. In
the antisaccade task subjects must suppress a tendency to foveate a suddenly appearing peripheral cue and instead make a voluntary saccade to
the mirror location. Results indicate that a large part of the circuitry
known to support response inhibition is in place by adolescence in autistic individuals. Differences in the recruitment of key regions including
frontal systems as well as differences in the efficiency of activating these
regions, reflected in differences in the timecourse hemodynamic response
function, were present in the autism group. We also found many similarities in developmental transitions in the autism and typicals group from
adolescence to adulthood, suggesting preservation of key developmental
processes. These studies indicate impairments in neocortical function in
autism that is present across development.
E 18
ERP EVIDENCE FOR LIFE-SPAN DEVELOPMENT OF EXECUTIVE
FUNCTIONS: THE ROLES OF TASK PREPARATION AND
INTERFERENCE CONTROL IN A CUED TASK-SWITCHING
PARADIGM Daniela Czernochowski, Yael M. Cycowicz, Marianne de
Chastelaine, Cort Horton, David Friedman; Cognitive Electrophysiology
Laboratory, New York State Psychiatric Institute — Relative to young adults,
children and older adults exhibit difficulty in interference control. However, it is currently unclear whether deficits in this control process can be
ameliorated if given sufficient time to prepare for upcoming interference.
Hence, the cue-target interval [CTI] was manipulated in a task-switching
paradigm in children (9-10 years), young (20-25 years) and older adults

Cognitive And Brain Development

(61-83 years). Participants responded on the basis of which number or
how many numbers were presented in compatible (1, 333) or incompatible (3, 111) target displays, the latter requiring interference control. Reaction time costs were observed for all groups, but pronounced for
incompatible switch trials in children and older adults. Children also had
high error rates in this condition. Additional preparation time (1200 vs.
600 ms CTI) increased children’s accuracy and reduced reaction times for
older adults. Switch relative to stay cues in mixed blocks elicited larger
ERP amplitudes beginning ~200 ms, ~350 ms, and ~500 ms post cue for
young adults, older adults and children, respectively. However, for older
adults, this differentiation was considerably reduced in amplitude. These
data suggest that older adults’ difficulties may originate from a reduced
ability to prepare for an upcoming switch. Therefore, when faced with
incompatible target displays, they need to recruit control processes to
reduce interference thereby maintaining accurate performance, but at the
cost of longer RTs. Unlike the elderly, children appear able to prepare
when given sufficient time, but fail to exert adequate control in response
to incompatible targets as indicated by their error-prone behavior.
E 19
STIMULUS-DEPENDENT
HEMISPHERE
ASYMMETRIES
IN
DEVELOPMENT: AN MEG STUDY OF M100 LATENCY IN
CHILDREN WITH AUTISM DISORDER AND TYPICALLY
DEVELOPING CONTROLS A. Lisette Isenberg, Paul Fillmore, M. Anne
Spence, Nicole Gage; University of California, Irvine — In adults, the auditory evoked M100 component detected by magnetoencephalography
(MEG) peaks within a narrow (~20ms) time window across left (LH) and
right (RH) hemispheres. For most adults, M100 latency peaks later in LH
vs. RH for both speech and non-speech sounds, although the neural bases
are unknown. We use MEG to record auditory responses for speech and
non-speech sounds in typically developing (TD: n=8) children and children with autism disorder (AD: n=8) to determine if (i) the M100 latency
(LH>RH) asymmetry is present during development; (ii) it differs for
speech vs. non-speech sounds using within-subject analyses, and (iii)
results for AD children with language impairment are similar to TD.
Stimuli - Speech: consonant-vowel (CV) syllables; Tones: (Spectral) puretones (250-2000Hz), (Temporal) tones with brief discontinuities (gaps, 540ms). TD results – Speech: M100 latency LH>RH for all CV syllables;
Tones: Spectral and Temporal: M100 latency LH<RH for all stimuli. AD
results show similar patterns to TD, but with increased variability. Findings provide evidence that (i) M100 LH>RH asymmetries for speech are
present in TD and AD children by age 8; (ii) asymmetries are reversed for
tonal stimuli in both groups across Spectral and Temporal conditions; (iii)
despite greater variability, AD have a similar pattern of results. Thus,
children (TD and AD) show an adult-like M100 asymmetry (LH>RH) for
speech, with an opposite (LH<RH) pattern for non-speech. Findings indicate that there are maturational differences in LH/RH time-to-peak for
the auditory evoked M100 component.
E 20
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN WHITE MATTER DEVELOPMENT
AND
DELAY/
PROBABILITY
DISCOUNTING
IN
ADOLESCENCE Elizabeth Olson, Paul Collins, Catalina Hooper, Ryan
Muetzel, Monica Luciana; University of Minnesota — Discounting
tasks
assess the extent to which the subjective value of a reward decreases as
the time until the delivery of the reward or the odds against receiving the
award increases. Associations have previously been demonstrated
between impulsive and/or risk-taking behavior (such as illicit drug use)
and performance on discounting tasks, with impulsive subjects showing
greater rates of discounting (i.e. greater declines in subjective value over
time). Functional MRI studies have implicated the prefrontal cortex as
well as the parietal cortex in discounting behavior. Previous work by this
and other research groups indicates continuing maturation on tasks
believed to recruit prefrontal regions over the course of adolescence, suggesting a protracted developmental timecourse of prefrontally mediated
functions. For this reason, we hypothesized that discounting rates would

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

decrease over the course of adolescence and that these changes would be
associated with changes in the brain’s structural maturation. In this
study, healthy adolescents completed computerized delay and probability discounting tasks and a diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) brain scan
using a 3T magnet. Voxelwise and region-of-interest approaches were
used to analyze the data. Findings indicate behavioral differences in discounting behavior between younger and older adolescents. Relationships between changes in white matter organization in prefrontal,
parietal, and other cortical regions and changes in delay and probability
discounting rates are evident and will be discussed relative to theories of
adolescent brain development and the neural networks presumed to
underlie discounting behavior.
E 21
PHANTOM PENISES IN TRANSSEXUALS; A PROBE FOR
UNDERSTANDING INNATE GENDER SPECIFIC BODY-IMAGE IN
THE BRAIN Paul McGeoch, Vilayanur Ramachandran; Center for Brain
and Cognition, UCSD — 70% of men after amputation of the penis for carcinoma, or other causes, experience a phantom. Conversely, in male to
female transsexuals, who have undergone gender reassignment surgery,
we found the incidence of a phantom penis to be 30%. This is consistent
with their report that they feel like women and never felt that their
penises belonged to their body-image in the first place. Remarkably, 60%
of female to male transsexuals report vivid phantom penises- with erections- existing from early childhood; long before they had phalloplasty.
Indeed most of them had undergone no genital surgery at all. They report
enhancement of the sensation by testosterone therapy. Also only about
10% of female to male transsexuals report phantom breasts following surgery to remove breast tissue (compared with 35 to 50% following mastectomy for carcinoma). We explain these intriguing findings by postulating
a hardwired gender specific body image in the brain (specified by hormonal cascades and direct genetic effects in the embryo) that does not
match the external somatic gender. These reports are not confabulatory;
female to male transsexuals often try to “grab” their member during masturbation or (unconsciously) purchase jeans with low crotches. Secondly,
apotemnophiliacs (a “control” group who feel that a limb isn’t part of
their body image), always experience phantoms after amputation. Koro
(a syndrome in which Malaysian males have the delusion of a shrinking
penis) may arise from related mechanisms. The converse delusion- elderly white males experiencing phantom expansion of the penis (S.M.
Anstis; 2006) remains un-named.
E 22
THE EFFECTS OF AGE, LANGUAGE PROFICIENCY AND SES ON
ERP INDICES OF SYNTACTIC PROCESSING IN CHILDREN
Laura Sabourin, Eric Pakulak, David Paulsen, Jessica Fanning, Helen Neville;
University of Oregon — Recent research into children’s syntactic development has suggested that an adult-like biphasic LAN-P600 pattern (a left
anterior negativity followed by a later posterior positivity to syntactic
violations) is present, albeit at delayed latencies, in children as young as
two years (Oberecker, Friedrich and Friederici, 2005). This and other
child language Event-Related Potential (ERP) research investigating syntactic development have used isolated sentences during auditory stimuli
presentation. The goal of this study was to investigate syntactic processing in 4- and 5-year-olds using natural speech which accompanied and
formed a coherent narrative for 7 minute animated video clips. Participants saw up to five of these video clips. Each clip contained 100 sentences, of which 20 (per video) were syntactic canonical/violation pairs
of interest. Adult participants showed the expected biphasic LAN-P600
pattern to these same sentences. In addition we analyzed the ERP
responses to canonical and violation sentences in four and five year-old
children. Language proficiency measures (using standardized tests) were
obtained for each child during extensive behavioural testing and family
SES was determined using a parent questionnaire. Results show that the
anterior (adult LAN) and posterior (adult P600) effects are independently
affected by age, proficiency and SES. We conclude that age, SES and pro-

161

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

ficiency differences are reflected in brain organization for language in
children and thus it is important to consider each of these factors in studies of language development.
E 23
DIFFERENTIAL CORTICAL ACTIVATIONS DURING VISUAL
LETTER PROCESSING IN FIVE-YEAR-OLD CHILDREN AND
ADUTLS: AN FMRI STUDY Yoshiko Yamada, Laura Sabourin, Scott
Klein, Mark Dow, Helen Neville; University of Oregon — Neuroimaging
studies on reading have revealed a recruitment of a left-hemisphere network (frontal, temporo-parietal, and occipito-temporal regions) in
skilled, adult readers. However, very little is known about the development of these reading-related cortical regions in young children. In this
study, hemodynamic responses to visually presented letters and false
fonts were examined in adults and five year olds who have just begun to
develop reading skills. During the acquisition of functional magnetic resonance images (fMRI), letters and false fonts were presented in separate
blocks interleaved with rest blocks. Adults and children differ greatly in
the amount of experience with printed letters; however, false fonts used
in this study were novel to both groups. Subjects were asked to respond
when the same letter or false font was repeated in two successive trials
(i.e., a 1-back task). Increases in the BOLD signal to false fonts relative to
letters suggested that adults and children recruit similar bilateral posterior brain regions when processing visually presented novel stimuli. In
contrast, the pattern of activations to letters differed between adults and
children, and only adults exhibited greater activations to letters as compared to false fonts in the temporo-parietal region, a part of the reading
network. The results will be discussed in terms of how experience modulates the organization of reading-related cortical regions.
E 24
THE
EFFECTS
OF
PARENT
TRAINING:
ENHANCING
CHILDREN’S NEUROCOGNITIVE FUNCTION Jessica L. Fanning,
David Paulsen, Stephanie Sundborg, Helen Neville; University of Oregon — Past
research indicates that when parents adopt specific behavior management techniques they produce positive conduct outcomes in their children (Fisher, et al., 2002). The current study tested the hypothesis that,
with specialized training, parents can be made aware of interaction techniques and language facilitation strategies and that such training would
enhance children’s neurocognitive development. We randomly assigned
parents to either the experimental (N=14) or control (N=14) condition.
Treatment group parents participated in the Success in Parenting Preschoolers (SIP2) training program by attending weekly 2-hour classes for
eight weeks. We tested the relationship between completion of the SIP2
training and children’s behavioral performance on specific measures of
cognitive processes, i.e. language, attention, memory, visuospatial cognition, numeracy, and IQ. We also examined event-related potential (ERP)
measures of language (semantics, syntax) and auditory attention. Here,
we report behavioral data showing increased abilities in receptive and
expressive language, vocabulary, IQ, working memory, and sustained
attention in children whose parents completed SIP2 training. These
improvements were significantly greater than the gains made by the control group of children. We also report preliminary ERP data showing a
more mature pattern of brain organization for the treatment group of
children. Taken together, these results suggest that explicit training in
parenting skills can lead to enhancements in children’s neurocognitive
function.
E 25
ERP INDICES OF SPEECH PROCESSING IN INFANT AND
TODDLER: MATURATIONAL CHANGES FROM 3 MONTH TO 7
YEARS OLD OF AGE Karen Garrido-Nag, Yan Yu, Thia Datta, Nancy
Vidal, Valerie Shafer; The Graduate Center, CUNY — Studying
speech
sound processing abilities in infants and toddlers can provide important
information about the association between speech processing deficits and
language impairment in young children (e.g., Trehub & Henderson,
1996). The purpose of this study was to investigate the maturational

162

Cognitive And Brain Development

changes in the spatial-temporal patterns of the brain’s obligatory and
mismatch responses (MMR) to speech input. Infants and children (3
months to 7 years) listened to 250ms-long, phonetically similar vowel
contrasts (I vs. E) presented in an oddball paradigm while event-related
potentials (ERPs) were collected from 65 scalp sites. The preliminary
results show that the latencies of the obligatory “P100” component and
positive MMR discriminative response systematically shift earlier with
increasing age, as expected (see Morr, et al., 2002). The amplitude of the
positive MMR decreased and shifted from a right dominant to a more
central topography with age, up to 3 years of age. By age four, the positive MMR had disappeared and is replaced by a negativity which is consistent in topography with the adult mismatch negativity (MMN). A late
negative (LN; 500-800 ms) discriminative response starts to appear at the
age of 18 month, with its latency gradually reducing with increasing age.
Variation from these general patterns of maturation that are related to
language experience (monolingual versus bilingual input), language
measures and gender will be presented.
E 26
SUPPRESSING UNWANTED MEMORIES: A DEVELOPMENTAL
FMRI STUDY Pedro M. Paz-Alonso1, Simona Ghetti1, Bryan J. Matlen1,
Michael C. Anderson2, Silvia A. Bunge3; 1University of California, Davis,
2
University of Oregon, 3Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of
California, Berkeley — The Think/No-Think paradigm has attracted substantial interest for the study of intentional inhibitory-control processes
on memory suppression (Anderson & Green, 2001). In this paradigm,
participants first learn a series of word-pairs. In a later phase (i.e., Think/
No-Think), they are presented with the first member of the pair (i.e., cue),
and they are asked to either remember or suppress the second member of
the pair (i.e., target). In the final recall task, suppressed targets typically
are remembered less than baseline and this decrease is larger as a function of the number of times the targets were suppressed. The interaction
between hippocampus and DLPFC appears to be critical for suppressing
unwanted memories. Specifically, No-think trials have been associated
with increased dorsolateral prefrontal activation, and reduced hippocampal activation in adults (Anderson et al., 2003). The present fMRI study
was aimed at investigating the neural underpinnings of developmental
inhibitory-control processes on memory suppression. A total of 32
healthy, native English speakers, from two age groups (8- to 12-year-olds,
and adults) will participate in the present fMRI study. Neuroimaging
data will be acquired during the think/no-think phase. After scanning,
memory for all the word-pairs will be tested twice (i.e., same- and independent-probe memory tests). We predict that, compared to adults, 812-year-olds will exhibit lower behavioral suppression levels and a
weaker negative correlation between prefrontal cortex and the MTL,
given that Menon et al (2005) documented the development of functional
connection between the DLPFC and MTL between 11 and 19 years of age
during memory encoding.
E 27
RESPONSE INHIBITION IN CHILDREN WITH ASD: REDUCED
PREFRONTAL
RECRUITMENT
AND
COMPENSATORY
POSTERIOR CONTRIBUTIONS Anne Della Rosa1, Jennifer Foss-Feig2,
Bryan Harrison1, Philip Lee2, Benjamin Yerys1, Chandan Vaidya2, William
Gaillard1, Lauren
Kenworthy1; 1Children's National Medical Center,
2Georgetown University — Neuroimaging studies
have documented
recruitment of frontostriatal networks for successful performance on
response inhibition measures (Rubia, et al., 2006). One study of adults
with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) noted abnormalities in prefrontal recruitment on measures of response inhibition (Schmitz, et al., 2005),
however whether these abnormalities are present in children with ASD is
unknown. The current study used fMRI imaging techniques and a Go/
No-Go task to examine the neural underpinnings of response inhibition
in 7-12 year old children with ASD and age/IQ matched controls. During
fMRI, children pressed a button in response to all letters (Go trials),
except the letter X (No-Go trials). Trials were blocked such that blocks of

Cognitive And Brain Development

all Go trials (Go blocks) alternated with blocks comprising 75% Go and
25% No-Go trials (No-Go blocks). For each subject, activation during
response inhibition (No-Go vs. Go blocks) was identified in SPM99.
Behaviorally, no significant group differences in reaction time or accuracy were observed.
Functionally, typically developing children
recruited regions associated with response inhibition, including inferior
frontal regions, (BA 11/47), anterior cingulate (BA 24/32), and inferior
parietal regions (BA 40). In contrast, children with ASD demonstrated
reduced recruitment of inferior frontal regions (BA 11/47), but increased
recruitment of striatal regions, middle temporal regions (BA 21/22), inferior parietal areas (BA 40), and premotor cortex (BA 6/8). These results
implicate reduced function in frontal regions in children with ASD, and
suggest compensatory recruitment of striatal and posterior regions to
allow behavioral performance comparable to controls on a measure of
response inhibition.
E 28
THE
DEVELOPMENT
OF
CORPUS
CALLOSUM
MICROSTRUCTURE AND BIMANUAL TASK PERFORMANCE IN
HEALTHY ADOLESCENTS Ryan L. Muetzel, Paul F. Collins, Bryon A.
Mueller, Kelvin O. Lim, Monica M. Luciana; University of Minnesota — The
corpus callosum (CC) is the primary connection between cerebral hemispheres, allowing for interhemispheric integration of sensory, motor, and
cognitive processes. Although reports are somewhat inconsistent, both
cross-sectional and longitudinal studies suggest that the CC continues to
mature structurally from infancy to adulthood. Diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI) provides in vivo information about brain tissue microstructure and
shows potential for elucidating subtle brain changes that occur late in this
developmental sequence. We used DTI to examine CC microstructure in
healthy right-handed adolescents and young adults (n=94, age 9-24
years), and correlated the imaging data with behavioral performance on
motor tasks. The primary DTI variable was fractional anisotropy (FA),
which reflects the degree of white matter’s directional organization. Participants completed two bimanual coordination tasks and the Grooved
Pegboard Task to assess interhemispheric transfer and fine motor control
functions. Performance on each measure was significantly correlated
with age. Males generally outperformed females. Significant correlations
between age and FA were observed in the splenium of the CC, which
interconnects posterior cortical regions. FA levels in the genu and splenium correlated significantly with task performance. Regression analyses indicated that bimanual coordination was significantly predicted by
age, gender, and splenium FA. Decreases in interhemispheric transfer
time and increases in FA likely reflect increased myelination in the CC
and more efficient neuronal signal transduction. These findings expand
upon existing neuroimaging reports of CC development by showing
associations between bimanual coordination and white matter microstructural organization.
E 29
CULTURE AND/OR LANGUAGE-SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OF
NEURAL BASES OF VERBAL AND NONVERBAL 'THEORY OF
MIND' Chiyoko Kobayashi, Elise Temple; Cornell University — Theory of
mind (ToM) – our ability to predict behaviors of others in terms of their
underlying intentions – has been examined through verbal and nonverbal false-belief (FB) tasks. Results of our previous functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) study with American English-speaking adults
and children have indicated that temporo-parietal junction (TPJ) may be
important for ToM processing throughout the development. In order to
replicate this finding in children with a different cultural/linguistic background, we studied 12 Japanese bilingual children (8-12 years-old) with
the same verbal (story-based) and nonverbal (cartoon-based) FB tasks. A
significant overlap of the story and cartoon ToM-specific brain activations of the Japanese adults and children was found primarily in bilateral
ventro-medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC). These results suggest that the
ways in which neural bases of ToM develop are not entirely universal.

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

E 30
ADOLESCENT CHANGES IN CORTICAL CONNECTIVITY
MEASURED BY DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING Monica
Luciana,
Paul Collins, Ryan Muetzel, Catalina Hooper, Kelvin Lim; University of
Minnesota — Recent studies concur that brain development continues
throughout adolescence, with reports of cortical gray matter volume
decline and increments in white matter volume. These changes appear to
be particularly pronounced in the prefrontal cortex. Neuroimaging innovations allow us to expand upon these findings to make inferences about
the potential for cortical connectivity. One such innovation is diffusion
tensor imaging (DTI), which measures three-dimensional water diffusion. As neuronal fibers develop more myelination and stronger directional organization, water diffusion becomes increasingly restricted
along axes perpendicular to the fibers, which can be quantified in terms
of fractional anisotropy (FA). Initial reports indicate that in healthy children and adolescents, FA levels increase significantly with age. We
hypothesized that this increase would be particularly pronounced in the
prefrontal cortex, concordant with changes in high level reasoning skills
that are also observed during adolescence. Healthy adolescents, ages 9 to
23 (n=60), completed a structural MRI scan including a DTI sequence
using a Siemens 3T scanner, in the context of a longitudinal study. Voxelwise and region-of-interest analyses revealed significant FA increases
with age, both broadly throughout the cortex and in subcortical pathways that connect the frontal lobe with striatal regions. Gender did not
substantially moderate these associations. Radial diffusion, a DTI index
of myelination, also showed age-related changes. Findings will be considered relative to volumetric changes in this age range, and implications for
functional connectivity will be discussed.
E 31
MATURATION
OF
NEURAL
SYSTEMS
MEDIATING
CALCULATION IN TYPICALLY DEVELOPING CHILDREN AND
ADOLESCENTS Hilary Knipe1, Paul Eslinger2, Jianli Wang2, Jennifer
Realmuto2, David Baker1, Steven Thorne1, David Gamson1, Erin Zimmerman2,
Qing Yang2, Bryn Lipovsky2, Lisa Rohrer3; 1Penn State University, 2Penn State
College of Medicine, 3University of Minnesota — Introduction. We tested the
hypothesis that the neurodevelopmental bases of mathematical cognition
entails a complex set of structures subserving not only number sense but
also representational knowledge and operational processes. This neural
system includes the superior parietal cortices as well as dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the anterior cingulate region. Methods. Participants
were healthy children and adolescents 8 – 19 years of age who completed
number calculation (addition and subtraction) and coin calculation tasks
while being scanned in a Philips 3T magnet with visual display goggles.
Images were processed with SPM2 software and analyzed for average
activation as well as age regression effects. Results. Average activation
maps revealed significant clusters in parietal, occipital- temporal, prefrontal, and medial temporal regions bilaterally. Age regression analyses
showed selective dynamic changes in parietal activation during development, with the right superior parietal cortex increasingly active with age
but the inferior parietal cortex activity decreasing with age. Contrasting
activation effects with age were found in prefrontal cortex and cingulate.
The number and coin calculation tasks showed overlapping activation in
the right and left superior parietal lobes as well as the right occipital-temporal region. Conclusion. Findings suggest that a large scale network of
cortical and subcortical structures subserve mathematical cognition,
prominently including the intraparietal sulcus region. Age-related maturational changes identified increasing activity in superior parietal cortices
but decreasing activity in prefrontal, medial temporal, and inferior parietal areas. Coin calculation problems engaged more activity in these
regions than number problems, but showed similar patterns of neuromaturational change with age.

163

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

E 32
THE EFFECTS OF INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC TRAINING ON BRAIN
PLASTICITY AND COGNITION IN YOUNG CHILDREN Gottfried
Schlaug1, Andrea Norton1, Marie Forgeard1, Udita Iyengar1, Martin
Kotynek-Friedl1, Katie Overy1, Ellen Winner2; 1Harvard Medical School,
2
Boston College — Previous research has revealed functional and structural neural differences comparing musicians with matched non-musician controls, with intensity and duration of instrumental training being
important predictors of these differences. It has also been demonstrated
that music training in children results in long-term enhancements in
extramusical cognitive domains. However, the underlying neural basis of
such enhancements and the differential contribution of nature and nurture to these brain differences is not known. We report initial behavioral
and neuroimaging results of our longitudinal studies in young children.
Matched (age, handedness, gender, IQ) groups of children (instrumental
or non-instrumental) underwent a battery of behavioral tests that
included auditory-perceptual, motoric, and various cognitive tests as
well as a high-resolution structural and functional MR imaging study
examining the neural correlates of pitch and rhythm discrimination. We
found no pre-existing neural, cognitive, motor, or auditory-perceptual
differences between the groups of children that were about to pursue
instrumental music training compared to those children that did not pursue instrumental training. After 16 months of observation in our longitudinal study, we found significant group differences in tests related to the
primary training domains (auditory-perceptual discrimination and fine
finger movements skills). No significant transfer effects were seen yet.
Functional imaging analysis showed significant changes in temporal,
frontal, and cerebellar activation only in the instrumental group, but not
in the control group. Preliminary voxel-based morphometric analyses
revealed trends in gray matter changes in superior frontal and temporal
regions.

Linguistic Processes: Syntax
E 33
THE GENERATION OF SYNTACTIC STRUCTURES: INSIGHTS
FROM EEG TIME-FREQUENCY ANALYSES Dietmar Roehm1, Hubert
Haider2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences
Leipzig, Germany, 2University of Salzburg, Austria — In the present EEG
experiment we investigated the generation of minimal syntactic structures. Participants were asked to produce verb-second (V2) sentences on
the basis of sequentially presented NP-NP-Verb chunks Pizza / Junggeselle / bestellen ('pizza' / 'bachelor' / 'to order'). Visual cues either forced
the sentence to be spelled out in past tense (i.e. with the finite verb in V2)
or in the perfect (i.e. with a finite auxiliary in V2 and the main verb in sentence-final position). Verb-types differed with respect to whether they
had an obligatorily separable particle (aussuchen 'to select') or not
(bestellen 'to order') and whether an additional prefix was added (e.g.
voraussuchen 'preselect', vorbestellen 'preorder'). ERPs timelocked to the
onset of the verb revealed a late positivity (550-800 ms) for double-prefixed particle verbs in comparison to the other conditions independent of
verb position. In contrast, frequency analyses revealed significant differences between conditions in the alpha (reflecting verbal complexity) and
beta/gamma frequency range (indicating the degree of grammaticality).
Furthermore phase coherence between electrodes revealed frequencyspecific synchronization patterns reflecting long-range neural integration
mechanisms during syntactic structure generation. The present results
demonstrate that frequency-based analyses can overcome the methodological limitations of ERP acquisition during sentence production.
Acknowledgements: The present research was supported by the Austrian
‘Fonds zur Förderung der wissenschaftlichen Forschung“, Project
P16281-G03.

164

Linguistic Processes: Syntax

E 34
AN
ERP
INVESTIGATION
OF
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PROCESSING: EFFECTS OF PROFICIENCY AND EXPLICIT AND
IMPLICIT TRAINING Kara Morgan-Short1, Karsten Steinhauer2, Cristina
Sanz1, Michael T. Ullman1; 1Georgetown University, 2McGill University — Second language (L2) event-related potential (ERP) research suggests that L2
grammatical processing generally differs from first language (L1) processing: grammatical violations in L2-speakers typically elicit a response
that differs from the biphasic LAN-P600 L1 pattern in that LANs are usually absent, and N400-like negativities are sometimes found instead.
However, LANs have been found at high proficiency levels of L2. Our
understanding of L2 processing should be enhanced by examining low
and high proficiency levels within-subjects. Additionally, the neurocognitive effects of different types of language training, in particular explicit
(e.g., classroom) vs. implicit (e.g., naturalistic) have not been examined,
even though such training differences are highly relevant to actual language learning. The current study examines these issues. Subjects learned
to comprehend and speak a Romance language-like artificial language
(BROCANTO2) to high proficiency under either explicit or implicit training conditions. For each training condition, morphological and syntactic
processing were assessed within-subjects with behavioral and ERP measures at both low and high proficiency levels. Preliminary results from
the study suggest that behaviorally, subjects receiving explicit training
outperformed those receiving implicit training at low proficiency,
whereas at high proficiency the pattern was mixed. ERP assessments suggest that at low proficiency, both training groups evidenced N400 patterns. Interestingly, at high proficiency, implicitly-trained subjects
showed a LAN/P600 pattern whereas explicit subjects continued to show
a N400 pattern. These results suggest that a change in L2 processing to
L1-like processing can take place, but that it may tend to occur only
under certain types of L2 training.
E 35
BOLD SIGNAL RESPONSE TO IMPLICIT SYNTACTIC
PROCESSING David Caplan1, Gloria Waters2,3, Jennifer Michaud1, Jung
Min Lee1; 1Massachusetts General Hospital, 2Sargent College, 3Boston
University — BOLD signal was measured in sixteen participants a font
change detection task. Participants made timed judgments about whether
all the words in written sentences were in the same font. The syntactic
form of the stimulus sentences was varied: half of the sentences contained an object-extracted relative clause and half contained a subjectextracted relative clause. For each of these stimulus types, half the sentences were presented with all the words in the same font, and half with
one word in a subtly different font. Accuracy was above 85% for all sentence types. RTs showed unimodal distributions for all sentence types,
indicating that the participants processed all sentences similarly, with
some superimposed noise as expected. There were longer RTs to objectthan to subject-extracted sentences, indicating that sentences were processed to the level of syntactic structure, despite this not being required
by the task. BOLD signal increased for the more complex object-extracted
sentences without font changes in Wernicke's area (L STG). This result
must be due to the processing of the sentences, not the use of the results
of this processing to accomplish the task, since the form of the sentence is
irrelevant to the task and uninformative regarding the correct response.
The result thus provides strong evidence that L STG plays a role in the
syntactic processing of object-extracted relative clauses.
E 36
MONITORING OF SUBJECT-VERB AGREEMENT ERRORS IN
COMPREHENSION: AN ERP STUDY Els Severens1, Bernadette, M.
Jansma2, Robert J. Hartsuiker1; 1Ghent University, 2Maastricht University — In
speech production more subject-verb number agreement errors are made
if the head noun phrase contains a number-ambiguous determiner (Hartsuiker, et al., M&C, 2003). This finding has been explained by error monitoring in the comprehension system which would have more difficulties
to detect and covertly filter out errors in the ambiguous sentence. We

Linguistic Processes: Syntax

aimed to find comparable results in a comprehension experiment. Eventrelated potentials were used to examine if ambiguity in the head noun
phrase in combination with the number of the local noun influences sentence comprehension. Participants read sentences like: De straat bij de
kerk/kerken is/zijn mooi [The street (common gender) near the church/
churches is/are beautiful] or Het plein bij de kerk/kerken is/zijn mooi
[The square (neuter gender) near the church/churches is/are beautiful].
In Dutch the neuter gender determiner (het) is always singular; in contrast, the common gender determiner (de) can be singular and plural.
When the local noun was singular we observed a more negative wave
elicited by incorrect verbs compared to correct verbs in the 350-400ms
time-window. This effect was largest when the head noun phrase contained no number ambiguity. When the local noun was plural the waves
were more positive for incorrect verbs than for correct verbs in the 600650ms time-window. This effect was largest when the head noun phrase
contained no number ambiguity. The results demonstrate that the effect
of agreement violations on comprehension is modulated by number
ambiguity. They are therefore compatible with a monitoring account of
number ambiguity effects in production.
E 37
AUDITORY SENTENCE PROCESSING IN ADOLESCENTS WITH
SPECIFIC AND NON-SPECIFIC LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT: ERPS
FOR SEMANTIC AND GRAMMATICAL CONSTRAINTS ON
VERBS Christine Weber-Fox1, Amanda Hampton1, John Spruill, III1, Bruce
Tomblin2; 1Purdue University, 2University of Iowa — Children with specific
language impairment (SLI) exhibit reduced speed and capacity for grammatical processing compared to children with normal language development (e.g., Miller et al., 2001; Weismer & Evans, 2002). Further,
electrophysiological findings in young children with SLI indicate atypical
ERPs for grammatical aspects of visual sentence processing (Neville et al.,
1993). The aim of the current study was to determine whether atypical
linguistic processing persisted into adolescence and how neural activity
patterns reflect different language developmental profiles. We studied
adolescents, aged 14-18 years, diagnosed with: 1) SLI (N=17), 2) non-specific language impairment (NLI) displaying reduced abilities in both verbal and non-verbal skills (N=13), and 3) normal language and non-verbal
abilities (N=17). The diagnosis of each participant in these groups was
stable from kindergarten through 8th grade. Verb-agreement violations
and violations of verb semantics were presented in natural speech. High
sentence judgment accuracy and typical N400 and P600 ERPs were elicited in the normally developing adolescents. In contrast, the adolescents
with SLI and NLI performed less accurately in detecting grammatical and
semantic verb errors. However, while the behavioral performance was
similar for the SLI and NLI groups, their ERPs reflected different underlying processes. Atypical N400s to the verb-agreement violations characterized the NLI group. The SLI group exhibited a reduced N400 for
semantic verb violations over the RH and an absent P600 to verb agreement violations. These findings indicate that the neural functions mediating linguistic processing in adolescents are closely related to their
language and cognitive profiles. [Supported by NIDCD P50DC02746]
E 38
THE STORAGE OF L2 PARSING KNOWLEDGE IN PROCEDURAL
MEMORY: AN ERP STUDY John David Purdy, Karen Froud; Teachers
College, Columbia University — Event related potential (ERP) studies have
shown that an early left anterior negativity (ELAN) is generated in
response to word-category violations, and that this response occurs earlier than responses to other types of syntactic violations or to semantic
anomalies. This corresponds to principle-based sentence processing models that posit an initial parse on the basis of word-category information.
The ELAN component has not, however, been detected in studies in
which an L2 learner is presented with a sentence containing a word-category violation. In the present study, sentences containing word-category
violations were presented to L1 Chinese learners of L2 English. The sentences were presented to L2 learners in two conditions: correct (e.g., The

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

candidate should honestly answer the question) and incorrect (e.g., *The
candidate should honest answer the question). The Chinese speakers
generated an ELAN-like component in response to word-category violations, although the component peaked about 30 ms later than the nativespeaker ELAN. This result suggests that the apparent difficulty Chinese
speakers have in adhering to the phrase-structure rules of English is not
due to an inability to perform an initial parse on the basis of word category. We propose that L2 learners may be utilizing a domain-general
probabilistic learning mechanism to learn rules of the L2, and are storing
these rules in procedural memory. However, the parsing knowledge
made available by this mechanism may not be treated as linguistic; consequently, activation levels of these non-linguistic responses to word-category violations may not be high enough to generate native-like syntactic
structures.
E 39
IMPACT OF PHONOLOGIC MARKERS IN LEARNING SUBJECTVERB AGREEMENT IN FRENCH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE.
EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Cheryl FrenckMestre1, Haydee Carrasco2; 1Laboratoire Parole et Langage, Centre National de
Recherche Scientifique, 2Université de Provence — The study aimed to evaluate the impact of the phonological realisation of morpho-syntactic errors
in subject-verb agreement in French as a second language. Changes in
brain activity were recorded in Hispanic learners of French when reading
visually presented sentences that were either correct or contained subjectverb agreement errors which were either phonologically realized (je
mangez, etc) or not (je manges). Comparisons between regular and irregular verbs (je vas) were also performed (note, for irregular verbs, morpho-syntactic errors were always phonologically realized). Results from
previous studies in second language learners have shown both an N400
and P600 effect to morpho-syntactic errors in sentence contexts (Osterhout et al., 2005). In native French, Largy and Fayol (1999) found that
phonological markers facilitate the learning of subject-verb agreement in
French children and reduce production errors in French adults. Our previous ERP results with native French speakers show greater sensitivity to
morpho-syntactic errors when these errors are phonologically realized
than when silent, with a larger P600 response for the former (FrenckMestre et al. 2006). The results reported here, for native Spanish speakers
learning French show both a LAN and a P600 effect to morpho-syntactic
errors. This was true for both regular and irregular verbs, and was independent of phonological realisation, i.e. the processing of subject-verb
agreement was not impacted by phonological realisation for these L2
readers. In conclusion, phonological markers might not be relevant cues
in acquiring subject-verb agreement for Hispanic learners of French, in
contrast to our ERP results obtained for native French readers.
E 40
ERP EVIDENCE ON THE INTERACTION OF METRICAL AND
SYNTACTIC PROCESSING: THE CASE OF THE P600 Sonja
A.
Kotz, Maren Schmidt-Kassow; Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and
Brain Sciences — Based on previous observations that metrical regularities of a given language influence auditory language processing in general and syntactic processing in particular (Schmidt-Kassow & Kotz,
2006), we further investigated the interaction of metrical and syntactic
processing. Rather than listening to metrical errors, participants had to
detect metrically deviant, but possible syllable stress patterns in a metrically predictable sentence context. In addition, we tested syntactically
deviant, metrically and syntactically deviant and metrically and syntactically correct sentences. All sentences included two syllabic words (first
syllable stress). Metrically deviant sentences included a tri-syllabic verb
with second syllable stress. Syntactic deviation was induced by a morphological inflectional error in the critical verb (syllable stress correct)
and a double violation contained a metrically and syntactically deviant
verb. Results from a metric judgment task show a P600 elicited by all
three deviation types. In a syntactic judgment task only the syntactic and
double deviation elicited a P600. Comparable to our previous results,

165

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

metric deviations elicit a P600, especially when attention is directed
towards the deviation. These data underline the importance of metrical
information during auditory language processing and suggest that the
P600 is not syntax specific per se. The data will be discussed with regard
to a language processing model (Friederici & Kotz, 2003) and extended
by suggestions from the Dynamic Attention Theory of Large and Jones
(1999).
E 41
MONITORING OF LANGUAGE PERCEPTION: P600 EFFECTS OF
SENTENCE-PICTURE MISMATCHES Constance Th Vissers, Herman
H. Kolk, Nan van de Meerendonk, Dorothee J. Chwilla; NICI Radboud
University of Nijmegen — We propose that monitoring for errors not only
occurs in language production but also in language perception. When a
sentence brings forth two incompatible representations, a conflict occurs
triggering reanalysis, meant to check for possible processing errors. This
monitoring response is reflected in a P600 effect (Kolk et al., 2003; van
Herten et al. 2005, 2006). In support of this, Vissers and colleagues (2006)
found a P600 effect after misspellings in sentences in which the correct
word was highly expected; no such effect was obtained when this word
was not expected. Presumably, the subject in the first condition checks
whether the misspelled word has been misread. Here, the monitoring
theory was further tested. We argued that, when a subject sees a picture
and subsequently reads a sentence which does not match the picture
meaning, the natural response will be to reprocess the sentence to check
whether it has been misread. We presented pictures of spatial arrays (e.g,
a triangle above a square), followed by a sentence giving a true or false
description of the picture. We predicted that a mismatch between picture
and sentence meaning elicits a P600 effect. This was tested by recording
ERPs from 27 sites while participants read sentences matching or mismatching a preceding picture. The ERPs for picture-sentence mismatches
showed a P600 effect relative to those for the picture sentence matches.
This P600 effect was maximal at central/posterior sites. These findings
further bolster our claim that monitoring occurs in language perception
and is reflected by P600.
E 42
MEG CORRELATES OF GRAMMATICAL PROCESSING IN
GERMAN LEARNERS OF DUTCH Douglas Davidson, Frauke Hellwig,
Peter Indefrey; F. C. Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Max Planck
Institute for Psycholinguistics — Previous electrophysiological research on
multilingual sentence processing has shown evidence of responses to
grammatical violations relatively early during language learning. We
examined evoked-field responses to constituent-order violations in adult
German learners (n=13) of Dutch early during their acquisition of Dutch.
Sentences were presented one word at a time (800 ms/word) followed by
a scene in a sentence-picture matching task over a series of three recording sessions at the start, the end, and one month following their L2
coursework. The average evoked field and the planar gradient of the
evoked field to word order violations averaged over the three sessions
showed a significant violation response on left hemisphere sensors
200:400 ms after the violation onset. The results suggest that responses to
grammatical violations can emerge relatively quickly during acquisition
of a second language.
E 43
OBJECT SHIFT AND EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Mikael Roll,
Merle Horne, Magnus Lindgren; Lund University — Swedish Object Shift is
restricted to unstressed pronouns. Sentences where an object pronoun
precedes a sentence adverb, such as Han åt den inte ‘(lit.) He ate it not’,
are thus well-formed, whereas sentences with a full noun object preceding a sentence adverb, such as Han åt sylt/sylten inte ‘(lit.) He ate jam/
the jam not’, are illformed. Explanations for this word category restriction
have been based on either morphosyntactic features involved in Object
Shift or semantic/pragmatic features the process is associated with. In an
attempt to obtain experimental support for one of these explanations
using Event-Related Potentials, the brain reaction to sentences violating

166

Linguistic Processes: Syntax

the word category restriction was tested. A significantly enhanced Left
Anterior Negativity (LAN) was found 300-500 ms after onset of the critical word in sentences where an indefinite full noun object violated the
restriction as compared to control sentences. This finding supports a morphosyntactically based explanation of the word category restriction on
Object Shift.
E 44
DOES ADJECTIVE PROCESSING IN L2 DEPEND ON LEARNERS’
NATIVE LANGUAGE? EVIDENCE FROM ERPS. Alice Foucart1,2,
Cheryl Frenck-Mestre3,2; 1University of Edinburgh, 2University of Provence,
France, 3CNRS — The present experiment is part of an ERP study (Foucart & Frenck-Mestre, CNS 2006), which examines two opposed linguistic
models concerning SLA. According to the Failed Functional Features
Hypothesis (Hawkins & Chan, 1997; Hawkins & Franceschina, 2004),
grammatical features that are not triggered in the native language are no
longer available to late L2 acquirers. In opposition, the full transfer full
access hypothesis (FTFA) claims that new features present in L2 can be
acquired, but require sufficient exposure (Schwartz & Sprouse, 1994,
1996; White, 1989). In the present study, we compared the brain activity
of French native speakers, German-French and English-French L2 learners during gender agreement violations on pre-posed and attributive
adjectives in French. Native speakers showed a P600 effect in case of gender-concord violations (larger for pre-posed adjectives than for attributive adjectives). German-French learners did not show any effect in case
of gender violations. However, it is important to note that in German the
plural form of the article and adjective is common both for feminine and
masculine words; the nul-effect could be due to an inappropriate transfer
from L1 to L2. English-French learners revealed an N400 effect to gender
concord violations on pre-posed adjectives, but did not show any effect
for attributive adjectives. This suggests that English speakers are sensitive to gender violations in their second language. These results support
the FTFA as well as other models claiming that non-native speakers can
achieve native-like grammatical processing, even when the L2 is learnt
later in life (Herschensohn, 2000).
E 45
AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY OF THE PROCESSING
OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF ANAPHORA Sarah
Callahan1,
Janet
Nicol2, Tracy Love3, David Swinney1; 1University of California, San Diego,
2University of Arizona, Tucson, 3San Diego State University — One influential linguistic account of anaphora (e.g. Hankamer & Sag, 1976; Sag &
Hankamer, 1984) makes a distinction between surface anaphora and
deep anaphora based on the observation that surface anaphors require a
linguistic antecedent while deep anaphors do not. The current study
investigated whether correlates of the surface/deep distinction could be
observed in real-time processing using electrophysiological techniques.
In addition, this study examined whether the processing of verb phrase
(VP) anaphora differed from the processing of noun phrase (NP) anaphora. Participants made plausibility judgments of auditorily-presented
sentences involving surface VP anaphora (e.g. The player shuffled the
deck at the beginning of the game and the dealer did too.), deep VP anaphora (e.g. ... did it too.), or deep NP anaphora (e.g. ... shuffled it too.). In
the implausible version of each sentence, the subject of the second conjunct (e.g. the dealer) was replaced with an inanimate NP (e.g. the fortune). Comparisons of plausible and implausible sentences at the second
subject NP (e.g. dealer/fortune) revealed an N400 and a P600 component
in implausible sentences. Comparisons of the three types of anaphora at
the word “too” showed that the processing of sentences involving both
types of VP anaphora was similar, but differed from the processing of
sentences involving NP anaphora. Implications for theories of the processing of anaphora are discussed.

Perceptual Processes: Multisensory Processing

E 46
WORKING MEMORY AND SENTENCE COMPREHENSION
DURING ARTICULATORY SUPPRESSION Gregory
Hickok,
Corianne Rogalsky; UC Irvine — Broca's area has long been implicated in
sentence processing, but its specific role continues to be hotly debated.
Early evidence implicated Broca's area in syntactic processing, however
recent lesion and imaging data suggest that at least part of Broca's area
contributes to sentence comprehension as a verbal working memory
resource. The present study focuses on one conceptualization of working
memory, namely that the comprehension of complex sentences requires
verbal information to be stored in something like Baddeley's phonological loop. If in fact a phonological loop is necessary for sentence comprehension, particularly the comprehension of syntactically complex
sentences, comprehension performance should decrease as a function of
sentence complexity during articulatory suppression. Subjects were
administered a sentence-to-picture matching test during both articulation
and manual tasks. Sentences presented were of varying complexity and
semantically reversible. An interaction between suppression task and
complexity was found. This interaction can be attributed to a significant
difference between performance during articulatory and manual suppression for the most complex sentence type, object-relative clause sentences. No significant differences between suppression types were found
for active, passive, or subject-relative clause sentences. These behavioral
results reflect involvement of a phonological component of working
memory, possibly supported by Broca's area, in high-load sentence processing situations. Imaging studies will assess the anatomical locus of
this effect.

Perceptual Processes: Multisensory
Processing
E 47
AUDIOVISUAL SPEECH INTEGRATION IN AUTISM SPECTRUM
DISORDER: EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS
Maurice Magnee1,2, Beatrice de Gelder2,3,4, Herman van Engeland1, Chantal
Kemner1,5; 1University Medical Center Utrecht, 2Tilburg University,
3Massachusetts General Hospital, 4Harvard Medical School, 5Maastricht
University — Background: Integration of information from multiple sensory sources is an important prerequisite for successful social behavior,
especially during face-to-face conversation. It has been suggested that
communicative impairments among patients with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) might be caused by an inability to integrate synchronously
presented visual and auditory cues. Methods: We investigated audiovisual integration of speech stimuli among thirteen high-functioning adult
patients with ASD and age- and IQ matched controls using electroencephalography, focusing both on early pre-phonological, as well as late
phonological integration. Results: We show dissociation in integrational
abilities in the patient group, with a deficit specifically related to the late
integration of phonological information. Conclusions: Patients with ASD
are able to integrate visual and auditory cues at an early level of information processing. However, impairments in the higher order integration of
phonological information may very well contribute to the communicative
disabilities which are typical for the disorder.

Linguistic Processes: Lexicon
E 48
THE ROLE OF INHIBITION IN LEXICAL SELECTION: EVIDENCE
FROM NONFLUENT APHASIA Jason E. Crowther, Kelly A. Biegler,
Randi C. Martin; Rice University — Previous studies have reported that
aphasic patients with frontal lesions demonstrate increasing errors in
naming pictures blocked by semantic category compared to pictures

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

drawn from different categories. The present study assessed whether
these exaggerated semantic blocking effects should be attributed to a deficit in inhibiting lexical representations during word production or a deficit in inhibiting semantic representations. If the deficit involved
semantic representations, then similar results were expected in comprehension. Two nonfluent aphasic patients, ML and AR (showing evidence
of a verbal inhibition deficit in other studies), a fluent aphasic patient,
LW, and older controls were tested on several semantic blocking tasks.
In two picture-naming tasks, controls and patients showed increasing
semantic interference in latencies across repeated presentations in the
semantically blocked condition, with an exaggerated effect for the nonfluent patients. In two auditory word-picture matching tasks, only the
nonfluent patients with an inhibition deficit showed significantly increasing semantic blocking effects across repeated presentations. It was
hypothesized that the patients may have used a naming strategy in the
comprehension task, that is, matching the name of the picture to the spoken word. To eliminate naming as a strategy in a comprehension task,
subjects performed an auditory word-picture associate matching task
(e.g., “kennel”- “dog”). Little evidence was found for increasing semantic
blocking effects for the nonfluent patients. The results supported the
notion that the nonfluent patients’ deficit is specific to inhibiting lexical
representations, with the mechanism presumably only involved during
production in selecting from among several activated lexical competitors.
E 49
EFFECTS OF FORMAL, LEXICAL AND SEMANTIC PROPERTIES
ON BRAIN ACTIVATION IN VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION: A
MULTI-PARAMETER FMRI STUDY Catherine-Marie Longtin1, Olaf
Hauk1, Mike A. Ford2, Friedemann Pulvermüller1, William D. MarslenWilson1, Matthew H. Davis1; 1Medical Research Council, UK, 2Cambridge
University, UK — We investigated brain activation modulated by different types of psycholinguistic information processing. Using a design similar to a previous ERP study (Hauk et al., NeuroImage, 2006), fMRI data
were collected from 15 participants who made lexical decisions on 300
monomorphemic words varying in their formal, lexical, and semantic
properties, as well as on matched pseudowords. Eleven psycholinguistic
variables were condensed using principal component analysis, yielding
five orthogonal factors: word length, orthographic typicality, lexical frequency/familiarity, semantic coherence, and imageability. Multiple
regressions with brain activation were performed for each variable and
subject. Regression coefficients were then entered into the group analysis
to assess the significance of a linear relationship between brain activation
and the psycholinguistic variables. Word frequency showed a negative
correlation with activation in the left fusiform gyrus and left inferior frontal cortex. These regions also showed stronger activation for
pseudowords compared to words. Imageability produced a negative correlation in the left middle temporal gyrus, whereas semantic coherence
yielded activation in inferior temporal and parietal lobes. Overall these
results are consistent with our previous findings obtained with EEG and
source localisation, and suggest that visual word recognition networks
are distributed over multiple brain areas modulated by different word
variables, and therefore likely reflect distinct but interacting processes.
E 50
AUDITORY PROCESSING OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF PSEUDOWORDS: AN EVENT-RELATED FMRI STUDY Tim Raettig, Angela
D. Friederici, Sonja A. Kotz; Max-Planck-Institute for Human Cognitive and
Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — Imaging results on real word and
pseudo-word processing have been heterogeneous, allowing only cautious claims about the neuroanatomical loci of lexico-semantic processing. In order to shed more light on this issue, we examined the impact of
different procedures used to create non-lexical stimuli on the outcome of
comparisons between such items and matched real words. We anticipated that the degree to which a pseudo-word can be lexicalized determines how word-like it is processed. To verify this idea, we tested
pseudo-words that were either transparently or opaquely derived from

167

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

real words or phonotactically illegal in an event-related fMRI paradigm,
utilizing a lexical decision task. All types of pseudo-words elicited a
stronger hemodynamic brain response than real words in the bilateral
superior temporal gyri. Real words produced stronger brain activations
than pseudo-words in the bilateral angular gyri, the bilateral posterior
middle temporal gyri, the rostral and caudal cingulate gyrus and the precuneus. When contrasted to opaque pseudo-words, transparent pseudowords elicited a stronger brain response in the same temporo-parietal
regions as real words. Our results provide further evidence for an
involvement of the bilateral posterior middle temporal and angular gyrus
in post-lexical semantic processing. The data also indicate that transparently derived pseudo-words are processed similarly to real words. In
contrast, post-lexical semantic operations are blocked when opaquely
derived pseudo-words are processed.
E 51
COGNITIVE AND NEURAL CORRELATES OF FAST, EFFORTLESS
WORD LEARNING: AN MEG STUDY Christian
Dobel, Markus
Junghöfer, Benedikt Klauke, Caterina Breitenstein, Pienie Zwitserlood;
University of Münster — Our study demonstrates how words of a novel
language are rapidly and without effort integrated into an existing conceptual-lexical system. Untutored language learning involved coincidental presence of particular sound patterns with a specific object. This
procedure was termed statistical learning (e.g. Breitenstein & Knecht,
2002). If words have to be learned, sound and pictures were paired more
frequently that in a non-learned condition. Crossmodal priming before
and after training revealed that stable connections between newly
learned words and objects came into existence. We further explored the
nature of these learning processes in an MEG study, comparing M400
responses to native and novel words before and after training. A clear
M400 response was visible upon picture presentation, more strongly
expressed over the left hemisphere. This response was modulated within
the native language by amount of semantic relatedness in both pre and
post test. The novel words elicited the strongest M400 response. Most
importantly, this response was strongly reduced after the statistical learning procedure in which words and objects were frequently paired. In the
non-learned condition no M400 reduction was found. Localizing the
responsible brain regions with Minimum Norm methods demonstrated
the involvement of the medial-inferior temporal lobe of the left hemisphere. Thus, time-locked brain measures such as M400 thus provide a
neural index of rapid integration of novel words into existing networks of
lexical and conceptual representations.
E 52
BRAIN
MECHANISMS
OF
WORD
VERSUS
PICTURE
PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM A FMRI STUDY IN CHINESE
Xiaoyi Wang1, Nan Hu1, Haiyan Zhou1, Yue Xu1, Jie Lu2, Hua Shu1; 1Beijing
Normal University, Beijing, China, 2Xuan Wu Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China — The goal of this research was to investigate
the neural basis of specific components of word and picture processing
and their interaction by a 2(Chinese word versus picture) x 2(dangerous
judgment versus covert naming task) design. Subjects were asked to
name silently or make dangerous judgment with (1) two-syllable Chinese
words (e.g. “&#32769;&#34382;”, tiger) and (2) the corresponding pictures. The variables such as the category (animals, tools and vegetables/
fruits), frequency of words, the familiarity and the age of acquisition, in
the materials were counterbalanced and matched among the conditions.
All images were acquired using a 1.5 T Siemens scanner. The results
showed that compared with picture tasks, the word tasks produced activation mostly in the bilateral occipital lobe, including the fusiform gyrus.
The size of activation (BOLD signal) in two picture tasks was equal in the
left and right, but strong left lateralization in the word tasks. It indicated
the selective specialization for word recognition in left fusiform gyrus
(VWFA). Note here we found no activation in the posterior superior temporal lobe in both picture and word tasks, which was always regarded as
the vital area responsible for orthography to phonology conversation in

168

Linguistic Processes: Lexicon

alphabetic language. Moreover, a significantly more activation was found
in left inferior frontal gyrus (BA45) and insula in judgment task, but not
in naming task, which is consistent with the former studies in the semantic judgment tasks. These results suggested that for Chinese readers,
word processing was different from those in English, and also from picture processing in the underlying anatomical mechanisms.
E 53
THE
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES
OF
MORPHOLOGICAL PRIMING IN LANGUAGE PRODUCTION
Dirk Koester1, Rick Giesbers1, Niels O. Schiller2,1; 1Maastricht University,
2Leiden University, Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition — Knowledge
about the (morphological) make-up of words is (can be) essential for
speech production of complex words ("hand.appel" [eating apple] not
"han.dappel"; dots indicate syllable boundaries). Recently, the production
of morphologically complex words in German has been shown to facilitate the subsequent production of picture names that were part of the
previously produced complex words (Dohmes et al. [2004]. Brain & Language). The (facilitative) effects were interpreted as morphological priming. In two experiments, we tried to replicate the effect in another
language, Dutch, and to determine the electrophysiological correlates of
morphological priming. Previous studies in language comprehension
suggested that the brains’ N400 response may reflect morphological processes. A long-lag word-picture priming design was used to collect
behavioural data in Experiment 1 and event-related potentials (ERPs) in
Experiment 2. While behavioural priming effects confirmed previous
results and extended these to another language, preliminary analyses of
Experiment 2 yielded large positive going ERPs before speech onset. The
production of morphologically primed picture names seems to be dissociated from the production of unprimed picture names at more frontal
electrode sites. These findings suggest a morphological processing component in speech production that cannot be reduced to semantic or form
processing. Furthermore, the ERP effects that are related to morphological processes appear to be different for language production and comprehension.
E 54
NEURAL PROCESSING OF RULE-LIKE AND IRREGULAR
PATTERNS IN LANGUAGE: AN FMRI STUDY OF PAST TENSE
PRIMING Aneta Kielar1, Marc F. Joanisse1, Randy Lynn Newman2;
1University of Western Ontario, 2Acadia University — Much of the debate
about rule-like patterns in language has focused on the status of regular
vs. irregular past tenses in English. While studies have found differences
in how such forms are processed, it remains unclear whether such data
can provide unequivocal support for a dual-systems model; indeed, such
findings are equally compatible with the connectionist view that all forms
are processed via semantic, phonological and orthographic constraints.
On this theory, differences in past tenses arise as a result of the degree to
which verbs rely on information about either form (phonology/orthography) or meaning (semantics). The present study directly tested the predictions of this theory using a crossmodal priming task and fMRI at 4T.
Fifteen adult participants were scanned as they performed a lexical decision task. The regularity of prime-target pairs was manipulated in order
to identify priming-related fMRI signal suppression associated with regular (baked-bake), irregular (sang-sing) and part regular verbs (sleptsleep), compared to monomorphemic phonologically (army-arm) or
semantically (jacket-coat) related pairs and nonwords. A key finding was
the observation of priming effects for irregulars in both LIFG and LMTG
regions, but a failure to identify similar effects for part-regular forms. We
argue this finding contradicts the predictions of a dual mechanism
approach, that all irregulars should show equal priming effects. The
results are instead consistent with the view that the regular/irregular distinction is graded, such that forms are processed in a distributed set of
brain regions that encode form and meaning information that is weighted
differently across verb types.

Linguistic Processes: Lexicon

E 55
A FACTOR ANALYTICAL APPROACH TO HEMISPHERE
DIFFERENCES IN LEXICAL PROCESSING Suzanne Welcome1, Laura
Halderman2, Janelle Julagay1, Christiana Leonard3, Christine Chiarello1;
1University of California, Riverside, 2University of Pittsburgh, 3University of
Florida Brain Institute — The left and right hemispheres may each contribute to word recognition in somewhat different ways. Large-scale studies
afford the opportunity of employing factor analyses to assess whether
there might be a different factor structure for words presented to the LVF
and RVF. To the extent that each hemisphere is employing different
mechanisms to recognize words, RVF and LVF scores should load on different factors. The current study tested 110 individuals (55 female) on
seven divided visual field tasks (word and nonword naming, lexical decision, masked word recognition, semantic decision, category and verb
generation). Reaction time and accuracy scores for each VF and each task
were submitted to a factor analysis using an oblique rotation. A six-factor
solution was obtained which accounted for 87% of the total variance. The
findings supported both hemisphere differences and similarities in the
processing of single words. For RT, the factor structure for both hemispheres differentiated between tasks requiring semantic retrieval,
unmasked and masked word identification. However, for accuracy RVF
and LVF scores segregated into different factors. For the RVF most of the
tasks loaded on a single factor, while for the LVF two factors differentiated between tasks with a single correct response (word naming, lexical
decision, masked word recognition, semantic decision) and tasks with
more than one correct response (nonword naming, category and verb
generation). This suggests that increases in the number of response alternatives affects word retrieval accuracy only within the right hemisphere.
E 56
COMPETITION
EFFECTS
IN
LEXICAL
AMBIGUITY
PROCESSING Ekaterini Klepousniotou1, Vincent Gracco2, G. Bruce Pike1;
1MNI, McGill University, 2School of Communication Sciences and Disorders,
McGill University — The present study investigated the meaning/sense
competition effects in lexical ambiguity processing. Under the theoretical
assumption that lexical ambiguity is not a homogeneous phenomenon,
but rather that it is subdivided into homonymy and polysemy, the patterns of meaning activation (and competition) of ambiguous words were
explored. The two categories of lexical ambiguity (i.e., homonymy and
polysemy) were further subdivided into two types each: balanced (e.g.,
“panel”) and unbalanced (e.g., “pen”) homonymy; metaphorical (e.g.,
“lip”) and metonymic (e.g., “rabbit”) polysemy. Single-word priming lexical decision and semantic judgment tasks were used in which the ambiguous words served as primes and were followed by three types of targets:
a word associated with their dominant meaning; a word associated with
their subordinate meaning; and an unrelated word. It was hypothesized
that the greatest competition effects would be observed for balanced
homonymous words that have multiple unrelated meanings of approximately equal frequency, leading to competition and delayed reaction
times compared to unrelated targets. On the other hand, metonymically
polysemous words were expected to show no competition effects given
that their multiple senses are interrelated, are stored together and, thus,
do not compete for activation. Overall, the results supported our hypotheses that there are stronger competition effects for balanced homonymous words that have multiple unrelated meanings of equal frequency,
while for unbalanced homonymous and metaphorically polysemous
words, dominant meanings were preferentially activated. On the other
hand, for metonymically polysemous words that have multiple interrelated senses, both senses were activated and no competition effects were
observed.
E 57
PARAMETRIC STUDY OF VISUAL WORD PROCESSING
COMBINING MEG AND FMRI Asaf Bachrach1, John Gabrieli1, Susan
Gabrieli1, Alec Marantz1,2; 1MIT, 2NYU — We report the findings of a
multi-modal imaging study of visual word processing designed to test

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

the possibility of analyzing single trials of imaging experiments via correlations with continuous stimulus variables (Hauk et al 2006). Subjects
performance on a lexical decision task was monitored using Magnetoencephalography (MEG) and trial related Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) (two separate sessions). We use a parametric design
where each item was coded for 'string properties' (length, average bigram
count and size of orthographic neighborhood) and 'lemma properties'
(token frequency and imagability). Parameters were drawn from The
English Lexicon Project (Balota et al 2002) and MRC Psycholinguistic
Database (Wilson 1988). Words were chosen to vary continuously along
all stimulus dimensions and such that the stimulus variables themselves
were maximally decorrelated. The fMRI data provided spatial localization of parameter-related activation while the MEG data was used for
temporal localization, with individual trial data correlated with stimulus
variables ms by ms. Furthermore, individual subject structural MRI and
fMRI data were used to constrain the MEG forward model (MNE software, Martinos Center MGH). Preliminary results suggest that early
visual activation (M100, M170) localized at the occipital lobes and left
fusiform gyrus (McCandliss et al. 2003) correlates with string properties.
Lemma properties seem to correlate with later MEG response components (M350 and others), localized to medial and superior temporal as
well as frontal cortices. The analyses support the possibility of correlational parametric designs (continuous variables, no binning) for neurolinguistic research.
E 58
THE VISUAL M170 AND MORPHOLOGICAL DECOMPOSITION
Eytan Zweig, Liina Pylkkänen; New York University — The effect of morphological complexity on visual word processing was investigated in
three MEG experiments where we compared affixed words to orthographically controlled monomorphemic words in a lexical decision task.
In experiment 1, we contrasted suffixed words such as ‘farmer’ to orthographic controls such as ‘winter’. Visual stimuli were presented to 16 participants while magnetic fields were recorded with a whole-head MEG
system. We found an effect of morphological complexity in the M170,
whose left hemisphere generator has previously been associated with letter string processing. Surprisingly however, our M170 effect was right
lateral. One explanation of this is that the effect arises because the left
side of only the complex words contained an existing English stem. Thus,
the effect could have been driven by early stem-recognition in the contralateral (i.e., right) hemisphere. Experiment 2 tested this by comparing
prefixed words (`refill’) to orthographic controls (‘resume’), thus flipping
the relative placement of the stem and affix in the word. While the results
did replicate the effect in the right hemisphere (suggesting it is an effect
of morphological complexity), a similar effect also appeared in the left
hemisphere (consistent with a stem-recognition effect). This suggests that
perhaps both factors interact. To separate them from each other, Experiment 3 uses the same stimuli as Experiment 1 but directly manipulates
visual presentation, presenting the words in either the left or right visual
fields, and also foveally but rotated 90 degrees clockwise.
E 59
NOUNS
VS.
VERBS:
AN
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATION OF THE PROCESSING OF GRAMMATICAL
CLASS INFORMATION Stavroula-Thaleia Kousta1, Horacio A. Barb1,
Leun Otten2, Gabriella Vigliocco1; 1University College London, 2Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London — Is grammatical class
information an organising principle of lexical knowledge? Evidence bearing on this question is mixed, compounded by the fact that semantic correlates of grammatical class have often not been controlled for (e.g the
fact that verbs tend to denote actions and nouns tend to denote objects).
In two experiments, we manipulated grammatical class (noun vs. verb)
and semantic (motor vs. sensory) information in order to tease apart
semantic and syntactic contributions to grammatical class. Event-related
potentials (ERPs) were recorded while native Italian speakers read single
words and short phrases (determiner + noun or pronoun + verb). ERPs

169

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

for single-word reading revealed differences both for grammatical class
and semantic distinctions, with voltage amplitudes more positive for
verbs and motor words, as compared to nouns and sensory words
respectively. Interestingly, these two effects were not dissociable in terms
of scalp distribution (posterior sites) or latency (300-450 ms after word
onset). Later on (after 500 ms), an interaction between both variables was
observed, whereby only motor verbs differed from the other conditions.
For phrase reading, early differences (starting at 150 ms) were found
between function words (frontal negativity associated with pronouns as
compared to determiners), followed by differences between nouns and
verbs (verbs more negative than nouns, between 275-375 ms). Overall,
these results highlight the role of semantic variables in the distinction
between nouns and verbs, as well as the effect of syntactic context in their
processing.
E 60
GENDER AGREEMENT TRANSFER DURING SENTENCE
PROCESSING
IN
EARLY
LANGUAGE
LEARNERS;
AN
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY Katherine J. Midgley1,2,3, Nicole
Y. Y. Wicha4, Phillip J. Holcomb1, Jonathan Grainger3; 1Tufts University,
2Université de Provence, 3CNRS, 4University of Texas at San Antonio — We
predicted that at an early stage of English acquisition, L1 French speakers
should show sensitivity to L1 gender during L2 sentence processing. To
assess this we exploited that fact that French possessive determiners are
gender marked and must agree with the gender of the noun they modify
and not the gender of the anaphoric referent as in English. We predicted
that French speakers might perceive a gender agreement violation on
such items as "his shoe" ("his" being masculine and the translation equivalent of "shoe" in French being feminine) and that this could have an
effect on the P600, shown in previous studies to be a marker of agreement
violations. French speakers in their second year of English studies were
presented with grammatically correct RSVP sentences in English and
asked to read for comprehension. Critical nouns were preceded by possessive determiners that either agreed with or disagreed with the gender
of the translation equivalents in French. (e.g., “Barbara saw her shoe
under the bed.” (OK condition) “Peter saw his shoe under the bed.” (perceivable gender agreement violation or PGAV condition)). The electroencephalogram was recorded at 28 scalp sites and event related potentials
were computed off-line to the two conditions. A positivity was observed
between 400 and 700 ms post stimulus onset to PGAV items. This positivity is more pronounced at anterior sites and over the right hemisphere.
Our results suggest that grammatical gender associated with nouns from
L1 can influence how these items are processed during sentence comprehension in L2.

Linguistic Processes: Other
E 61
AN ERP STUDY OF PROFICIENCY IN SECOND LANGUAGE
Harriet W. Bowden1, Cristina Sanz1, Karsten Steinhauer2, Michael T.
Ullman1; 1Georgetown University, 2McGill University — What are the neurocognitive mechanisms of late second language (L2) acquisition and use,
and do these differ from first language (L1)? How does L2 experience
and/or proficiency affect L2 neurocognition? It is the goal of the current
study to shed light on these questions, focusing on Spanish as an L1 and
L2. Specifically, we examine the neurocognition of Spanish L2 at different
levels of experience/proficiency (low, medium, and very high), as compared to Spanish L1. Low experience/proficiency learners have approximately 2 semesters of classroom Spanish; medium experience/
proficiency learners have 6-8 semesters of classroom Spanish plus 1-2
semesters immersion; very high experience/proficiency learners have 6-8
semesters of classroom Spanish plus multiple years of full immersion.
Unlike in many other neurocognitive studies, L2 proficiency is not only
self-rated, but is also measured with two proficiency assessment instru-

170

Linguistic Processes: Other

ments: the Simulated Oral Proficiency Interview and the Elicited Imitation task. Event-related potentials (ERPs) are used to examine
neurocognitive processing of (visually-presented) Spanish sentences in a
violation paradigm, with violations of lexical-semantics, phrase structure,
gender, number, and regular and irregular present-tense inflection. Preliminary results suggest that L1 ERP components observed in other L1s
(i.e., N400s for lexical-semantic violations and LANs+P600s for phrase
structure violations) are also observed in L1 Spanish; L2 Spanish learners
at low experience/proficiency, however, show a non L1-like pattern.
Implications for neurocognitive models of L2 (e.g., the declarative/procedural model of Ullman, the shallow-structure hypothesis of Clahsen) will
be discussed.
E 62
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN LANGUAGE AND ATTENTION
SYSTEMS: ATTENTION EFFECTS ON EARLY LEXICAL
PROCESSING Yury Shtyrov1, Teija Kujala2, Friedemann Pulvermuller1;
1MRC Cognition & Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, 2Cognitive Brain
Research Unit, University of Helsinki, Finland — The mismatch negativity
(MMN) reflects activation of neural memory traces for spoken words.
Memory trace activation leads to an enhanced MMN response to meaningful words as opposed to senseless matched pseudowords. This lexical
MMN enhancement was found in passive oddball designs and was therefore suggested to be automatic and attention-independent. To test this,
we systematically varied the level of attention by using a stimulus detection task and recorded MMN responses to a set of phonologically and
acoustically balanced words and pseudowords using a multi-deviant
paradigm. Under non-attend conditions, the word-elicited MMN (peaking at ~120 ms after the words could be uniquely recognized) was significantly larger than that to pseudowords, confirming early activation of
lexical memory traces. However, when attention was directed towards
the stimuli, such word-pseudoword difference in the MMN was not any
longer present, even with a trend to pseudoword advantage at ~190ms.
Whereas MMNs to words seemed unchanged by attentional variation,
the first phase of the pseudoword response was significantly enhanced
by attention. At later times, attention significantly modulated a positive
deflection at ~230ms and a second negative wave at ~370ms for all stimuli. The data indicate that the early word processing is not affected by
attentional demands and may thus indeed be automatic with attention
effects on lexical processing accumulating at latencies above ~200ms.
Lexical enhancement of the MMN seems specific to conditions where the
subjects’ attention is directed away from the stimuli. These effects may be
explained in terms of the strength of cortical feedback control.
E 63
SELECTIVE DEGRADATION OF LEXICAL AND CROSS-FORMAT
OBJECT-TO-WORD PRIMING IN PRIMARY PROGRESSIVE
APHASIA Emily Rogalski, Marsel Mesulam, Fred Rademaker, Sandra
Weintraub; Northwestern University Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimers
Disease Center — An object naming impairment is the single most common feature of Primary Progressive Aphasia (PPA). In order to explore
the nature of this deficit, repetition priming effects for words and pictures
were examined. Nineteen PPA patients and 18 healthy elderly controls
classified serially presented words and pictures as natural versus manmade while reaction times were recorded. Results demonstrated that
healthy elderly control subjects showed a priming effect for both withinformat (word-word, picture-picture) and cross-format (picture-word,
word-picture) pairs. Patients and controls demonstrated comparable
priming effects for picture-picture identity priming, implying that
implicit processing can be relatively unaffected in PPA when the stimuli
are non-lexical. In the cross-format trials, PPA patients showed priming
effects for the word-picture but not picture-word pairs. PPA patients’
failure to elicit a priming effect in the picture-word condition suggests a
deficit in constructing automatic (implicit) object-to-lexical associations.
A degradation of signal-to-noise ratios at the level of lexical but not object
representations can be invoked to explain these results and may provide

Linguistic Processes: Other

a general mechanism for word-finding and naming deficits in PPA. This
explanation is consistent with the partial and selective loss of neurons
within components of the language network.
E 64
CEREBRAL CORRELATES OF PHONOLOGICAL AND VISUAL
ATTENTIONAL PROCESSES IN HEALTHY SKILLED READERS.
AN FMRI STUDY Carole Peyrin1, Monica Baciu2, Cyril Pernet3, Laurent
Lamalle4, Cédric Pichat2, Christoph Segebarth4, Jean-François Démonet1,
Sylviane
Valdois2; 1INSERM U455, Toulouse, France, 2Laboratoire
Psychologie & NeuroCognition, Grenoble, France, 3Center for Cognitive
NeuroImaging, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 3Center for Cognitive
NeuroImaging, Glasgow, United Kingdom — Functional MRI was used to
investigate the functional anatomy of the phonological and visual attentional processes relevant for reading. For this purpose, fourteen French
skilled readers were engaged in a task of rhyme detection relying on phonological processing and in two innovative visual attentional tasks: a lateral masking task addressing selective attention during parafoveal
flanked letter processing and a global report task highlighting the attentional mechanisms involved in letter string processing (i.e., the visual
attention span). Functional MR imaging was performed on a Bruker 3T
MR imager, equipped with echo-planar (EPI) acquisition. Each paradigm
was designed in an event-related mode. Data analyses were performed
by using SPM2 (Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, London, UK). Lateral masking was associated with activation in the left middle occipital gyrus (BA 19) and left superior parietal lobule (BA 7)
suggesting an attention-modulated local processing in these areas. The
global report task activated both inferior frontal/premotor cortex and
angular/middle occipito-temporal gyri (BA 39/19) suggesting that this
task involves divided attention when multiple letters have to be attended
to simultaneously for processing the whole letter sequence. Finally,
rhyme detection selectively activated a frontal-parietal network extending rostrally to the anterior inferior part of the left frontal gyrus (BA 44/
45). These findings provide new insights on the role of parietal regions in
the phonological and visual attentional processes related to reading.
These processes are impaired in dyslexia so that the present results could
be used as control data in future study involving dyslexic participants.
E 65
MORPHO-PHONOLOGICAL AND LEXICAL PROPERTIES OF
SPOKEN WORDS AND THE FRONTO-TEMPORAL LANGUAGE
NETWORK Mirjana Bozic1, Lorraine K. Tyler2, Carolyn McGettigan3,
Billi Randall2, William D. Marslen-Wilson1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain
Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, 2University of Cambridge, 3Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London — Previous research has
established that bilateral temporal and left frontal systems play a key role
in speech comprehension. But there are still major uncertainties about
how these systems operate together to support the dynamic process of
mapping the speech input onto stored lexical representations. In the current MRI study we aimed to isolate lexical processing from the lowerlevel auditory processing of speech, and to investigate how it is modulated by the lexical properties of spoken words. Based on previous evidence (Tyler et al 2005), we hypothesised that simple words are
processed bilaterally, and that an increase in morpho-phonological complexity should trigger a shift to a more left lateralised fronto-temporal
processing network. To test this hypothesis we manipulated the presence
of potential embedded stems and inflectional affixes in a set of single spoken words, and contrasted them against a baseline of envelope-shaped
‘musical rain’(Uppenkamp et al 2006), which shares the complex auditory properties of speech without triggering speech percepts. We found
that simple words activate bilateral temporal regions, anterior and ventro-lateral to the primary auditory cortices. Lexical processing was significantly more left-lateralised for morpho-phonologically complex words.
Both the presence of potential embedded stems and inflectional affixes
activated the left inferior frontal gyrus, and words with embedded stems
also activate its RH homologue. The results confirm that morpho-phono-

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

logical complexity of spoken words crucially influences the response of
the fronto-temporal language processing network. We discuss the findings in terms of structural processing demands due to stem competition
and affix decomposition processes.
E 66
N100 AND P300 RESPONSES TO NATIVE AND NON-NATIVE
VOWELS IN LATE BILINGUALS Paula Garcia, Karen Froud; Teachers
College, Columbia University — This study examines the perception of the
English vowel contrast /i/ vs. /I/ by native Spanish speakers. Only one
of the vowels (/i/) occurs as a phoneme in Spanish. Speech perception
studies have revealed that perception of foreign vowels is influenced by
the phoneme categories in the native language. Some native Spanish
speakers find it difficult to discriminate /i/ and /I/, and they often
report identifying both vowels as a single Spanish vowel. In two auditory oddball paradigms, participants were asked (a) to ignore binaurally
presented English vowel sounds /i/ and /I/, spoken by different speakers (3 male, 3 female) and watch a silent movie while EEG was recorded;
and (b) to attend to the vowels and decide, trial-by-trial, which of the two
was being presented. There were no differences in responses to the different speakers, in any condition. Event-related potential analyses revealed
a more anterior N100 response to the native than the non-native vowels
in the non-attentional condition, though there was no significant amplitude difference between the two (hence, no mismatch negativity effect).
This pattern of responses may be consistent with previous research showing that activation of the auditory what stream is involved in analysis of
phonological features of the speech stream. In the attentional condition,
the P300 showed increased amplitudes in response to the non-native
vowels when compared to the native vowels; this amplitude difference
was not seen in native English-speaking controls, and may provide an
index of allocation of additional attentional resources to a less familiar
sound.
E 67
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THE ROLE OF THE RIGHT
HEMISPHERE IN CAUSAL INFERENCE COMPREHENSION: AN
FMRI INVESTIGATION Chantel Prat, Robert Mason, Marcel Adam Just;
Carnegie Mellon University — Inferential processes are necessary and
prevalent in discourse comprehension.
Neuroimaging studies have
shown that the right hemisphere (RH) plays an important role in inference generation and integration. Recent research suggests that the role of
the RH in discourse processes varies as a function of individual reading
skill (Prat, Long & Baynes, in press). In the current fMRI experiment,
individual differences in the neural underpinnings of causal inferencing
were examined. 18 Carnegie Mellon undergraduates read a total of 40
two-sentence passages. There were 4 conditions, resulting from the
orthogonal manipulation of causal distance between sentences (moderate
versus distant) and connective word cues (presence or absence of a clause
connective like therefore), with 10 passages of each type. Consistent
with previous research, greatest RH activation was observed for moderately related sentences. Presence of a clause connective interacted with
causal distance, causing decreased RH activation in the moderate conditions and increased RH activation in the distant conditions. Individual
differences analyses were conducted, focusing on the moderately related
passages with no connectives which consistently elicited RH activation.
Reliable negative correlations with Nelson-Denny Reading Test scores
were observed in right superior temporal, inferior frontal, and middle
frontal gyri. Specifically, individuals with lower reading skill recruited
RH homologues of left hemisphere (LH) language areas to a greater
extent than did individuals with higher reading skill. No reliable correlations with skill were observed in the LH. These findings extend previous
behavioral research suggesting that the role of the RH in discourse processes is modulated by reading skill.

171

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

E 68
CONCRETENESS EFFECT IN BILNGUALS: AN ERP STUDY
Alexandra Geyer, Phillip Holcomb; Tufts University — Our previous ERP
studies, involving monolingual participants, suggested dissociation
between the processes/representations of words referring to concrete
concepts (e.g., truck) and abstract concepts (e.g., thought). Specifically,
concrete words elicited a larger, more anterior N400 distribution that,
arguably, reflects activity in imagistic processes which are activated by
concrete words and pictures. This finding strongly supports multi-representational/processing models, which assume that there are at least two
different types of semantic representational systems (linguistic and imagistic) and that the concreteness advantage is due to concrete words tapping knowledge in both systems, while abstract words tapping primarily
knowledge in the linguistic system (Paivio, 1986). In the present experiment, we set out to examine whether the same dissociation between concrete and abstract word representations will be present in moderate
proficiency bilinguals’ second language (L2). Participants performed a
concreteness judgment task in two blocks to ensure semantic processing
of all words. Our results revealed that, overall, ERPs elicited by L1 words
were more negative than ERPs elicited by L2 words. In addition, the
N400 component elicited by concrete L1 words starts about 50ms earlier
than the N400 component elicited by concrete words in L2. Likewise, the
P3 component, likely reflecting the concreteness decision process, started
later for L2 than for L1. Our results replicated our previous results in that
in L1, concrete words elicited a more anterior N400 distribution compared to abstract words. Importantly, these differences were also seen in
L2. The findings will be discussed in terms of recent models of bilingual
memory.
E 69
MECHANISMS
UNDERLYING
SPEECH
COMPREHENSION
UNDER ADVERSE LISTENING CONDITIONS: BEHAVIOURAL
AND FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING DATA Jonas
Obleser1,
Richard J.S. Wise2, Sophie K. Scott1; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
University College London, UK, 2MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Hammersith
Hospital, London — Speech comprehension is supported by both acoustic
signal decomposition and semantic context. We report results from
behavioural as well as event-related fMRI studies that look at the psychoacoustic and neural correlates basis of this interaction with two speech
manipulations, one acoustic (parametrically varied spectral degradation
of the speech signal using noise vocoding) and one linguistic (semantic
predictability of the signal). Behaviourally, a quasi-linear increase in comprehension with more spectral detail available was observed amongst
low-predictability sentences. In contrast, predictability was most effective
on intermediate signal degradation levels (8-band noise vocoded speech).
High semantic predictability here led to a ~40% increase in sentence comprehension compared to low semantic predictability in two different
experiments. In the fMRI analysis, we therefore directly compared highto low-predictable speech at intermediate 8-band signal quality and
found strikingly left-hemispheric activity increases in the angular gyrus,
medial and lateral prefrontal cortex, and the posterior cingulate gyrus.
Functional connectivity between these regions appeared also increased,
particularly with respect to the left angular gyrus. In contrast, activity in
both superior temporal sulci and the left inferior frontal gyrus correlated
with the amount of spectral detail in the speech signal, irrespective of
predictability. These results demonstrate that the involvement of highorder cortical areas, remote from auditory cortex, and their enhanced
functional connectivity facilitate speech comprehension when the clarity
of speech is reduced. (supported by Wellcome Trust, UK; MRC, UK;
Landesstiftung Baden-Wuerttemberg gGmbH)

172

Linguistic Processes: Other

E 70
HESITATION HELPS, BUT LISTENERS STILL HAVE WORK TO
DO:
AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION INTO
REPAIRS IN SPEECH Lucy
MacGregor1, Martin Corley1, David
Donaldson2; 1University of Edinburgh, 2University of Stirling — Speakers
sometimes revise their speech mid-utterance, occasionally including a
hesitation such as “er” at the interruption point between the reparandum
(material to be replaced) and the repair. Do repairs cause processing difficulty for listeners? Does an “er” separator affect the ease of processing
such a construction? Participants (n=24) listened to utterances which
were either fluent, or contained a repair comprising two consecutive
verbs [e.g. Even though I hadn’t seen him school I [recognised] REMEMBERED him straight away]. Half the utterances contained an “er” before
the critical word [e.g. Even though I hadn’t seen him since school I [recognised] – er – REMEMBERED him straight away]. EEG was recorded
and ERPs formed relative to critical word onsets. We focused on ERPs for
repair words relative to identical words in fluent utterances and compared effects for utterances with and without an “er” before the critical
word. For utterances without an “er”, repairs elicit an early (250-650ms)
anterior-frontal negativity which we suggest reflects detection of a syntactic violation. The negativity is followed (650-850ms) by a bilateral, centro-parietal/parietal positivity, which we interpret as a P600 reflecting
syntactic reanalysis or integration difficulty. For repairs preceded by an
“er” there is no indication of early negativity. However, there is an early
onsetting, sustained centro-parietal/parietal positivity (250-850ms)
which is topographically identical to the later positivity observed for fluent utterances. We suggest that hesitation prepares listeners for a possible
non-syntactic input, but does not reduce the cost associated with syntactic reanalysis.
E 71
SPEAKING WORDS IN THE SECOND LANGUAGE: FROM
SEMANTICS TO PHONOLOGY IN 170 MILLISECONDS Taomei
Guo, Danling Peng; Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China — The present
experiment is designed to investigate the time course of semantic and
phonological retrieval during the second language production by using
the ERP technique. During the experiment, 15 Chinese-English bilinguals
were required to name pictures in their second language. Before performing this task, they had to carry out a dual choice GO/NOGO task based
on semantic information (i.e., whether the picture was of an object or an
animal) and phonological information (i.e., whether the picture’s English
name starts with the letter C or F). During the time window of 200-700 ms
after stimulus onset, nogo trials generated a more negative ERP profile
relative to go trials. A clear-cut N200 was obtained from their difference
waves. Overall, the latency of N200 elicited by semantic information is
earlier than that by phonological information. This is consistent with
many previous findings obtain in monolingual studies, and supports the
common viewpoint of the discrete two-step theory and the interactive
activation model. These findings suggest that the semantic information is
also encoded earlier than the phonological information during the second
language production.
E 72
PROCESSING
PRONOUNS
WITHOUT
ANTECEDENTS:
EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIALS. Ruth
Filik, Anthony Sanford, Hartmut Leuthold; University of Glasgow — Pronouns that occur without an explicit referent in the prior context are typically difficult to process. We investigate a specific case, in which the
plural pronoun 'they' has no explicit referent, yet causes no apparent
problems, as in 'On the flight, they served really bad food'. Some unspecified set of individuals, ('the stewardesses', or 'the airline') can be inferred
as being the referent of 'they', but it is not crucial to determine who specifically is being referred to. Using ERPs, along with word-by-word
visual presentation, we investigated how readers process the pronoun in
these cases. The pronoun 'they' appeared in contexts that either did or did
not contain an explicit referent (e.g., 'the stewardesses'). We compared

Linguistic Processes: Other

this to the processing of singular pronouns ('he' or 'she'), for which it is
necessary to determine a specific referent. For example, 'On the flight, she
served really bad food', in a context that either did or did not mention 'the
stewardess'. There were two key findings. Firstly, when the pronoun had
no explicit referent, a larger frontocentral positivity was observed 750ms
after pronoun onset for 'he/she' than 'they', reflecting the additional difficulty involved in establishing a referent for 'he/she' than for 'they' when
no explicit referent is available. Secondly, 'he/she' evoked a larger N400
than 'they', regardless of whether or not there was an explicit referent for
the pronoun. This finding adds to a growing body of research suggesting
fundamental differences in the way these pronouns are handled by the
language processor.
E 73
AUTOMATICITY OF WORD LEVEL SKILLS IN CHILDREN WITH
READING COMPREHENSION DEFICITS DESPITE NORMAL
WORD READING SKILLS April Materek1, Anna Khizanishvili1, Laurie
Cutting1,2,3; 1Kennedy Krieger Institute, 2Johns Hopkins University, 3Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine — In order to become a skilled reader, accurate
as well as fast and automatic single word reading must be attained; however, some students present with reading comprehension deficits (RCD)
despite purportedly having normal word reading accuracy (RCD/NWR).
Few studies have comprehensively examined the speed and automaticity
of word-level skills in RCD/NWR. In this study, sixty-five children (26
RD, 30 Control, 9 RCD/NWR), ages 10 to 14, completed the Test of Word
Reading Efficiency (TOWRE) as well as various lexical decision measures, including automaticity measures requiring divided attention.
Results indicated that children with RCD/NWR read just as quickly and
accurately as Controls, even on measures of automaticity, and that both
Controls and RCD/NWR read isolated words at a faster rate than RD
participants. The aforementioned results suggest that deficits in children
with RCD/NWR stem from factors other than word-reading skills.
E 74
EFFECTS OF CORTICAL LANGUAGE LATERALIZATION ON
THE LATERALIZATION OF THE VISUAL WORD FORM
SYSTEM Qing Cai1, Michal Lavidor2, Marc Brysbaert3, Yves Paulignan1,
Tatjana A. Nazir1; 1Institut des Sciences Cognitives, Bron Cedex, France,
2University of Hull, UK, 3University of London, UK — The present ERPstudy was aimed at clarifying to what extent language lateralization and
visual expertise affects perception of laterally displayed words. We did
so by analyzing performance of readers (Latin alphabet) that were either
left or right hemisphere-dominant for language. The results showed that:
(I) Visual field effects during word recognition differed between right
hemisphere (RH) and left hemisphere (LH) dominant participants, indicating that language organization in the brain has a significant impact on
the way words are recognized. (II) While in LH dominant readers the N1
topography was characterized by a left lateralized occipito-temporal negativity, in RH dominant readers the N1 topography was characterized by
a right lateralized occipito-temporal negativity. Since the left lateralized
occipito-temporal negativity had been interpreted as electrical signature
of the visual word form area (VWFA) activity, the VWF system seems
thus to develop in the language dominant hemisphere. (III) Despite the
mirror reversed VWF system in the two populations, visual field effects
in word recognition were not mirror reversed. This indicates that other
factors than cortical language lateralization modulate the way laterally
displayed words are recognized.
E 75
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF REFERENCE
PROCESSING AT THE SENTENCE LEVEL Manfred F. Gugler, Sonja
Rossi, Angela D. Friederici, Anja Hahne; Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — Referential connections
within a sentence define the relations between different sentence units.
Previous studies investigated referential processes mostly within a discourse context. The present study aimed to monitor reference processing
at the sentence level and embedded within syntactically anomalous sen-

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

tences. Thus, the study directly investigated in a within-subject comparison German word category violations embedded in sentences with and
without a reference structure. Reference is achieved by adding a prepositional phrase immediately following a referent, in this case the subject
noun. Thus the prepositional phrase directly refers to / specifies the preceding referent. In sentences without a reference structure, on the other
hand, the prepositional phrase does not follow the referent and therefore
does not directly refer to it. 25 participants listened to the acoustically
presented sentences and performed a judgement task while the EEG was
recorded. The event-related brain potentials (ERPs) averaged on the verb
revealed regarding the word category violation compared to correct sentences an anterior negativity reflecting phrase structure building processes and a P600 indicating processes of reanalysis in both sentences
structures. However, only in sentences with a reference structure, an
additional negativity was present. Thus, this negativity may reflect disturbed referential integration processes between the referent and the
prepositional phrase due to the omission of a highly expected noun. Further the present study could show in a within-subject comparison that
reference-related processes do not only occur at the discourse level but
play an important role also within a single sentence.
E 76
GAMMA-BAND RESPONSE TO AUDITORY STIMULI OF
VARYING TEMPORAL COMPLEXITY. A STUDY IN HEALTHY
ADULTS. Sonja Rossi, Isabell Wartenburger, Susanne Passow, Silke
Telkemeyer, Till Nierhaus, Hellmuth Obrig; Charité University Medicine,
Berlin, Germany — Extraction of temporal and spectral information from
complex auditory material requires differential specialization of the processing neural ensemble (Zatorre et al., 2002). In accord with this principle studies have demonstrated a superior ability of the left hemisphere
for detection of rapid temporal transitions while the right hemispheric
auditory pathway may be superior in processing slowly varying segments and spectrally complex stimulus properties (Boemio et al., 2005;
Schönwiesner et al., 2005). Here we investigate this very issue by means
of EEG, exploiting the potential of gamma-band analysis. The study
investigates the neural predisposition for the interhemispheric specialization of language processing, since it is well known that linguistic input
contains information in different time domains: While transitions
between formants require rapid sampling, syllables or prosodic aspects
are processed on a much slower time scale. This most likely founds the
strong lateralisation of specific aspects of language processing (Wartenburger et al., 2006). In the present study we presented slowly (transitions
> 100 ms) and fast modulated acoustic stimuli (transitions < 50 ms) (stimuli were taken from Boemio et al., 2005) while the EEG were recorded.
Our preliminary data indicate an increase in transient gamma band activity for fast modulated stimuli. This may suggest that the gamma band
reflects the neuronal activity in secondary auditory cortices relevant to
normal language processing, the latter involving fast input variations.
We currently investigate the lateralisation since formant transitions
should require faster sampling when compared to prosodic aspects.
E 77
LEARNING NOVEL WORDS: AN FMRI STUDY EXAMINING
MODULATIONS IN ACTIVATION RELATED TO WORD
FAMILIARITY Amy Clements-Stephens1, Pooja Gaur1, April Materek1,
Laurie Cutting1,2,3; 1Kennedy Krieger Institute, 2Johns Hopkins University,
3
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine — Studies have examined how the brain
responds to various types of word stimuli. One area that has been of
increasing interest is an area in the left fusiform gyrus, often referred to as
the "visual word form area" (VWFA), which has been hypothesized to be
important for word recognition. While some have suggested that this
area is important for word recognition because it subserves pre-lexical
processing, others have hypothesized that this area is sensitive to the
familiarity of words, with greater activation associated with less familiarity. To examine this issue, 10 adult normal readers learned to attach
meaning to pseudowords via two different training methods. Modula-

173

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

tions in signal activity in response to trained pseudowords, untrained
pseudowords (which matched the trained pseudowords in terms of syllable type, consonant clusters, etc), and high and low frequency words
were then measured via functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
The highest mean activation was for the most unfamiliar words
(untrained pseudowords), followed by low frequency words, trained
pseudowords, and high frequency words. Results also indicated that
while the activation associated with trained pseudowords was not significantly different than for words (high and low frequency), it was significantly lower than for untrained pseudowords (p < .03). Additionally,
untrained pseudowords showed significantly more activation than high
frequency words (p < .01), but not for low frequency words. Results suggest that the VWFA is sensitive to word familiarity.
E 78
OBSERVING AN ANIMATED TONGUE SLIP. Iemke
Horemans1,
Niels O. Schiller2,1; 1Maastricht University, The Netherlands, 2Leiden Institute
for Brain and Cognition, The Netherlands, Maastricht University, The
Netherlands — Observing others is regarded as an important way of
learning. Another way to learn is by making errors and consequently
adjust the system to not make the same error again. This also holds for
errors made by others. The current event-related potential (ERP) study
examined the processes involved in detecting speech errors made by others. Participants viewed animations of a dot moving through a network.
Simultaneously, they listened to a description of the path of the dot. The
descriptions were recorded during a previous experiment in which participants were asked to describe the path of the dot. Each network consisted of eight colored line drawings that were connected to each other
with straight or curved lines. Participants were asked to press a button
whenever they detected a speech error in the network description. The
speech errors studied were color (e.g., rode tafel instead of groene tafel),
determiner (e.g., het stoel instead of de stoel) and direction errors (e.g.,
naar boven instead of naar onder). Both color and direction errors elicited, after the acoustic onset of the error, a centro-parietal negativity
around 300 ms and a centro-parietal positivity around 800 ms. However,
the determiner errors elicited a fronto-central negativity around 300 ms
after the acoustic onset of the error. These data show that processes
involved in detecting determiner errors differ from processes involved in
detecting color and direction errors. This might implicate that the speech
monitoring system is a specialized system which might play an important role in observational learning.
E 79
EFFECTS OF STRESS AND CONTEXT ON VERBAL SELFMONITORING Lesya Ganushchak1, Niels O. Schiller2,1; 1Maastricht
University, The Netherlands, 2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, The
Netherlands — During speech production, in order to prevent or correct
errors we continuously monitor what we say. In stressful circumstances
when making a speech error has more severe consequences, e.g., giving a
talk during conference vs. casual conversation, it is plausible to assume
that a verbal self-monitor must work harder in order to prevent errors. In
the current event-related-potential (ERP) study, we used the semantic
blocking paradigm to investigate whether stress affects participant’s performance and measured the Error Related Negativity (ERN). The semantic blocking paradigm manipulates the context in which pictures to be
named appear. Participants were required to name pictures that appear
in semantically related blocks (e.g., table, chair, and closet) and semantically unrelated blocks (e.g., table, apple, and car). We have shown that
the stress manipulation had no effect on error rate; however, the amplitude of the ERN increases in the stress condition, compared to the no
stress condition. This indicates that the monitor was more active in the
stress than no-stress condition. Furthermore, participants showed semantic interference effects and made more errors while naming semantically
blocked pictures. Interestingly, the amplitude of the ERN observed after
overt speech errors was also larger during semantically related than
semantically unrelated blocks. We suggest that semantically related

174

Linguistic Processes: Other

blocks led to more conflict between possible responses, thereby increasing reaction time and the amplitude of the ERN.
E 80
LANGUAGE AND ACTION: COMMON NEURAL SUBSTRATES
FOR ACTION WORD PROCESSING AND MOTOR CONTROL
Véronique Boulenger, Alice C. Roy, Beata Y. Silber, Yves Paulignan Marc
Jeannerod, Tatjana A. Nazir; Institut des Sciences Cognitives CNRS/UCBL,
Bron, France — Recent studies demonstrate that aspects of language
understanding rely on the sensori-motor system. The present aim determined whether processing of action words engages cortical areas that are
also involved in motor control, and evaluated the role of these regions in
word retrieval. The first experiment employed electrophysiological and
kinematics measures to assess the influence of subliminal presentation of
action verbs and concrete nouns on the simultaneous preparation of a
reaching movement. Twenty-five, right-handed, French native speakers
completed one session. Results revealed that, compared to nouns, the
readiness potential amplitude decreased significantly when action verbs
were presented. The kinematics results substantiated this, as wrist acceleration peak amplitude reduced following an action word compared to a
noun. This indicates that unconscious perception of action verbs interferes with the preparation and execution of a movement. The second
experiment evaluated the role of the motor system in action word processing, by comparing masked repeated priming effects for nouns and
verbs in patients with Parkinson’s Disease (PD), using a lexical decision
task. Ten PD patients completed two sessions (with and without L-Dopa
treatment); 10 controls completed one session. The results showed that
while priming effects for nouns were similar for patients (irrespective of
treatment) and controls, no priming effect for action verbs in patients
deprived of treatment was found. However, with L-Dopa, priming effects
for action words were similar to controls. In conclusion, action word processing and motor action share common neural substrates, and motor
cortical regions appear to contribute to action word processing.
E 81
LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION IN PATIENTS WITH APHASIA IS
AMELIORATED
BY
TEMPORAL-PROCESSING
TRAINING
Elzbieta Szelag1,2, Aneta Szymaszek1, Monika Lewandowska1, Joanna
Seniow3, Martina Fink4, Pamela Ulbrich4, Jan Churan4, Marc Wittmann4;
1
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, Warsaw, Poland, 2Warsaw School of
Social Psychology, Warsaw, Poland, 3Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology,
4Generation Research Program, Ludwig-Maximilian
Warsaw, Poland
University, Bad Tölz, Germany — Experimental studies have reported a
close association between temporal information processing and language
comprehension. Language-learning impaired (LLI) children and braininjured patients with aphasia show elevated thresholds in the detection
of temporal order (TO) as compared to control subjects. The present
study aimed at improving auditory speech comprehension (ASC) in
aphasics with a specific training in TO perception. We tested 25 patients
having deficits in both ASC and the perception of TO. ASC was assessed
employing phoneme discrimination tests on the word and the sentence
level as well as using the Token Test. The TOT was measured in two conditions using either two 1ms clicks presented monaurally one to each ear
or two 10 ms tones (400, 3000Hz) presented binaurally. All patients who
displayed elevated TOTs in comparison to healthy controls participated
in eight 45-minutes sessions of the specific temporal training aimed to
improve the perception of sequencing abilities, or they participated in a
non-temporal control training (n=7) on volume discrimination. The temporal training yielded an improvement in TO perception in both the click
and the tone conditions. Moreover, a transfer of improvement was
observed from the time domain to the language domain, which was
untrained during the training. The control training did not improve
either the perception of TO or ASC in any language tests. These results
are in agreement with previous studies from the literature which proved
ameliorated ASC following the temporal training in LLI children.

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing

E 82
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY OF ANAPHORIC
RESOLUTION IN SENTENCES AND DISCOURSE Veena A. Nair,
Amit Almor, Jennifer M. C. Vendemia; University of South Carolina — We
examined ERP waveforms underlying the processing of repeated name
and pronoun anaphors in sentences and discourse using the 128 channel
“Geodesic sensor net”. Previous behavioral studies have shown that
repeated proper name reference to a previously mentioned salient entity
leads to increased reading times (the repeated name penalty) relative to a
non-repetitive or pronoun reference to the same entity. Antecedents were
either single noun phrases (NPs) as in “John finished exam and John/he
went to the movies” or part of conjoined NPs as in “John and Mary finished exams and John/he went to the movies”. Replicating the results of
an earlier study by Swaab et al. (2004) we found a larger N400, in the sentence condition, in response to repeated name anaphors when the antecedent was a single NP than when it was part of a conjoined NP. In
contrast, with discourse items, we found a larger N400 in the conjoined
NP relative to the single NP condition. We also found larger anterior negativity for discourse than sentences and for conjoined NPs than for single
NPs. The difference between the N400 response to sentence and discourse items accompanied by the anterior negativity suggest that the
increased N400 reflects the difficulty in antecedent identification that precedes the integrative discourse processes underlying the repeated name
penalty.
E 83
PROSODY AND INFORMATION STRUCTURE: AN FMRI STUDY
Tessa van Leeuwen, Monique Lamers, Karl Magnus Petersson, Carlos
Gussenhoven, Toni Rietveld, Benedikt Poser, Peter Hagoort; Radboud
University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, the Netherlands — Words in spoken language contain semantic, syntactic and phonological information, for each
of which knowledge is retrieved from memory and then dynamically
unified during sentence comprehension (Memory-Unification-Control
model, Hagoort, 2005). Here, we focus on prosody and its contribution to
sentence information structure. In Dutch, new information in a sentence
(the focus) generally receives prosodic emphasis (an accent), while given
information does not. The contribution of prosody to information structure depends on the way lexical items are combined into larger structure;
therefore we refer to this as phonological unification. In our fMRI study,
subjects listened to two grammatical sentences that each described an
object on the screen. The second object differed from the first in either
shape (shape-word focus) or colour (colour-word focus). In the second
sentence the accent was on the focus-word (focus-accent agreement) or
on a non-focus word (focus-accent disagreement). Stimuli were presented
while the scanner was silent to avoid acoustic interference. Preprocessing
and data analysis were performed with SPM2 and time-locked to critical
word onset. We hypothesized that in the focus-accent disagreement condition phonological and also semantic unification of the sentences require
more effort due to the incorrect prosodic accent in the sentences. Indeed,
when contrasting focus-accent disagreement with focus-accent agreement we find stronger activation in BA 47 (semantics) in the anterior left
inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) and in BA 6/9 (phonology) in posterior
LIFG. Manipulating prosody thus leads to a higher load for phonological
as well as semantic unification, illustrating the parallel nature of unification.
E 84
BRAIN LESION ANALYSIS OF AUDITORY COMPREHENSION IN
PEOPLE WITH APHASIA Jeffrey Solomon1, Whitney Anne Postman2,
Therese Kling3, Allen Braun2; 1Medical Numerics, Inc., 2National Institute of
Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health,
3
University of Maryland — It is hypothesized that independent brain
regions subserve lexical and syntactic processing and that these processes
can be differentially disrupted by brain damage (Vermeulen, 1982). In
our study, 32 subjects with left hemisphere stroke-induced aphasia
received MRIs and were given auditory comprehension tasks from the

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

WAB, PAL and PALPA batteries. Specific tasks from these batteries were
selected to assess lexical and syntactic processing. Summing across all
subjects, the brain lesions affected the entire MCA territory. We developed the Analysis of Brain Lesion (ABLe) software to delineate the
lesions, spatially normalize the MRI brains and perform voxel-based
lesion-symptom mapping (Bates et al, 2003). We incorporated the Automated Anatomic Labeling (AAL) brain atlas (Tzourio-Mazoyer et al,
2002) to determine brain regions putatively causing deficit in an automated fashion. Our goal was to use a data-driven method to find areas
common to all auditory comprehension tasks and to differentiate areas
associated with lexical versus syntactic processing. Our results indicate
the following gyri correlated with deficit in all auditory comprehension
tests: middle frontal, precentral, postcentral, inferior and superior parietal, angular, supramarginal, and middle occipital. The following areas
were found to be associated with lexical but not syntactic tests: superior
frontal, middle and inferior frontal orbital, inferior frontal triangular,
superior temporal pole and insula. The middle temporal gyrus was associated more with deficits in syntactic processing. Our findings confirm
some areas commonly associated with auditory comprehension and suggest overlap as well as uniqueness to the neural substrates underlying
lexical and syntactic processing.
E 85
SEEKING THE NEURAL BASIS OF THE LEFT HEMISPHERE
SUPERIORITY FOR READING USING MEG Laura Barca1,2, Uzma
Urooj1, Michael Simpson1, Andrew W. Ellis1; 1York Neuroimaging Centre
(YNiC), University of York, York, UK, 2Institute for Cognitive Science and
Technologies, ISTC-CNR, Rome, Italy — Words are recognised more
quickly and more accurately when presented to the right of a central fixation point than when presented to the left. The most common explanation
of this effect is based on the assumption that words presented in the right
visual field (RVF) are projected initially to the left hemisphere (which is
dominant for language in most right-handers) while words presented in
the left visual field (LVF) are projected to the right hemisphere and must
be transferred across the corpus callosum to the left hemisphere for identification. That process of identification is thought to involve the ‘visual
word form area’ (VWFA) in the left mid fusiform gyrus. Cohen et al.
(2002) found stronger BOLD responses in the VWFA to words in the RVF
than in the LVF. The present study used magnetoencephalography
(MEG) to investigate the spatiotemporal evolution of cortical activity
during the processing of words and scrambled words presented 1.5°
from fixation in the LVF or RVF. Synthetic Aperture Magnetometry
(beamforming) was used to localize changes in power within selected frequency bands as a function of time. We then used virtual electrode analysis to interrogate the time-frequency behaviour within regions of interest
to brain responses to words and patterns and to better understand the
neural basis of the left hemisphere superiority for visual word recognition.

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing
E 86
SOUND DURATION PROCESSING IN HUMAN AUDITORY
CORTEX OF AGING ADULTS Joel S. Snyder1, Bernhard Ross2, Kelly
McDonald2, Rotman ReMeaghan Aalto2, Bruce A. Schneider3, Claude Alain2;
1
VA Boston Healthcare System/Harvard Medical School, 2Rotman Research
Institute, Baycrest Centre, Toronto, 3University of Toronto, Mississauga — Processing temporal changes in sound of brief duration is important for phoneme discrimination. Deficits in temporal processing may underlie agerelated speech-processing problems. In the present study, we examined
the effects of age on processing brief sound durations. To observe temporal processing in primary and secondary auditory cortex, we recorded
middle- and long-latency auditory evoked fields (AEFs) using magnetoencephalography while young, middle-aged, and older adults were

175

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

presented with pure tones of varying duration (34, 46, 64, and 76 ms).
During the recordings, participants were asked to ignore the stimuli and
watch a muted subtitled movie of their choice. For each participant, the
AEFs were modeled with a pair of dipoles in the superior temporal plane
and the effects of sound duration and age on the amplitude and latency
of the resulting source waveforms of cortical activity were examined. For
the middle-latency AEFs, sound duration had little effect on amplitude or
latency. For the long-latency AEFs, increasing sound duration was paralleled by a decrease in P2 amplitude and this effect was comparable in all
three age groups. Middle- and long-latency AEFs were delayed in older
than in younger adults. Moreover, middle- (i.e., Pa wave) and longlatency (i.e., P1 wave) AEPs amplitude increased with age. This observed
age-related increases in amplitude might be partly related to inhibitory
deficits occurring at different relays along the ascending auditory pathway and in auditory cortex. These data demonstrate preserved auditory
temporal encoding in auditory cortex of normal aging adults.
E 87
HUMAN INTRACRANIAL INVESTIGATION OF AUDITORY P2
GENERATORS Pejman Sehatpour1, Sophie Molhol1, Theodore Schwartz2,
Ian Fiebelkorn1, Ashesh Mehta2, John Foxe1; 1Nathan Kline Institute, 2Weill
Cornell Medical College — The auditory P2 component is a positive peak in
the auditory evoked potential (AEP) occurring between 150-300 ms post
stimulus onset. It shows a dipolar scalp distribution with the positivity at
the vertex. The P2, and the underlying neural processing it represents, is
important because it has been implicated in functions such as the conscious perception of sounds, musical expertise, speech sound training,
and study of auditory system maturation and short-term plasticity. To
date, the underlying generators of the P2 have only been estimated from
scalp-recorded data and the precise cortical loci are not yet established.
Nonetheless, a pair of locations in the supratemporal plane, and bilateral
temporo-parietal cortices have been implicated in its generation. Other
studies have described the N1-P2 as a functional complex with common
generators. Here, using human intracranial recordings we directly characterized the generators of the N1 and P2 components. Patients with
intractable epilepsy were presented with 1000 Hz tones of 60 ms duration
while recordings were made from 64 to 128 subdural electrodes. Both
common and distinct generators for the N1 and P2 AEP components
were found. P2 generators were found in both the prefrontal and anterior
temporal cortical regions.
E 88
NEURAL CORRELATES OF DYNAMIC ATTENDING TO
SYNCOPATED RHYTHMS Theodore Zanto1, Heather Chapi1, Edward
Large1, Scott
Kelso1, Fred
Steinberg2; 1Florida Atlantic University,
2
University MRI — We conducted a study to evaluate the role of attending in the perception of syncopated rhythms. Sixteen participants were
tested behaviorally to determine their ability to tap the beat of ten highly
syncopated patterns. Participants returned for one EEG and one fMRI
session. In these sessions, they were instructed to attend to a syncopated
pattern, mentally rehearse the pattern during a retention interval, and
then reproduce the pattern. During a control condition, subjects heard the
rhythmic patterns, however, they were instructed to study a list of words,
remember the words during the retention interval, and then recall as
many words as possible. We measured evoked beta-band and gammaband activity while participants attended and ignored the rhythmic patterns. Evoked activity anticipated the beat of the rhythm in both conditions, however power was attenuated when ignoring the rhythmic
stimulus. Functional brain activation was observed in the right medial
frontal gyrus (BA 9) and anterior cingulate gyrus (BA 32) when attending, versus ignoring, the rhythmic patterns. Implications for dynamic
allocation of attention are discussed.

176

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing

E 89
AUDITORY EVOKED POTENTIALS TO INTERAURAL TIME
DIFFERENCES IN 500 AND 4000 HZ CLICK TRAINS. Ilse
Wambacq, Faith Parker, Lauri Romei, Joan Besing, Janet Koehnke; Montclair
State University — This study was designed to measure auditory evoked
potentials (AEPs) in response to interaural time differences (ITDs) in 500
and 4000 Hz click trains. Adults with normal hearing listened under earphones to octave-band filtered click trains at 500 and 4000 Hz. The trains
included five, 1-ms clicks, separated by 9 ms silent intervals. The standard stimulus was a diotic 50 ms click train. Stimuli were presented in a
passive oddball paradigm. There were two target stimuli; one was a
dichotic, 50 ms click train with a 0.9 ms interaural time difference (leading to the left ear), and the other was a diotic, 50 ms click train that was
frequency-shifted by 15% compared to the frequency of the standard
stimulus. Separate runs were presented for each frequency (500 versus
4000 Hz) and target-stimulus type (ITD versus frequency-shift). Visual
observation of the AEP waveforms of four adults shows amplitude differences between standard and target stimuli in AEP components between
80 and 400 ms post stimulus onset. In this time window, frequency
related AEP differences are present with the 500 Hz stimuli evoking
larger AEPs than 4000 Hz stimuli. Clear morphological differences are
also observed in AEPs to ITD-targets versus frequency-shift-targets in all
of the subjects. This suggests that AEPs reflect differences in processing
of ITD and frequency-shift stimuli. Data collection is continuing; AEP
analysis of ten subjects will be presented.
E 90
SPATIOTOPIC
ORGANIZATION
IN
CORTICAL
REPRESENTATION OF AUDITORY STIMULI Santani Teng, David
Whitney; University of California, Davis — Localizing the source of sounds
in space is a crucial function for navigating and internally representing
our environment. Animal studies have described subcortical spatiotopic
maps in owls and some mammals (e.g. Knudsen, 1982; Brugge et al.,
1998). Lesion studies have also implicated mammalian auditory cortex in
the localization of sounds (e.g. Jenkins & Merzenich, 1984); however,
although afferent visual and somatosensory information is represented
spatiotopically in cortex, no such map of auditory space has yet been
described in humans. In this fMRI study, we scanned subjects while presenting pink-noise moving auditory stimuli to subjects through headphones. The stimuli simulated the effect of presentation from one of eight
positions in a free-field environment and were calibrated individually to
subjects’ ears. Preliminary analysis indicates greater correlation between
voxels reflecting BOLD response to adjacent or overlapping stimuli than
voxels reflecting response to more spatially separated stimuli. In addition, spatially specific BOLD responses to frontal auditory stimuli were
found in visual cortex, despite the absence of visual stimuli. The correlations suggest a measure of spatiotopic organization in the cortical representation of auditory stimuli.
E 91
MONOLINGUAL
AND
BILINGUAL
CHILDREN’S
BRAIN
ACTIVATION IN VOWEL PERCEPTION Nancy Vidal, Hia Datta,
Tatiana Liisa Laine; The Graduate Center City University of New York — We
examined how monolingual English and bilingual Spanish-English, 8 -10
year old children allocate attention in discriminating American-English
vowels using Event-related potentials (ERPs). Learning a first language is
hypothesized to lead to greater automaticity in processing native language phoneme categories (Jusczyk, 1997; Bialystok 2004; Werker & Curtin, 2005; Strange 2006). ERPs were recorded to the /I/-/E/ contrast,
which is phonemic in English and not Spanish, in an oddball paradigm
designed to elicit the Mismatch negativity (MMN) and Late Negativity
(LN). Targets interspersed among the vowels were used to manipulate
attention in three conditions: a) ignore all sounds and watch a silent
movie with close captions (Passive), b) press a button to the higher frequency of two tone targets (Tone Task) and, c) press a button to the /ba/
of two speech targets (Speech Task). Preliminary results indicate a robust

Perceptual Processes: Auditory Processing

LN-like negative activity between 300 – 600 ms in the frontal channels
that invert at the mastoids in all three experimental conditions and for
both language groups. The only difference was that the bilingual group
had a slightly smaller LN in the Speech Task than the monolingual
group. The absence of a clear MMN in children around 200 ms, which we
find in adults to these stimuli, suggests that speech processing of these
stimuli under these conditions is difficult for them.
E 92
PRE-ATTENTIVE PROCESSING OF AUDITORY STIMULI: A
HUMAN INTRACRANIAL STUDY OF MISMATCH NEGATIVITY
GENERATORS
FOR
PHONEMIC
AND
NONPHONEMIC
SOUNDS Ian Fiebelkorn1, Pejman Sehatpour2, Pierfilippo De Sanctis2,
Thomas Thesen3, Orrin Devinsky3, Sophie Molholm2, John J. Foxe1,2; 1City
College of New York, 2Nathan Kline Institute, 3New York University — Hemispheric specialization of speech was first reported during the second half
of the 19th century by Paul Broca and Karl Wernicke. The findings of
these early lesion studies have since been confirmed by fMRI and PET
imaging; however, the stage of auditory processing at which this hemispheric specialization first emerges is still the subject of investigation. The
mismatch negativity (MMN), an event-related potential (ERP) component elicited by the disruption of a repeated auditory stimulus, has been
used to investigate the pre-attentive processing of phonemic and nonphonemic sounds. Previous studies have hypothesized that speech stimuli elicit two MMNs in the left temporal lobe, one phonemic and one
nonphonemic. Given the poor spatial resolution of scalp recordings, further evidence is needed to confirm or reject this hypothesis. Human
intracranial recordings, which provide superior spatial resolution, offer a
unique opportunity to investigate MMN generators. Here we use an oddball paradigm with stimuli developed by Liebenthal and colleagues
(2005) to localize MMN generators for phonemic (familiar consonantvowel syllables) and nonphonemic sounds (acoustically matched control
sounds). Preliminary data suggest common MMN generators in the left
superior temporal gyrus and the left inferior frontal cortex, two cortical
locations previously reported by intracranial recordings to contribute to
the MMN component. These data contradict earlier ERP studies that
hypothesized separate MMN generators for phonemic and nonphonemic
sounds. More data must be collected to explore the existence of additional MMN generators.
E 93
SPEECH-LIKE
PROCESSING
OF
NONSPEECH
SOUNDS
FOLLOWING EXTENSIVE CATEGORIZATION TRAINING James
L. Keidel1, Einat Liebenthal2, Jeffrey R. Binder2, Keith R. Kluender1, Mark S.
Seidenberg1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2Medical College of
Wisconsin — Many studies have attempted to address whether speech
has a unique cortical representation, qualitatively different from other
types of auditory information. However, direct comparisons of speech
and nonspeech processing are confounded by participants' overwhelmingly greater experience with speech. Further, speech processing requires
extensive abstraction over both intra- and inter-speaker variability to
recover the intended message, in contrast to more general forms of auditory perception. To address these issues, we imaged participants using
fMRI during ABX discrimination of speech and complex nonspeech
sounds both before and after categorization training on the nonspeech
sounds. During training (20 hrs. total), participants played a modified
version of Tetris in which nonspeech stimuli (generated from filtered and
spectrally rotated speech) provided information that players could use to
improve performance. Contrast of pre- and post-training scans of nonspeech processing revealed recruitment post-training of a left-lateralized
network comprised of both traditional auditory and speech processing
areas as well as association cortices. These areas included foci in bilateral
superior and middle temporal gyri, predominantly in the left hemisphere. Behavioral testing indicated that after training participants displayed speech-like processing for the nonspeech sounds such as reduced
within-category discrimination. We suggest that, as in the parallel case of

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

face and greeble perception, auditory expertise gained through experience leads to the development of a "specialized" neural network to process the trained sounds.
E 94
REPRESENTATION OF VOWEL SOUNDS IN POSTERIOR
SUPERIOR TEMPORAL CORTEX Adam Tierney, Marty Sereno; UC
San Diego — Imaging studies have consistently shown that listening to
speech stimuli leads to activation of left posterior superior temporal cortex. The representation of information in this area and its role in speech
processing, however, remain an open question. Based on the importance
of the position of the first and second formants in distinguishing between
different vowels, we hypothesized that posterior superior temporal cortex might contain a topographic map of the position of one or both of the
first and second formants. To test this idea, we asked subjects in the fMRI
scanner to listen to a series of computer-generated vowels and respond
whenever they heard one of two English vowels. During the scans, the
second formant was repeatedly ramped from 980 to 2260 (or vice versa)
while the first formant varied randomly between 300 and 620. In order to
detect activation associated with particular second formant values we
computed the fourier transform of the time series at each vowel, compared the power at the frequency of the stimulus presentation to the
power of the other frequencies, and painted the resulting data onto the
reconstructed cortical surface. The phase angle of significant voxels, then,
reveals the second formant value to which each was maximally responsive. The results show a region in the posterior superior temporal sulcus
containing a range of different phases suggesting that a map of second
formant position might exist there.
E 95
ENHANCING PERCEPTUAL LEARNING OF A PRACTICED
TARGET TASK BY PRACTICING AN IRRELEVANT TASK Beverly
A.
Wright, Andrew T. Sabin, Roselyn M.
Wilson; Northwestern
University — Human adults can improve their ability to discriminate
between stimuli with practice, indicating that sensory systems are not
rigid, but rather can be changed through experience. In most cases, such
improvements occur only if the to-be-learned (target) task is actually
practiced. However, there has been no consideration of whether targettask performance is necessary throughout the entire course of training.
Here we report evidence that it is not. We compared learning on a target
auditory frequency-discrimination task across listeners who were trained
with one of four regimens. In all cases, the training consisted of repeated
threshold measurements, over 6-10 sessions on separate days, using an
adaptive (3-down/1-up), two-interval forced-choice procedure with a 1kHz pure-tone standard. Neither listeners who practiced the target frequency-discrimination task for 360 trials/session (n=8), nor those who
practiced duration discrimination (a non-target task) for 900 trials/session (n=6) improved significantly more than untrained controls on frequency discrimination (p> .529). In contrast, listeners who practiced 360
trials of frequency discrimination immediately followed by 360 trials of
duration discrimination in each session did (n=8; p=0.034). Showing that
this learning enhancement on the frequency task due to practice on the
duration task was time dependent, it did not occur in listeners who had a
four-hour break between practicing the two tasks in each session (n=8;
p=0.476). These results suggest that stimulus exposures associated with
the trained target task can contribute to learning, even if a non-target task
is being performed, as long as both tasks are practiced within a restricted
time window.
E 96
THE RETURN FROM SYNCHRONY IN 40-HZ OSCILLATIONS IN
HUMAN SENSORY SYSTEM Bernhard Ross; Rotman research Institute,
Baycrest Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada — Oscillatory activity around 40 Hz
in sensory systems is widely discussed in relation to feature binding and
object encoding. 40-Hz oscillations are small in amplitude and difficult to
extract from ongoing background EEG or MEG. However, large amplitude responses can be evoked with periodic stimulation at the rate of 40

177

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

Hz in visual, auditory, or somatosensory modality. We recorded 40-Hz
auditory steady-state responses (ASSR) with MEG using 40-Hz amplitude-modulated sound presented binaurally at 60 dB above sensation
level. Sources were localized with a pair of equivalent current dipoles in
bilateral primary auditory cortices. The oscillatory brain activity was
interpreted as strong representation of the auditory input at cortical level.
The stimulus was modified by sudden changes in the interaural phase
difference (IPD), which was perceived as change in the spatial characteristic of the sound. The IPD changes resulted in sudden decrease of the 40Hz amplitude and return to full amplitude within 200 ms. The response
phase shifted by about 90 degrees and returned also within 200 ms to the
steady state. The ASSR phase response could even be observed close to
the discrimination threshold for interaural phase differences below 1500
Hz. The data corroborated our previous findings that the ASSR could be
reset by a concurrent stimulus. The results were interpreted as general
mechanism of reset of synchrony in cortical networks induced by any
change in the stimulus. The reset of synchrony resolves the problem of
strong binding and allows detection of small changes in the auditory
environment.
E 97
MODULATING
COGNITIVE
PERFORMANCE
USING
TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION Nora
Schnider, Bradley Vines, Gottfried Schlaug; Music and Neuroimaging Lab,
Harvard Medical School — Previous studies have shown that transcranial
direct current stimulation (tDCS) can modulate regional brain excitability
which in turn may lead to behavioural and cognitive performance
changes if the behavior/cognitive performance tested draws on the
region being modulated. Neuroimaging and behavioral studies have
implicated the left supramarginal gyrus (SMG) as a nodal point in the
short-term storage of auditory material. We recently demonstrated that
cathodal tDCS applied over the left SMG lead to a significant decline in
accuracy in a pitch memory task which was not seen when cathodal tDCS
was applied over the right SMG. In the present study we tested whether
anodal tDCS applied over the left SMG would enhance performance in
this pitch memory task. We controlled for the possibility of a general
enhancing effect by using a visual memory task as control. The performance scores for the pitch memory task significantly improved after a
period of anodal stimulation to the left SMG which was not seen after
sham stimulation. This effect was specific for the pitch memory task and
was not seen for the visual memory control task which performance did
not significantly change. Furthermore, mood assessments were not significantly changed after anodal tDCS stimulation and can thus not
explain the enhanced pitch memory effect. These results underscore the
role of the left SMG in as a short-term auditory storage region. Furthermore, our experiments also demonstrate the potential of tDCS to positively influence behavioral and cognitive performance through
modulation of regional brain excitability.

Perceptual Processes: High-Level Vision
E 98
THE N170 RESPONSE TO VISUAL WORDS IS LEFTLATERALIZED AND EXPERIENCE-DEPENDENT IN BOTH
JAPANESE AND ENGLISH Urs Maurer, Jason D. Zevin, Eva Hulse,
Bruce D. McCandliss; Weill Medical College of Cornell University — Fast
visual brain processes engaged in reading are indexed by an occipitotemporal negativity occurring between 150 and 200ms after stimulus
onset (the N170). Left-lateralization of the N170 for word stimuli compared to visual control stimuli has been frequently observed and may be
related to visual expertise. Cross-linguistic studies with Japanese and
English provide an opportunity to study, whether left-lateralized N170
effects of visual expertise are modulated by other linguistic factors such
as second-language learning and the consistency with which a script

178

Perceptual Processes: High-Level Vision

maps onto phonology. In Experiment 1, native Japanese speakers living
in the U.S. and native English speakers participated in a one-back task
with kanji and hiragana stimuli (Tanji et al., 2005). Whereas hiragana
characters correspond consistently to a single phonological unit, this
mapping is relatively arbitrary for kanji characters. The N170 was left-lateralized for native Japanese speakers compared to native English speakers, indicating an effect of visual expertise. This effect, however, was not
further modulated by the consistency of the phonological mapping (kanji
vs. hiragana). In Experiment 2, the same subjects viewed English words
and visually matched symbol strings. A left-lateralized N170 for words
compared to symbols was observed in both groups, indicating an effect
of visual expertise. This effect was not further modulated by native language experience (English vs. Japanese). Taken together, the results suggest that left-lateralized specialization for visual words in the N170 is
general across scripts that vary widely in their spelling-to-sound and
spelling-to-meaning mappings and across scripts that are learned at different times in life.
E 99
EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY DURING VISUAL FEATURE
BINDING Christopher Summerfield, Etienne Koechlin; Ecole Normale
Superieure, Paris — A central problem in the cognitive neurosciences is
how sensory information is integrated (the ‘binding problem’). Some
theories have proposed that visual binding occurs when new links are
formed between feature-specific neurons within the visual cortices,
whereas others argue that integration occurs between representations at
higher levels, in the frontal or parietal cortices. These theories lead to
opposite predictions about the flow of neural information between posterior and anterior association cortices during visual binding. We used
dynamic causal modelling (DCM), a direction-specific effective connectivity analysis technique, to assess how extrastriate visual regions
exchanged information with the prefrontal and parietal cortices during a
task in which subjects selected targets on the basis of color, form, motion
(1d condition) or a combination of these features (2d condition). Selecting information on the basis of 2 visual dimensions reliably enhanced
bottom-up but not top-down interactions between the color-, form- and
motion-sensitive regions and more anterior regions, relative to the 1d
condition. These results offer support for a feedforward model of visual
binding.
E 100
THE POSTMAN RINGS ONCE. MEASURING THE TIME COURSE
OF FEAR RECOGNITION IN MOVIES Corné
van Heijnsbergen1,
Hanneke Meeren1, Julie Grèzes2, Beatrice de Gelder1,3; 1Tilburg University,
Tilburg, The Netherlands, 2CNRS - Collège de France, Paris, France, 3Athinoula
A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA, USA — When the doorbell rings
and we prepare to open we are primed for different kinds of encounters
depending on who will be there. On some occasions the unexpected visitor inspires fear and loathing. On such occasions a rapid reaction is called
for. The goal of this study was to measure how fast the brain reacts to the
specific emotional content of an instrumental action like opening the
door. The temporal aspects of processing dynamic emotional body
actions were investigated in an EEG study using short video clips (920ms,
25Hz) of neutral and emotional (fear) instrumental actions. Video fragments were preceded by a 700ms neutral still image to avoid stimulus
onset waveforms in the ERPs triggered at the onset of movement. After
correction for basic visual features the condition-specific ERPs were analysed by paired t-tests at consecutive sample points. Enhanced amplitudes for fear were found at 190-230 ms after movie onset on occipitotemporal electrodes and from 300-900ms ms on occipito-temporal and
centro-frontal electrode sites. The time window and topographical distribution of the earliest emotion effect corresponded to the ERP-component
distribution associated with the N170 component, similar to what has
previously been observed with still bodies (Stekelenburg & de Gelder,
2004; Meeren et al., 2005). The sustained effect, which is exclusive to

Perceptual Processes: High-Level Vision

dynamic stimuli, corresponded to a topographical N170/VPP-distribution. We argue that these sustained effects reflect prolonged neural activity elicited by the continuous stream of incoming dynamic information
signalling fear which helps to trigger appropiate behavior in the
observer.
E 101
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF “STRUCTURES FROM MOTION”
PERCEPTION IN CHILDREN UP TO THE SCHOOL AGE Peter
Klaver, Janine Lichtensteiger, Thomas Dietrich, Thomas Loenneker, Ernst
Martin; Children's University Hospital Zurich — The visual detection of
pattern and motion is a striking example of cognition-influenced perception. Motion information, following initial, local, directional analysis in
brain area V1, undergoes higher-level processing. These processes may
involve integration with other types of information. E.g., “structures
from motion” processing must interact with shape-based information to
enable the recognition of 3D rotating objects, and thus, participates in the
integration of processing by brain areas that are specialized in shape
detection. Tasks involving these different motion-based discriminations
are known to activate distinct specialized brain areas in adults, including
visual processing specialized areas in the occipito-temporal lobe and
visuomotor processing related areas in the parietal lobule. Whether they
do so in young normally developing children is unknown. Here, we
investigated the neural development of normally developing children up
to the school age using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
Imaging data showed comparable brain activity for random motion processing between ten adult control subjects (age 20-30 years) and ten children (age 5-6 years) in motion processing areas human middle temporal
area (MT+), lateral occipital sulcus (LOS) and visual area 3a (V3a). Structures from motion induced increased activity in adults compared to children in the left inferior parietal lobule (IPL) and reduced activity in the
right occipital lingual gyrus (LO). These findings suggest that neural
development in the dorsal pathway (IPL) is not mature at the age of 6,
whereas deficits in maturation are compensated with increased activity
in shape processing related area LO.
E 102
GUIDED FIXATIONS MODULATE FACE- AND BODY-SPECIFIC
RESPONSES IN THE OCCIPITOTEMPORAL CORTEX DURING
SOCIAL PERCEPTION James P. Morris1, Steven R. Green1, Brian
Marion2, Gregory McCarthy2; 1Duke University, 2Yale University — Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has revealed distinct foci of
activation for faces and for bodies in ventral occipitotemporal cortex
(VOTC) and lateral occipitotemporal cortex (LOTC). Recent work from
our laboratory has shown that activations by bodies are attenuated when
a face is present in the scene. We hypothesized that this attenuation may
be related to the scanpaths subjects use to view the scene. Here, we experimentally manipulated subjects’ fixations while they viewed a static picture of a virtual character. Each run consisted of alternating blocks in
which the subject made successive fixations upon a small crosshair that
made discrete jumps to a new location every 500 ms. We varied the location of the crosshair so that it would move between the face and torso of a
virtual character. Confirming our hypothesis, we found reduced activity
in the LOTC when subjects tracked the fixation cross over the face relative to tracking the fixation cross over the torso. The results in the ventral
occipitotemporal cortex (VOTC) were not as clear. Within the functionally predefined face area, we found no difference in activation evoked by
fixations made over the face relative to those made over the torso. However, a full-brain voxel-based analysis revealed voxel clusters in the
VOTC in which greater activation was evoked for fixations made on the
face relative to those made on the torso. These results illustrate the potential confounding influence of uncontrolled eye movements for neuroimaging studies of social perception.

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

E 103
TIME-COURSE OF AWARENESS FOR FACIAL IDENTITY Melanie
Genetti, Severine Heinzer, Asaid Khateb, Alan Pegna; Geneva University
Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland — Subliminal perception studies have led
to consider awareness as a continuum of states ranging from unaware to
complete awareness. In this study, we addressed the question of the timecourse of activation of visual awareness in relation to facial identity. Fifteen healthy subjects were presented with a celebrity’s face (CF) or an
unfamiliar face (UF) followed by a mask composed of an unfamiliar face.
Stimuli were displayed at the centre of a screen, at five durations ranging
from 16 to 266ms. Subjects were asked to respond whether the CF was
present or not. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded using 125channel EEG. A topographic analysis showed different segment maps
emerging between 220 and 460ms that were linked with the level of
awareness. The increase in levels of awareness with longer presentations
was mirrored by the progressive appearance of a specific scalp topography beginning at about 220ms, at the expense of distinct topographies
present at low levels of awareness. The analysis did not reveal any specific topography associated with facial identity, but was correlated with
an enhanced response of the P1 component. These results bring further
proof of the existence of an electrophysiological correlate of awareness
that occurs on a gradual scale.
E 104
EMOTIONAL GIST OF CONTEXTS RAPIDLY INFLUENCES
RECOGNITION OF FACIAL EXPRESSIONS AN ERP STUDY
Ruthger Righart1, Beatrice de Gelder1,2; 1Tilburg University, 2Martinos Center
for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Charlestown — Recent evidence clearly indicates rapid effects of
scene contexts on object recognition. In a similar vein we recently showed
that recognition of a facial expression is influenced by scene contexts in
which the face is presented (Righart & de Gelder 2006). The aim of the
present study was to examine how these early stages are affected when
individuals discriminate facial expressions (fear, happy) accompanied by
congruent, incongruent or neutral contexts. We observed a general effect
of context information as shown by the fact that the N170/VPP amplitudes were smaller when faces were accompanied by meaningful as compared to meaningless contexts (i.e., scrambled images). Furthermore, an
emotion specific effect was found for the N170 component. The N170
amplitudes for faces, particularly fearful faces, were larger when contexts
were fearful as compared to happy and neutral contexts. These findings
suggest that information from the emotional gist of a scene context is
integrated with facial expressions in the an early stage of face encoding.
E 105
THE PRIMACY AND FREQUENCY EFFECTS IN MASKED
PRIMING OF VISUAL IDENTIFICATION Alexander Sokolov1, Pietro
Guardini1,2, Marina Pavlova3,4; 1Ulm University Medical School, Ulm,
Germany, 2Padua Univ, Padua, Italy, 3Cognitive Social Development
Neuroscience Unit, Children’s Hospital, University of Tuebingen, Germany,
4
Institute of Medical Psychology & Behavioral Neurobiol, University of
Tuebingen, Germany — Psychophysical and neurobiological theories of
perceptual priming take account solely of within-trial events like primetarget congruency and their temporal arrangement (Henson 2003, Prog
Neurobiol 70 53-81; Eimer and Schlaghecken 2003, Biol Psychol 64 7-26).
Here, in a series of masked-priming experiments we examine if the frequency and serial order of congruent and incongruent trials affect visual
target identification. Participants pressed a respective key, promptly
deciding whether or not a target square (duration, 106.4 ms) had gaps in
its outline. In a trial, either a congruent or incongruent prime (same or
different square, respectively; 26.6 ms) and a mask (a square with dotted
outline; 79.8 ms) preceded the target. In between-subject designs, we varied the frequency of congruent and incongruent trials in the series (1:1,
1:3, and 3:1) and the serial order of their presentation (either congruent or
incongruent trials were more, or equally, likely to occur at the series outset). The results indicate a reliable response time, RT, and error-rate

179

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

priming (enhanced congruent trials) in series with equal-frequent trials.
RT, unlike error rate, is generally reduced with mainly congruent trials
presented at the series outset. In series with different frequent trials, frequent congruent trials augment priming effect while frequent incongruent trials completely abolish priming (a frequency by congruency
interaction). RT, unlike error rate, is generally reduced with frequent trials presented at the series outset. The findings suggest that the primacy
(serial-order) and frequency effects on priming are dissociable and that
both within-trial and between-trial neural processing modulate perceptual priming.
E 106
THE TIME COURSE OF FUSIFORM CORTEX ACTIVATION
DURING THE PERCEPTION OF FEARFUL BODY EXPRESSIONS
ASSESSED WITH MEG Hanneke Meeren1, Nouchine Hadjikhani2, Seppo
Ahlfo2, Matti Hämäläinen2, Beatrice de Gelder1,2; 1Tilburg University,
Tilburg, The Netherlands, 2Athinoula A. Martinos Center, Massachussetts
General Hosipital/MIT/Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA — We
used magnetoencephalography (MEG) to investigate the time course of
brain activation of perceiving emotional body language. Recent work has
demonstrated that the perception of human bodies selectively activates a
region in the middle part of the fusiform gyrus (mFG) associated with
face processing (“the fusiform face area (“FFA”). In addition, this region
enhances its activity when the perceived body expresses fear. The underlying neural mechanism of this fear-related enhancement however, is
unclear. It has been suggested that this may result from feedback projections from the amygdala. So far, information about the time course of
FFA activation, essential to shed further light on this issue, has been lacking. The goal of present study was to investigate the temporal dynamics
of fear-related body processing in the mFG. Pictures of neutral and fearful bodies were shown to participants while measuring MEG, and the
responses were analyzed with the method of anatomically constrained
minimum norm estimate. Consistent with earlier fMRI studies, we found
enhanced amplitudes for fear in the mFG of both hemispheres. Small
early differential responses were found around 120 ms after picture
onset. In addition, a strong fear-induced enhancement was found at 230
ms post-stimulus in the left mFG only. These timecourses suggest that the
sensitivity of the FFA for fearful body expressions partly arises from
feedforward visual input. In the left hemisphere however, it appears predominantly to result from strong feedback after extensive processing by
other regions, possibly the amygdala.
E 107
DEVELOPMENT OF HIGHER VISUAL-COGNITIVE ABILITIES
INVESTIGATED BY BIOLOGICAL MOTION PERCEPTION: AN
FMRI STUDY. Janine Lichtensteiger1, Peter Klaver1, Thomas Loenneker1,2,
Ernst
Martin1; 1University Children's Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland,
2
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland — Humans can efficiently detect
another living being in the environment and are able to retrieve many
features directly from its kinematics. The detection of this kind of motion
(biological motion = BM) is a striking example of cognition-influenced
perception. Cognitive procedures that are connected to visual perception
can be used to follow the progress of brain development in children. In
this study, children and adults are examined using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) and behavioral testing. We investigated perceptual performance in BM detection task in which targets (BM), which
are displays of a point-light figures that moved coherently (walking,
jumping, or waving), and nontargets (random motion) are masked or
unmasked by scrambled motion. Functional brain images were collected
on a 3T whole-body scanner. Stimuli were presented using video goggles.
Preliminary results of 13 adults indicate that the right posterior superior
temporal sulcus (pSTS), which is known to play a crucial role in the perception of BM, is significantly activated while adults attended to BM and
BM in noise. In two six year old children we found reduced activation for
BM in pSTS as compared to adults.

180

Perceptual Processes: High-Level Vision

E 108
ROLE OF PREFRONTAL CONTROL IN VISUAL OBJECT
CATEGORIZATION: BEHAVIORAL AND FMRI EVIDENCE FOR
OBJECT MODEL VERIFICATION THEORY Giorgio Ganis1,2,3, Haline
E. Schendan4,3, Stephen M. Kosslyn2; 1Harvard Medical School, 2Harvard
University, 3MGH/Athinoula Martinos Center, 4Tufts University — The
visual system rapidly categorizes objects seen under optimal viewing
conditions. However, the categorization of objects seen under impoverished viewing conditions (e.g., partial occlusion by other objects) not only
requires more time but may also depend more on top-down processing,
as hypothesized by object model verification theory. Two experiments,
one with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and one behavioral with the same stimuli, tested this hypothesis. FMRI data were
acquired while people categorized more impoverished (MI) and less
impoverished (LI) line drawings of objects. FMRI results revealed stronger activation during the MI than LI condition in brain regions involved
in top-down control (inferior and medial prefrontal cortex, intraparietal
sulcus), and in posterior, object-sensitive brain regions (ventral and dorsal occipitotemporal, and occipitoparietal cortex). The behavioral experiment indicated that taxing visuospatial working memory, a key
component of top-down control processes during visual tasks, interferes
more with the categorization of MI stimuli (but not LI stimuli) than does
taxing verbal working memory. Together, these findings provide evidence for object model verification theory and implicate greater prefrontal cortex involvement in top-down control of posterior visual processes
during the categorization of more impoverished images of objects.
E 109
OBJECT
REPRESENTATIONS
FOR
MULTIPLE
VISUAL
CATEGORIES OVERLAP IN MEDIAL FUSIFORM CORTEX Gilles
Pourtois1, Sophie Schwartz1, Mona Spiridon1, Roberto Martuzzi2, Patrik
Vuilleumier1; 1University of Geneva, Switzerland, 2University Hospital,
Lausanne, Switzerland — How representations of visual objects are maintained across changes in viewpoints is a central issue in visual perception. We used event-related fMRI in 16 healthy volunteers to map visual
cortical areas responding to a large set (156) of exemplars from three distinct visual categories (faces, houses, chairs), each repeated once after a
variable time lag (3-7 intervening stimuli). Exemplars were repeated
with the same (but different retinal image-size) or different viewpoint.
The task was kept constant across object categories (modern vs. old judgments). We identified adaptation effects on neural responses (repetition
suppression) by comparing the first presentation vs. repetition of each
individual exemplar. We found that adaptation effects closely overlapped with category-selective responses (as identified using a separate
localizer scan). These included the lateral fusiform gyrus (FG) for faces,
para-hippocampal gyrus for houses, and lateral occipital complex for
chairs. In face-selective FG, adaptation effects occurred only for faces
repeated with the same viewpoint, but not with a different viewpoint,
replicating our previous study using faces alone. Moreover, a region in
right medial FG, adjacent to but non-overlapping with lateral FG,
showed significant repetition suppression for faces as well as for other
objects, regardless of changes in viewpoint or in retinal image-size. Our
results reveal a common neural substrate in the medial FG underlying
view-invariant recognition for multiple object categories. Such a shared
system in the medial FG for multi-part object representations challenges
the traditional view of abstract/3D face-specific representations in the
FG.
E 110
EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIAL CORRELATES OF VISUAL
AWARENESS IN CHANGE DETECTION Hartmut
Leuthold;
University of Glasgow, Centre of Cognitive Neuroimaging, Glasgow, Scotland,
UK — The relationship between visual awareness and attention is a controversial issue in change detection research. Event-related brain potential (ERP) studies have shown an early negative ERP deflection maximal
over posterior electrodes (N2) to depend on the awareness of visual

Perceptual Processes: High-Level Vision

change. However, change detection performance is also related to modulations of the N2pc potential, a posterior-lateralized ERP component that
is typically taken to index spatially selective attentional processing of relevant items. To address whether or not N2 and N2pc are linked to visual
awareness, the present ERP study employed color and shape change
detection paradigms, in which memory and test items (set size = 2 vs. 5)
were successively presented (delay = 1,000 ms) to the left and right of fixation. A cue indicated the location of task-relevant items (left vs. right).
Replicating previous reports, detected changes as compared to undetected and no-changes triggered a parieto-occipital N2 deflection 200 ms
after test array onset. Crucially, an N2pc component was elicited even on
trials for which item changes were undetected and N2 was absent. In contrast to N2pc, a lateralized ERP marker of visual-short term memory
(VSTM) indicated that fluctuations in VSTM encoding and maintenance
during the delay period relate to change detection performance. In conclusion, the present study strengthens the view that the posterior ERP
negativity (N2) provides a sensitive neural correlate of processes associated with changes in visual awareness. By contrast, N2pc appears to
reflect a functionally distinct attentional process that is only indirectly
linked to change awareness.
E 111
CHILDREN’S EVENT-RELATED RESPONSES TO SINGLE
LETTERS Anthony Herdman; Simon Fraser University — Because most
children frequently view letters, neural networks likely reorganize to
allow for fast recognition of such visual objects. Thus, early cortical
event-related responses (ERPs) might peak earlier and with greater
amplitude to a letter (an experienced object) than to a non-letter (an inexperienced object). To investigate this, I recorded behavioural responses
and ERPs from children while they judged visual stimuli to be a letter or
a non-letter. Reaction times were 28 ± 26 ms faster for correctly identifying a letter than a non-letter. Analyses of variance of stimulus types (letter vs. non-letter) by hemispheres (left vs. right) were performed on the
N170 amplitudes and latencies at an occipital electrode site that had the
largest N170 response. ANOVA results didn’t show significant N170
amplitude differences between stimulus types or hemispheres. However,
the N170 peaked 7 ms earlier to a letter than a non-letter (p=.01) and 5 ms
earlier in the left than right hemisphere (p=.07). N170 latency differences
between letter and non-letter stimuli were significantly correlated with
reaction time differences (r= 0.72; adjusted r2 = 0.45; p = .029). This
latency effect demonstrates that early perceptual processing in children is
faster for frequently experienced letters than non-letters, which is conceivably a result of reading experience.
E 112
CONCEPTUAL TUNING CURVES IN THE HUMAN BRAIN
REVEALED THROUGH FMRI-ADAPTATION Stephen J.
Gotts,
Shawn C. Milleville, Patrick S.F. Bellgowan, Alex Martin; NIMH/NIH,
Bethesda, MD — Rapid stimulus repetition in fMRI experiments commonly leads to a stimulus-specific reduction in the BOLD response,
referred to as fMRI-Adaptation. It has been argued that the degree of
recovery from adaptation to a subsequent, related stimulus reveals critical information about the tuning preferences of cells in affected brain
regions (Piazza et al., Neuron, 2004). We conducted a rapid event-related
fMRI-adaptation experiment (N=18 participants) with pictures of animals
in which we identified brain regions sensitive to conceptual similarity.
We manipulated the conceptual relationship between adaptation and
deviant probe stimuli over five levels: identical image, different exemplar
of the same animal, close semantic associate (e.g., cow-horse), same animal class (e.g. mammals: cow-tiger), and different animal class (e.g.,
mammal vs. fish: cow-shark). We observed fMRI-Adaptation broadly
throughout dorsal and ventral visual pathways, as well as in prefrontal
regions and thalamus. Recovery to deviant stimuli following an adaptation sequence was observed within these same regions. For much of
visual cortex, recovery from adaptation was nearly complete to a different exemplar image, consistent with retinotopic tuning. In contrast, con-

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

tinued adaptation to identical pictures, exemplars and close semantic
associates was found in bilateral fusiform, inferior frontal, insula, posterior parietal, and cingulate cortices. The recovery curves that we have
measured can be thought of as conceptual tuning curves that may be
used to dissociate different functional components of visual object processing in the brain, as well as to study alterations in tuning with practice.
E 113
THE TIME COURSE OF THE FACE INVERSION EFFECT Bruno
Rossion, Olivier D'Arripe, Corentin Jacques; Universite Catholique de
Louvain, — Human faces look more similar to each other when they are
presented upside-down, leading to an increase of error rate and response
time during individual face discrimination tasks. This inversion effect is
one of the most robust finding in the face processing literature. Recent
neuroimaging studies using adaptation to face identity have shown that
the ‘fusiform face area’ was the primary neural source of the behavioral
face inversion effect (FIE). However, the time course of the FIE – i.e. when
inversion affects the coding of facial identity in the human brain remains unclear. Here we addressed this question by recording eventrelated potentials (ERPs) on the scalp during an adaptation paradigm
with upright and inverted faces. Subjects were presented with a first
(adapting) face stimulus for about 3000 ms, followed by a second face of
either the same identity or a different identity. The ERP response to the
second face stimulus was markedly reduced over occipito-temporal electrode sites when it was identical to the adapting face, starting at about
160 ms. When the exact same stimuli were presented upside-down, the
reduction of signal was smaller, and took place about 30 ms later, in line
with the behavioral effect of inversion. This result shows that the effect of
face inversion on individual face discrimination takes place during early
face perceptual processes in the occipito-temporal cortex. It also strongly
suggests that individual face configuration is extracted as early as 160 ms
following stimulus onset.
E 114
“WHAT HAPPENS WHEN A FACE RINGS A BELL?” AN ERP
BACKWARD-MASKING STUDY. Julie Coutya1,2, Caroline Langer1,2,
Anthony Hosein1, Boutheina Jemel1,3; 1Hôpital Rivière-des-Prairies, Montréal;
2Concordia University, Montréal, 3Université de Montréal, Montréal — Familiarity of faces have been shown to affect early and late event related potentials (ERPs) components. This supports the theory that perception is
permeable to cognitive processes. This study uses a backward masking
paradigm to investigate the extent of that permeability. By varying the
timing between stimulus offset and mask onset, visual processing can be
controlled, allowing a step-by-step analysis of neurophysiological correlates of conscious recognition. ERPs were collected with 64 EEG channels
while participants (N=17) performed a familiarity judgment on pictures
of familiar and unfamiliar faces. Each picture was viewed at five durations (ranging from 11 ms to 319 ms), interposed between two masks. The
five presentation durations of each picture plus mask were first presented sequentially (4 blocs) and then randomly (4 blocs), the order of
which was counterbalanced across subjects. On average, faces were first
recognized at 44ms for sequential and 121 ms random. The ERP data
reveal larger amplitude of the N170 face-sensitive component to masked
stimuli at 44 ms (recognition threshold) than at lower presentation durations. Later ERPs, namely the N400 familiarity component, was the largest at recognition level, smaller at 1-level before recognition and absent at
2-levels before recognition. These findings implicate conscious perception, and probably re-entrant feedback processes in the elicitation of the
N170 face component which is consistent with the cognitive penetrability
of face perception. The gradual increase of later ERPs with recognition
level supports a gradual activation mode of face representations.
E 115
REDUCTION IN WHITE MATTER CONNECTIVITY, REVEALED
BY DTI, MAY ACCOUNT FOR AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN FACE
PERCEPTION Cibu Thomas1, Linda Moya1, Galia Avidan2, Kate
Humphreys3, Kwan-jin Jung1,4, Mary Peterson5, Marlene Behrmann6,1;

181

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

1

Carnegie Mellon University, 2Ben Gurion University, Beersheva, Israel,
College, UK, 4University of Pittsburgh, 5University of Arizona,
6University of Toronto, Canada — The age-related reduction in the ability
to recognize faces has often been attributed to changes in memory or
learning abilities in older individuals. Recently, however, difficulties in
the perceptual discrimination between faces has also been reported, suggesting a perceptual contribution to the decrement in face perception as a
function of age. To explore the neural basis of this age-related alteration,
we measured the structural integrity of two major posterior-anterior
white matter tracts that pass through the pre-eminent face processing
area, the fusiform gyrus, in a large group of individuals ranging from 18
to 86 years of age, using diffusion tensor imaging. Additionally, we documented the behavioral performance of these individuals on fine-grained
discrimination tasks in which the stimuli (pairs of cars or pairs of faces)
were morphed to yield varying levels of perceptual difficulty. Performance on the behavioral tasks was slowed and less accurate as a function
of age, and to a greater degree for faces than for cars. There was also a significant reduction in the number and fractional anisotropy in the white
matter tracts as a function of age and, moreover, this was correlated with
the behavioral profile. These findings target a specific neural mechanism,
which might mediate the age-related changes in face perception.
3Birkbeck

E 116
FACE RECOGNITION AS A SPECIAL COGNITIVE ABILITY: AN
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES STUDY Christopher F.
Chabris1,
2
1
1
Margaret E. Gerbasi , Melissa Liebert , Ken Nakayama , Bradley C.
Duchaine3; 1Harvard University, 2Princeton University, 3University College
London — Evidence that computational processes required for face recognition may be localized in areas of the ventral visual pathway has supported the claim that faces are “special.” However, the ability to engage
such processes and recognize faces accurately could depend on general
cognitive ability (g) or on other abilities, such as memory or attention. To
test the hypothesis that face recognition is a special cognitive ability, we
administered to 1700 individuals the Cambridge Face Memory Test
(CFMT), which has been shown to discriminate between prosopagnosic
and control subjects and to engage face-specific processes, plus several
tests of other cognitive abilities. We found that the CFMT was reliable (6month test-retest stability, r = .70) and that it predicted performance on
an unrelated test of face memory (r = .47). However, only 2% of the variance in CFMT accuracy could be predicted from performance of a shortform Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices (RAPM), the single best
test of g (r = .14, N = 98). In a separate but demographically similar sample (N = 111), RAPM predicted at least 4% of the variance in each of six
cognitive measures comparable in difficulty to the CFMT. Also, CFMT
was substantially unrelated to measures of facial emotion recognition,
verbal recognition memory, or vigilance (all r < .14). Taken together,
these results support our hypothesis, they illustrate the value of cognitive
neuroscience insights in studying individual differences, and they suggest that an individual differences approach may illuminate questions
about the neural architecture of cognition.
E 117
DOES RECALL OF A FAMILIAR FACE EVOKE A PERSONSPECIFIC FFA RESPONSE? AN FMRI ADAPTATION STUDY.
Mark J.E. Macdonald, Jennifer Goldschmied, Sharon Thompson-Schill,
Geoffrey K. Aguirre; University of Pennsylvania — The Fusiform Face Area
(FFA) has been proposed to store distributed representations of facial
identity, although it has been debated whether the link between this representation and semantic knowledge regarding a specific person resides
within the FFA or more anterior temporal regions. We tested the hypothesis that access of visual memory for a face adapts the neural response
within the FFA to the subsequent presentation of that face. The specificity
of the response was further evaluated by testing if mental imagery of a
face would produce partial adaptation for the face of someone with a
similar appearance. Subjects were trained over the course of ten days to
recognize and name two sets of artificially created faces. Faces within one

182

Perceptual Processes: High-Level Vision

set were designed to share more visual similarity than the other. During
each scanning trial, either Face-Face, or Name-Face pairs were presented
serially, and subjects performed unrelated tasks designed to elicit mental
imagery of the faces. Levels of neural adaptation were then compared
between conditions. Within the FFA bilaterally and the R LOC, significant adaptation for repeated visual face presentation was observed, as
were larger responses to visually distinct as compared to similar faces. In
no region was adaptation observed in response to presentation of the
name of a face. Thus, this experiment does not support a role for the FFA
or LOC in linking facial identity with visual memory of an individual.
Further analyses of these data will focus upon more anterior regions
within the temporal lobe.
E 118
RECURRENT LOOP MODEL OF FLANKER EFFECTS ON
RECOGNITION Tsvi Achler, Ana Torralbo; University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign — In our recurrent loop model of recognition, each
input feature is regulated as to how much influence it can have on the
network representations through pre-synaptic competition via input
shunting. This model provides a rich set of predictions for the efficiency
of recognition in a variety of tasks. To test this model, we performed the
flanker task, where the distractor can be response compatible or incompatible with the target, and in some conditions the flankers were surrounded by irrelevant letters that appear to compete with the flanker
representation. Our human experiential results show that the interference
produced by the flankers is modulated by interactions of the surrounding
irrelevant letters. Our model of the visual cortex suggests that these
effects occur due to the competitive mechanisms involved in recognition
which are sensitive to manipulations such as the flanker task. These same
mechanisms are also sensitive to the manipulation of the flankers by surrounding distractors. Thus all of these manipulations are predicted with
the general mechanisms of recognition within our model.
E 119
THE INFLUENCE OF NUMBER OF EYE FIXATIONS ON FACE
RECOGNITION Janet Hsiao, Garrison Cottrell; UCSD — Researchers
have shown that eye movements during visual perception are linked to
the underlying cognitive processes. In face recognition, it has been
reported that we have one or more preferred fixations and a tendency to
use a regular sequence of eye movements for specific tasks (e.g., WalkerSmith, Gale, & Findlay, 1977). In the current study, we conduct a face recognition experiment to examine the influence of number of fixations in
face recognition. Participants were presented with face images at the
study phase and asked to recognize the same faces at the test phase. We
restricted the number of fixations on the face image randomly at the test
phase to one, two, three, and no restriction. We show that participants are
able to recall the faces with just a single fixation, and they have better performance when two fixations are allowed. Nevertheless, there is no further improvement with more than two fixations. It may suggest that we
only need two fixations to recognize a face. We also show that when comparing the first two fixations that participants made during training and
testing, the second fixations for the training and testing are significantly
different but the first fixations are not; also, the first two fixations for the
training set are significantly more divergent than those for the testing set.
The results suggest that different eye movement strategies are used for
training and testing, and the first two fixations in face recognition may
have a functional role in retrieving informative facial information.
E 120
CATEGORIZATION IN THE VISUAL CORTICOSTRIATAL
LOOP. Carol A. Seger1, Dan Lopez-Paniagua1, Joseph M. DeGutis2,
Corinna M. Cincotta1; 1Colorado State University, 2Veterans’ Affairs Hospital,
Martinez, California — We used fMRI to examine how brain regions in the
visual corticostriatal loop (including inferior temporal cortex and the
body and tail of the caudate nucleus) are recruited and interact during
categorization learning. On each trial, subjects viewed a face or house,
pressed a button indicating whether it belonged to category A or cate-

Memory: Memory Systems

gory B, and received feedback. Faces and houses were arbitrarily
assigned to categories and category assignment could not be learned via
identification of any rule or pattern. Eight houses and eight faces were
learned; of each, six were deterministic (3 belonged to category A, 3 to
category B), and 2 were random (category A for half the trials, B for the
other half). A mixed design was used, with stimulus type (faces and
houses) manipulated on a block basis and accuracy and feedback valence
examined on a post hoc event related basis. Subjects also performed a
localizer task for the fusiform face area (FFA) and parahippocampal place
area (PPA) during which they viewed blocks of faces, houses, animals,
and tools while performing a 1-back task. The bilateral body and tail of
the caudate was recruited during correct categorization of deterministic
stimuli (both houses and faces). In contrast, the head of the caudate and
ventral striatum (which participate in the executive and motivational corticostriatal loops) were modulated by feedback valence. We also examined functional connectivity between FFA and PPA and the body and tail
of the caudate using coherence and partial coherence methods.
E 121
THE INVERSION EFFECTS FOR CHINESE CHARACTERS ManYing Wang1, Bo-Cheng Kuo2; 1Soochow University, 2National Taiwan
University — The inversion effect exhibited for face stimuli refers to the
disproportionate decrement in recognition performance as compared to
nonface stimuli and the effect is attributed to the disruption of configural
properties. The effect of inversion on the recognition of Chinese characters was examined in this study. To the extent that the configural property also plays a role in the recognition of Chinese characters, sizeable
inversion effects would be expected. The inversion effect for one-component unique characters and two-component compound characters were
compared with that of faces. Unique characters produced an inversion
effect similar in size with faces that was only half as large as compound
characters. Experiment 2 recorded scalp EEG (37 channels) in 14 participants performing the lexical/face decision task for real vs. pseudo-characters and real vs. scrambled faces. Decision time data replicated that of
Experiment 1. Robust N170 components were elicited at right occipital/
temporal sites for both characters and faces. Unique characters produced
a larger N170 than compound characters and that, in turn, was larger
than faces. The direction of the effect of inversion was different for faces
and characters – it enhanced the amplitude of N170 for characters but
reduced N170 for faces. The large N170 effect in unique characters was
interpreted as the result of a stimulus structure that facilitates configural
processing and inhibits part-based processing (Sagiv & Bentin, 2001).

Memory: Memory Systems
E 122
NEURAL CORRELATES OF PHONOLOGICALLY CONSTRAINED
RETRIEVAL CUE PROCESSING: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION
Kayoko Okada, Michael D. Rugg; University of California, Irvine — Previous
research suggests that, depending on the goal of a memory search, subjects differentially process retrieval cues to maximize the probability of
retrieval success. The present fMRI experiment investigated the neural
correlates of differential cue processing by employing identical cues to
probe memory in two different tasks. For both tasks, study items comprised visually presented words. In the simple recognition task, subjects
(N=19) discriminated between new and studied words, whereas in the
homophone recognition task, they discriminated between new items and
homophones of studied words. Thus, whereas the recognition cues
potentially overlapped study items at all representational levels, overlap
in the homophone task could occur only at the phonological level. Contrasts of the activity elicited by unstudied items in the two tasks revealed
greater activity in left dorsal inferior frontal cortex in the homophone
task relative to simple recognition, and greater right anterior temporal
activity for the reverse contrast. These findings lend further support to

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

the notion that retrieval cue processing is modulated by retrieval goal,
and that subjects generate cue representations most likely to overlap with
salient attributes of the sought-for memories. In addition, successful
retrieval was associated with enhanced activity in a network of lateral
and medial parietal regions, but a cross-over interaction in the anterior
medial temporal lobe (hippocampus/amygdala), such that new items
elicited greater activity than old items in simple recognition, and viceversa in the homophone task. This latter finding may reflect the differing
roles played by familiarity in supporting performance in the two tasks.

Perceptual Processes: Low-Level Vision
E 123
NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF VISUAL PERCEPTUAL LEARNING IN
CARDINAL AND OBLIQUE ORIENTATION DISCRIMINATION
Yan Song, Yi Zhang, Jing Kang, Xiaolan Li; Beijing Normal University,
Beijing, China — The two experiments described here used event-related
potentials (ERPs) to investigate the neural mechanisms of visual perceptual learning in cardinal and oblique orientation discrimination in human
adults. Reaction times and ERPs were recorded during four consecutive
training sessions in which subjects discriminated the orientation of gratings. Psychophysical threshold measurements were performed before
and after the training. We investigated the learning-induced behavioral
and ERP changes and whether these changes were orientation specific.
For cardinal orientations, reaction times and thresholds were not
changed across training sessions. ERP results showed that a non-specific
N1 decrement over the posterior areas. For oblique orientations, however, reaction times and thresholds were significantly decreased across
training sessions. In addition, training resulted in a non-specific N1 decrement and specific P2 and P3 increment over the posterior areas. In sum,
the two kinds of orientation discrimination learning are different not only
in behavioral performance, but also in brain activity. Compared with cardinal orientations, more visual processing stages, later ERP components
were involved in learning oblique orientations. Our findings further indicate that the two kinds of orientation discrimination learning have different neural substrates.
E 124
ENHANCED VISUAL DETAIL PERCEPTION IN AUTISM
SPECTRUM
DISORDER:
AN
IMBALANCE
BETWEEN
FEEDFORWARD,
HORIZONTAL
AND
FEEDBACK
PROCESSING Myriam W. G. Vandenbroucke1,2, H. Steven Scholte1,
Victor A. F. Lamme1,3, Herman van Engeland2, Chantal Kemner2,4;
1University of Amsterdam, 2University Medical Center Utrecht, 3Netherlands
Institute for Neuroscience, 4Maastricht University — Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is described by several behavioural abnormalities, including
a strong tendency to detail perception. In the current research, an explanation for this aspect of ASD is proposed and investigated based on
insights in the role of visual feedforward, horizontal and feedback connections. Whereas by feedforward and horizontal processing global features are extracted, feedback activity from higher to lower visual areas
leads to the incorporation of details in a visual scene. An imbalance
between these mechanisms could cause an imbalance between global and
detail processing in ASD. To test this we used both psychophysical and
EEG data from a new texture discrimination task, where surface segregation was varied independently from texture boundaries. Good performance in the task strongly relied on feedback processing and subtraction
ERP’s could distinguish between feedforward, horizontal and feedback
activity. The results showed that subjects with ASD (N = 13) had lower
performance scores compared to controls (N = 31) which was supported
by the EEG data. The ERP related to horizontal connection activity was
absent in the ASD group. In contrast, the consecutive feedforward activity to extrastriate cortex was enhanced compared to control subjects and,
finally, there was a delay in the feedback related ERP signal. From the

183

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

current results we can conclude that aberrancies in early, low-level visual
mechanisms in subjects with ASD indicate an imbalance between feedforward, horizontal and feedback processing. This might be the underlying
cause of enhanced detail perception in these patients.
E 125
VISUAL FIELD ASYMMETRIES IN EARLY VISUAL PROCESSING:
AN ERP STUDY OF PERCEPTUAL LEARNING Karsten Raus, Gilles
Pourtois, Christoph Michel, Patrik Vuilleumier, Sophie Schwartz; University of
Geneva, Switzerland — Previous research has demonstrated retinotopic
learning effects in visual texture discrimination tasks, suggesting that
learning may involve functional reorganization in primary visual cortex
(V1). We hypothesized that lasting changes in early visual processing
should affect electrophysiological brain responses. Visual-evoked potentials were recorded from 20 healthy volunteers following intensive training on a texture discrimination task in one visual quadrant. Our aim was
to establish whether perceptual learning can alter the first retinotopic
response in visual cortex, as reflected by the C1 component, which is generally regarded as impervious to manipulations of higher cognitive processes. Results obtained 24h after training in the upper visual field
corroborated this hypothesis, with C1 amplitude significantly reduced in
the trained as compared to the untrained quadrant. These results provide
the first direct evidence for a modulation of neural responses occurring at
the earliest cortical stage of visual processing following perceptual learning. However, the same effect was not observed for subjects trained in the
lower visual field. Differences in scalp distribution of C1 and its overlap
with later VEP components following activation of dorsal versus ventral
aspects of the calcarine sulcus may account for this discrepancy. Critically, behavioral measures revealed lasting performance improvement
only for the subjects trained in the upper visual field, which is in agreement with previous reports of functional differences across upper and
lower hemifields. We conclude that post-training improvement on a
visual task implicates neural changes within V1, reflected here by a modulation of the earliest cortical response recorded with EEG.
E 126
ELECTRICAL
STIMULATION
IN
LATERAL
OCCIPITOTEMPORAL
CORTEX
INDUCES
FORM-FROM-MOTION
BLINDNESS Manuel Mercier1, Margitta Seeck2, Olaf Blanke1; 1LNCO BMI - EPFL, 2University Hospital of Geneva — The ability to extract the
form of objects defined entirely by visual motion cues (form-from-motion
or FfM perception) is a remarkable achievement of the human visual system. Studies in brain damaged patients and recent neuroimaging studies
suggest that FfM perception and more elementary motion perception
(motion direction perception) are carried out in distinct extrastriate
regions. The detailed anatomical mechanisms remain largely unresolved.
Here we tested FfM perception during direct electrical cortical stimulation (ECS) in extra striate human cortex and recorded intracranial event
related potentials (iERP) during FfM perception in a 27 year-old, righthanded patient undergoing pre surgical epilepsy evaluation for pharmaco resistant epilepsy. ECS and iERPs were carried out with 80 subdural electrodes implanted over parietal, temporal and occipital cortex of
the right hemisphere. We applied a previously used ECS protocol (Blanke
et al., 2002) using absolute FfM discrimination thresholds prior to ECS trials at 20 sites in lateral occipito-temporal cortex. Severe FfM blindness in
the central visual field was induced at 2 sites in lateral occipital complex.
At these 2 sites the patient was not at all able to discriminate the FfM
stimulus, but performed normally for motion direction discrimination.
ECS at other sites led to milder impairments. iERPs peaking at ~100 ms
and at ~170 ms revealed large amplitude responses selective for FfM
stimuli in lateral occipital cortex partially overlapping with the 2 sites
where ECS induced severe FfM blindness. Our data provide intracranial
electrophysiological evidence for the key role of right lateral occipital cortex in FfM vision.

184

Perceptual Processes: Low-Level Vision

E 127
PERCEPTUAL REVERSAL OF A BISTABLE AMBIGUOUS
STIMULUS IS PRECEDED BY ACTIVITY IN INFERIOR PARIETAL
LOBE: AN ELECTRICAL SOURCE IMAGING STUDY Juliane Britz,
Theodor Landis, Christoph Michel; University of Geneva, Switzerland — Bistable
ambiguous figures like the Necker cube induce involuntary perceptual
alternations between two mutually exclusive views of a physically
unique stimulus. Previous EEG studies addressing this phenomenon
have identified both changes in the spectral power in the period preceding a perceptual alternation and different visual evoked potentials following the alternation. In the present study, we hypothesized that the
momentary functional microstate of the brain just before stimulus presentation predicts reversal of the perception. 256-channel EEG was
recorded while subjects were presented with a complex version of a
Necker cube which was repeatedly flashed on a computer screen for 800
ms followed by a blank for 600 ms and were asked to report a change in
perception relative to the preceding presentation by means of a button
press. Scalp potential maps just before the stimuli were grouped in those
preceding stable and those preceding change trials. A k-means cluster
analysis identified statistically different map topographies between the
two conditions. Statistical comparison of the source estimations identified activity in the right inferior parietal lobe, immediately preceding the
stimulus as a predictor of a reversal of the perception. While previous
studies identified this area to be involved in discrimination of direction
changes of translational motion, we here show that an activation of this
area before the stimulus leads to perceptual reversal of a static stimulus.
E 128
FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING EVIDENCE THAT VISUAL
INPUT TO THE PREFERRED RETINAL LOCATION IN PATIENTS
WITH MACULAR DEGENERATION ELICITS CORTICAL
REORGANIZATION Keith L. Main1, Kevin P. Moloney1, Erin N. Kinzel1,
Jimmy Ginn1, Susan A. Primo2, Julie A. Jacko1,2, Eric H. Schumacher1; 1Georgia
Institute of Technology, 2Emory University — Research with non-human primates suggests that deafferentation of visual pathways can result in reorganization of the primary visual cortex. Under some circumstances,
neurons in the disconnected cortex may begin to respond to stimulation
outside their original receptive fields (Kaas et. al., 1990). Recent research
has shown that cortical reorganization occurs in humans with macular
degeneration (MD), an eye disease that results in the loss of central
vision. Baker and colleagues (2005) reported that activation in the lesion
projection zone occurred for visual stimuli presented to patients’ preferred retinal location (PRL) (i.e., the intact retinal area used to fixate in
place of the diseased macula). From these results it is unclear whether
cortical reorganization is associated with PRL stimulation exclusively or
if it is a general phenomenon of the disease. To examine this question, the
current study first used microperimetry to map the visual field and PRL
of six MD patients and age-matched controls, and then used fMRI to
measure brain activity while presenting visual stimuli to different regions
of each participant’s visual field. We found evidence for cortical reorganization, as indicated by heightened activity in the posterior calcarine sulcus during PRL stimulation. Reorganization was more pronounced for
stimulation of the PRL compared to retinal areas at the same eccentricity
and those possessing the same photosensitivity. These findings both support and extend existing research, indicating that cortical reorganization
may be driven, in part, by visual or attentional processes specific to the
development and use of a PRL.
E 129
TEMPORAL PROPERTIES OF MONOCULAR AND DICHOPTIC
CROWDING Paul F. Bulakowski, Robert B. Post, David Whitney;
University of California, Davis — Identification of an object in the peripheral visual field is impaired when it is crowded by surrounding, nonoverlapping objects. Several studies have reported two unique characteristics of crowding. First, optimal crowding for binocularly presented
stimuli occurs with very brief stimulus onset asynchronies (SOAs); thus

Perceptual Processes: Other

the crowding effect is temporally dependent. Second, crowding occurs
when a target and its flankers are both presented to one eye (monocular
presentation) or when each is presented to a different eye (dichoptic presentation). Thus, crowding may occur at a single stage in the visual system. To test this, we measured the temporal dependence of crowding
when the target and flanker stimuli were presented monocularly or
dichoptically. A method of constant stimuli task revealed that crowding
varied as a function of the target-flanker SOA for both monocularly and
dichoptically presented stimuli. Crowding across conditions was optimal
at an SOA of ~25 ms and there was a slight (~10-15 ms) asynchrony in the
time courses of monocular and dichoptic crowding. The magnitude of
crowding was ~30% greater for monocular than dichoptic crowding at 0
SOA. Crowding’s unique time course rejects flash suppression, rivalry as
well as metacontrast, pattern, and object substitution masking as explanations for the results. Our data suggest that crowding operates over a
relatively broad temporal window and raise the intriguing possibility
that there are independent monocular and binocular stages of crowding.
E 130
THE ROLE OF CUE TYPE AND CUE DURATION IN THE
PERSISTENCE OF A BOUND FORM IN VISION Szymon
Wartak,
Evan F. Risko, Derek Besner; University of Waterloo — Several recent studies using shape-from-motion displays have investigated binding processes involved in vision. Typically, shape-from-motion paradigms have
used segmented line drawings and a motion cue to distinguish figure
from ground. After removal of the cue the shape persists in consciousness
for a short time. This persistence has been used as an index of binding
processes in vision and is said to be supported by the lateral occipital cortex. In the present investigation, we manipulated cue type and cue duration in order to assess the influence of the specific segregating cue on the
duration of persistence. Results demonstrate that cue type does indeed
influence persistence. Discussion focuses on the nature of the segregating
cue in binding processes and the function of the lateral occipital cortex.

Perceptual Processes: Other
E 131
PSEUDONEGLECT FOR THE BISECTION OF MENTAL NUMBER
LINES Andrea Loftus1, Michael Nicholls1, Jason Mattingley1, Heidi
Chapman1, John Bradshaw2; 1University of Melbourne, Australia, 2Monash
University, Australia — Patients with left neglect bisect mental number
lines to the right. This study determined whether individuals with an
intact brain show ‘pseudoneglect’ for mental number lines. In Experiments 1 - 4, participants saw number triplets and determined whether the
numerical distance was greater on the left or right side of the inner number. Despite changing the spatial configuration of the stimuli, or their
temporal order, the numerical length on the left side was consistently
overestimated - indicating the bias is based on a mental representation.
The leftward bias was also observed for sets of negative numbers (Experiment 5) – demonstrating that the bias is not the result of an arithmetic
distortion caused by logarithmic scaling. Using numbers prone to large
or small rounding-down errors, Experiment 6 showed that the bias was
not the result of rounding-down. The task demands were changed in
Experiment 7, so that participants determined whether the inner number
was the true arithmetic centre or not. Participants overestimated the left
side by mistaking numbers shifted to the left to be the true numerical centre. The task was applied to three patients with right parietal damage. A
rightward bias was observed, which depended on the severity of neglect
symptoms. Together, the data demonstrate a robust leftward bias for
mental number line bisection, which reverses in neglect. The bias mirrors
pseudoneglect for physical lines and reflects an expansion of the space
occupied by lower leftward numbers and a contraction of space for
higher rightward numbers.

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

E 132
NEURAL BASIS OF TIMING PROCESSING ACROSS VISUAL AND
AUDITORY MODALITIES Lynn Y.L. Shih1, Wen-Jui Kuo1, Tzu-Chen
Yeh2,3, Ovid J.L. Tzeng4,1, Jen-Chuen Hsieh2,1; 1Institute of Neuroscience,
School of Life Science, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Taipei
Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Institute of Brain Science, School of
Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan,4National YangMing University, Taipei — Timing processing is a primordial component
of human behaviour, especially on the scale of milliseconds. However, no
consensus has been reached about whether timing processing is specialized, distributed or localized. Some studies had been systematically
manipulated the time scale of duration discrimination to probe for the
mechanism of timing processing, but few was done on the perceptual
modalities. In the present study, we sought to compare the neural networks underlying auditory and visual duration discrimination by using
3-T fMRI in order to have a sophisticated understanding about the mechanism of timing processing in the brain. Eighteen right-handed subjects
participated in this study. Two tasks, auditory and visual duration discrimination, were studied. In auditory duration discrimination, two
intervals were presented via headphone. Subjects were asked to discriminate which one of these two intervals was longer. In visual duration discrimination, two gray circles were presented on the screen successively,
and the subjects were instructed to determine which of the circles staying
on the screen longer. Our data suggests a distributed timing network,
including both amodal and modality-specific brain regions. Amodal
areas for timing processing include frontal-temporal-striatal networks
which are responsible for information encoding and maintenance.
Modality-specific area depends on the sensory modality used to register
the timing information. Except audition, timing processing in other sensory modalities may require extra process to transfer the information into
auditory manner, because of the superiority of audition over others in
timing processing.
E 133
PREFRONTAL
LOBE
CONTRIBUTION
TO
GLOBAL
PERCEPTION Elisa Ciaramelli1, Fabrizio Leo2, David Burr3, Michela Del
Viva3, Elisabetta Ladavas2; 1Rotman Research Institute, Toronto, Canada,
2
Universita' di Bologna, Italy, 3Universita' di Firenze, Italy — Recent
research suggests a role of top-down modulatory signals on perceptual
processing, particularly for the integration of local elementary information to form a global holistic percept (e.g., Piccini et al., 2003). In this
study we investigate whether prefrontal cortex may be instrumental in
this top-down modulation in humans. We recruited 6 patients with prefrontal lesions. Four out of the 6 patients showed impaired performance
in standard neuropsychological tests requiring perception of a global
structure from local cues (e.g., Street Completion Test, Overlapping Figures subtest of the BORB). We then conducted a psychophysical experiment aiming to quantify the limits of perceptual grouping in our patients.
A control group of 4 patients with temporal lesions and a control group
of 17 age-matched healthy individuals were also tested. We measured
detection thresholds for perceiving a circle defined by a closed chain of
Gabor patches over a noisy background (e.g., Field et al., 1993). Crucially,
the number of patches defining the circle was manipulated across experimental conditions, hence varying the inter-element distance values. Performance of patients with prefrontal lesions was far worse than that of
patients with temporal lesions and normal controls when the patterns
were sparse, requiring integration across relatively extensive regions of
space. In contrast, for denser patterns performance of prefrontal patients
was similar to that of the control groups. These results implicate the prefrontal cortex in the process of integrating elementary features into a
holistic global percept, when the elements do not form a “pop-out” display.

185

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

E 134
INVESTIGATING THE AGING EFFECTS OF VISUALLY-GUIDED
MOVEMENTS
IN
IPSILATERAL,
MIDLINE
AND
CONTRALATERAL SPACE Karen Lau, Eric Roy, Amanda Skakum,
Genevieve Desmarais; University of Waterloo — Visual aiming movements
are often used to gauge the consequences of age-related slowing of motor
processes. Movements made in the ipsilateral side of space are typically
faster and more accurate than movements made at midline and in contralateral space. These effects may occur because target information is
processed more efficiently within the same hemisphere rather than across
hemispheres, and there are favourable biomechanical kinematic properties within ipsilateral movement. However, the differences in these ipsilateral advantages are unclear when comparing healthy young and
elderly individuals. To assess this issue, we asked healthy young and elderly participants to focus on a fixation point, while targets appeared near
or far away from participants. These targets appeared at midline, at 30
degrees, or at 60 degrees to the right or left from midline. When a tone
was heard, participants pointed towards the location of the target.
Younger participants were quicker when reaching for ipsilateral and
midline targets than for contralateral targets in near conditions. However, for targets further away, contralateral and midline reaches
appeared to be equivalent in terms of movement time, with ipsilateral
targets being significantly quicker than the other two. In contrast, elderly
participants displayed this latter pattern for both near and far targets. It
was also found that the elderly participants’ ipsilateral trials had a
quicker movement time when compared to their younger counterparts.
This suggests that elderly adults may be more proficient in ipsilateral
movements, perhaps due to an increased preference to perform ipsilateral movements as they grow older.
E 135
THE BASAL GANGLIA ARE NOT CRUCIAL TO INTERVAL
TIMING: A CASE REPORT. Martin
Wiener, H.B. Coslett, Anjan
Chatterjee; University of Pennsylvania — The ability to perceive time in the
range of seconds to minutes, known as interval timing, is a vital dimension of cognition. However, the neurobiological mechanisms underlying
interval timing remain poorly understood. Recent investigations have
suggested that the basal ganglia play a major role in the ability to remember temporal durations and respond to stimuli in a temporally-controlled
manner (Meck, 2006). We report a patient, WF, with bilateral destruction
of the entire basal ganglia secondary to hypoxia. Neurologic examination
revealed basal ganglia deficits without visual or memory impairment.
WF was tested on a variety of timing tasks including: interval production, estimation and reproduction in the 2-12 second range; a psychophysical temporal discrimination task with intervals of 300, 600, 2000,
and 8000 ms; and the “peak procedure” at 8 and 21 seconds. WF performed normally on the psychophysical tasks and the production, estimation and reproduction (except for a tendency to underestimate at
longer intervals). He performed normally on the peak procedure at 8 seconds but underestimated 21 seconds. There was no migration effect
(Malapani et al., 1998). These data do not support the claim that the basal
ganglia are crucial for interval timing.
E 136
THE ROLE OF THE LATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN
ACTION COMPREHENSION Patric Bach1, Marius Peelen2, Steven
Tipper1; 1University of Wales, Bangor, 2Neurology and Imaging of Cognition
(NIC), Geneva — The outcome of human transitive actions depends not
only on the motor act that is performed but also on the objects that are
used. A theory of action comprehension therefore needs to account for
how both of these aspects shape the understanding of an action (e.g.,
Bach, et al., 2005). We investigated which neuronal systems represent the
motor act and the function of the objects during action observation. In the
experiment, the participants watched everyday actions of tool use (e.g.
cleaning a plate with a sponge). A between-block task manipulation was
used to isolate the brain structures that derive the motor act and the areas

186

Perceptual Processes: Other

deriving the function of the objects. In one block they judged whether the
motor act was performed correctly. In another block they judged whether
a particular outcome was associated with the use of the objects. Our
results reveal a dissociation between the brain areas involved in action
understanding. Areas in the parietal and premotor cortex (typically associated with ‘mirror’ processing) primarily represent the motor act that is
performed. The function of the objects, however, is not represented by
these areas, but by an area in the lateral prefrontal cortex. The understanding of human transitive actions relies on processes in both of these
sytems.
E 137
ON THE ROLE OF ATTENION FOR MOTOR ACTIVATION BY
ACTION OBSERVATION: A MU RHYTHM STUDY Stefanie
Schuch, Andrew P. Bayliss, Steven P. Tipper; School of Psychology, University
of Wales, Bangor, UK — There is now ample evidence that the human
motor system is activated by perceiving another individual’s actions. An
open question is, however, whether the motor system is being activated
automatically, or whether attending to the perceived action is necessary
for motor system activation to occur. One means by which activation of
the human motor system can be investigated is by assessing oscillatory
activity in the EEG, particularly activity in the 8-13 Hz band (mu
rhythm). A decrease in mu rhythm activity has been shown to be correlated with both execution of an overt movement and perception of a
movement performed by another individual. The present study investigated changes in mu rhythm activity when subjects passively observed
videos of grasping actions. At the end of each block, subjects had to make
a judgment. In one of the two conditions, they had to estimate how many
times the grasping actions they saw had involved a precision vs. power
grip. In the other condition, they had to estimate how many times a
colour change, which occurred in the background of the grasping action
on every trial, had involved a particular color. Because the visual input is
identical in the two conditions, any differences in mu rhythm desynchronization must be due to the different tasks the participants engaged in,
that is, attending to the grasping action vs. attending to the color change
in the background.
E 138
POP-OUT EFFECTS IN COLOR-GRAPHEMIC SYNESTHESIA
Veronica Gross1, Catherine Harris1, Sandra Neargarder2, Alice CroninGolomb1; 1Boston University, 2Bridgewater State University — Color-graphemic synesthesia is a unique phenomenon in which printed stimuli
produce a secondary visual photism, a color, in the visual field or "mind's
eye" of the synesthete. Previous studies have suggested that certain colorgraphemic synesthetes experience visual pop-out when examining
printed stimuli that trigger their synesthesia. We hypothesized that if
pop-out occurs, it could enhance speed and accuracy on tests that require
discrimination between letter and non-letter stimuli as previously noted
in several case studies. We also wished to determine how this pop-out
might be affected by the letter's placement in the simulus. We presented
to eight color-graphemic synesthetes and eight control participants a
masked, word-like array of five letters and pseudoletters (nonsense
shapes made of letter components) for 125 ms and asked them to make
judgments about the stimuli. In the “detect” condition, participants were
asked whether a letter was present in this array. In the “locate” condition, they were asked where the letter was located in the array. We found
no significant group differences for number correct or reaction time on
the “detect” condition. There was a trend towards better performance of
synesthetes than the control group (p=.076) on the locate condition, but
no differences in reaction time. These results indicate that the presence of
pop-out in color-graphemic synesthesia may be more limited than previously suggested. Further analysis of the effect of placement may hint as
to the contribution of stimulus location in this form of popout.

Perceptual Processes: Somatosensory Processing

E 139
SPATIAL ORIENTATION IN THE BLIND : ARE THEY A-MAZEING? Madeleine Fortin1, Patrice Voss1, Maryse Lassonde1, Constant
Rainville2, Dave Saint-Amour1, Franco Lepore1; 1Université de Montréal,
2Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montréal — Vision obviously plays a key role
in the development of spatial representations, as no other sensory modality can provide as much information about our surrounding environment. One can therefore wonder how the absence of visual input might
affect the proper development of complex spatial abilities. A previous
study conducted in our lab showed that blind individuals were able to
properly develop virtual topographical orientation skills. We wanted to
further investigate the orientation skills of blind individuals in a more
ecological environment. We therefore submitted one group of blind individuals (n=19) and one group of paired sighted blindfolded individuals
(n=19), to an orientation task involving locomotion in a real-scale maze.
The participants were guided once by the experimenter in the labyrinth
along a predetermined path and were invited to freely explore each corridor along the way in order to learn and memorize the specific path
taken. Afterwards, they were asked to follow the same path by themselves while the experimenter, walking behind, pointed out and corrected their errors. The errors made by the participants were noted by the
experimenter. This procedure was repeated five times with four different
paths increasing in complexity (6, 8, 10 and 12 decision points). An overall orientation score was then computed. Results show that blind individuals made fewer errors then the sighted blindfolded participants while
performing this task, suggesting that blind individuals can acquire a
more accurate sense of space when this learning relies solely on egocentric cues.
E 140
TRIGGERED PERCEPTIONS AND VISUAL PRIMING IN
GRAPHEME-COLOUR SYNAESTHESIA Catherine Mulvenna, Neil
Muggleton, Vincent Walsh; UCL, London — Evidence shows that grapheme-colour synaesthetes experience positive and negative priming effects
related to their triggered colour experiences in colour-naming tasks.
However, it has not been shown that the same effects occur in circumstances without explicit colour-naming, or whether lexical activation has
a greater role in synaesthetic processing than typical sensory processing.
This is also important in estimating the extent to which the presence of
synaesthesia can affect an individual in everyday cognitive tasks. Here,
using a variation of a colour-priming paradigm, priming effects from the
synaesthetic colour percept were isolated and the semantic element
present in previous studies was absent. Nine classified synaesthetes carried out the experiment twice a minimum of 14 days apart; once when
asked to complete the task as quickly as possible, and once when asked to
attend to their synaesthesia in addition to completing the task as quickly
as possible. Results showed a significant positive priming effect only
when subjects attended to their synaesthetic colour. The presence of synaesthesia in an individual therefore produces colour priming effects by
significantly influencing reaction time in non-colour cognitive judgements. However, this effect occurs only when the individual attends to
the secondary experiences.
E 141
A MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY STUDY OF GLOBAL AND
LOCAL FEATURE PROCESSING OF FACES Jennifer N. Barrie1,
Brian Luus1, Anthony Herdman1, Jim Tanaka2, Mario Liotti1; 1Simon Fraser
University, 2University of Victoria — Adults can more accurately identify
faces of low (LSF) than high spatial frequency (HSF), which supports the
concept that face perception relies on more global than local feature processing (Deruelle et al., 2004). The purpose of this study was to determine
if varying the spatial frequency of faces modulated the face-specific M170
response. We recorded magnetoencephalography (MEG) from 12 participants while they made face/object discriminations. Stimuli included LSF
and HSF faces and objects. In the sensor domain, Regions of Interest were
defined over left and right occipito-temporal scalp regions and grand-

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

averaged responses were computed over the 4 conditions. Results indicated a Stimulus x Spatial Frequency interaction for latency (F(1,11)=18.6,
p<0.001) with the M170 to LSF faces occurring earlier than the M170 to
HSF faces (M=148, M=173ms) and no effect of spatial frequency for
objects. Analyses of source waveforms were consistent with sensor data
results (F(1,11)-interaction=46.0, p<0.001). The M170 was localized in the
left and right fusiform gyri. Preliminary results from time-frequency
analyses indicate that power in the alpha (7-13 Hz) and gamma (30-50Hz)
bands peaked earlier to LSF than to HSF faces, LSF objects and HSF
objects between 100-150 ms and 175-200 ms. These findings indicate that
the M170 is sensitive to spatial frequency modulations. The Stimulus x
Spatial Frequency interaction supports the notion that global aspects of a
face are perceived before more local aspects.
E 142
"FILLED IN" LETTERS EVOKE SYNESTHETIC COLORS Mikhenan
Horvath, V. S. Ramachandran; University of California, San Diego — We presented common words such as deaf with the middle letters missing (d--f)
and replaced with a nonsense shape, or visual noise. At a suitable distance subjects usually “fill in” the missing letter – seeing “ea” in the d--f
for example. We then showed similar words to three grapheme color synesthetes, whom each reported seeing the synesthetic color associated
with the letter. The effect did not occur if there was simply a gap instead
of “noise” between the flanking letters. This suggests that “filled in” letters that do not exist on the retina can nonetheless evoke synesthetic colors.

Perceptual Processes: Somatosensory
Processing
E 143
MIRROR-TOUCH SYNAESTHESIA AND EMPATHY Michael
J.
Banissy, Jamie Ward; University College London, UK — Previous
studies
have indicated evidence of a tactile mirror-system in which actual and
observed touch results in activity in similar areas of primary and secondary somatosensory cortices (Keysers et al., 2004; Blakemore et al., 2005).
In the later study, a single case of a vision-touch interaction (mirror-touch
synaesthesia) was reported, whereby observed touch to a human was
experienced as tactile stimulation in a somatotopic location on the
observer’s body (Blakemore et al., 2005). Building upon these findings,
this group study investigated behavioural correlates of mirror-touch synaesthesia by using two spatial congruity paradigms in which touch was
applied to participants face or hands while participants observed another
person or object being touched on a congruent or incongruent site. Participants were requested to detect the site of actual touch while ignoring
observed touch (and the synaesthetic touch induced from it). Consistent
with self-reports, mirror-touch synaesthetes were significantly faster at
identifying a site touched on their own face or hands when observed
touch to another person was congruent with their synaesthesia compared
to incongruent trials. No significant differences were observed for control participants. Furthermore, the relationship between mirror-touch
synaesthesia and empathy was investigated. Empathic ability was measured using the empathy quotient (Baron-Cohen & Wheelwright, 2004).
Mirror-touch synaesthetes showed significantly higher scores on the
emotional reactivity subscale of the empathy quotient compared to controls. These findings were partially consistent with the notion that we
understand and empathise with others by a process of simulation (Gallese & Goldman, 1998).
E 144
NOW YOU’LL FEEL IT – NOW YOU WON’T: PRE-STIMULUS
ROLANDIC MU RHYTHM PREDICTS EXTINCTION OF
SUPRATHRESHOLD SOMATOSENSORY STIMULI Ruth
Schubert1, Stefan Haufe2, Felix Blankenburg3, Arno Villringer1, Gabriel
Curio1; 1Charité - University Medicine Berlin, Germany, 2Technical University

187

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

Berlin, Germany, Fraunhofer Institute First, Berlin, Germany, 3University
College London, London, United Kingdom — A recent electrophysiological
study revealed that parieto-occipital alpha-power correlates with conscious perception of near-threshold (50% detection rate) visual stimuli
(Babiloni et al., 2005). In the somatosensory system, conscious perception
of a clearly supra-threshold target stimulus applied at the left index finger can be suppressed in a high proportion of trials when followed by a
higher-intensity mask stimulus at the right index finger. Previously, we
showed that this somatosensory “extinction” in healthy subjects is
reflected in decreased post-stimulus mid-latency ERP components (Schubert et al., 2006). Here, we analysed how pre-stimulus EEG rhythms correlate with these different perceptive states (conscious perception vs.
extinction) of clearly supra-threshold somatosensory stimuli. We conducted a time–frequency EEG analysis for perceived and extinguished
stimuli in the time interval of 500 ms immediately preceding stimulus
onset. For perceived compared to extinguished target stimuli, the power
of the pre-stimulus rolandic mu-rhythm, i.e., the alpha-band (8–12 Hz)
and lower beta–band (12–18 Hz), decreased significantly (p<0.001). The
effect was dominant over right sensorimotor regions, contralateral to the
target stimulus. The results suggest that a modulation of low-frequency
bands (<20 Hz) is related to conscious perception of also supra-threshold
somatosensory stimuli and may imply a general mechanism for conscious perception. We propose that pre-stimulus suppression of the neuronal “baseline” oscillatory activity in the somatosensory cortex (murhythm) facilitates conscious somatosensory perception. Top-down control from higher-order attentional systems may produce a transient suppression of rhythmic activity in sensory receiving areas and provide a
selective preparedness for processing of incoming stimuli.
E 145
DO REPRESENTATIONS OF FACIAL EXPRESSIONS FORM AN
INTEGRAL PART OF EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCE? Joshua
Ian
Davis1, Ann Senghas2, Kevin Ochsner1; 1Columbia University, 2Barnard
College of Columbia University — How are facial expressions represented
in emotional processing? Are facial expressions integral parts of emotional experiences, or are they only communicative outputs? To examine
whether representations of facial expressions are integral to emotional
experience, it is necessary to restrict expressions and observe whether
emotional experience decreases in strength as a result. In order to rule
out expectancy effects about how expression and emotion should be
linked, all participants were instructed that the study pertained to memory and attention and a majority of the questions they answered supported this claim. All participants wore dummy electrodes on their faces.
Those in the experimental group were informed that we were monitoring
brain wave activity. Any muscle movement under the electrodes, they
were told, would render the data unusable. They were compared to 2
groups who were not instructed that they could not move. Video records
were used to ensure participant cooperation. Debriefing interviews
revealed that participants did not guess at the hypothesis. In order to
rule out the possibility that the distracting effects of restricting one’s
facial movement was the only cause of any decrease in emotion that
might occur, one of the control groups was given an alternative distracting task, to count backwards by threes. Participants rated counting backwards by threes as more distracting than restricting one’s own facial
muscles. Nonetheless, participants who restricted their facial movement
reported significantly less negative emotional experience in response to
stimuli than either of the control groups, who did not differ from each
other.
E 146
CALORIC VESTIBULAR STIMULATION; A NOVEL TREATMENT
FOR THALAMIC AND OTHER CENTRAL PAIN SYNDROMES V.
S. Ramachandran, P. D. McGeoch, Lisa E. Williams; Center for Brain and
Cognition, UCSD — Chronic thalamic pain syndrome develops in the
contralateral limbs, body and face soon after a stroke. The pain is relentless and the slightest touch - sometimes even a whiff of air- can trigger

188

Memory: Memory Systems

excruciating pain. The disorder is generally permanent and incurable.
Other types of chronic pain, such as phantom pain result mainly from
central reorganization of thalamic and cortical pathways (Ramachandran
and Hirstein, 1998) causing discrepant sensory input. Thalamic pain
might represent a pathological amplification of the thalamic/posterior
insular response to pain signaled by discrepant sensory input. Given the
substantial vestibular input to the insula we wondered if thalamic pain
might be relieved by caloric/vestibular stimulation. We tested this conjecture on two patients. We asked the patients to rate pain on a scale of 1
to 10, on a chart. We then performed a left cold water (zero degrees)
caloric irrigation over a 30s period until nystagmus appeared. There was
a striking reduction in pain in both patients, which lasted (at least) two
weeks in one case. Placebos (e.g. lukewarm water; ice cubes on the ear
etc) were completely ineffective. Insular cortex receives both vestibular
and pain signals. We postulate the vestibular modulation of pain is mediated here. We are investigating whether permanent remission can occur
and whether other types of chronic neuropathic pain may respond similarly.
E 147
THE EXPECTATION TO MOVE CAUSES ATTENUATION OF
SENSORY INPUT Martin Voss1,2, James N. Ingram3,2, Daniel M.
Wolpert3,2, Patrick Haggard4; 1St. Hedwig Hospital & Charité University
Hospital, Humboldt University, Berlin, 2Institute of Neurology, Queen Square,
London, UK, 3Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK, 4Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience and Department of Psychology, London, UK — When a part of
the body moves, the sensations evoked by a probe stimulus to that body
part are attenuated. Two mechanisms have been proposed to explain this
robust and general effect. First, feedforward motor signals may modulate activity evoked by incoming sensory signals. Second, reafferent sensation from body movements may mask the stimulus. Here we delivered
probe stimuli to the right index finger just before a cue appeared instructing subjects to make rapid left or right index finger movements. In a twoalternative force choice paradigm, subjects judged the intensity of the
probe stimulus in comparison to a reference stimulus. The point of subjective equality was determined. When the cues were unpredictable, sensory attenuation occurred for tactile stimuli applied to the right index
finger just before this finger was cued (and subsequently moved). However, there was no attenuation in the right finger just before the left finger
was cued. This result suggests that sensorimotor events occurring after
the probe caused attenuation ‘postdictively’. When movement cues were
predictable (right cues four times more frequent than left cues), we found
attenuation in the right index finger even when the left finger was cued
and moved. This attenuation linked to a movement that was likely but
did not in fact occur, suggests a new expectation-based mechanism, distinct from both feedforward motor signals and postdictive masking.

Memory: Memory Systems
E 148
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES
OF
CONTENTSPECIFIC RECOLLECTION Jeffrey Johnson, Brian Minton, Michael
Rugg; University of California, Irvine — Several functional neuroimag-

ing studies have demonstrated that the neural correlates of episodic retrieval (‘recollection’) differ according to the content of
retrieved episodes. It has been hypothesized that these contentspecific differences reflect the ‘reinstatement’ of encoding-related
processes or representations at the time of recollection. It remains
unclear, however, whether these effects are a direct manifestation
of the retrieved content that supports the recollection of an episode, or whether they are associated with processes engaged subsequent to retrieval. The present study addressed this issue by

Memory: Memory Systems

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

employing event-related potentials (ERPs) to investigate the temporal dynamics of content-specific differences in the neural correlates of recollection. Subjects studied a series of words that were
each presented in the context of one of two encoding tasks. The
‘scene’ encoding task required imagining the object corresponding to each word as appearing within the pictorial landscape
scene on which it was superimposed, whereas the ‘sentence’ task
required the covert generation of a sentence incorporating the
word. Memory for the words was subsequently tested with a
‘remember/know/new’ procedure. Consistent with the reinstatement hypothesis, the ERP correlates of recollection differed
topographically according to the encoding history of the test
word. The content-specific ERP differences were maximal at midfrontal sites and, importantly, onset concurrently with the recollection effects. These findings suggest that the reinstatement of
encoding-related processes or representations may provide the
basis for recollection, rather than reflecting content-specific processes that are employed subsequent to retrieval.

189

Monday, May 7, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

190

Memory: Memory Systems

Poster Session F
Attentional Processes: Visual
F1
FEATURE PRIMING IN UNMEDICATED SCHIZOPHRENIA
PATIENTS: IS LOCATION SPECIAL? Ruth Salo1, Susan Ravizza1,
Thomas Nordahl1, Lynn Robertson2; 1UC Davis Imaging Research Center, 2UC
Berkeley and VA Northern California Health Care System — The distractibility that schizophrenia patients display may be the result of a deficiency in
filtering out irrelevant information. The aim of the current study was to
assess whether patients with schizophrenia exhibit greater effects of
changes to task irrelevant features compared to healthy participants. Fifteen outpatient schizophrenia patients who were currently drug-free as
part of an investigational drug study and fifteen controls participated in
the study. Subjects identified targets whose features could repeat or
switch. The task-relevant feature of the target was letter identity whereas
color and/or location were always task-irrelevant. Each trial consisted of a
brief presentation of a target and distractor letter. Participants responded
by pressing the appropriate key associated with the target letter. Of primary interest in this experiment were the effects of switches in the irrelevant features (color and location), when target identity remained constant.
All participants were slower when color and location switched, however,
schizophrenia patients tended to show a bigger location switching effect
than controls (p < .01) when differences in age were taken into account. In
contrast, color switching effects were no greater than controls (p > .05).
These results suggest that unmedicated schizophrenia outpatients do not
exhibit global impairments of feature processing. Instead, impairments
appear to be restricted to situations in which task-irrelevant location features vary. These findings are consistent with other studies that have
reported deficits in spatial processing in schizophrenia. Keywords: schizophrenia, feature processing, cognitive control, spatial attention
[K01DA16293-01 to RS].
F2
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN EARLY PROCESSING OF VISUAL
NOVELTY ODDBALL STIMULI AS INDEXED BY THE P2 ERP
COMPONENT Jenna Riis1,2, Hyemi Chong1,2, David Wolk3, Scott
McGinnis1,2, Phillip Holcomb4, Dorene Rentz1,2, Kirk Daffner1,2; 1Harvard
Medical School, 2Brigham and Women's Hospital, 3University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, 4Tufts University — Relatively little is known about
information processing correlates of the P2 component. We investigated
the extent to which the P2 to visual stimuli is sensitive to novelty, ‘targetness’, rareness, direction of attention, and changes over the adult lifespan.
Old, middle-aged, and young subjects (n = 92), relatively well matched for
demographic variables and current level of cognitive performance compared to age-matched peers, participated in a visual novelty oddball paradigm under an Attend and an Ignore condition, which included standards,
targets/rares, and novels. P2 difference waves (novels – standards and targets/rares – standards) were analyzed. We found the P2 to novels > targets under the Attend condition for old and middle-aged, but not young
subjects. The P2 to novels > rares for all age groups under the Ignore condition. The P2 to novels was larger in old and middle-aged than young
subjects under the Attend condition. In old, but not middle-aged or young
subjects, the P2 to novels was larger under the Attend than Ignore conditions. The P2 to targets under the Attend condition was larger than to rares
under the Ignore condition for all age groups. Our results suggest that the
P2 component is more responsive to novelty than targetness or rareness in
old and middle-aged subjects and more sensitive to targetness than rareness in all age groups. We found an age-related increase in P2 amplitude to
visual novels detectable by middle age. Also, in old, but not middle-aged

and young subjects, the P2 to novelty is modulated by direction of attention.
F3
THE UNIQUE POWER OF NEW OBJECTS TO CAUSE
DISTRACTION: BEHAVIORAL AND FMRI EVIDENCE FROM A
NOVEL CONTINUOUS PERFORMANCE TASK So-yeon Kim, Joseph
B. Hopfinger; University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill — Previous behavioral studies have debated whether abruptly appearing new objects have a
unique ability to capture attention or whether salient luminance changes
alone capture attention. In the present study, we investigated whether the
neural activity triggered by a task-irrelevant luminance change differed
depending on whether or not it defined a new object. We measured the
distracting effects of such stimuli on behavior and neural activity using a
new continuous performance task. Participants discriminated the orientation of a centrally-located ever-present red ‘T’ that rotated but never disappeared. In the experimental condition, a task-irrelevant gray square
abruptly appeared or disappeared (every 5-16 seconds) in the peripheral
visual field. In the control condition, the same luminance changes
occurred, but an outline of the square remained on the screen throughout
the block, resulting in an object always being present there. FMRI data
revealed that visual areas coding the location of the peripheral gray square
were significantly activated only to the abrupt onset of a new object (i.e.,
the luminance increment only in the experimental condition). Furthermore, only this abruptly appearing new object caused distraction, as measured in behavior and neural activity. Performance on the central task
suffered only when the luminance change was associated with a new
object, and activity in the visual areas coding the central target location
was significantly reduced only following the appearance of a new object.
These data provide new evidence for the unique ability of new objects to
capture attention and for the neural correlates of distraction.
F4
NEURAL
SYSTEMS
OF
COVERT
ORIENTING
USING
DIRECTIONAL CUES AND EYE GAZE Yoko Nagata1,2, Sarah Bayless1,
Margot Taylor1; 1Hospital for Sick Children, 2Komazawa University — The
neural networks implicated in the attentional effects following eye-gaze
cue are not yet specified. We investigated whether eye-gaze represents a
special cue and whether the neural mechanisms involved in processing
eye-gaze cues are different from non-eye-gaze cues in the context of covert
visual orienting. A modified Posner paradigm was used, in which a photograph of a face was presented centrally. In the eye-gaze condition, left or
right averted eye-gaze served as the directional cue. In the non-eye-gaze
condition, the straight gaze was presented with a small cue stimulus
appearing either side of the face. Cue-to-target SOA was 300ms, valid and
invalid cues were evenly distributed. Recordings were made on a 151
channel CTF/MEG system while participants performed the task; anatomical scans were obtained using 1.5T MRI. Source analyses were completed
with an event-related spatial filtering technique (erSAM). Behavioural
results indicated faster overall responses in the eye-gaze condition, and
validity effects observed only in the eye-gaze condition. Four peak MEG
activations to cue-onset were analysed. The earliest peaks (85ms, 140ms)
were localized occipito-temporally and did not differ between conditions.
At 215ms the fields showed a right anterior cingulate source that was
greater for the eye-gaze condition, suggesting greater inhibitory effort to
eye-gaze compared to non-eye-gaze cues. At 255ms the STS activation was
more anterior for the non-eye-gaze condition. During the earliest stages of
processing the cue-type did not differ, but by 215ms, cortical activation
was differentiated between eye-gaze and non-eye-gaze cues.

191

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

F5
EXOGENOUS CUEING DURING BINOCULAR RIVALRY INVOLVE
EARLY MODULATIONS OF VISUAL CORTEX Wayne Khoe1, Jude
Mitchell2, John Reynolds2, Steve Hillyard3; 1University of California, La Jolla,
California, 2The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California,
3
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California — Mitchell, Stoner
and Reynolds (2004) observed that exogenously cuing one of two virtual
surfaces, defined by superimposed rotating dot patterns, resulted in a
perceptual bias for the cued surface image during binocular rivalry.
Observers were impaired in judging the direction of a translation on the
uncued surface. We investigated the event-related potential (ERPs)
evoked by translations of the cued and uncued surfaces during binocular
rivalry and monocular viewing in a similar paradigm. Subjects compared
the direction of the first (T1) and second (T2) dot translation. T1 was
viewed binocularly while T2 occurred under dichoptic (deleting one surface of differing rotation direction from each eye resulting in binocular
rivalry) or monocular viewing (deleting both surfaces from one eye). Subjects were impaired in making the comparison when the translations
occurred on different surfaces. The magnitude of the impairment was
approximately equivalent comparing monocular to dichoptic presentation of T2. Though in both viewing conditions the posterior N1 component (160-210 ms) elicited by T2 of the cued surface was found to be
larger than for the uncued surface, only during dichoptic viewing condition was the posterior P1 component (110-160 ms) evoked by T2 on the
cued surface larger compared to the uncued surface. The N1 surface
selection modulation perhaps reflects a surface-based selection mechanism, whereas the earlier P1 modulation represents a biasing of interocular competition prior to the stage of surface selection under conditions
of rivalry. These results provide evidence that object based selection
mechanisms interact with eye-of-origin selection mechanisms.
F6
MEG REVEALS SYNCHRONIZED NEURAL NETWORK FOR
VISUOSPATIAL ATTENTION Sam Doesburg, Lawrence Ward;
University of British Columbia — A central problem for cognitive neuroscience is determining how the brain is able to dynamically rearrange its
functional connectivity to produce transient networks to support the universe of perceptions and tasks of which it is capable. Local neural synchrony has been demonstrated to be relevant for perceptual binding and
large-scale synchronization has been proposed as a mechanism for the
selection of task/percept relevant neural populations and their integration into a brain-wide network that defines the contents of consciousness.
Selective attention is ideal for the investigation of this hypothesis since
attended information is (i) more effectively integrated with information
in other sensory modalities and processing in higher cognitive areas; (ii)
biased for inclusion in consciousness. In an earlier study we calculated
long-distance phase synchronization between EEG electrodes as subjects
deployed their attention to a particular location in the visual field and
found that covert deployment of endogenous attention to one hemifield
induced transient long-range gamma-band synchronization between the
contralateral visual cortex and other, widespread cortical areas. Our current repetition of this paradigm using MEG sensor recordings reveals lateralization of long-range high-alpha-band synchronization sustained
throughout the period of attentional maintenance. This suggests that
oscillatory neural synchronization in the gamma-band is relevant for the
establishment of a large-scale network of functionally integrated brain
areas, while alpha-band synchronization is required for maintenance of
this network. We have localized sources of oscillatory MEG activity and
calculated phase-locking between them in order to elucidate the largescale network of functionally integrated brain areas underlying visuospatial selective attention.
F7
SPATIAL TOPOGRAPHY AND ATTENTIONAL MODULATION IN
THE HUMAN PULVINAR Jason Fischer, David Whitney; UC Davis — The
lateral and inferior pulvinar have widespread connections with visual

192

Attentional Processes: Visual

cortex and are often implicated in visual attentional processing. Highly
specific pulvinar lesions in humans can result in spatial neglect (Karnath,
2004) and attenuation of crowding phenomena (Michael & Desmedt,
2004), suggesting that the pulvinar plays a critical role in allocating attention and in spatial vision. However, little functional data exists to support
this directly. Similarly, while single-unit studies have shown retinotopic
topography in some sub-regions of the monkey pulvinar (Bender, 1981),
such topography has not been established in the human pulvinar. Here
we used fMRI to test for attentional modulation of human pulvinar
responses and for visual topography in the pulvinar. In one experiment
subjects attended to flickering Gabor stimuli which were located in one of
five positions. Compared to when subjects passively viewed the same
stimuli, there was significantly greater BOLD response in the pulvinar
bilaterally. Consistent with previous studies, attention increases the magnitude of pulvinar responses. More interestingly, when subjects attended
at the fixation point (passively viewing flickering Gabors that were
located in one of five positions), patterns of pulvinar activity discriminated among the five Gabor positions. Cross-correlating patterns of
BOLD response within the pulvinar for the different stimulus positions
revealed that the right hemisphere pulvinar was able to discriminate
objects separated by less than 2 degrees visual angle (at ~10 deg. eccentricity). These results indicate that human pulvinar is modulated by
visual attention, and it also carries extremely precise topographic information about object position.
F8
FROM WITHIN, FROM WITHOUT: AN FMRI STUDY OF
INTERNALLY-GENERATED AND EXOGENOUSLY-CUED SHIFTS
OF ATTENTION C. Christine Camblin, Joseph B. Hopfinger; University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill — A number of fMRI studies have identified a
fronto-parietal network which corresponds to both endogenously-cued
and exogenously-cued shifts of attention, indicating that endogenous and
exogenous attention may be subserved by overlapping brain regions. In
order to more precisely isolate the neural correlates of attentional shifting, per se, we created a novel paradigm wherein participants reported
voluntary shifts of attention that were not associated with any external
cue. Using this task as a baseline, we were able to examine the additional
processes triggered by external cues. In a previous study, we found that
voluntary shifts of attention that are cued by a centrally-presented arrow
produced more frontal and parietal activity than voluntary shifts that are
not prompted by an external stimulus. These differences were strongest
in the left hemisphere occurring even when the attentional effects in
visual processing regions were the same for both conditions, suggesting
the greater left hemisphere activity for arrow cues may have been related
to processing the symbolic cue, not simply moving attention. In the
present study, we compared internally generated shifts of attention with
non-predictive exogenously-cued attention shifts. The greatest difference
between these types of shifts occurred in the right hemisphere; in particular, the right parietal lobe was significantly more active for exogenouslycued shifting compared to internally-genereated voluntary shifts. Both
types of shifts produced typical attention effects in visual processing
regions, however, suggesting the greater right parietal activity in the
exogenous cue condition may relate to the need to disengage attention
from a salient external stimulus.
F9
USING EEG CLASSIFICATION TO TRACK COMPETITION IN
NEGATIVE PRIMING Ehren Newman1,2, Ken Norman1,2; 1Princeton
University, 2Center for the Study of Brain Mind and Behavior — Competition in cognitive processing has lasting consequences for the subsequent
accessibility of competing representations. Negative priming (NP) demonstrates that, when representations compete, the representations that
lose the competition are subsequently harder to access. To better understand the competitive dynamics that generate these effects, we developed
a method of tracking the activation of the competing representations at
the sub-trial time scale. Our methods rely on a pattern classification anal-

Attentional Processes: Visual

ysis of EEG data. We found that when a subject views an image, we were
significantly above chance at classifying which one (of four) image types
the subject is viewing based upon the EEG signal. We show here, the specific time course, within a trial, that we were able to classify over. We also
show that when images from different categories (e.g. a face over a
house) are superimposed the classifiers were significantly above chance
at predicting the class of both images. Using this, we tracked the activation of each stimulus in a negative priming task. We then tested for connections between how much the to-be-ignored stimulus is processed (as
detected by the classifiers) and how fluidly it is processed in the future.
We present preliminary evidence that images that are processed more
when they are marked to-be-ignored are subsequently processed less fluidly.
F10
NEURAL ACTIVITY DURING INHIBITION OF RETURN Troy A.
W. Visser1, Jason B. Mattingley2, Mark A. Williams3; 1University of British
Columbia - Okanagan, 2University of Melbourne, 3McGovern Institute for
Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology — Behavioral inhibition plays a key role in a variety of human activities. In visual search, this
is evidenced by a phenomenon known as inhibition of return (IOR) in
which target detection is slower at a previously-cued location than at an
uncued location when the interval between a non-predictive cue and target exceeds about 200 ms. Studies have shown that target discriminability
is reduced at cued locations during IOR, implicating low-level inhibitory
processes. However, the neural locus of this effect has not been directly
examined. To this end, we used fMRI to measure activation in the occipital and parietal cortices (including V1 and V2) during a visual cueing paradigm. Participants viewed a display consisting of a central fixation
flanked by two placeholder boxes slightly above and to the left and right.
On each trial, a non-predictive cue was presented briefly directly below
one of the placeholders, followed by a target inside one of the placeholders. The cue-target onset asynchrony was 200 or 800 ms. Participants
pressed a key to indicate the onset of the target. Results showed that
while cued targets were responded to faster at the short SOA, the reverse
occurred at the longer SOA, indicative of robust IOR. These behavioural
effects were accompanied by changes in brain activity in visual processing areas.
F11
THE TIMECOURSE OF THE DIVISION OF THE ATTENTIONAL
SPOTLIGHT Edmund Lalor1,2, Simon Kelly1, Barak Pearlmutter3, Richard
Reilly2, John Foxe1,4; 1The Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, New
York, 2The School of Electrical, Electronic and Mechanical Engineering,
University College Dublin, Ireland, 3The Hamilton Institute, National
University of Ireland, Maynooth, Ireland, 4The Cognitive Neuroscience
Program, The City College of the City University of New York — Current
models of visuo-spatial attention are dominated by the concept of an
attentional “spotlight” that facilitates the processing of stimuli falling
within its boundaries. While the traditional view has been that this spatial spotlight has a unitary beam, recent evidence has suggested that it is
more flexible and can be divided into multiple beams that can facilitate
processing in spatially non-contiguous regions without including intervening regions containing irrelevant or distracting information. This
“split spotlight” attention has been shown to be expressed as both
enhanced activation in specific brain regions, using fMRI, and enhanced
processing of the steady-state visual evoked potential (SSVEP), using
EEG. However, neither fMRI nor the SSVEP can provide detailed information on the timecourse of split-spotlight attentional modulation. A
detailed analysis of the temporal profile of modulation has to date not
been possible due to the inability to measure separate VEPs from simultaneously presented stimuli. Such an analysis has recently been shown to
be feasible using the novel VESPA technique developed by our group. In
the current study, a mosaic of interposed stimuli were presented, some to
be ignored and others to be attended and a VESPA was determined for
each location. Data from 15 subjects show that a strong modulation of the

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

VESPA (F(1, 14) = 9.32, p < 0.01) is evident at 90-100ms (during the visual
P1 component) demonstrating that the split attentional spotlight is
expressed in modulation of activity at a level as early as has been found
to date in the literature.
F12
EFFECT OF OBSERVED GAZE ON ORIENTING BEHAVIOR AND
BRAIN AREA LIP. Stephen V. Shepherd1, Robert O. Deaner1,2, Jeff T. Klein1,
Michael L. Platt1; 1Duke University, 2Grand Valley State University — Both
humans and macaques shift our attention in the direction we see others
look. Furthermore, attention cuing by observed gaze follows a common
stereotyped time course in both humans and macaques (Deaner & Platt
2003), suggesting primates use a common neural mechanism to reflexively share attention. Here we investigate the effects of social gaze cues
on macaque behavior and neuronal activity within macaque lateral intraparietal area (LIP). We first mapped the response field (RF) of each neuron using standard memory saccade trials. Subjects then performed a
peripheral target detection task: to receive reward, they (1) fixated a central disc (2) followed by a centrally-presented picture of a familiar
macaque looking toward or away from the neuron’s RF, then (3) shifted
gaze to a peripheral target appearing unpredictably either within or
directly opposite the RF. Social gaze cues appeared for a variable duration of 100, 200, 400, or 800 ms; supporting previous results, gaze-following was observed most often at the 200ms cue duration. Neurons
discriminated gaze cues, even in the absence of visual stimulation within
or saccade toward the classical RF. We further found that the magnitude
of later visually evoked and saccadic activity in the RF depended on gaze
direction of previously observed social cues. Finally, we compared the
time course of these neuronal effects to the time course of saccadic reaction time shifts in order to infer the causal relationship between neurometric and psychometric cue responses. Poster available at http://
www.duke.edu/~svs/research/CNS2007.pdf for conference duration.
F13
THE EFFECTS OF ATTENTION UPON FACE-SPECIFIC ERPS
RECORDED FROM SUBDURAL ELECTRODES IN THE FUSIFORM
GYRUS Gregory McCarthy, Brian Marion, Truett Allison, Ken Vives; Yale
University — We investigated the influence of attention upon the time
course of face processing in the fusiform gyrus using ERP recordings
from subdural electrodes. Fifteen patients provided informed consent, all
of whom were being evaluated for surgical treatment of epilepsy. A
screening task was used to identify face-specific sites. Subjects viewed a
series of pictures depicting tools, fruits, flowers, letterstrings, and faces
while detecting infrequent targets. A face-specific site was one in which
the negative potential at ~200 ms (N200) in the ERP elicited by faces was
at least twice as great in amplitude as the ERP to any other stimulus category. Twenty-three face specific sites were identified in and near the fusiform gyrus. For the primary task, a series of stimuli were briefly
presented, each consisting of two houses and two faces arranged around
a fixation cross. On half of the trials, the two faces were identical. The
houses were identical on the remaining half. The subject made a choice
response indicating whether the faces were identical, or whether the
houses were identical, in separate runs. There were no significant differences in the amplitude of the N200 at the predetermined face-specific
sites as a function of whether the subjects were attending to faces or
houses. However, when faces were attended, a large negative slow
potential was evoked beginning at about 230 ms and peaking at 800-900
ms. These results suggest that the face-specific N200 ERP is insensitive to
attention, but that attended faces evoke additional long duration neural
activity.
F14
SLIGHTLY NOISY BRAINS SEE BETTER: PRESTIMULUS
DYNAMICS IN EEG AND PERCEPTUAL PERFORMANCE Lauren
Emberson1, Keiichi Kitajo2, Lawrence Ward3; 1Cornell University, 2RIKEN
Brain Science Institute, 3University of British Columbia — In a complex,
dynamic, and undeniably non-linear system like the brain, there are con-

193

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

stant fluctuations of noise, where noise is characterized as background
neural activity with random phase and an absence of spectral peaks. In
this study, we relate this a priori concept of noise measured in prestimulus EEG signals to performance in a simple visual task. Subjects detected
small luminance changes while 64 channel EEG was recorded. After
determining each subject’s threshold for the stimuli, the experimental
stimuli and the environment were held constant allowing for undisturbed endogenous fluctuations in brain activity. Moreover, the task was
carefully designed to thwart subject prediction of stimulus presentation
thus avoiding anticipation effects. The prestimulus EEG recordings were
extracted for one second epochs ending with stimulus presentation on hit
trials only. Noise was quantified in these epochs and related to the performance, measured in reaction times. An intermediate level of endogenous neural noise gave rise to the fastest responses in the detection task
confirmed by a significant non-linear cubic relation of reaction time to
noise level. This noise-performance relationship is similar to the phenomenon of stochastic resonance where a non-zero level of noise is necessary
for optimum processing of threshold stimuli in a non-linear system.
These findings imply that endogenous neural noise could be a major contributing factor in how our brains respond to information. This study also
informs questions of how dynamic brain states relate to attention, perception, and phenomenal awareness.
F15
INVESTIGATING
THE
RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN
THE
ATTENTIONAL BLINK EFFECT AND INCREASED TASK LOAD
USING REAL WORLD PICTURES Aaron T. Karst1, Eric S. Clapham1,
Jana Kainerstorfer2,3, Andrei Medvedev3, John VanMeter3, C. Mark Wessinger1;
1University of Nevada, Reno, 2University of Vienna, 3Center for Functional and
Molecular Imaging, Georgetown University Medical Center — The current study
investigated the characteristics of the attentional blink effect by manipulating attentional task load and stimulus complexity. By substituting real
world pictures into the attentional blink design we were able to increase
stimulus complexity in an attempt to better understand this phenomenon. Varying complexity of stimuli allowed us to vary complexity of task.
One experiment utilized a simple stimulus as target 1 (T1), differing from
the distracters and the second target (T2) in color and complexity. T1 varied randomly between letters and numbers; all were blue in color. T2 was
always a real world colored bike, with distracters also being real world
colored pictures. At the conclusion of each trial participants were
instructed to indicate whether T1 was a letter, number, or absent. Next
participants were to indicate how many targets were presented during
the trial. Another experiment followed the same attentional blink design
using more complex stimuli for T1. Well-characterized real world color
pictures were used. However, the participant’s task was to indicate
whether T1 was animate, inanimate, or absent. Distracters and T2 (bike)
were gray scale real world pictures. Again participants were to indicate
how many targets were presented during the trial. Behavioral findings
across these experiments indicate that increasing attentional task load
strengthens the attentional blink effect. Additionally, functional magnetic
resonance imaging data collected utilizing related paradigms are being
used to help identify brain regions mediating the relation between task
load and the attentional blink effect.
F16
MALE SUPERIORITY IN ASPECTS OF DYNAMIC VISUALSPATIAL ATTENTION KatieAnn Skogsberg1, Lucica Iordanescu2,
Marcia Grabowecky1, Satoru Suzuki1; 1Northwestern University,
2Northwestern Universitiy — Gender differences in visual-spatial skills are
primarily found for mental rotation. Mental rotation, however, may
involve a number of sub-processes such as mentally rotating and tracking
the vertices and planes of the item, and shifting attention between the
rotated and test items. Although neuroimaging studies have found that
men and women produce different brain activation patterns while
engaged in mental rotation tasks, surprisingly few studies have investigated whether or not there are gender differences for these sub-processes.

194

Attentional Processes: Visual

Our study aimed to elucidate this question by testing 166 participants (66
male, 100 female), using tasks evaluating relevant sub-processes: multiple-object tracking, attending to rotational direction and attention shifting. Compared to women, men were more accurate at multiple-object
tracking, more successful at sustaining an intended direction when the
motion signal was ambiguous, and faster at rapidly shifting attention
between locations. These results suggest that there are indeed behavioral
differences between men and women on the sub-processes that may be
involved in mental rotation. Therefore, gender may be an important factor to control in experiments using tasks that involve these sub-processes,
including but not limited to mental rotation.
F17
AN UNIFIED THEORY OF BOTTOM-UP AND TOP-DOWN
ATTENTIONAL CONTROL Michael
Mozer,
Matthew
Wilder;
University of Colorado — Although diverse, theories of visual attention
generally agree in positing that attention is guided by some combination
of three distinct strategies: (1) Bottom-up guidance arises from distinctive
or locally-contrasting visual features, such as abrupt onsets or color singletons (e.g., Itti & Koch, 2001). (2) Top-down gain modulation of bottomup proceses has been proposed to explain how attention can be driven
primarily by task relevant feature dimensions (e.g., Wolfe, 1994). (3) Topdown contextual effects are believed to operate on scene gists to identify
likely locations of interest given a task (e.g., Torralba et al., 2006). Because
the three strategies can make conflicting suggestions, theories include
rules for combining or arbitrating among the strategies. We propose an
alternative conceptualization consisting of a single unified mechanism.
We show that the previously proposed strategies -- and their combinations -- can be viewed as instances of our unified mechanism. The unified
perspective offers advantages, which include: avoiding the sometimes
arbitrary rules used for combination of strategies, simplifying the operation of control, and producing a parsimonious and principled framework
for understanding attentional control.
F18
SHARPENING OF NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS: A MECHANISM
OF TOP-DOWN CONTROL OVER INFORMATION PROCESSING
BY SELECTIVE ATTENTION Anthony J.-W. Chen1,2, Michael Britton1,
Todd W. Thompson3, Mark D'Esposito1; 1University of California, Berkeley,
2
VA, San Francisco, 3MIT — How is top-down control by selective attention implemented in the human brain? Modulation of the magnitudes of
localized neural responses has been emphasized as a mechanism of attentional control. However, these models do not take into account the organization of information representation in distributed, overlapping
cortical networks. Organization in networks implies possible variability
in levels of representational fidelity, with more distinctive vs. more overlapping network representations of information processing. We hypothesize that an important mechanism of selective attention may be the
modulation of levels of fidelity in order to improve processing for taskrelevant information. Using event-related functional MRI methods, this
may be measured as selectivity of responses in localized brain regions
and the degree of overlap of spatially distributed activity corresponding
to processing of stimuli. Healthy human subjects (n=32) selectively
attended to one of two competing image categories (ignoring the competing category) or non-selectively attended to both. Selective attention to a
category resulted in high selectivity for that category in regions of the
visual association cortex (VAC) compared to ignoring the same category.
In some individuals, a reversal of selectivity towards the competing
attended category was apparent. Non-selectively attending to both
resulted in an intermediate level of selectivity. Patterns of voxels activated by the different categories showed less overlap during the selective
attention conditions compared to the condition that did not require selectivity. These results support the hypothesis that selective attention may
be implemented as a sharpening of information representation in the networks of the visual association cortex.

Attentional Processes: Visual

F19
SPATIAL UPDATING IN THE ABSENCE OF THE CORPUS
CALLOSUM IN HUMANS Elisha
Merriam1,
Maryse
Lassonde2,
3
4
1
2
Christopher Genovese , Carol Colby ; New York University, University of
Montreal, 3Carnegie Mellon University, 4University of Pittsburgh — With
each eye movement, stationary objects in the world change position on
the retina yet we perceive the world as stable. Spatial updating is one
neural mechanism by which the brain compensates for shifts in the retinal image. The brain circuits that produce updated spatial representations remain unknown. We tested the hypothesis that the corpus
callosum is required for updating visual information from one hemisphere to the other in humans. We used fMRI to measure activity related
to spatial updating in four neurologically intact individuals and one splitbrain subject (ML) who had undergone a complete callosotomy fifteen
years prior to the study. Subjects performed a single-step saccade task
that we have used previously to demonstrate spatial updating in human
parietal cortex. In this task, the subject fixates a cross while a salient
visual stimulus flickers in the periphery. The stimulus is then extinguished and a tone cues the subject to make a horizontal saccade to a second cross. The size and direction of the saccade are selected so as to bring
the location of the preceding stimulus into the opposite hemifield. Spatial
updating is observed as the shift in activity from one hemisphere to the
other in conjunction with the saccade. We observed robust spatial updating in parietal cortex in ML and in the neurologically intact individuals.
This result demonstrates that spatial representations can be updated
across visual hemifields in the absence of the corpus callosum in humans.
F20
THE EFFECT OF LUMINANCE CHANGES ON THE ALLOCATION
OF SPATIAL ATTENTION Kathryn Fischer1, Christopher Gore2;
1Indiana State Unversity, 2Unversity of Bergen — Evidence from “pseudoneglect” has suggested that the hemispheres of the brain asymmetrically
allocate attention to the contralateral side of space with a slight bias
towards the left side of space. The present study further explored this
attentional bias in healthy adults using a computer adapted version of the
clinical confrontation task. Participants were required to detect a single
stimulus briefly presented (17 milliseconds) in the left or right visual field
or two stimuli presented simultaneously (one in the left and one in the
right visual field). Brightness of the stimuli changed from trial to trial.
Some stimuli were very easy to detect (high brightness), others were
barely detectable (medium brightness), and some were not detectable at
all (low brightness). There was no difference in accuracy for left versus
right stimuli during conditions of high brightness and low brightness.
However, there was a clear preference for left stimuli during conditions
of medium brightness as accuracy was greater for these stimuli compared
to those appearing on the right. The results suggest that attention is
slightly biased to the left side of space when stimuli are difficult to detect.
The present findings extend those found in the pseudoneglect literature
and support the idea that spatial attention may be lateralized in the brain.
Additionally, this lateralization may be modulated by stimulus parameters.
F21
MEASURING ATTENTION IN BOTH THE UPPER AND LOWER
AND THE LEFT AND RIGHT VISUAL FIELDS Deanna J. Greene,
Nancy Sin, Eran Zaidel; University of California Los Angeles — The Attention Network Test (ANT) is a brief computerized battery measuring three
components of attention: Conflict resolution, spatial Orienting, and Alerting. The ANT stimuli consist of a leftward or rightward pointing target
arrow flanked by congruent or incongruent arrows, presented above or
below fixation. Trials are preceded by spatial and/or temporal cues: center, double, valid, invalid, none. We constructed a lateralized version of
the task (LANT), which rotates the ANT stimuli by 90° and presents them
tachistoscopically. We found differences between the upper and lower
visual hemifields in the ANT and between the left and right visual hemifields in the LANT. Consequently, we constructed a version of the ANT

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

that presents the stimuli in each of four quadrants (QANT): upper left,
upper right, lower left, lower right. We ran the QANT on 41 right-handed
undergraduate students, and measured Conflict (incongruent vs. congruent flankers), Orienting Cost (center vs. invalid cues), Orienting Benefit
(center vs. valid cues), and Alerting (double vs. no cues). There were significant estimates of each network in each quadrant. Conflict and Orienting did not interact with quadrant, but Alerting did. Alerting was largest
in the upper left, smallest in the lower left, and similarly intermediate in
the upper and lower right. This suggests an attentional bias in Alerting
for extrapersonal space in the right hemisphere.
F22
VIGILANCE TRAINING VS. SEARCH TRAINING IN COGNITIVE
REHABILITATION
OF
PATIENTS
WITH
HEMISPATIAL
NEGLECT Joe DeGutis1, Thomas Van Vleet2; 1University of California,
Berkeley, 2Department of Veterans Affairs, Martinez VA — Currently there
exists no generalizable, long-lasting treatment for the debilitating spatial
and non-spatial deficits exhibited in patients with chronic neglect. While
several experimental interventions have utilized methods to induce
increased scanning of neglected space (e.g., optokinetic stimulation, selfcueing) or enhanced vigilance (e.g., sustained attention training), there
has been no direct comparison of spatial and non-spatial interventions in
the same patients. In the current study we compared a novel scanning
intervention and a vigilance training intervention within the same
patients with chronic neglect. The scanning intervention consisted of
training patients to search for a disappearing/reappearing object in a
complex, natural scene. A sound was randomly presented on the left side
of the scene on 50% of trials and was not predictive of target location. The
vigilance intervention consisted of training patients to detect a target
scene in a continuous stream of distracter scenes presented at fixation.
Patients improved performance on both intervention tasks which generalized to improvements on assessments of attention. Scanning and vigilance interventions produced similar improvements in object-based
attention. However, they had differential effects on visual search: scanning training increased search efficiency whereas vigilance training promoted a greater balance between searching right and left space. Also,
scanning training promoted longer-lasting effects than vigilance training.
These results suggest that training both spatial and non-spatial mechanisms of attention may provide beneficial and unique improvements in
patients with neglect.
F23
CHOLINERGIC ENHANCEMENT INCREASES REPRESENTATION
SELECTIVITY IN VISUAL ASSOCIATION CORTEX David Fegen1,
Anthony J-W Chen1,2, Aaron Koralek1, Joshua Hoffma1, Adam Gazzaley2,1,
Mark D'Esposito1; 1Henry H. Wheeler Jr. Brain Imaging Center at the Helen
Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 2University of
California at San Francisco — Whereas increased acetylcholine levels have
been shown to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio at the neural level, the
mechanisms by which these drugs work at a systems level is unknown.
This study tests the hypothesis that a cholinesterase inhibitor, donepezil,
will enhance the selectivity of visual representations by altering the neural activity pattern across a distributed network. Specifically, we predict
that donepezil will cause the neural representations of sensory stimuli to
exhibit less overlap with those that characterize other visual object categories. Healthy human subjects (n=28) were scanned with fMRI while
they performed a 1-back task, which involved viewing images from two
visual categories (faces or scenes) in alternating 16 sec blocks. The effects
of donepezil (5mg) were assessed using a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled crossover design. The 15 most responsive voxels for each
visual category were identified for each subject within an anatomically
defined region of inferotemporal cortex. An overlap analysis revealed
that there was less overlap of maximally face and scene responsive voxels
with donepezil administration. Furthermore, a percent signal analysis
showed that donepezil does not selectively increase the signal (image category being shown) nor reduce the noise (image category not being

195

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

shown), but rather amplifies the overall difference between the two.
These results suggest donepezil increases representation selectivity by
decreasing the overlap between representations of different object categories and enhancing the overall signal-to-noise ratio.
F24
ALCOHOL INTOXICATION SELECTIVELY AFFECTS NOVELTYP3A AMPLITUDE AND TIME-FREQUENCY THETA ACTIVITY: A
PLACEBO CONTROL DESIGN Noah Venables1, Edward Bernat1, Paul
Collins1, Alan Lang2, Christopher Patrick1; 1University of Minnesota, 2Florida
State University — Previous research has demonstrated moderately low
doses of alcohol attenuate both novelty P3a and target P3b ERP responses
in a novelty-oddball experiment, but suggests that novelty P3a responses
related to orienting may be selectively reduced (Marinkovic et al., 2001).
The current study assessed whether acute alcohol intoxication differentially impacts the amplitude of novelty P3a vs. target P3b. Additionally,
time-frequency energy was decomposed into theta and delta components
and evaluated. Finally, intoxication effects on the affective differentiation
in the processing of unexpected emotional stimuli were assessed. A
visual novelty-oddball paradigm in which IAPS pictures served as the
novel affective stimuli was employed. Participants were randomly
assigned to receive alcoholic or placebo beverages. Mean blood alcohol
concentration in the alcohol group was .089%. Behavioral performance
(accuracy and reaction times) was not significantly different between
groups. Alcohol significantly reduced novelty P3a amplitude to a greater
extent than target P3b amplitude. Despite the reduction in novelty P3a,
the alcohol group showed the same ERP differentiation of emotional content relative to neutral in the IAPS pictures as placebos. Finally, time-frequency delta and theta components around the time of the P3a and P3b
were identified using principal component analysis of time-frequency
data (cf. Bernat et al., 2005). Results suggest that alcohol impacts midlinefrontal theta more than parietal delta, particularly during orienting to
novel stimuli.
F25
SUSTAINED ATTENTION DECREASES SPATIAL SPREAD OF
VISUAL RESPONSES IN HUMAN EARLY VISUAL CORTEX
Michael Silver, Amitai Shenhav, Mark D'Esposito; University of California,
Berkeley — We used fMRI to measure the spatial extent of visual
responses in human early visual cortex while subjects performed a sustained attention task. Animal studies have demonstrated that sustained
attention increases cortical release of acetylcholine (ACh). We have previously shown that increasing synaptic ACh in human subjects with the
cholinesterase inhibitor donepezil (Aricept) decreased the spatial spread
of responses to visual stimuli. In the present study, subjects viewed a contrast-reversing checkerboard annulus centered about the fixation point.
The annulus was presented in a block-alternation design, with periods of
10 seconds of stimulus alternating with 10 seconds of a blank screen. In
separate 5-minute fMRI runs, subjects either passively viewed the stimulus annulus or covertly attended to its left or right half while performing
a target (contrast decrement) detection task. Targets occurred at random
times and locations within the annulus, thereby requiring subjects to
maintain attention over the entire cued hemiannulus for the full stimulus
duration (10 seconds). We measured the number of voxels in early visual
cortex that showed a positive fMRI response to stimulus presentation for
attended, ignored, and passively viewed stimuli. Relative to passive
viewing, sustained attention caused a significant decrease in the spatial
spread of visual responses. This result was obtained for visual cortex representing the attended hemiannulus as well as cortex representing the
ignored hemiannulus. Thus, compared to passive viewing, sustained
visual attention per se reduced spatial spread of responses to a visual
stimulus, regardless of whether that stimulus was attended or ignored.

196

Attentional Processes: Visual

F26
ATTENTION NETWORKS AND WHITE MATTER: EVIDENCE
FOR DISTINCT STRUCTURE-FUNCTION RELATIONSHIPS FOR
ALERTING, ORIENTING, AND CONFLICT Sumit Niogi1, Rachel
Kolster1, Bruce McCandliss1,2, 1Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
2
CNRC-TBI: The Cognitive Neurobiological Research Consortium in Traumatic
Brain Injury — Attentional processes have been proposed to involve three
component processes – alerting, orienting, and executive function –
which have been linked to separable brain networks (Posner and
Petersen, 1990) via functional neuroimaging and lesion studies. In the
current study, we investigate relationships between individual differences in efficiency of components of attention and specific white matter
tract regions. White matter microstructure was measured in 25 normal
adults using 3 Tesla magnetic resonance diffusion tensor imaging, and
related to performance in each component of attention using the Attention Network Task (Fan et. al., 2002). Fractional anisotropy (FA) values
were evaluated using a small number of a priori regions of interest, analyzed on a subject-by-subject basis. Performance in the alerting component was correlated with integrity of the thalamic radiations (p<0.05), yet
this ROI was uncorrelated with orienting or executive components of
attention. Similarly, performance in orienting, but not alerting or executive function, was correlated with the splenium of the corpus callosum
(p<0.05). Finally, performance with only the executive component of
attention was correlated with FA scores in the anterior corona radiata
(p<0.05). Statistical dissociation across these relationships is demonstrated using a series of multiple regression analyses showing that
unique variance is attributed to each structure-function relationship. By
establishing a relationship between individual differences in each component of attention with variations in integrity of specific white matter pathways, it is possible to delineate the neuronal pathways involved in the
attention networks.
F27
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF IMMUNE-MEDIATED PALINOPSIA
Martin Goldstein1, Michael Silverman1, Annabel Wang1, Oliver Tuescher2,
Jennifer Woehr1, Marcel Kinsbourne3; 1Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
2Universitätsklinik Freiburg, 3New School — Background: Emerging evidence implicates inflammatory mediators (e.g., cytokines) in the neuropathophysiology of select neuropsychiatric disturbances. Interferonalpha (IFN), a potent activator of the inflammatory cytokine network, has
been recently employed as a model for probing inflammatory mechanisms by which somatic medical conditions can produce neuropsychiatric dysfunction. Objective: To characterize neural substrates of palinopsia
(perseveratory afterimages (AI)) in a premorbidly neuropsychiatricallywell 42 year-old woman treated with immunomodulator therapy for
chronic hepatitis C infection. Methods: 120 stimuli comprising 6 categories (iconic color, iconic black/white, nonsense forms, happy face, sad
face, neutral faces) were serially presented at varying onsets in a counterbalanced pseudorandomized order (SOA=4s) during EPI-BOLD fMRI
acquisition performed on a Siemens 3T MRI scanner (TR=2000ms;
TE=30ms; flip angle=90°; FoV=210mm x 210mm; 3.0mm thickness; 1mm
gap; matrix=64x64). Subject was instructed to attend to each image and,
once removed, respond using a button press to AI presence (AI+) or
absence (AI-). Image analysis was conducted using SPM2. Results: A significant difference in AI occurrence was revealed as a function of stimulus onset (X2(3) =12.26, p<0.01). Contrasting mean BOLD responses
associated with AI+ versus AI- trials revealed AI+ associated activation
of a neural network including dorsal anterior cingulate, thalamus, caudate, and right parietal regions. Conclusion: Palinopsia can be associated
with activation of a distinct neural network involving components implicated in visual attention and conflict-detection. Consistent with other
findings revealing IFN-related cognitive impairment associated with
functional neural changes, these findings offer additional evidence implicating inflammatory markers as candidate mediators of neuropsychiatric
dysfunction in somatic medical illness.

Attentional Processes: Visual

F28
EFFECTS
OF
LEARNED
INHIBITION
ON
CORTICAL
PROCESSING Maha Adamo1, Taylor W Schmitz2, Kamal Shaikh1, Eve De
Rosa1; 1University of Toronto, 2University of Toronto — Selective attention
operates by increasing the signal-to-noise ratio for behaviourally relevant
information, which can be achieved by increasing the signal from relevant information and/or by reducing the noise from irrelevant information. When a given distractor has been ignored previously in two
separate contexts, negative transfer is evident in the slowed response
times elicited when that distractor becomes the target. For example, if
places are first ignored while faces are attended, and then places are
again ignored while chairs are attended, the places will elicit slower
responses when they finally become the target and tools are ignored. We
examined the modulatory effects of this suppression and subsequent
negative transfer on functionally distinct extrastriate cortical areas that
respond selectively to these different classes of stimuli. Fifteen healthy,
young adults were scanned using a spiral-in/out protocol on a GE 3T
MRI scanner (TR = 2s, TE = 30ms; 28 slices, slice thickness = 6mm, gap =
0, in-plane resolution = 3.6mm x 3.6mm). Using a block design, participants were exposed to place stimuli as distractors in two contexts before
places became the target stimuli, as described above. Analyses using
SPM2 revealed modulation in extrastriate areas commensurate with the
relevance of the stimulus classes. Namely, altered BOLD activations were
observed in the parahippocampal place area (PPA) during the final block
in which places switched from irrelevant to relevant. This change in cortical activity is likely due to inhibitory modulatory influences from the lateral frontal cortex.
F29
DISTINCT AND OVERLAPPING FRONTAL-SUBCORTICAL
NETWORKS FACILITATE CHANGES IN SELECTIVE ATTENTION
DURING LEARNED INHIBITION Taylor W. Schmitz, Maha Adamo,
Eve De Rosa; University of Toronto — The process of visual selective attention directly influences the scope of perceptual information encoded in
extrastriate cortices. This enables the enhancement of behaviourally relevant information in the visual field, while minimizing distraction from
irrelevant information. However, in order to facilitate such adaptive
responses to stimuli, both the brain must rapidly learn new contingencies
when confronted with changes in stimulus relevance. This fMRI investigation focused on differentiating the neural mechanisms underlying
adaptive response to task-induced shifts in selective attention. We used a
simultaneous discrimination paired-associate paradigm in which participants learned to respond to relevant target stimuli while ignoring irrelevant distractor stimuli. Then in a second learning phase, the participants
continued to ignore the same distractors while learning to respond to
new target stimuli. In a third negative transfer phase, the irrelevant distractor stimuli from the first two learning phases became the new target
stimuli paired with new distractor stimuli. FMRI (3T Signa) was acquired
on fifteen cognitively intact young adults while they performed this
paired-associates task. Group analyses of the fMRI task revealed distinct
and overlapping neural systems involved at each phase of learning and
transfer. Signal in the left lateral orbitfrontal and rostral anterior cingulated cortices was significantly greater in the second learning phase compared to the first when the same distractor stimuli appeared in a new
context, indicating that the distractors were truly behaviourally irrelevant. Comparisons of the transfer phase with the second learning phase
yielded activation in the anterior hippocampus, indicating adaptive
learning response to novel processing contingencies.
F30
AGE-RELATED
CHANGES
IN
SELECTIVE
ATTENTION
ENHANCES MEMORY FOR THE IRRELEVANT Fred Cheng1, Taylor
W. Schmitz2, Lynn Hasher1, Eve De Rosa1; 1University of Toronto, 2University
of Toronto — Selective attention enables us to process behaviourally relevant information from the environment while simultaneously filtering
out the irrelevant. Given that the efficiency of selective attention is pre-

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

sumed to decline in the course of normal aging, the present study examined how the processing of irrelevant information differs between
younger (n=48; mean age=19.3±2.6) and older adults (n=29; mean
age=74.1±5.3). Participants performed a gender judgment task comprised
of superimposed face (target) and house (ignored) stimuli. It was hypothesized that older adults would unintentionally encode more task irrelevant (house) information. Some of the stimuli were presented multiple
times non-consecutively, whereas others were presented only once. On a
subsequent implicit recognition test, participants matched the previously
seen faces with either the correct (previously seen) house or a novel
house. Performance accuracy on the implicit recognition test provided a
measure of unintentional encoding of irrelevant (house) information during the gender judgment task. Older adults exhibited significantly better
accuracy on the implicit recognition test (0.62±0.04) compared to the
younger group (0.49±0.03) for the repeated irrelevant stimuli from the
gender judgment task. However, there was no difference detected in
explicit recognition for the houses between groups. The results suggest
that older adult’s enhanced implicit knowledge of irrelevant information
reflect impaired selective attentional control. Future neuroimaging studies examining selective attention processes between these two groups
may reveal distinct neural signatures that predict the behavioural correlates of impaired selective attention in older adults. This work is currently underway in our lab.
F31
THE ROLE OF FRONTAL CORTEX IN THE SPATIAL
REPRESENTATION OF NUMBERS Elena Rusconi, Domenica Bueti,
Vincent Walsh, Brian Butterworth; University College London, UK — Recent
neuropsychological and neurophysiological studies have suggested that
prefrontal cortex may be involved in non-verbal number processing,
when relevant for the current behavioural goals. More precisely, it has
been suggested that the right inferior frontal gyrus (rIFg) in humans may
contribute to the spatial mental representation of numbers, also known as
mental number line. rIFg is part of a right-lateralized frontoparietal network that conveys signals to a dorsal network supporting attentional orienting in contralateral space. In particular, the frontal eye fields (FEF) are
known to contribute to visual scene analysis and visual conjunction
search tasks when eye movement commands are not required. In the
present study, we hypothesised they might be also involved in exploring
a conceptual space, such as the mental number line. We examined the
proposed functions of the human rIFg and rFEF by interfering with their
normal functioning with rTMS while participants performed numerical
tasks. The results establish that rIFG supports a representation of the
entire mental number line while rFEF is crucial for contralateral orienting
(that is toward small numbers), but only when number magnitude is relevant to the task.
F32
ATTENTIONAL
DEPLOYMENTS
IN
SPACE:
NEURAL
CORRELATES OF BEHAVIORAL PERFORMANCE Simon
Kelly1,
Manuel Gomez-Ramirez2, Jennifer Montesi1, John Foxe2; 1Nathan S. Kline
Institute for Psychiatric Research, 2The City College of the City University of
New York, — We investigated the dynamics of anticipatory attentional
deployment and how these deployments support behavior during performance of a spatial cueing task. Arrow cues instructed subjects to
attend to either the left or right hemifield in anticipation of an imperative
stimulus appearing 800ms later. Stimuli consisted of either an ‘X’ or ‘+’
surrounded by small circles. The subject was required to respond if a target appeared on the cued side, and to ignore stimuli appearing on the
opposite location. By parsing the data into correct (i.e. hits) and incorrect
responses (i.e. misses and false alarms) and then inspecting the activity in
the interval between the cue and the imperative stimulus (CTI), we
assessed the links between anticipatory attentional deployment processes
and behavioral performance. Our analysis focused on the Late Directing
Attention Positivity (LDAP) and the alpha-differential-effect of the late
phase of the CTI. These electrophysiological (EEG) components have

197

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

been extensively shown to reflect real markers of spatial attentional
deployments. First, broadband ERP analysis revealed a greater LDAP
contralateral to the cued side for hits relative to misses. Secondly, the
oscillatory power in the alpha frequency range (8-14 Hz) showed a
greater alpha-differential-effect for hit versus miss responses in both
hemispheres. Importantly, no significant differences between hits and
misses where found in the earlier ERP components of the cue stimulus,
which further suggests that these two well-established EEG correlates of
spatial attentional deployment may have direct influence on the behavioral outcome of task performance.

Emotion
F33
PERCEPTION OF POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE EMOTIONAL
FACIAL EXPRESSIONS IN HUMANS: A COMBINED ELECTROAND MAGNETO-ENCEPHALOGRAPHY STUDY Shasha
Morel1,
2
3
2
Aurélie Ponz , Manuel Mercier , Patrik Vuilleumier , Nathalie George1,4;
1
CNRS UPR 640 – LENA / Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France,
2Université de Genève, Switzerland, 3 Neuroscience, Brain-Mind Institute,
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland, 4Centre MEGEEG, Paris, France — Several recent studies have provided evidence for
influences of emotional facial expression on face encoding and memory.
However, the temporal dynamics of this interaction is not yet clear. We
investigated this issue in a repetition paradigm using 70 fearful, 70 happy
and 70 neutral faces, each repeated once with a lag of 1 to 6 minutes.
Fourteen subjects participated in this combined electro-encephalography
(EEG -64 electrodes, nose reference-) and magneto-encephalography
(MEG -151 sensors, whole-head CTF system-) study. An early repetition
effect was found between 40 and 50 ms in occipito-temporo-parietal
regions in both MEG and EEG. Although this effect was present for all
emotions, its scalp distribution varied according to the facial expression
in MEG and it reached significance only for neutral faces in EEG. The
face-selective N170 (EEG) and M170 (MEG) both showed a repetition
enhancement for neutral faces only. This was associated with greater
M170/N170 for emotional than for neutral faces on first but not on second presentation. Around 300ms, a repetition suppression effect specific
to fearful faces was observed in MEG, together with greater M300 component for fearful faces on first presentation only. Other effects included
an earlier P100 and enhanced Late Positive Component (LPC) to fearful
compared to happy and neutral faces, in EEG data. These results show
that emotional facial expressions modulate face encoding and memory at
different stages of face processing, starting as soon as 40-50ms. Fearselective effects however were first found around 100 ms and then on the
late components (LPC and M300).
F34
USING THE MEMORY CHARACTERISTICS QUESTIONNAIRE TO
EXAMINE HOW WE REMEMBER EMOTIONAL STIMULI
Katherine Mickley, Elizabeth Kensinger; Boston College — A major approach
to the understanding of emotion and cognition is the study of memory
for emotional events, but exactly what details are remembered about
these emotional events has yet to be clearly defined. In order to determine the details people remember about emotional items, participants
viewed pictures that varied by valence (negative, positive, neutral) and
arousal (high arousing, low arousing). After an approximately 45-min
delay, participants were given a recognition memory test. If participants
indicated that an item was “old,” they were then asked to complete a
series of memory characteristics questions, asking them the amount of
thoughts, feelings, associations, visual details, and temporal information
they remembered about the item’s presentation. Although recognition
accuracy was similar regardless of valence or arousal, emotion did affect
the memory characteristics responses. Thoughts as well as feelings were
most likely to be remembered for negative arousing pictures. However,

198

Emotion

emotion did not affect the amount of visual detail, temporal information,
or other associations that participants remembered between valence and
arousal categories. These results suggest that people’s internal thoughts
and feelings often make up the core of an emotional memory, whereas
other components such as visual details, order effects, or associations
play a much smaller role.
F35
EMOTIONAL
PROCESSES
IN
GO/NOGO
CONFLICTS
Annekathrin Schacht1,2, Roland Nigbur1,2, Werner Sommer1,2; 1HumboldtUniversity at Berlin, 2Institute of Psychology, Biological Psychology/
Psychophysiology — Recent research indicates close functional and neurophysiological ties between error and conflict processing. Emotional processes have been shown to be present in decision making and to be
relevant for the optimization of behavior. Therefore, emotional processes
might also play an important role in correct performance in cognitive
conflict paradigms. Here we investigated emotional reactions in a Go/
NoGo paradigm which is known to evoke elementary but relatively
strong response conflicts. In Experiment 1, the appearance of cognitive
conflicts in NoGo trials was corroborated by enhanced N2/P3 amplitudes in Event-related potentials. NoGo trials elicited larger skin conductance responses (SCRs) and higher activity of the corrugator muscle than
Go trials. Further, the intensity of cognitive conflicts was manipulated by
varying the proportion of NoGo trials (50, 35, and 20%). As NoGo probability decreased, all psychophysiological indicators increased in amplitude or duration. In Experiment 2, only 20% NoGo trials were used. Here,
additional to SCRs startle blinks of orbicularis oculi muscles were
recorded in response to acoustic startle probes. Whereas SCRs replicated
enhanced amplitudes in NoGo trials found in Experiment 1, no modulations of startle blink amplitudes were found. Taken together, the present
results suggest that NoGo conflicts induce emotional arousal as reflected
in SCRs. The prolonged corrugator activity may indicate the obtrusiveness of NoGo situations in predominantly Go-oriented response sets or it
may reflect some kind of negative emotional valence. However, NoGo
situations do not appear to activate the motivational defensive system as
startle blink amplitudes were not modulated relative to Go trials.
F36
WATCH OUT ! FEARFUL FACES MODULATE EARLY
ELECTROMAGNETIC BRAIN RESPONSES ASSOCIATED WITH
GAZE CUEING EFFECT Nathalie George1,2, Sara Benetti3, Shasha
Morel1, Teresa Farroni3,4; 1Cognitive Neuroscience and Brain Imaging Unit,
CNRS UPR 640 (LENA) / Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France,
2Centre MEG-EEG, Hopital de la Salpetriere, Paris, France, 3University of
Padova, Italy, 4Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck College,
London, England — Seeing a face with averted gaze triggers in the
observer an automatic orienting of spatial attention in the direction of the
seen gaze. It has been recently shown that this effect can be enhanced
when the face is fearful as opposed to happy or neutral. Here we investigated the cerebral correlates of this effect in a Posner-like cueing paradigm using fearful and happy faces. Fifteen subjects saw neutral faces
with direct gaze which became fearful or happy while their gaze moved
to the right or left or remained straight. This was followed after a variable
delay by a target in the valid or invalid hemifield which the subject had to
detect. Electromagnetic brain responses were recorded on a 151-sensors
whole head CTF system. We found early differentiation of Event-Related
magnetic Fields (ERFs) in response to fearful versus happy cues which
peaked around 100ms. Most importantly, there was a very early enhancement of the ERFs in response to valid relative to invalid targets which
was selective to fearful faces. This effect was observed between 55 and 65
ms and shows that fear can modulate the attentional bias induced by seeing gaze shifts from the very early stage of visual processing. It provides
evidence for neural mechanisms subtending rapid spatial orienting of
attention in response to fearful stimuli.

Emotion

F37
NEURAL RESPONSE TO DYNAMIC PROPERTIES OF FACIAL
EXPRESSION Anna Matheson1, Michelle de Haan1; 1Institute of Child
Health, University College London, London, UK — Dynamic properties of
facial expressions can influence the perception of emotions, with motion
often enhancing the neural response and improving accuracy of perception. The aims of this study were to examine the effects of motion on: (1)
the identification of 6 basic facial emotions, and (2) the timing and scalp
topography of the neural events accompanying emotion perception. In
Experiment 1 (n=36), participants identified emotion in static and morphed dynamic images of six basic facial expressions (anger, disgust, fear,
happiness, sadness and surprise). Overall, they tended to rate dynamic
images more accurately than static ones (p=0.056), but a Motion and
Emotion interaction indicated that this was driven by anger, fear, and
sadness (p’s <0.05). In Experiment 2 (underway), participants’ 128-channel event-related potentials are being recorded while they passively view
a subset of these images selected to control accuracy of recognition across
static and dynamic formats. We anticipate that the N170 component will
be larger for dynamic than static expressions and show a different scalp
topography due to the differential involvement of the fusiform gyrus and
superior temporal sulcus in generating the N170 in the two conditions.
The results suggest that the dynamic properties of facial expressions
allow for a higher degree of accuracy of recognition, possibly because the
temporal aspects of motion provide additional cues for differentiating
emotions. Experiment 2 provides additional information about differences in the timing and topography of brain events involved in processing static and dynamic emotions.
F38
CAPTURING NEURAL PROCESSES OF FEAR EXCITATION AND
INHIBITION WITH EVENT-RELATED SYNTHETIC APERTURE
MAGNETOMETRY Brian Cornwell1, Linda Johnson1, Christian Grillon1;
1National Institute of Mental Health — Neuroimaging studies of fear have
predominantly focused on elucidating neural mechanisms mediating fear
excitation with less emphasis on studying those mediating fear inhibition. Adaptive MEG beamformer analyses offer a unique way to study
both these phenomena as they unfold over time across distributed neural
systems. Using an instructed threat procedure, 180 trials began with a
threat stimulus indicating potential risk of shock. One of two stimuli then
appeared and coterminated with the initial threat stimulus (~1500ms
SOA), either a cue indicating that participants were still at risk (100 trials,
20% shock reinforcement at cue termination) or a cue indicating that they
were completely safe (80 trials). Neuromagnetic data were collected from
16 healthy participants (7 women) at 600Hz with a 275-channel wholehead MEG system. Event-related synthetic aperture magnetometry analyses were conducted to estimate the distribution of stimulus-evoked
responses (1-30Hz) across the brain (in 5mm steps) in 100ms post-stimulus windows. Participants reported greater anxiety to the second threat
stimulus and less anxiety to the safety stimulus relative the first threat
stimulus. Source analyses confirmed that the initial threat stimulus elicited a rapid amygdala response, indicating fear processes were engaged
before safety cue presentation. Notably, we found greater left ventromedial prefrontal and bilateral supramarginal gyral activity to the safety cue
over the second threat cue, two structures that have been implicated in
fear inhibition and successful regulation of negative affect. Our presentation will focus on characterizing the time courses of activity of the major
structures involved in fear excitation and inhibition.
F39
EARLY NEUROMAGNETIC MODULATIONS TO EMOTIONAL
FACES Margot J. Taylor1, Sarah J. Bayless2, Nathalie George3, Magali
Batty4; 1Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, 2Research Institute,
Hospital for Sick Children, 3CNRS UPR 640 - LENA / Université Pierre et
Marie Curie, and Centre MEG-EEG, Paris, France, 4INSERM U619, Centre de
Pedopsychiatrie, CHU Bretonneau, Tours, France — The
neural
system
underlying the processing of facial emotion encompasses the face-sensi-

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

tive visual ventral stream as well as limbic structures and orbitofrontal
cortex. We used magnetoencephalography (MEG) with an event-related
spatial filtering technique (erSAM), that calculates source power at single
time points to image time-locked activity with high spatial accuracy, to
determine the neural underpinnings of early emotional face processing.
Eighteen adults participated. MEG was recorded while subjects viewed
faces expressing six basic emotions (anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, surprise) and neutral expressions; subjects responded to rare, nonface stimuli. Analyses of the latency and amplitude of M170 at the sensor
level showed a main effect of emotion on latency (happy and neutral
faces had shorter latencies than negative emotions); there was a trend for
M170 amplitude to be largest to fearful faces. The latency of the occipitally recorded M90 showed a global effect of emotion. erSAM analyses of
M170 showed activations in the fusiform gyri, which were not affected by
emotion. This suggests that the effects on the peak measures of M170
were due to overlapping sources at the sensors, likely including STS
regions. At 90ms the erSAM analyses showed the expected posterior
visual regions of activity and also left orbitofrontal activation, but only
for the fearful faces. This is consistent with models of activation of the
frontal lobes via subcortical pathways with emotionally salient stimuli, as
shown with fMRI. With MEG and erSAM we were able to demonstrate
the impressive rapidity of this orbito-frontal involvement.
F40
FMRI EVIDENCE FOR SIMULATION AS A MECHANISM FOR
EMOTION UNDERSTANDING AND EMPATHY Christine
I.
Hooker1, Sara C. Verosky1, Laura T. Germine2, Robert T. Knight1, Mark
D'Esposito1; 1University of California at Berkeley, 2University College
London — Recent research suggests that specific brain regions facilitate
the use of simulation as a mechanism for understanding mental states,
such as the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) for imitation, the somatosensory
related cortices (SC) for identifying emotional expression, and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) for using self-knowledge to understand the mental states of similar others. We tested the hypothesis that
these three regions should be active during emotion judgments in which
people are most likely to use simulation; specifically, emotion recognition
of someone with similar vs. dissimilar perspective as themselves, and
emotion inference that requires imagining (vs. identifying from available
cues) what a person would feel if they had more knowledge about a situation. Furthermore, we predicted that neural activity in these regions
during these judgments would correlate with the amount of empathy
experienced in daily life. We found that the IFG, VMPFC, and SC were
more active during emotion judgments that were most likely to use simulation as compared to emotion judgments that were not. Furthermore,
activity in these regions was significantly correlated to self-reported
empathy. The findings suggest that using simulation as a strategy to
understand emotional states is related to enhanced empathy.
F41
SEXUAL OFFENDERS BIAS ATTENTION TO EROTIC WORDS:
AN ERP STUDY Yu-Ying Chou1, Chi-Kuang Sun2, Chiao-Yun Chen2,
Ovid J.L. Tzeng3, Daisy L. Hung3; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
National Central University, Jhongli, Taiwan, 2Institute of Neuroscience,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Institute of Neuroscience,
National Yang-Ming University; Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica,
Taipei, Taiwan — Introduction: The individuals with various emotional
and drug-abuse disorders demonstrated attentional bias for stimuli specifically related to their characteristics. Here we incorporated the emotional Stroop task into the event-related potentials (ERPs) to investigate if
the sexual offenders exhibit attentional bias for erotic words. Method:
The study was divided into two sections. First, we requested twenty
healthy male subjects to rate the valence of the emotional words to select
the formal stimuli. Second, we required six sexual offenders and six normal subjects to conduct the emotional Stroop task when ERPs were
recorded. There were a total of three types of the emotional words – negative, erotic, and neutral – to be presented in color of red, green, blue, or

199

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

yellow. The colored rectangles were set as the baseline. The participants
had to ignore the meaning of the words as well as press the button corresponding to the color of the word presented. Results: The sexual offenders relative to the normal controls tended to respond to the erotic words
with stronger N1 but weaker N2 amplitudes. Both of them did not differ
in their behavioral performance. Discussion: Our study demonstrated
that behaviorally attentional bias might be reflected in the early ERP components. And our results suggest that these sex offenders might have differential neural underpinnings of attentional bias for erotic materials.
F42
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EMOTION REGULATION IN SEXUAL
OFFENDERS AND HEALTHY CONTROLS: A GO/NO-GO TASK
FOLLOWING AFFECTIVE PICTURE PROCESSING Chi-Kuang
Sun1, Yu-Ying Chou2, Chiao-Yun Chen1, Ovid J. L. Tzeng3, Daisy L. Hung3;
1Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan,
2
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University, Jhongli,
Taiwan, 3Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University; Institute
of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan — Introduction: Recent theoretical accounts of emotion regulation assign an important role in inhibitory control, yet there is little relevant research on their neural
underpinnings. Here we investigated how emotion regulation intertwines response inhibition across sexual offenders and healthy controls.
Method: A total of five sexual offenders and five normal male subjects
participated in this study. We recorded the event-related potentials
(ERPs) when participants viewed emotional pictures followed by a simple go/no-go procedure. Three categories of emotional pictures derived
from the IAPS (unpleasant vs. pleasant vs. neutral) were used as the emotion prime. Particularly, the pleasant contents were characterized by
erotic couples and females. Results: The sexual offenders relative to the
healthy controls showed larger late positive potentials (LPP) to pleasant
pictures. The healthy controls, instead of the sexual offenders, showed
smaller N2 amplitudes (No-Go minus Go) to the go/no-go tasks under
the unpleasant and pleasant conditions relative to the neutral condition.
Discussion: The results suggest that the differential N2 across the sexual
offenders and healthy controls might derived from their previous differential impact of emotional pictures reflected in the LPP. There might be
both genetic and environmental contributions to sexual offenders’ altered
neural underpinnings of emotion regulation on response inhibition.
F43
THE MEDIUM AND THE MESSAGE: NON-CONSCIOUS
PROCESSING OF EMOTIONS FROM FACIAL EXPRESSIONS AND
BODY LANGUAGE IN BLINDSIGHT Marco Tamietto1, Luca Latini
Corazzini1, Giuliano Geminiani1, Lawrence Weiskrantz2, Beatrice de Gelder3,4;
1
University of Torino, Italy, 2University of Oxford, Oxford, UK, 3Martinos
Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown, Boston, MA, USA, 4Tilburg University, The
Netherlands — Non-conscious recognition of emotions in the absence of
striate cortex - affective blindsight - has thus far emerged only for facial
expressions. Here we investigated whether: a) affective blindsight is
present also when emotions are expressed through non-facial signals; b)
non-conscious extraction of affective information is insensitive to perceptual differences between various ways of communicating the same emotion (e.g., a fearful facial or bodily expression). We used indirect
measures of blindsight on the well-known patient DB with left hemianopia to test for affective blindsight for emotional body language (Experiment-1) and for the joint combination of facial and bodily emotional
expressions (Experiment-2). Happy or fearful expressions were presented
either unilaterally in the right intact hemifield or bilaterally in congruent
and incongruent conditions (i.e., with both stimuli showing the same
emotion, or with one stimulus showing happiness and the other showing
fear, respectively). Reaction times (RTs) were faster in the bilateral congruent condition with two fearful bodily expressions than in the unilateral or bilateral incongruent condition (Experiment-1). Most
interestingly, two congruent fearful expressions reduced RTs even when

200

Emotion

the same emotion was conveyed by body language in one hemifield and
by facial expressions in the opposite hemifield (Experiment-2). These
results indicate that: a) affective blindsight occurs also for bodily and not
only for facial expressions; b) the congruency in the emotional meaning
instead of the perceptual similarity between the consciously seen and
non-consciously perceived stimulus is the critical factor for interhemispheric cooperation in affective blindsight to occur.
F44
THE INITIAL BRAIN RESPONSE TO PLEASANT AND
UNPLEASANT MUSIC. AN FMRI STUDY. Tom Fritz, Koelsch Stefan;
Max Planck Institute for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig — The present
study used short pleasant music excerpts and their manipulated unpleasant counterparts to determine neural correlates of music listening with
functional magnetic imaging (fMRI). It contributes to the investigation of
the timecourse of emotion, focusing on the initial response to acoustic
stimuli with positive and negative valence. Furthermore, it investigates
the distortion of the vertical organization of music (spectrum), and the
distortion of a horizontal organization of music (forward/backward). A
correlation of BOLD signal with decreasing valence revealed an activation of the right amygdala, the premotor cortex bilaterally, the right
motor cortex, the paracentral lobe bilaterally, and the right superior parietal lobe. The activation of the amygdala in the response to increasing
unpleasantness of the music replicates a previous finding (Koelsch et al.,
2005), but now revealing that the amygdala is already activated in the initial response to unpleasantly manipulated music. A correlation of BOLD
signal with increasing valence revealed activations in a dorsal aspect of
the amygdala and the frontomedial orbitofrontal cortex (among others).
That different anatomical aspects of the amygdala are involved in both,
the perception of high and low valenced stimuli is in line with findings
that demonstrated that this structure is not only important for negative
emotions, but also relevant for positive emotions. The orbitofrontal cortex
has previously been shown to be involved in emotion processing during
music listening; the present data provide the first evidence for such an
involvement with functional MRI. Furthermore, the functional connectivity of the observed maxima in the central and dorsal aspects of the
amygdala are investigated.
F45
THE EFFECT OF MOTIVATION AND STRESS ON THE ERN AND
THE P3 Koki Ikeda, Taiki Takahashi, Hirokata Fukushima, Toshikazu
Hasegawa; University of Tokyo — Two ERP components, the error-related
negativity (ERN) and the P3 are known to be enhanced when motivational factors of task performance are emphasized. To examine whether
these motivational modulations of ERPs are accompanied with and
related to the physiological stress responses, we measured the feedbackERN, the P3, and two stress biomarkers, salivary cortisol and alpha amylase, simultaneously. The experiment was conducted in a between-subject design, using the time estimation task. Subjects in the experimental
condition performed the task under video recording and negative evaluation by the experimenters. Preliminary data analysis showed, although
the motivational manipulation did modulate the amplitude of the ERN
and the P3 in the predicted direction, they were not accompanied with
the overall group difference in salivary alpha amylase level. However,
there was a significant correlation between the alpha amylase level and
the P3 amplitude when the motivational factors were emphasized. The
results were discussed in the context of central noradrenergic system of
arousal and anxiety.
F46
DIFFERENTIAL HABITUATION OF AMYGDALA ACTIVITY TO
FEARFUL FACES IN ADOLESCENCE Todd Hare, B. J. Casey; Sackler
Institute, Weill Medical College of Cornell University — Functional
magnetic resonance imaging studies have shown that the response of the
amygdala to fearful facial expressions decreases with repeated presentations (Breiter, et al., 1996; Thomas et al., 2001). Here we compared habituation of the amygdala response to fearful faces between adolescents and

Emotion

adults. Eighteen adolescents (12-17 yrs; 10 male) and 22 adults (19- 32
yrs; 11 male) were scanned on a 3T GE Signa magnet using a spiral in and
out sequence. Subjects viewed fearful faces presented as targets in the
context of a go/nogo paradigm. Non-targets were calm faces. Adults and
adolescents did not differ in terms of accuracy or reaction times to fearful
target faces. There was a main effect of trial on amygdala response to
fearful faces in the right and left amygdala (F 8.31; p< .05) as well as an
interaction between trial and age (F 4.41; p< .05). Adults showed a
decrease in the amygdala response to fearful faces by the middle trials of
the run, but adolescents did not show a decrease until the last trials of the
run. Across all ages trait anxiety scores from the Spielberger State-Trait
Anxiety Index were negatively correlated with habituation in the left
amygdala (r = -.466, p < .05) such that individuals with higher trait anxiety had less decreases in amygdala activity over time. These results suggest that examining changes in amygdala responses over time might
provide clues as to why adolescence is a period of increased risk for the
onset of anxiety-related disorders.
F47
ENCODING
ACTIVITY
PREDICTING
SUBSEQUENT
EMOTIONAL MEMORY AFTER SHORT AND LONG DELAYS
Maureen Ritchey, Florin Dolcos, Kevin S. LaBar, Roberto Cabeza; Duke
University, Durham, NC — Emotional arousal has been generally associated with memory benefits for words, events, and pictures. This effect
may be mediated by multiple memory processes: for example, controlled
attention and elaboration may be enhanced during encoding, while
amygdala-mediated stress hormones may boost consolidation. Furthermore, emotional memory seems particularly resilient to time, and its
integrity may be sustained or even improved relative to neutral over
weeks or months. The present study aims to characterize how time modulates the importance of encoding- and consolidation-related activity in
supporting emotional memory. In a subsequent memory paradigm, participants were scanned while encoding briefly-presented negative and
neutral pictures. Recognition memory for half of the pictures was
assessed at each of two delays: 20 minutes post-scan and 1 week later.
Participants responded using a 6-point confidence scale, enabling us to
analyze parametric effects of memory strength on encoding activity. Consistent with previous results, we found Dm effects in the prefrontal cortex
and medial temporal lobes (MTL), with the amygdala associated with
negative memory. Also consistent with previous research, short-delay
memory across emotion types was associated with encoding activity in
visual processing-related areas. Long-delay memory, on the other hand,
relied more on activity within the prefrontal cortex. Preliminary investigations into emotion by delay interactions suggest that subregions of the
amygdala differentially support subsequent emotional memory at each
delay. These results demonstrate main effects of both emotion and delay
interval on subsequent memory, suggesting distinct encoding and consolidation-related mechanisms that support negative and neutral information over time.
F48
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF RECOGNITION
MEMORY FOR EMOTIONAL FACES IN MILD COGNITIVE
IMPAIRMENT Maria Gruno1, Katja Werheid1, Ove Almkvist2, Ulrika
Lonnqvist-Akenine3, Norbert Kathmann1, Bengt Winblad4; 1Humboldt
University Berlin, Institute of Psychology, 2Karolinska Institute Stockholm,
3
Karolinska University Hospital Stockholm, 4Karolinska Institute Stockholm,
Alzheimer Disease Research Center — Previous
behavioural
research
revealed that recognition memory is influenced by negative facial emotion in healthy young and elderly. The present study used event-related
potentials (ERPs) to investigate whether the impact of negative facial
emotion on recognition is preserved in Mild Cognitive Impairment
(MCI). Sixteen mnestic MCI patients (mean age 67.3 ± 6.0) and matched
controls were asked to discriminate previously studied from non-studied
angry and neutral faces. Behavioural results indicated reduced memory
performance for MCI patients. However, in both groups true recognition

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

(hits) was enhanced for angry versus neutral faces. False recognition
(false positives) was augmented for angry faces in controls but unaffected
in MCI. ERPs generated by correctly classified studied compared to nonstudied faces revealed similar frontal (400–550 ms) and parietal (550-700
ms) old/new effects for both groups. In the early time window angry
faces elicited a stronger old/new effect than neutral faces. Moreover, in
MCI patients compared to controls late positive component (LPC) amplitudes to correctly classified faces were lowered at parietal and augmented at frontal electrode sites. Concluding, despite reduced overall
recognition, negative facial expression improved recognition performance in MCI. ERPs indicated that regardless of frontally distributed
LPC, processes facilitating recognition memory are intact in MCI.
F49
EMOTIONAL PICTURE RELATED LATE POSITIVE POTENTIALS
ARE OBSERVED IN TAIWANESE POPULATION Kuan-Hua Chen,
Nai-Shing Yen, Ying-Ru Lai, Yu-Chieh Chang; National Chengchi University,
Taipei, Taiwan — Viewing emotional pictures, comparing to viewing neutral pictures, prompts a larger P3 and a positive potential which sustained from 400 to 6000 ms after-stimulus. These emotional ERP (eventrelated potential) effects were repeatedly reported with Caucasian population, but its generalizability across cultures is still an open question. In
present study, we replicated the study of Cuthbert, Schupp, Bradley, Birbaumer, & Lang (2000) and aimed to probe the generalizability of the
emotional ERP effect to Taiwanese (Chinese) population. Twenty healthy
males (n = 12) and females (n = 8) participated in this study and all
received 54 pictures (positive = 18, negative = 18, neutral = 18; pictures
were the same as that in Cuthbert et al.) from IAPS with each picture
being presented 6 s. EEG were recorded on F3, Fz, F4, C3, Cz, C4, P3, Pz,
P4 with a time window from 120 ms pre-stimulus to 1000 ms after-stimulus. A larger P3 and a late positivity were observed in all electrodes when
participants viewed emotional pictures. This is consistent with the findings from previous studies with Caucasian population, but is inconsistent
with the study by Hot and his colleagues (Hot, Saito, Mandai, Kobayashi,
& Sequeira, in press) in which they used Japanese but did not find emotional effect on frontal area. In addition, we found a larger N2 for neutral
pictures which was not observed in Cuthbert et al., but was reported in
Palomba, Angrilli, & Mini (1997) with different pictures being used.
F50
STUCK IN A MOOD AND YOU CAN’T REMEMBER WHY:
EVIDENCE FOR THE SUSTAINED EXPERIENCE OF EMOTION
BEYOND DECLARATIVE MEMORY IN AMNESIA Justin
S.
Feinstein, Melissa C. Duff, Daniel Tranel; University of Iowa — Throughout
life we encounter a range of events capable of eliciting intense and prolonged states of emotion (e.g., the sadness and grief triggered by the
news of a loved one’s death). In the above example, it is unclear how
much the sustained experience of sadness is dependent upon, versus
independent of, intact declarative memory for the news of the death. In
other words, can the emotion persist once the memory for what induced
the emotion has been forgotten? This question was addressed in 6
patients with severe anterograde amnesia due to circumscribed bilateral
damage to the hippocampus. Each patient underwent a series of mood
inductions using highly emotional film clips designed to elicit prolonged
states of sadness, happiness, disgust, or amusement. Following the end of
each induction, current emotion and mood were assessed at multiple
time points, including before and after a memory recall test for the
recently presented films. Amnesic patients reported experiencing significant levels of the induced emotion when probed immediately following
the end of the induction. Approximately 5 minutes later, some of the
patients were unable to recall any of the film clips. Despite this significant
memory impairment, these patients continued reporting elevated levels
of the induced emotion that lingered for over 20 minutes at a magnitude
commensurate with healthy comparison subjects who have no brain
damage and no memory impairment. These findings provide direct evi-

201

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

dence that an emotion can endure beyond one’s ability to consciously
recall the events that initially triggered the emotion.
F51
EFFECTS OF AGING ON FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF THE
AMGYDALA DURING EMOTIONAL EVALUATION: A NETWORK
ANALYSIS OF FMRI DATA Peggy L. St. Jacques, Florin Dolcos, Roberto
Cabeza; Duke University — Although emotional evaluation is largely preserved in older adults, they sometimes experience negative stimuli as less
negative than young adults. This effect may contribute to the "positivity
bias" often observed in older adults. Most functional neuroimaging studies on the effects of aging in emotional evaluation have focused on
amygdala activity. In the present study, in contrast, we focused on the
interactions between the amygdala and the rest of the brain. Using eventrelated fMRI, we scanned healthy young and older adults while rating
the valence of emotional pictures. Consistent with other behavioral evidence, older adults’ valence ratings revealed that they experienced negatively valenced pictures as being less negative than young adults. To
investigate the effects of aging on amygdalar interactions we identified a
right amygdala region that was activated in both groups, and used this
region as a "seed" in functional connectivity analyses. Using individualtrial fMRI activity within-participants, we measured correlations
between the right amygdala and the rest of the brain across trials. Then,
we identified regions whose correlations with the amygdala were significantly reduced or enhanced by aging. In young adults, activity in the
right amygdala co-activated to a greater extent with superior frontal cortices, possibly reflecting increased processing of negative stimuli into
working memory. In contrast, in older adults, activity in the right
amygdala co-activated with inferior frontal cortices, possibly reflecting
the inhibition of negative affect. Thus, age-related reductions in processing negatively valenced stimuli might reflect the engagement of topdown processes that inhibit the response to negative emotion.
F52
COGNITIVE AND EMOTIONAL INFLUENCES IN DORSAL
ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX Jeffrey Maxwell, Heleen Slagter,
Alexander Shackman, Richard Davidson; University of Wisconsin Madison — Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) has been implicated in a variety of cognitive and emotional processes, with some evidence suggesting
that it can be functionally delineated into dorsal cognitive and rostralventral emotional subdivisions (for a review, see Bush, Luu, & Posner,
2000). However, the majority of previous affective-conflict studies have
differed from typical cognitive Stroop/Flanker investigations in that they
have not explicitly induced motor/response-conflict. In the present
investigation, participants responded to non-emotional geometric shapes
in the presence of both cognitive (cf. typical Eriksen flanker paradigm)
and emotional (cf. Emotional Stroop/Flanker) distractors that were
mapped onto conflicting motor responses. Consistent with previous
observations, dorsal ACC was activated by cognitive distractors. Moreover, this same putatively cognitive region was activated by emotional
distractors (angry and happy facial expressions) and by emotional distractors more strongly than by cognitive distractors. The overall degree to
which the dorsal ACC responded to cognitive and emotional distractors,
however, was only related to behavioral interference during cognitive trials, suggesting a potentially different role of the dorsal ACC in dealing
with cognitive and emotional distraction.
F53
MOTION AND FORM IN FEARFUL BODIES ENHANCE THE
ACTIVITY OF DISTINCT NEURAL SYSTEMS Anthony Atkinson1,
Maike Heining2, Mary Phillips3,2; 1Durham University, Durham, UK,
2
Institute of Psychiatry, London, UK, 3University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine — Emotional stimuli receive enhanced processing, exemplified
by increased activity of ventral occipitotemporal form processing regions
by fearful facial and body postures. It is unknown whether fearful body
movements similarly enhance motion processing. Using fMRI, we found
that form and motion cues in whole-body gestures elicit distinct patterns

202

Emotion

of emotional modulation. Seven males were scanned while viewing static
and moving images of single actors portraying fear or emotionally neutral actions with their bodies (faces invisible). Participants judged the sex
of the actors. Whole-brain analyses contrasted blood-oxygenated leveldependent neural responses to fearful versus neutral actions in full-light
static displays, and in patch-light and identical but fully illuminated
dynamic displays. Viewing full-light fearful gestures enhanced activity in
ventral occipitotemporal cortex, relative to neutral gestures. This emotional modulation was greater for moving than for static full-light stimuli, likely reflecting enhanced processing of multiple configurations of
body form. In contrast, fearful patch-light but not full-light displays
increased activity in biological motion sensitive right posterior superior
temporal cortex. Thus, bodily signals of emotion modulate neural regions
that code for salient properties of the stimulus, instead of providing a
more general boost to visual processing. Region-of-interest analyses
showed a near-significant trend for greater amygdala activity to fearful
versus neutral gestures, which is consistent with amygdala feedback
mediating enhanced processing of emotional stimuli. Form and motion
also differentially enhanced activity in several action representation
regions, consistent with but suggesting the need to supplement the idea
that seeing fearful bodies fosters flight: simulation processes may also be
engaged.
F54
FACIAL IMITATION OF EMOTIONAL EXPRESSIONS: A STUDY
COMBINING CENTRAL (EEG) AND PERIPHERAL MEASURES
(EMG). Amal Achaibou1, Gilles Pourtois1,2, Sophie Schwartz1, Patrik
Vuilleumier1,2; 1Neurology and Imaging of Cognition, University of Geneva,
Switzerland, 2Swiss Centre for Affective Sciences, University of Geneva,
Switzerland — Several psychophysiological studies revealed that when
human subjects are exposed to emotional facial expressions, they often
produce an unconscious covert imitation that can be measured by electromyography (EMG) in emotion-relevant facial muscles. The neural
pathways involved in these spontaneous reactions remain unknown.
Here we measured concurrently cortical activity using electroencephalography (EEG) and facial muscle activity using electromyography
(EMG), while 15 healthy participants watched short movies displaying
either happy or angry facial expressions. EMG activity was recorded for
the Zygomaticus major (ZM) which elevates the lips during a smile, and
the Corrugator Supercilii (CS) which knits the eyebrows during a frown.
We found increased EMG activity for CS in response to angry faces, and
enhanced EMG activity of ZM in response to happy faces, corroborated
by a significant muscle x emotion interaction in agreement with previous
EMG work. More importantly, in EEG, we found that the amplitude of an
early visual evoked potential (right lateral occipital P1) was larger in
response to happy faces when the ZM activity was high as compared to
low; whereas the amplitude of the N170 component was smaller in
response to happy faces when ZM activity was high as compared to low,
and smaller in response to angry faces when CS activity was high as compared to low. These results suggest that more intense facial mimicry may
enhance processing within early visual pathways while reducing later
cortical processing associated with N170, consistent with dual-route
models for analysis of face expression and face identity.
F55
HUMOR PROCESSING IN NARCOLEPTIC PATIENTS ASSESSED
BY FUNCTIONAL MRI Aurelie Ponz1, Rositsa Poryazova2, Esther
Werth2, Ramin Khatami2, Peter Boesiger3, Patrik Vuilleumier1,4, Claudio
Bassetti2, Sophie Schwartz1; 1Neurology and Imaging of Cognition, University
of Geneva, Switzerland., 2University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 3Institute
for Biomedical Engineering, University of Zurich and Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology, Switzerland, 4Swiss Centre for Affective Sciences, University of
Geneva, Switzerland — Narcolepsy with cataplexy (NC) is a sleep-wake
disorder characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness and cataplexy, i.e.
a sudden loss of muscle tone triggered by intense positive emotions. NC
is linked to a hypothalamic hypocretin/orexin (Hcrt) deficiency, but the

Emotion

neurophysiological mechanisms underlying such dramatic reaction to
positive emotion remain unknown. Here we used fMRI to test whether
NC patients show an altered brain response to emotions. Twelve NC
patients and 12 healthy matched controls were scanned while they performed a humor judgment task. Stimuli were “mini-action scenes” composed of a succession of two almost identical pictures. The first picture
depicted a neutral scene while the second one could reveal either a funny
or a non-funny new element. MRI data were acquired on a 3-T scanner
and analyzed using the general linear model for event-related designs
(SPM2). Behaviorally, NC patients had slower reaction times than controls, as expected. There was no group difference in humor rating. The
fMRI results revealed that patients and controls share a common neural
network for humor processing including associative visual areas, frontoinsula and amygdala, bilaterally. However, when compared to the controls, patients showed reduced hypothalamic response to humor and
increased activity in the right amygdala. These data provide a first evidence for an exaggerated limbic response to positive emotions in NC
patients. Our findings also suggest that hypothalamic Hcrt activity might
exert a crucial modulatory influence on emotional processing within the
amygdala, gating emotional signals to afford appropriate autonomic
reactions.
F56
PLACEBO EFFECTS ON HUMAN MU-OPIOID ACTIVITY DURING
PAIN Tor Wager1, David Scott2, Jon-Kar Zubieta2; 1Columbia University,
2
University of Michigan — Placebo-induced expectancies have been
shown to decrease pain in a manner reversible by opioid antagonists, but
little is known about the central brain mechanisms of opioid release during placebo treatment. This study examined placebo effects in pain using
PET with [11C] carfentanil, which measures regional mu-opioid receptor
availability in vivo (binding potential). Noxious thermal stimulation was
applied at the same temperature for placebo and control conditions. Placebo treatment affected opioid activity in a number of predicted opioidrich regions that play central roles in pain and affect, including periaqueductal gray (PAG) and nearby dorsal raphe and nucleus cuneiformis,
amygdala, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), insula, rostral anterior cingulate
(rACC), and lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC). These region appeared to be
subdivided into two sets, one showing opioid increases specific to noxious heat and the other showing anticipatory opioid reductions during
warm stimulation. These findings suggest that one of the mechanisms of
placebo is the potentiation of endogenous opioid responses to aversive
stimuli. Opioid activity in many of these regions was correlated with placebo effects in reported pain. Connectivity analyses on individual differences in opioid binding revealed that placebo treatment increased
connectivity between the PAG and rACC, and increased functional integration among limbic regions and PFC. Overall the results suggest that
endogenous opioid release in core affective brain regions is an integral
part of the mechanism whereby expectancies regulate affective and nociceptive circuits.
F57
ATTENTION (BUT NOT INSTRUCTION) AFFECTS THE
POSITIVITY BIAS IN MEMORY FOR EMOTIONAL PICTURES IN
OLDER ADULTS Jennifer Tomaszczyk, Myra Fernandes; University of
Waterloo — According to socioemotional selectivity theory, old age is
associated with a greater emphasis on self-regulation of emotional states,
and this focus fosters a bias in processing positively valenced material,
relative to younger adults. There is disagreement in the literature, however, about whether the “positivity bias” influences performance on
memory tasks. Some studies suggest older adults attend to and remember proportionately more positive relative to negative information than
younger adults, whereas other studies show no difference in memory
enhancement for negative and positive information in older adults. Differences in instructions, and subsequent attention paid to stimuli during
encoding, across these studies could account for the inconsistent findings. In Experiment 1, younger and older participants were instructed to

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

either passively view or actively categorize positive, negative, and neutral pictures by valence. There was a main effect of Valence and Age on
number of pictures recalled, as well as an Age X Valence interaction, but
no effect of Instruction condition. Older adults recalled significantly more
positive, but not more negative pictures, relative to neutral ones, whereas
in younger adults both positive and negative picture recall was higher
than neutral. In Experiment 2 we directly manipulated attention through
use of a divided attention (DA) paradigm. The effect of Valence, but not
Age, was maintained, and there was no Age X Valence interaction under
DA conditions. Results suggest that differences in amount of attention
devoted to processing pictures during encoding may account for the
varying results in the literature.
F58
THE EMOTIONAL VOICES: HUMAN AMYGDALA AND ORBITOFRONTAL RESPONSES TO EMOTIONAL PROSODY: HUMAN
INTRACRANIAL RECORDINGS Didier Grandjean1, Gilles Pourtois1,
David Sander1, Lucas Tamarit1, Sophie Schwartz2, Patrik Vuilleumier2,
Margitta Seeck3, Klaus Scherer1; 1Swiss Center for Affective Sciences,
University of Geneva, 2University Hospital of Geneva, 3Presurgical epilepsy
unit, University Hospital of Geneva — The central nervous system has
developed specialized neural systems to process relevant information,
including emotional prosody in the auditory domain. The exact neural
architecture involved in the decoding of emotional prosody is still unsettled. Particularly, the respective contributions of the amygdala and the
orbito-frontal cortex (OFC) in processing affective prosody are debated.
Intracranial local field potentials (LFP) were recorded in a patient prior to
surgery for pharmaco-resistant epilepsy while he was instructed to listen
to fearful, angry, sad or happy tone of voice, and matched control auditory stimuli. These LFPs were analyzed in the time-frequency domain
using Continuous Wavelet Transform. Our results demonstrate that the
amygdala and the OFC are both involved in the online decoding of emotional prosody (positive and negative relative to neutral). The coupling
between amygdala and OFC regions in response to emotional prosody
was investigated by computing synchrony of the phase information in
the time-frequency domain. These connectivity analyses reveal an
increased synchrony between these two distant regions depending on the
affective content of the voice. Thus, our new findings suggest that the
decoding of emotional prosody is a complex auditory process, requiring
cross-talks between distant but interconnected brain areas.
F59
COGNITIVE TRAINING FOR SCHIZOPHRENIA PATIENTS
ENHANCES ABILITY TO CONTROL THE INFLUENCE OF
NEGATIVE AFFECT ON SOCIAL JUDGMENTS Sara
Verosky1,
Asako Miyakawa1, Demian Rose2,3, Sophia Vinogradov2,3, Christine Hooker1;
1University of California at Berkeley, Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute,
2
University of California at San Francisco, 3San Francisco VA Medical
Center — Prior research indicates that schizophrenia (SZ) patients misinterpret social cues, usually by ascribing negative valence or negative
intentions to ambiguous stimuli. Factors contributing to this misinterpretation are unclear. Here, we investigated whether negative affect influences the social judgments of other people and whether the ability to
control negative affect when making social judgments could be enhanced
through training. Schizophrenia patients performed a task in which they
were first primed with positive, negative, or neutral affect and then
judged the trustworthiness of a neutral face. The results show that SZ
patients rated the neutral face as significantly less trustworthy after the
negative affect prime as compared to the positive or neutral affect prime.
This problematic influence of negative affect on social judgment
decreased after cognitive remediation training. The results suggest that
social judgments, especially concerning the suspiciousness of other people, are influenced by negative affect. Furthermore, cognitive training can
help patients regulate the influence of their negative affect on social judgments so that feelings such as paranoia do not lead to social misinterpretations. Data from healthy control subjects on this task suggest that the

203

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

ability to regulate the influence of negative affect on social judgments is
mediated by the lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC). Collectively the findings
suggest that behavioral training in cognitive control, which is mediated
by the lateral PFC, can help patients regulate the influence of negative
affect on social judgments so that they can assess social situations more
accurately.
F60
INCREASED ANXIETY AND POOR EXECUTIVE CONTROL
INCREASE EMOTION-INDUCED MEMORY TRADE-OFFS Jill
Waring1, Jessica Payne2, Elizabeth Kensinger1; 1Boston College, 2Harvard
University — Healthy young adults have often demonstrated a trade-off
in memory performance for highly emotional items relative to neutral
contextual details in an image. We investigated whether results of normative testing of affective states, executive function, or visuospatial processing abilities may correlate with the magnitude of the trade-off observed.
64 young adults studied scenes comprised of a negative or a neutral
object placed on a neutral background. They then took a recognition
memory test: they were presented with objects and backgrounds separately, and asked to indicate whether each was the same studied item, a
similar studied item, or a novel item. The trade-off was measured as the
advantage in memory for the negative versus the neutral items coupled
with the disadvantage in memory for the backgrounds presented with
negative versus neutral items. The results revealed a significant positive
correlation between measures of anxiety and the magnitude of the tradeoff in memory for specific negative images over background details.
There was also a significant negative correlation between spatial processing and executive function ability and a trade-off in memory for general
(gist-based) information in a scene. These results suggest that increased
anxiety, poor spatial memory, and poor executive function may prevent
the creation of a complete mental representation of all components
within a complex emotional scene.
F61
AFFECTIVE RATINGS OF SURPRISE FACES ARE MODULATED
BY VISUAL FIELD AND BY ADJACENT FACIAL EXPRESSIONS
WITHIN THE SAME VISUAL FIELD Timothy D. Sweeny, Marcia
Grabowecky, Ken A. Paller, Satoru Suzuki; Northwestern University — Emotional expressions of briefly flashed faces can influence affective evaluation and various measures of neural activity. Given that face-responsive
inferotemporal neurons have large receptive fields, often including the
entire contralateral visual hemifield, we hypothesized that responses to
surprise faces might be modulated by concurrent facial processing within
the same hemifield if there is insufficient time to attend to individual
faces. We developed a procedure to test this idea in which each trial
included two faces presented for 50 or 100 ms backward-masked by
Gaussian noise to limit visual attention. Participants made four-choice
affective ratings of surprise faces concurrently presented with a happy or
angry face. A central post-cue presented briefly at the offset of the masks
indicated which face to rate. Within hemifield, surprise faces paired with
angry faces were rated as more negative than surprise faces paired with
happy faces. When faces were presented in opposite hemifields, no influence of emotional expression was found on surprise-face ratings, ruling
out a high-level response bias from processing of emotional faces. In
addition, left-visual-field surprise faces were rated as more negative than
right-visual-field surprise faces. In sum, happy and angry faces modulated affective judgments of surprise faces presented within the same
hemifield, but not across hemifields. In the absence of selective attention,
we may tend to see an average expression of multiple faces in the same
visual field due to the large receptive fields of inferotemporal neurons.
F62
IS
EMOTIONAL
PROCESSING
FACILITATED
UNDER
DECREASED PERCEPTUAL CONDITIONS ? Stephanie
Dubal,
Gwladys Rey, Aurelie Foucher, Roland Jouvent; CNRS-UPMC CHU PitieSalpetriere — Affective stimuli enhance and facilitate sensory processing.
Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) amplitude enhancement and latency

204

Emotion

shortening for emotional stimuli are generated in visual cortical areas.
This facilitation mechanism would contribute to capture and guide attention to environmental important signals. Less is known about how sensory variables modulate emotional processing. We used affective stimuli
with different contrast level to investigate whether or not emotional perception is modulated by perceptual characteristics. We tested this
hypothesis using ERPs in conjunction with an affective rating paradigm.
Positive and Neutral pictures at 100, 60 and 20 % contrast were displayed
for 200 ms, and subjects had to judge the pleasantness of each picture.
There was no selective modulation of the occipital P1 by emotion content:
lowest contrast pictures elicited larger P1 than high-contrast pictures, for
both neutral and positive pictures. The P1 wave was not earlier for low
contrast emotional stimuli, suggesting that there was no effect of contrast
manipulation on perceptual facilitation for emotional stimuli. Emotional
content of the stimuli modulated the centrally P2 wave, with larger P2
amplitude for positive than for neutral images, at 100% contrast. In
response to low-contrast pictures, there was no emotional effect on P2
amplitude. These results suggest that perceptual characteristics may
interact with emotional content perceptive processing in affective tasks.
F63
WHEN I SEE YOUR SMILING FACE: AMYGDALA ACTIVITY
WHILE REMEMBERING HAPPY FACES Takashi Tsukiura1,2, Roberto
Cabeza1; 1Duke University, Durham, NC, 2Neuroscience Research Institute,
AIST, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan — Using event-related fMRI, we investigated the neural correlates of the effect of emotion on memory for
socially-relevant information. We predicted that memory for a recently
encountered person would be better for happy than for neutral faces.
Additionally, we predicted that this effect would involve the amygdala, a
region known to mediate the enhancing effect of emotion on memory
retrieval. During encoding, face-name pairs were presented one by one.
Half of the faces were happy and half neutral, and participants rated
facial expressions. During retrieval in the scanner, studied names intermixed with new names were presented, and for each one participants
indicated whether it matched (1) a happy face, (2) a neutral face, (3) a
studied face of unknown expression, or (4) no studied face (i.e., a new
name). Confirming our first prediction, retrieval of face expression was
faster and more accurate for happy than for neutral faces. Confirming our
second prediction, amygdalar activity was greater for successful than for
unsuccessful retrieval of happy faces but did not differ between successful and unsuccessful retrieval of neutral faces. Given that the names used
as retrieval cues were emotionally neutral, the amygdala activation can
be safely attributed to the emotional nature of the memories themselves.
In addition to the amygdala, successful retrieval of happy faces was associated with enhanced activity in medial temporal, fusiform, and parietal
regions. In sum, our results suggest that we are more likely to remember
someone who was warm and approachable than someone who was cold
or distant.
F64
TRAIT
ANXIETY
AND
LATERALIZED
EMOTIONAL
INTERFERENCE: CORRELATION WITH CORPUS CALLOSUM
MORPHOLOGY
AND
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC
COHERENCE Andrei C. Miu, Julia Avram, Anca Amagdei, Rodica Baltes,
Renata M. Heilman; Babes-Bolyai University, Romania — The objectives of
the present study were to replicate the effect of trait anxiety (TA) on right
hemisphere emotional interference, and explore the correlation of the
interhemispheric transfer time (IHTT) of emotional word processing with
the morphology of the corpus callosum, the electroencephalographic
(EEG) coherence and two indices of the autonomic regulation of emotion.
For this purpose, 50 right-handed participants that scored below or above
average on TA self-reported questionnaires were tested in a lateralized
lexical task comprising both Stroop and emotional interference blocks of
trials. Following the so-called Poffenberger paradigm, the lateralization
of task varied the hemifield in which the visual stimuli were presented
and the hand that the participant was instructed to use for response. Dur-

Emotion

ing the task, skin conductance responses (SCRs) and electrocardiography
were recorded. First, we tested whether the emotional interference was
stronger when the stimuli were presented in the left visual hemifield, by
analyzing both manual reaction times, and the synchronous SCRs and
heart rate. Then, the IHTT calculated by subtracting the manual reaction
times of the responses in the uncrossed conditions from those in the
crossed conditions was correlated further with the midsagittal area of the
corpus callosum estimated from magnetic resonance imaging scans, and
the frontal, parietal and occipital EEG coherence. Finally, we assessed
whether TA had an effect on emotional interference and its psychophysiological correlates.
F65
SELECTIVE
INVOLVEMENT
OF
POSTERIOR
STS
IN
RECOGNIZING EMOTION FROM MOTION Jennifer Silvers1, Thalia
Wheatley2, Alex Martin1; 1NIH / NIMH, Lab Brain & Cognition, Bethesda,
MD, 2Psychology & Brain Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, — A
large body of monkey neurophysiological and human neuroimaging data
indicates that a posterior region of the superior temporal sulcus (pSTS)
plays a central role in processing biological motion. In addition, recent
studies suggest that pSTS may also be involved in understanding social
interactions, thus suggesting that this region may play a role in social
cognition that extends beyond biological motion perception. The current
study was designed to confirm the role of pSTS in perceiving abstract
representations of animacy, and to determine whether pSTS is also modulated by emotional information embedded in those representations. To
address this issue, we tested twenty-two healthy adults using an eventrelated fMRI design. During each run, subjects watched 18 cartoons of a
single ball in motion. According to how it moved, the ball appeared to be
inanimate (e.g., falling like a drop of water), animate but non-emotional
(e.g., gliding like an ice-skater), or animate and emotional (e.g., shaking
like someone scared). Subjects were required to rate the emotional intensity conveyed by each animation. We first identified regions involved in
perceiving animacy by comparing the animate non-emotional and inanimate conditions. This analysis identified a number of areas previously
implicated in social perception including bilateral pSTS, the middle frontal gyri, and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex. Within these regions, activity
in the bilateral pSTS, but not in the other regions, increased when motion
was interpreted as conveying emotion (animate emotional > animate
non-emotional). This finding suggests that pSTS may be critically
involved in decoding emotional content from motion cues.
F66
CONTRALATERAL N170 MODULATION BY NONCONSCIOUS
FEAR-EVOKED SPATIAL ATTENTION AS MEASURED BY ERP
Joshua Carlson, Karen Reinke; Southern Illinois University — The
superior
colliculus, pulvinar, and amygdala appear to comprise a neural network
associated with processing nonconscious fearful faces. It has been suggested that this network may be involved in an automatic orienting
response. Behavioral studies have revealed that spatial attention is influenced by nonconscious fearful faces, but a direct investigation of the neural dynamics associated with this behavior has yet to be performed. ERP
studies of spatial attention using non-emotional cues have found that
attention is modulated as early as P1. A modified version of the Posner
(1980) dot-probe task was performed while ERPs were recorded. Two
faces (from Gur et al, 2002) were simultaneously nonconsciously presented (33 ms) to the left and right of fixation, then were immediately
masked by neutral faces (100 ms), and followed by a target dot appearing
in one of the two locations. The subjects’ task was to indicate the location
of the target dot. Cued spatial attention trials consist of one fearful and
one neutral nonconsciously presented face. Subjects produced faster reaction times for congruent (target dot appearing on the same side as a fearful face) compared to incongruent (target appearing on the opposite side
as a fearful face) trial types. These behavioral results suggest that spatial
attention is captured by fearful faces and attention is focused at the location of the fear stimulus. Consistent with these behavioral results we
found a significant visual field by hemisphere interaction for the ampli-

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

tude of the contralateral posterior N170 evoked by the nonconscious fearful face cues.
F67
THE INTEGRATED NEURAL PROCESSING OF ANTICIPATORY
THREAT Michael Silverman1, Oliver Tuescher2, Jin Fan1, Suzee Lee1,
Antonia New1, Martin Goldstein1; 1Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
2
Neurologische Universitätsklinik Freiburg — Background:
James-Lange
type conceptualizations of emotion (e.g., somatic marker hypothesis)
hold that the visceral afferent component, modulated by the autonomic
system, is essential for the phenomenological experience of fear.
Although neural responses associated with threat stimuli have been
robustly demonstrated (e. g., amygdala), the neural substrates responsible for transducing threat stimulus processing into component autonomic, cognitive, and emotional sequelae have yet to be fully elucidated.
Objective: To test whether the anticipation of a shock in a novel threat
paradigm would be associated with activations in brain regions hypothesized to mediate heteromodal sensory-limbic-autonomic integration, e.g.,
insula (Craig, 2003) and claustrum (Crick et al., 2005). Methods: Seven
right-handed female subjects were presented with an anticipatory threat
paradigm during EPI-BOLD fMRI acquisition on a Siemens 3T Allegra
MRI scanner. Trials consisted of color stimulus cues representing “safe”
or “threat” pseudorandomly paired with a color “target” stimulus. One
cue-target pair was associated with a possible electrodermal stimulation;
the other was not. Colors were fully counterbalanced across subjects. Galvanic skin response (GSR) was recorded contemporaneous with fMRI
scanning. Image analysis was conducted using SPM2. Results: GSR measures demonstrated autonomic arousal associated with threat conditions.
fMRI results revealed threat stimulus-associated neural activations in
insula, claustrum, DLPFC, and pontine regions. Conclusion: This anticipatory threat paradigm demonstrated activation of a neural network
whose components have been implicated in (a) integrating threat-related
exteroceptive and interoceptive stimuli (insula, claustrum), and (b) transducing this integrated afferent stream into a cascade of efferent modulation of autonomic (insula, pons) and cognitive regulation (DLPFC).
F68
INVESTIGATING THE MOTIVATIONAL BRAIN: THE ROLE OF
IMPLICIT POWER AND AFFILIATION MOTIVES ON NEURAL
RESPONSES TO ANGRY FACIAL EXPRESSIONS Julie L. Hall1,
Steven J. Stanton1, Michelle M. Wirth2, Christian E. Waugh3, Patricia A.
Reuter-Lorenz1, Oliver C. Schultheiss1; 1University of Michigan, 2University of
Wisconsin, 3Stanford University — Evidence from affective neuroscience
reveals a network of core emotional and motivational brain structures
dedicated to the analysis of a stimulus for emotional content and the
preparation of motivated action toward or away from the stimulus
(LeDoux, 2002; Rolls, 1999). Research indicates that implicit power motivation (the need to have impact on others) and implicit affiliation motivation (the need to have close, harmonious relationships with others)
predict the reinforcement value of angry and surprise faces and attention
toward or away from these facial expressions of emotion (Schultheiss &
Hale, 2006; Schultheiss et al., 2005). The present study was designed to
assess whether neural responses to angry facial expressions vary as a
function of individual differences in implicit power and affiliation
motives. Using an fMRI block design, 24 participants viewed angry facial
expressions and control stimuli (neutral faces, gray squares) under passive viewing and oddball task conditions. Both individual differences in
power and affiliation motives predicted greater neural activation in brain
areas associated with affective processes, including the amygdala, OFC,
and insula. However, these motives showed differential responses in
areas of the brain associated with reward. Affiliation-motivated individuals showed decreased activation in the nucleus accumbens and ventral
striatum in response to angry faces whereas power-motivated individuals showed greater activation in these areas. These data suggest that
angry facial expressions, as signals of threat and/or dominance, are emotionally salient for both power-motivated and affiliation-motivated individuals, but differ in terms of their reward salience for these groups.

205

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

F69
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EMOTION UNDER VARYING
PERCEPTUAL CONDITIONS Gwladys Rey1, Philippe Fossati1, Laurent
Lamalle2, Alexandre Krainik3, Kenneth Knoblauch4, Roland Jouvent1, Stephanie
Dubal1; 1CNRS / UPMC UMR 7593, Paris, France, 2INSERM IFR1, Grenoble,
France, 3INSERM / UJF U594, Grenoble, France, 4INSERM / UCBL U371,
IFR 19, Cerveau et Vision, Bron, France — Emotional pictures elicit greater
activation in visual cortex than neutral pictures. This well documented
phenomenon refers to a mechanism of perceptual amplification for emotional information. It has been speculated that such increases in neuronal
activity may reflect feedback influences from the amygdala that would
receive direct inputs from visual areas. Little is known about emotional
amplification in conditions of low vision. We used functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) to explore the effect of visual contrast level on
emotional processing, in relation to anhedonia, ie the loss of the capacity
to experience pleasure. Ten control subjects and 10 non-clinical anhedonic subjects - were presented with positive and neutral pictures at 20%
and 100% of contrast in a 3T Bruker scanner. The event-related design
included two randomized sequences of 120 stimuli and 30 null events
presented for 1.5 sec and followed by a fixation point of 2 sec. Subjects
judged the pleasant character of the pictures on a 4-point rating scale.
Data analysis is on process. First, we wonder if sensory characteristics
modulate visual areas activity for emotional content. As with high contrast pictures we expect that low contrast ones would also elicit emotional
amplification in visual areas. Second, we test the hypothesis that the emotional amplification would be lower in anhedonic subjects. We also
expect lower activations, in anhedonics, in regions known to be implied
in emotional perception and regulation, with special emphasis on the
amygdala, the anterior cingulated cortex, the medial prefrontal cortex.
F70
EFFECTS OF MINDFULNESS ON EMOTION REGULATION IN
ATTENTION, PERCEPTION, AND DECISION-MAKING Deidre
Reis1, Lisa Marchiondo1, Elizabeth Weissberg1, Jeremy Gray1; 1Yale
University — Mindfulness-based meditation is a form of mental training
intended to cultivate non-judgmental awareness of one's inner mental
life. In previous work, experienced meditators demonstrated sustained
high-amplitude gamma oscillations during meditation (Lutz, Greischar,
Rawlings, Ricard, & Davidson, 2004) at frequencies associated with mental processes such as attention, working memory, and perception, suggesting that meditation might lead to long-term behavioral and neural
changes. We examined the effects of meditation experience and trait
mindfulness on attention, perception, and decision-making through a
behavioral study of individuals with extensive experience (1000+ hours)
in mindfulness meditation. Participants completed an attentional blink
task adapted from Most et al (2005). In the face of negative emotional distractors, experienced meditators demonstrated target detection accuracy
rates higher than those previously reported for the same task by healthy
adults with a considerably lower mean (80% vs. 71%; t=2.52, p < .05),
indicating less disruption of attention by negative images. Subjective ratings of distractor image valence and arousal were comparable to those
reported by other participants previously. In addition, experienced meditators showed less of a difference in performance between trials with
emotional distractors at short versus long lags than previously published
(3% vs. 20%; t =-3.68, p <.001). These results indicate that negative images
may have less of a distracting effect on experienced meditators, despite
similar subjective reactions to the images.
F71
MITIGATING AMYGDALA RESPONSE HABITUATION TO
FACIAL EXPRESSIONS OF EMOTION. F.C. Davis1, A.A. McLean2,
H. Kim3, J.A. Oler2, E.C. Mazzulla2, T. Johnstone2, P.J. Whalen1; 1Dartmouth
College, 2University of Wisconsin, Madison, 3California Institue of
Technology — The human amygdala is highly responsive to facial expressions of emotion, presumably because they convey important information about the state of one’s social and physical environment. Though the

206

Emotion

amygdala is robustly activated by clearly negative expressions such as
fear, the facial expression of surprise represents an interesting test for the
amygdala because it can be associated with either positive or negative
events. Indeed, individual differences in amygdala responsivity to surprise reflect this inconsistent reinforcement history, as people who interpret surprised faces negatively show greater amygdala responsivity than
people who view the same faces positively. In the present study we used
fMRI to examine amygdala responsivity to fearful, surprised, and neutral
faces presented at varied durations. Subjects passively viewed these faces
presented for either 33, 200, or 1000 ms. Consistent with previous work,
amygdala responsivity to fearful facial expressions showed response
habituation over time. This responsivity did not vary as a function of
stimulus duration. In contrast, amygdala responsivity to surprised facial
expressions was more sensitive to stimulus duration, such that longer
presentations elicited more robust amygdala activation. This ‘robustness’
was reflected in a greater resistance to habituation over time during 1000
ms stimulus presentations only. To the extent that amygdala response
habituation to static pictures of facial expressions can be likened to an
extinction process (because facial expressions have a prior reinforcement
history), these data are consistent with the well-documented partial reinforcement extinction effect, where events that are inconsistently reinforced take longer to extinguish than those that are consistently
reinforced.
F72
THE AFTERMATH OF 9/11: EFFECT OF INTENSITY AND
RECENCY OF TRAUMA ON OUTCOME Barbara Ganzel1,2, B. J.
Casey1, Gary Glover3, Henning Voss1, Elise Temple2; 1Weill Medical College of
Cornell University, 2Cornell University, 3Stanford University — Background: Is there a long-term impact of traumas such as that of 9/11/01
on the brain and behavior of healthy individuals? Methods: Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we imaged twenty-two healthy
adults while they viewed emotional faces to assess the impact of trauma
exposure on the amygdala. Half of the subjects were near the World
Trade Center (WTC) on 9/11/01 and half lived more than 200 miles
away. All resided within the New York metropolitan area at scan.
Results: More than three years after 9/11/01, bilateral amygdala activity
in the fear-calm contrast was significantly higher in the group with close
proximity to the WTC on 9/11/01 as found in voxel-wise analysis of variance results for left amygdala (mni -25, -9, -20; Z = 3.13, p = .001) and for
right amygdala (mni 22, -9, -20; Z = 2.97, p = .001) and in region of interest
(ROI) analyses for left amygdala (t = -3.3, p = .003) and right amygdala (t
= -2.7, p = .01). This activity mediated the relationship between group status and current symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder. In turn, the
effect of group status on both amygdala activation (fearful versus calm
faces) and current symptoms was statistically explained by time since
worst trauma and intensity of worst trauma, as indicated by reported
symptoms at time of the trauma. Conclusions: These data are consistent
with a model of relatively slow amygdala recovery from high-intensity
trauma exposure in adults without a clinical disorder.
F73
IMAGING PLEASANT PAIN RELIEF Siri Leknes1,2, Merle Fairhurst1,2,
Keith Duncan1,2, Jon Brooks1,2, Irene Tracey1,2; 1Anatomy and Genetics,
University of Oxford, UK, 2Functional Imaging of Brain (FMRIB) Centre,
University of Oxford, UK — Pain relief is often defined as a reduction in
pain intensity, and little attention has been paid to the relief sensation
itself. We used the topical capsaicin model to create heat hyperalgesia in
13 subjects. Normally neutrally valenced temperatures were then used to
create 5 seconds of strong pain (mean 36°C) or pleasant cooling relief
(mean 20°C). The baseline temperature of 32°C was perceived as mildly
painful. In the 'immediate' condition, the cooling followed immediately
after the painful heat. In the 'delayed' condition cooling was delayed by
30 seconds. The conditions were signalled by coloured cues. The immediate cooling was rated as significantly more pleasant and relieving than
the delayed cooling, and the cue signalling this condition was associated

Emotion

with significantly more positive affect. These affect ratings were positively correlated with BAS reward responsiveness. The immediate cooling caused bilateral activation in the lateral orbital and prefrontal
cortices, the anterior insula, the anterior cingulate, thalamus, caudate,
putamen, and parietal cortices. No areas were significantly activated by
the delayed cooling, suggesting that the immediate cooling activations
were specific to type of relief rather than stimulus temperature. During
the delayed cooling several areas were deactivated, including the thalamus and several brainstem nuclei previously implicated in central sensitisation to pain: the periaqueductal gray (PAG), rostral ventromedial
medulla (RVM) and nucleus cuneiformis. Areas in the parahippocampal
region were deactivated during both immediate and delayed cooling.
This region has been implicated in anxiety-induced hyperalgesia to pain.
Immediate cooling relief ratings were positively correlated with state
anxiety.
F74
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EXPLICIT MORAL APPRAISALS: AN
FMRI STUDY Carla L. Harenski1, Olga Antonenko1, Matthew Shane1, Kent
A. Kiehl1; 1Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center — The goal of the current
study was to investigate neural responses associated with explicit judgments about the severity of visually depicted moral violations. In previous research we found that when individuals passively viewed
unpleasant pictures depicting moral violations, greater activity occurred
in superior temporal sulcus (STS) and posterior cingulate cortex (PCC)
relative to viewing unpleasant pictures that did not depict moral violations, while medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) was activated by both
moral and nonmoral stimuli (Harenski & Hamann, 2006). In the current
study, participants (n = 14) were scanned with fMRI while viewing 25
moral, 25 nonmoral, and 25 neutral pictures matched for social content
and (for moral and nonmoral pictures) emotional arousal. Moral pictures
were unpleasant scenes depicting moral violations, while nonmoral pictures were thematically similar unpleasant scenes that did not depict
moral violations. While viewing all pictures, participants made explicit
ratings based on the degree and severity of moral violations that they
judged to be present in each picture. Results showed increased activity in
MPFC, STS, and PCC when viewing moral relative to nonmoral pictures.
Activity in each region was positively correlated with online ratings of
moral severity. In addition, amygdala activity was correlated with moral
severity ratings, suggesting that emotional responses influenced moral
severity judgments. The finding of increased MPFC activity in the moral
condition is inconsistent with our prior passive viewing study, in which
MPFC activity occurred in both moral and nonmoral conditions. This
suggests a role of MPFC in the explicit identification of moral violations.
F75
ACQUISITION AND EXTINCTION OF CONTEXTUAL FEAR: AN
FMRI STUDY Stephan Hamann, Katherine Vytal; Emory University — Individuals can acquire fear responses not only to discrete stimuli paired
with unconditioned stimuli (UCSs), but also to the context in which the
UCS is presented, such as the testing room. Animal and human lesion
studies implicate the hippocampus as a critical structure in the acquisition of contextual fear, via its role in forming integrated memory representations of the conditioning context. We examined the acquisition and
extinction of contextual fear with fMRI to investigate the role of the hippocampus, amygdala, and other structures implicated in modulation of
contextual fear such as the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC).
Thirteen subjects were first pre-familiarized with two distinctive realworld contexts and then viewed photographs from each context while
auditory CSs (high or low tones) were presented in a 3 T scanner. Subjective online fear ratings and physiological responses (SCR, heart rate)
were recorded concurrently. During acquisition, the CS+ tone was partially reinforced with a wrist shock during one context only. Halfway
through the run, the UCS was discontinued and extinction was assessed.
Behavioral measures indicated significant acquisition and extinction of
contextual fear responses. As predicted, increased activity in the hippocampus/parahippocampal gyrus, insula, and amygdala was observed

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

during the reinforced context during contextual fear acquisition and
extinction. The VMPFC was more active during the “safe” context in the
acquisition phase as well as to a lesser extent during extinction. These
results are consistent with the proposed role of the hippocampal region
in contextual fear and highlight the involvement of VMPFC in inhibitory
fear processes.
F76
EXPLORING THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES FOR EMOTION
REGULATION AND PSYCHOPATHOLOGY IN NON-HUMAN
PRIMATES. Andrew S. Fox, Steven E. Shelton, Terrence R. Oakes,
Alexander K. Converse, Richard J. Davidson, Ned H. Kalin; University of
Wisconsin-Madison — The amygdala is a neural structure involved with
affective processing and psychopathology. Recently researchers have
begun to investigate the role of the prefrontal cortex in moderating
amygdala responsiveness with the idea that altered prefontal regulation
of amygdala activity underlies affective and anxiety-related psychopathology. In this study we selected three groups of anxious monkeys
(High n=11; Med n=12; Low n=12) from 117 animals based on their propensity to become behaviorally inhibited or freeze when presented with
the profile of a human intruder (Kalin & Shelton, 1989). After identification of the 3 groups of animals, each animal was given an injection of
[18F]-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) and separated from its partner
into a test cage where it remained for 30 min. During the FDG uptake
period, animals were awake and freely behaving allowing for assessment
of integrated brain metabolic activity during the separation period. Analyses revealed the amygdala to be more active in the high anxious group
when compared to the medium and low groups. To detect patterns of
brain activity associated with prefrontal-amygdala regulation, a whole
brain voxel-wise search was performed to identify brain regions that
were negatively correlated with amygdala activity. Results demonstrated
regions of prefrontal cortex including Area 46/9 and Area 10 that were
negatively correlated with amygdala activity in the middle or normative
group but were not correlated with amygdala activity in the anxious
group. These findings provide evidence for altered activity of prefrontalamygdala circuits in highly anxious individuals.
F77
FRIEND OR FOE? MODULATION OF BRAIN ACTIVATION TO
CANONICAL FACIAL EXPRESSIONS VIA SELF-RELEVANT
CONTEXTUAL INFORMATION. Jasmin Cloutier, F. Caroline Davis,
Todd F. Heatherton, William M. Kelley, Paul J. Whalen; Dartmouth College — The
current study examined how self-relevant contextual information modulates the neural processes involved in the perception of emotional facial
expressions. Specifically, subjects were imaged using fMRI while viewing
happy and angry faces that were immediately preceded by a self-relevant
context (e.g., "he just saw you win the lottery" or "she just saw you get
punched in the face"). Subjects were instructed that the subsequent facial
expressions were in reaction to information provided in the statements.
Outcomes were either favorable or unfavorable and were either congruent or incongruent with each facial expression's canonical valence (favorable outcomes: happy face preceded by happy statement, angry face
preceded by angry statement; unfavorable outcomes: angry face preceded by happy statement, happy face preceded by angry statement). Of
interest was the neural activity to favorable and unfavorable outcomes
regardless of facial expression, positive and negative facial expressions
regardless of outcome, and, critically, the reversal of prepotent meanings
of these facial expressions based upon outcomes (e.g., happy face preceded by " he just learned that you are very sick" - here the happy face
reflects an unfavorable outcome and angry face preceded by "she just
found out you lost your job"- here the angry face reflects a positive outcome, namely sympathy). Results revealed greater ventral prefrontal activation to "favorable" outcomes and greater insula activation to
"unfavorable" outcomes, regardless of facial expression and greater
amygdala activation in response to outcomes that required reversal of a
facial expression's canonical valence.

207

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

F78
MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND MU RHYTHM INVOLVEMENT IN
SOCIAL
COGNITION:
ARE
THERE
DISSOCIABLE
SUBCOMPONENTS OF THEORY OF MIND? Erin E Hecht, Pineda A
Jaime; Emory University — Gallese et al. (2004) distinguish between replication of others' mental states as if they were one's own (simulation theory), which is proposed to involve mirror neurons, and explicit reasoning
about others' mental states (theory theory), which is not proposed to
involve mirror neurons. Tager-Flusberg and Sullivan (2000) postulate a
seemingly related distinction between the social-perceptive component
of theory of mind, which involves online judgment of mental state from
facial and body expressions, and the social-cognitive component, which
is representation-based and linked to language and theory-building. In
this study, the role of mirror neurons, as indexed by the mu rhythm of the
EEG, was examined in subjects performing tasks that tapped either the
social-cognitive or social-perceptive component of theory of mind. Mu
suppression was positively correlated with accuracy on a social-perceptual task in which subjects matched facial emotional expressions. In contrast, mu suppression was not correlated with accuracy in a socialcognitive task in which subjects made judgments about others’ beliefs
and intentions. Furthermore, accuracy in a task that required judgments
about person-object interactions was correlated with mu suppression in
the emotion task, and vice versa. This suggests that a common neural
mechanism, likely the mirror neuron system, underlies judgments about
emotions and person-object interactions, while another mechanism
underlies judgments about beliefs and intentions. These results are consistent with a componential view of theory of mind.
F79
THE INFLUENCE OF EMOTION REGULATION STRATEGIES ON
RISKY DECISION-MAKING Laura Martin, Dominic Fareri, Mauricio
Delgado; Rutgers University — In day to day behavior, an individual is
constantly presented with salient conditioned cues representing risk-taking opportunities. Some of the cues may induce craving, subsequently
leading to risky decision-making. One potential way of controlling risktaking behavior is to use antecedent-focused strategies to reduce induced
craving. The goal of this study was to examine the influence of emotion
regulation on salient conditioned stimuli (CS), as measured by skin conductance responses (SCR) and risk-taking behavior. We used a conditioning paradigm in which a CS, a colorful picture of a slot machine,
represented a reward-seeking opportunity. Participants were faced with
a choice between two potential outcomes: a 50% chance of winning $20
(gamble) and a 100% chance of winning $5 (sure thing). Prior to CS presentation, an instructional cue directed participants on how to approach
each trial. When the instruction was “attend,” participants were to think
about winning money during CS presentation. When the instruction was
“reappraise,” they were to use the colors in the slot machine to help them
imagine a calm visual scene (e.g., sunset). Results from behavioral pilot
studies suggest that emotion regulation strategies were successful in
decreasing SCRs to the CS. Additionally, participants chose the sure
thing more often than the gamble option when using emotion regulation
compared to “attend” trials. These data suggest that cognitive strategies
can decrease physiological arousal induced by a salient CS, in turn influencing subsequent behavior. Further investigations will probe the neural
correlates underlying the influence of emotion regulation on risky decision-making.
F80
(EFFECT) SIZE DOES MATTER: A QUANTITATIVE METAANALYSIS OF NEUROIMAGING STUDIES OF EMOTION Karine
Sergerie, Caroline Chochol, Jorge Armony; McGill University & Douglas
Hospital Research Centre — Several meta-analyses of neuroimaging studies of emotional processing have been conducted in order to determine
the brain areas consistently involved, as well as whether these activations
are different depending on laterality, stimulus modality, etc. Of particular interest has been to examine to what extent amygdala responses

208

Memory: Memory Disorders

depend on these parameters. Although these previous analyses have provided critical insights on the neuroanatomy of emotion, they relied on the
so-called vote-counting technique, in which the relative numbers of
reported activations for different conditions across studies are compared.
That is, this approach typically does not take into account the magnitude
(effect size) and reliability (variance) associated with each of the reported
activations. Here, we present results from a comprehensive meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies of emotional processing which we conducted
based on over 400 published studies. Critically, we estimated the effect
size associated with each peak activation, using the statistical values
reported. These values were entered in a weighted general linear model
to examine the potential influence of various moderating variables. We
conducted whole-brain analysis as well as region-of-interest focusing on
the amygdala. For the latter, preliminary results from 85 studies including 182 activation peaks revealed a significant effect of gender (stronger
activation for men than women, p < 0.001), stimulus type (faces vs. pictures, p < 0.005), and type of control stimulus (p < 0.01) on the aggregated
effect sizes. In contrast, there was no significant difference in overall magnitude of activation between left and right amygdala (p > 0.5).

Memory: Memory Disorders
F81
PATTERN SEPARATION PROCESSES IN THE HUMAN MEDIAL
TEMPORAL LOBE Brock Kirwan1, Shauna Stark2, Naomi GoodrichHunsaker3, Barry Gordon2, Ramona Hopkins3, Craig Stark2; 1University of
California, San Diego, 2Johns Hopkins University, 3Brigham Young
University — Computational models and electrophysiology data from
animal models suggest that pattern separation, a process whereby similar
or overlapping mnemonic representations are made more dissimilar in
order to reduce retrieval errors, is supported by the structures of the
medial temporal lobe (MTL). These computational models typically posit
the hippocampus as having a critical role in the pattern separation process. We hypothesized that damage to the MTL, and critically to the hippocampus, would result in increased susceptibility to inter-stimulus
interference. To test this prediction, we tested amnesic patients with hippocampal damage and matched controls using a recognition memory
paradigm that manipulated pattern separation demands. Patients and
controls studied a series of either faces or objects and performed a recognition memory test after a brief delay. Pattern separation demands were
manipulated by varying the degree of inter-item similarity between testing blocks. Results indicate that patients with hippocampal damage were
impaired relative to controls when pattern separation demands were
high but were relatively unimpaired when pattern separation demands
were low. Furthermore, the deficit observed in the patients was modulated by stimulus type and task demands. These results are taken to
broadly support the predictions of the computational models that the
medial temporal lobe in general and the hippocampus specifically support pattern separation.
F82
NEURAL CORRELATES OF VERBAL RECALL DEFICITS IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA PATIENTS AND THEIR UNAFFECTED
BIOLOGICAL RELATIVES Dongju Seo1, Edward M. Bernat1, John J.
Stanwyck2, Scott R. Sponheim2,1; 1University of Minnesota, 2Minneapolis VA
Medical Center — Verbal memory impairments are one of the most severe
cognitive abnormalities in schizophrenia. Unaffected biological relatives
of schizophrenia patients frequently show verbal memory dysfunction,
suggesting an important genetic risk factor for schizophrenia. The purpose of this study is to investigate verbal memory dysfunction and
underlying electroloencephalogram (EEG) correlates of these abnormalities in schizophrenia patients and their biological relatives. We utilized
an experimental verbal memory task to examine free-recall performance
in 29 schizophrenia patients, 20 first-degree biological relatives of schizo-

Memory: Memory Disorders

phrenia patients, and 28 nonpsychiatric control participants. Participants
in three groups performed a size judgment task of thirty words and later
were asked to recall as many of those words as possible. Schizophrenia
patients displayed significantly impaired recall performance compared to
relatives (t (47) =-4.4, p <0.001) and controls (t (55)=-7.3, p<001). Additionally, biological relatives showed marginal impairment compared to
the controls (t (46)= -2.0, p=. 05). EEG was simultaneously recorded during the encoding phase of the task. For words they later recalled, schizophrenia patients showed enhanced early EEG processing during
encoding compared to the controls. Biological relatives showed similarly
enhanced early processing during encoding of words they later recalled.
We found verbal memory deficits in explicit recollection of words in
schizophrenia patients and their relatives. Further, EEG results suggest
that biological relatives of schizophrenia patients may have aberrant neural systems that reflect expression of genetic risk for the disorder in brain
function. More detailed comparisons of EEG/ERP activity between
schizophrenia patients, relatives and controls will be presented and discussed.
F83
A CASE WITH CONFABULATION CAUSED BY OCCLUSION IN
THE INTERNAL CAROTID ARTERY: EVALUATION OF
FANTASTIC-SPONTANEOUS CONFABULATION Sachiko
Anamizu1, Motoichiro Kato1, Masaru Mimura2, Tomoko Akiyama3, Fumie
Saito1, Haruo Kashima1; 1Keio University School of Medicine, 2Showa
University School of Medicine, 3Komagino Hospital — We report a case who
exhibited severe amnesia and fantastic spontaneous confabulation as a
result of an occlusion of the internal carotid artery, which involved the
basal forebrain, caudate nucleus, orbito-frontal and dorso-lateral frontal
structures. His spontaneous confabulation was most pronounced from 4
to 5 months post onset, which then disintegrated into provoked confabulation. At the period of spontaneous confabulation, we observed severe
impairment of both memory and executive function, which has been
ongoing ever since. During the course of his recovery we used a confabulation questionnaire (a series of 89 questions) to assess the degree and
rate of his improvement at 3 time points (4, 10 and 26 months post
onset).&#12288; We compared the case with two groups. The first group
was comprised of 8 normal, healthy control subjects. The second was
comprised of 9 amnesic control subjects who were suffering from basal
forebrain damage, who no longer suffered from spontaneous confabulation but still showed amnesia and provoked confabulation. The results of
this case were significantly different from the two control groups, especially with regard to the “unknown question” domains, such as questions
to which one should answer “I don’t know”, and questions related to the
subject’s personal future. A common factor of the two domains is that
there is no correct answer. The confabulation questionnaire proved to be
an effective method to evaluate the patient’s rate of recovery and the features of confabulation.
F84
PERCEPTUAL ENCODING DEFICIT UNDERMINES WORKING
MEMORY FUNCTIONS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA. Marina
Shpaner1,2,
Esther Rabinowicz1, Gail Silipo1, John Foxe1,2, Daniel Javitt1; 1Nathan Kline
Institute for Psychiatric Research, 2Cognitive Neuroscience Program, City
College of New York, Graduate Center, CUNY — Working memory problems are believed to cause pervasive cognitive deficits in schizophrenia.
There is mounting evidence, however, that cognitive deficits in schizophrenia stem from early perceptual deficits. Prior studies of the Dot Enumeration Perceptual Organization Task (DEPOT), comparing form vs.
number processing of the same stimuli, implicated deficits in visual
working memory in schizophrenia. These studies left open the question
of whether patients’ performance decrement was due to poor encoding
or poor consolidation of information. The present study changed the
DEPOT into a matching procedure to better differentiate encoding from
consolidation and recall. Twenty-six schizophrenic patients and twentysix matched controls made same/different form and number judgments

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

for stimulus pairs (4-, 5-, or 6-dot squares, rectangles or rhombi), separated by varying ISIs (300, 600, 1000, 2000, 4000 ms). Consistent with previous studies, patients responded faster than controls as the saliency of
the shape increased in the number task but not in the form task. There
was no group by delay interaction in accuracy or reaction times. Patients’
accuracy and reaction times followed the same pattern of responses as
that of controls’ across different delay intervals, albeit with lower overall
accuracy. This differential performance is consistent with a perceptual
encoding deficit rather than a dysfunction in consolidation. We concluded that patients employ the same cognitive process as controls,
although less efficiently.
F85
REGIONAL WHITE MATTER PATHOLOGY IN MILD COGNITIVE
IMPAIRMENT (MCI): DISSOCIATION OF LESION TYPE AND
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL FUNCTIONING Lisa Delano Wood1,
Christina Wierenga1, Norm Abeles2, Josh Sacco2, Kelly Klump2, Priyan
Weerappuli2, Zach Hambrick2, Alexander von Eye2, Dan Murman2, Andrea
Bozoki2; 1University of California San Diego, School of Medicine, 2Michigan
State University — Neuropsychological associations of regional white
matter lesion (WML) pathology (deep white matter lesions [DWML] and
periventricular lesions [PVL]) across the aging spectrum are not well
understood and, to date, research has been largely contradictory and
inconclusive. The current study set out to clarify some of the inconsistencies in the literature by relating volumetric analyses of WML (DWML and
PVL) to neuropsychological performance in a large clinical sample of
older adults diagnosed with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI), a transitional stage between normal and demented aging that is based on a
pathological model of change. Seventy older adults with MCI were
administered a comprehensive neuropsychological battery and WML
found on T2-weighted FLAIR (fluid-attenuated inversion recovery)
images were quantified using a semi-automated volumetric approach
(Pixel Thresholding). Results showed that, in contrast to performance on
memory and naming tasks, total WML strongly predicted executive
impairments, slowed processing speed, and visuospatial/construction
difficulties. In addition, separate regression analyses demonstrated that
results were primarily accounted for by DWML (and not PVL), most
likely due to frontal-subcortical circuitry disruption. Moreover, DWML
but not PVL significantly predicted overall poorer neuropsychological
functioning, after controlling for age, education, and level of depression.
Taken together, findings demonstrate a dissociation of lesion type on
cognitive impairment in MCI and implicate DWML as being most detrimental in terms of neuropsychological functioning. Clinical, theoretical,
and methodological implications of these results are discussed.
F86
EPISODIC MEMORY AND TEMPORAL LOBE ATROPHY IN
FRONTOTEMPORAL LOBAR DEGENERATION. Hedvig
Söderlund1, Morris Freedman1,2, Bruce L. Miller3, Sandra E. Black1,2, Brian
Levine1,2; 1The Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre for Geriatric Care,
Toronto, 2University of Toronto, 3Memory and Aging Center, University of
California at San Francisco — It has been unclear to what extent memory is
affected in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). Since patients usually have atrophy in regions implicated in memory function, the frontal
and/or temporal lobes, one would expect certain memory impairment,
and that the degree of atrophy in these regions is inversely related to
memory function. The purposes of this study were twofold: 1) to assess
episodic memory function in FTLD, and more specifically patients’ ability to episodically re-experience an event, and determine its source; 2) to
examine whether memory performance is related to atrophy in a particular region. FTLD patients (n=19) and healthy controls (n=14) were
assessed with cued recall, recognition, “remember/know” (Tulving,
1985; Gardiner, 1988) and source, at 30 min and 24 hrs after encoding.
Structural MRI was also run on 15 of the patients. ANOVAs revealed
worse performance in patients than controls in all memory measures, all
delays. Gray matter volume in the left medial temporal lobe was posi-

209

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

tively correlated with recognition and source memory, both delays. Volume in the left posterior temporal lobe correlated significantly with
recognition, both delays, and with source at 30 min. In summary, not
only is recall reduced in FTLD, so is the episodic re-experiencing of what
is recalled. Although memory isn’t always impaired in FTLD, this study
suggests that performance will or will not be impaired depending on the
degree of left medial and posterior temporal atrophy.
F87
EFFECT OF LEVELS OF PROCESSING ON RECOLLECTION AND
FAMILIARITY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Melanie Cohn1, Patrick
S.R. Davidson2, Morris Moscovitch1; 1University of Toronto, 2University of
Alberta — Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is traditionally associated with
impaired free recall and intact recognition memory, suggesting that recollection (contextually-rich memory) is more impaired than familiarity
(context-free memory). However, one study using single item recognition
reported intact familiarity and impaired recollection in PD patients
(Davidson et al.,2006). Our goals were to verify whether recollection
and/or familiarity estimates derived from a paired-associate paradigm
are compromised in PD and whether level of processing at encoding
could explain the above discrepancy. In two experiments, PD patients
(free of depression and of dementia) and healthy control participants
studied unrelated word-pairs and completed an inclusion and an exclusion recognition task in which new, half-new, rearranged and intact pairs
were presented. Participants had to identify pairs containing two studied
words (i.e., rearranged and intact pairs) in the inclusion task and identify
only intact pairs in the exclusion task. In Experiment 1, a deep encoding
study strategy was imposed (sentence generation) and PD patients
showed impaired recollection but intact familiarity. In Experiment 2, participants completed two study-test runs; one involving shallow encoding
(reading) and one involving deep encoding (sentence generation). Based
on preliminary data, PD patients showed intact recollection and impaired
familiarity following shallow encoding, but impaired recollection and
intact familiarity following deep encoding. The benefit from deep encoding varied between groups; it increased familiarity only in PD patients
and increased recollection only in control participants. Results will be
discussed in relation to medial temporal and frontal lobes’ roles in supporting recollection and familiarity, two regions affected by PD.
F88
PSYCHOGENIC MEMORY DEFICITS ASSOCIATED WITH
FUNCTIONAL CEREBRAL CHANGES: AN FMRI STUDY. Anne
Botzung1, Lilianne Manning2; 1Duke University; CNRS 7521, CNRS 858,
Université Louis Pasteur, 2CNRS 7521, CNRS 858, Université Louis
Pasteur — There is a remarkable paucity of neuroimaging studies having
investigated the possible functional brain correlates of selective autobiographical memory deficits observed in the context of no detectable neurological damage. However, all these studies have indicated functional
cerebral abnormalities. We studied a patient who presented with psychogenic memory deficits by means of a functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) experiment involving the retrieval of autobiographical
memories. The patient cannot access most of her autobiographical memories pertaining to her childhood up to sixteen years old. We carried out
comparisons between the forgotten and the preserved periods of life.
Memories from the preserved period were also compared with a control
condition of semantic memory. Compared with the control condition, the
evocation of the normally retrieved memories appears to be supported by
neural networks similar to those of normal subjects. Compared with the
forgotten period, the evocation of the normally retrieved memories was
associated with increased activation in left parahippocampal and dorsolateral frontal regions. The evocation of the preserved “islands” was associated with loci of activations bilaterally distributed in the temporo-parieto-occipital cortex. In accordance with the literature, these results
highlight cerebral functional changes associated with an autobiographical memory deficit observed without neurological background. These
functional abnormalities are observed in brain regions that, if damaged,

210

Memory: Working Memory

are likely to provoke similar memory deficits. Our data supports the idea
of common mechanisms implicated in both organic and psychogenic
amnesias. It also underlies the importance of such imaging studies in the
context of this pathology.
F89
VERBAL MEMORY RECOGNITION RELATES TO VENTRICULAR
VOLUME IN MILD ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE Monique Cola1, Stephanie
Daniels2, Maryellen McClain1, Pamela DeGeorge1, David Corey1, Anne
Foundas1; 1Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA,
2
Veterans Administration Hospital, New Orleans, LA — Individuals in the
early stages of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) have profound memory loss,
generalized brain atrophy and ventricular enlargement. The goal of the
present study was to determine whether a derived ratio of hemispheric,
cortical atrophy and/or ventricular enlargement correlated with memory
loss in early AD. Individuals with a diagnosis of probable AD (n = 6) and
healthy controls (n = 6) matched for age (Mean = 72.8 years) and education (Mean = 12.8 years) had volumetric MRI scans. Comprehensive neuropsychological tests were administered to all participants. Regions of
interest in the left and right hemispheres were measured on MRI scans
using a computer driven cursor. Total brain volume (TBV) and total
intracranial volume (TICV) did not differ significantly between groups.
AD subjects had volume reduction in prefrontal superior (p=.027) and
occipital inferior (p=.009) regions. Total lateral ventricular volumes (VV)
were increased in the AD group. Hemispheric VV was correlated with
performance on tests of verbal delayed recognition (right hemisphere, p =
.046, left hemisphere, p = .009). It is interesting that measures of ventricular volume in early AD correlated with verbal recognition memory but
did not correlate with immediate or delayed recall. There is some evidence that ventricular volume expands at a more rapid rate than wholebrain atrophy in mild cognitive impairment and may predict conversion
to AD. These results suggest that an index of cortical atrophy proportional to hemisphere volume and accounting for ventricular volume may
provide an accurate measure of early memory loss.

Memory: Working Memory
F90
PREFRONTAL CONTROL OF FAMILIARITY VS. RECOLLECTION
IN WORKING MEMORY Eva Feredoes, Giulio Tononi, Bradley Postle;
University of Wisconsin-Madison — Controlling the effects of proactive
interference (PI), the deleterious effect of prior mental activity on current
memory representations, is believed to be a key function of prefrontal
cortex (PFC). This view is supported by neuroimaging evidence that left
inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) of the PFC is differentially sensitive to high PI
conditions of working memory tasks. In a previous experiment we
showed, using the interference methodology of repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation (rTMS), that left IFG is indeed critical for controlling the effects of PI. In the present experiment, we addressed the question of what is the control mechanism supported by left IFG? First, with
an item recognition response-deadline procedure, we determined that PI
results from the rapid build-up of a familiarity signal that peaks approximately 200 msec after probe onset. A slower recollection-based signal,
maximal at 500 msec, indicated this to be the time by which all decisionrelated information had accrued. Next, we tested item recognition with
rTMS trains delivered either from 0 to 250 msec (early) or from 500 to 750
msec (late) after probe onset. Results indicated that the magnitude of
early rTMS-related disruption of high-PI probe accuracy was predicted
by an individual’s susceptibility to PI. The absence of a comparable effect
for late rTMS suggests that PI control occurs when the strength of the
familiarity-based signal exceeds that of the recollection-based signal. Left
IFG-based control may operate by biasing the influence of familiarity- vs.
recollection-based signals on recognition decisions.

Memory: Working Memory

F91
DETECTABLE CHANGES IN THE LEVEL OF CEREBRAL
ACTIVATION ARE RELATED TO AUDITORY WORKING
MEMORY LOAD OF THE FRONTAL LOBE: A FUNCTIONAL
NEAR INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY STUDY. Gerald
Voelbel1,2,
1
1
1
Jeannie Lengenfelder , Glenn Wylie , Neil Nadkani , Angela Smith1, John
DeLuca1,2; 1Kessler Medical Rehabilitation Research and Education
Corporation, 2University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey - New Jersey
Medical School — The objective of this study was to investigate whether
increased cerebral activation in the frontal lobes of healthy adults was
related to increased working memory load, using functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS). Nine right-handed, healthy adults (6 females)
between the ages of 20 and 51 without any history of neurological disease
or psychiatric disorders participated. Participants were seated comfortably and 30 fNIRS source/ detector optodes were placed on their foreheads. The fNIRS scan started with a 5 minute baseline period, followed
by the auditory presentation of the N-Back test. The participants tapped
the table with their right hand to respond to the target letters. The N-Back
consisted of three randomly presented trials of the 0-, 1-, 2-, and 3- back
conditions. In the N-Back test, the 0-back condition is a baseline condition, and the 1-, 2-, and 3- Back conditions place increasing demands on
the working memory system. The results show that across the 9 participants there was significantly elevated concentration of oxyhemoglobin
(OxyHb) in the right ventro-lateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) when 0Back (baseline) was subtracted from the 1-, 2-, and 3-Back conditions. A
significant increase in OxyHb was also detected in right VLPFC when the
2-Back was subtracted from the 3-Back condition. This study demonstrates the efficacy of using fNIRS to detect the relationship between cognitive constructs (working memory load) and physiological changes.
Furthermore, it extends our understanding of these changes by strongly
suggesting that the increases in the BOLD signal (fMRI) are due to
increases in OxyHb.
F92
SCALP AND INTRACRANIAL ERP CORRELATES OF PROACTIVE
INTERFERENCE IN FACE RECOGNITION MEMORY Marieke van
Vugt1, Robert Sekuler2, Hugh Wilson3, Michael Kahana1; 1University of
Pennsylvania, 2Brandeis University, 3York University — Individual differences in working memory span seem to be closely related to the ability to
resolve proactive interference, i.e., interference from previous trials.
Recent fMRI studies have shown the left inferior frontal gyrus, right inferior parietal sulcus and precuneus to be the main players in the resolution
of proactive interference, yet the electrophysiological correlates of proactive interference are unknown. We examined subjects' electroencephalographical (EEG) activity as they studied and maintained short lists of
faces (Wilson et al, 2002) for an immediate recognition memory test
(Sternberg, 1966). We used a recent negatives paradigm (Monsell, 1978),
where we varied how recently negative probes (lures) were studied. We
then compared EEG amplitude as a function of the recency of the probe
item, which allowed us to track the sequential involvement of different
brain areas in interference resolution. Preliminary results show that the
early ERP peaks (N1 and P2) are modulated by proactive interference in
posterior and right parietal, as well as frontal areas. We observe later left
frontal peaks in response-locked ERPs. We compare these findings to
preliminary intracranial EEG studies using the same task and stimuli,
where we find electrodes in temporal and perirhinal regions exhibiting
sustained differences as a function of interference, and electrodes in the
left parahippocampal region that show late proactive interference effects.
F93
RHYTHMIC EFFECTS IN VERBAL AND SPATIAL WORKING
MEMORY Caroline Palmer1, Zachary A. Schendel2; 1McGill University,
2
Ohio State University — Both EEG and MEG studies indicate oscillatory
neural behavior during verbal and nonverbal working memory tasks,
and repetitive motor or submotor activity can maintain spatial information in working memory, similar to how repetitive subvocalizations

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

maintain verbal information (Wesp et al, 2001). We test whether rhythmic
activity during stimulus presentation and recall differentially affects verbal and spatial working memory. Digits and spatial grid squares were
presented in different sequence lengths, either isochronously (with equal
interonset intervals, IOIs) or in simple rhythmic patterns of 3:1, 2:1, and
1:1 IOIs. Participants spoke (Digits) or tapped (Spatial and Rhythmic
sequences) their sequence reproductions on a spatially equivalent touchpad. Rhythmic presentation caused a modest reduction in accuracy (4%)
for both Digit and Spatial sequences. The presence of Digits or Spatial
items reduced overall accuracy of Rhythm reproduction substantially
(14%), compared with Rhythms presented alone. Thus, the presence of
Digits or Spatial information hurt Rhythm reproduction more than vice
versa. Participants’ Digit spans were significantly correlated with their
Rhythm spans (r = .63, p <.01); participants with larger Digit spans –
whether or not rhythm was present – tended to have larger Rhythm
spans. Participants’ Spatial spans did not correlate with their Rhythm
spans in any conditions. The asymmetric interference of non-rhythmic
information on Rhythms indicates that the representation of verbal and
spatial memory preserves its temporal dynamics; furthermore, the selective correlation of rhythm and digit spans suggests that the oscillatory
mechanisms involved in verbal encoding may also be involved in storage
of verbal working memory.
F94
RETROSPECTIVE VS. PROSPECTIVE CODING IN OBJECT
WORKING MEMORY Jarrod Lewis-Peacock, Brad Postle; University of
Wisconsin-Madison — Both retrospective and prospective coding for
objects have been observed in the prefrontal cortex and inferior temporal
cortex of non-human primates performing working memory tasks
(Rainer et. al 1999, Takeda et. al 2005). In the present study we use pattern
classification to probe the nature of retrospective and prospective coding
in object working memory in humans. A pattern classification algorithm
identifies patterns of cortical activity associated with the study of three
categories of pictures (faces, locations, and objects). The experiment proceeds in three phases: classifier training, paired-associate learning
(offline), and delayed paired-associate recognition. Stimuli from different
categories are paired to form between-category paired associates, e.g.
face-location, face-object, and object-location pairs. The ensuring pairedassociate delayed-recognition task, as compared to conventional delayed
recognition, allows the discrimination of retrospective coding (targetrelated) from prospective coding (probe-related). For example, one trial
contains a face-object pairing with the face as the target stimulus and the
object as the probe stimulus. If the delay-period activity pattern correlates
highly with the face pattern learned by the classifier this would be consistent with retrospective maintenance. However, if the delay-period activity pattern more highly correlates with the object pattern learned by the
classifier, this would be consistent with prospective reactivation. We
choose long delay periods (11 s) in our working memory task to permit
the evaluation of the evolution of the object representation over time. In
addition, analyzing cortical activation patterns for the entire brain allows
for the investigation of regional differences in the nature of object representation.
F95
REPETITION SUPPRESSION AND REACTIVATION IN VERBAL
SHORT-TERM RECOGNITION MEMORY Bradley Buchsbaum, Mark
D'Esposito; UC Berkeley — A great deal of recent work on the neural
underpinnings of recognition memory has shown that, in regions known
to be important for sensory processing, a novel stimulus elicits a stronger
response than a repeated one; and, moreover, the smaller response to the
second stimulus the greater the subjective report of item familiarity.
However, this phenomenon, often called "repetition suppression", would
seem to stand at odds with another oft-proposed neural mechanism for
recognition memory: namely, that perceptual traces established during
stimulus encoding are "reactivated" upon a subsequent encounter of the
same stimulus. Moreover, in short-term memory, at least, it is thought

211

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

that memory traces established during initial stimulus perception
undergo a rapid temporal decay. In the present work we examined, first,
whether at short repetition lags, and using verbal stimuli, reactivation or
repetition suppression is observed in sensory cortical regions known to
be involved in memory for words. Second, we investigated whether both
phenomena: repetition suppression and trace reactivation, are modulated
by the number of intervening items (1-5) between an item and its repeat.
Lastly, we examined how the phenomena of repetition suppression and
reactivation are affected by a change in modality (auditory-to-visual or
visual-to-auditory) between repetitions. Subjects performed a continuous
verbal recognition task (ISI = 2.5 s), with randomly ordered auditory- and
visual-verbal stimuli and repetition lag varied between one and five
items. Pronounced repetition suppression was observed for both auditory and visual items in (mid-anterior superior temporal gyrus) auditory
and visual sensory cortices, respectively. Moreover, the degree of withinmodality repetition suppression in the mid-anterior superior temporal
gyrus was correlated with individual differences in recognition memory
accuracy. In contrast, reactivation (greater activity for a repeated item)
was observed in auditory association cortex of the posterior superior
temporal gyrus for both within- and cross-modality repetitions. Our
results indicate that neighboring cortical regions in the superior temporal
lobe exhibit repetition suppression and reactivation, respectively, and
that these differential effects reflect fundamentally different roles for
these areas in recognition memory.
F96
LEARNING MODULATES NEURAL ACTIVITY IN VISUAL
WORKING MEMORY Youssef Ezzyat1, Katherine Sledge Moore2, Ingrid
Olson1; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2University of Michigan — Because
humans perform well on many visual cognition tasks, such as object recognition, the limits that have been observed in visual working memory
(VWM) seem striking. Researchers have repeatedly found VWM capacity
limits of approximately four items. This observation has proven robust to
changes in features and familiarity. In a series of change detection experiments Olson et al (2005) further showed that overall VWM capacity was
not improved when subjects learned to recognize task stimuli. However,
subjects did show improvement when they learned to associate specific
stimuli with specific to-be-detected changes. These results support the
hypothesis that learning can determine the information stored in VWM
(the prioritization account) but cannot increase its overall capacity. We
conducted the present fMRI study to determine the neural correlates of
VWM prioritization. Subjects were trained outside the scanner on visual
arrays and were subsequently scanned while performing a change detection task on both learned and novel arrays. Our results showed learningmodulated activity reflected by decreased activation for learned displays
compared to novel ones. These results are consistent with the prioritization theory and suggest a top-down modulation of information stored in
VWM.
F97
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN WORKING MEMORY AS
DETERMINED BY THE ANALYSIS OF SPEED-ACCURACY
TRADEOFF Brian C. Rakitin, Arjun Kumar, Rohit Namibisan, Christian
Habeck, Yaakov Stern; Columbia University — Speed-accuracy
tradeoff
(SAT) analysis of a delayed matching-to-sample task was used to examine age-related differences in working memory. Sixteen healthy young
adults (ages 18-35) and sixteen healthy older adults (ages 65-85) completed a memory task in which they were presented with a visual
sequence: memory stimuli (two abstract shapes; 3000ms), blank delay
(5000ms), a probe stimulus of variable duration (single abstract shape;
125, 250, 500, 1000, or 2000ms), and a mask (500ms). Subjects decided
whether the probe stimulus matched either of the memory stimuli; they
were instructed to respond during the mask, placing greater emphasis on
speed than accuracy. We used Hintzman & Curran’s (1994) three-parameter compound bounded exponential model of SAT to describe changes
in discriminability associated with processing time. Group-level analysis

212

Memory: Working Memory

revealed a significantly higher asymptote for the young adult group, but
no difference across groups in rate of curvature change or x-intercept. In
addition, analysis of neuropsychological variables demonstrated that IQ
is a better predictor of the shape of the SAT function than age. Our results
suggest that working memory capacity decreases with aging, while the
threshold for discriminability and the rate of information accumulation
remain constant.
F98
REFRESHING FACES AND SCENES: ASSESSING FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY AMONG BRAIN REGIONS DURING A SINGLE
THOUGHT Matthew Johnson1, Carol Raye1, Mark D'Esposito2, Karen
Mitchell1, Marcia Johnson1; 1Yale University, 2University of California Berkeley — "Refreshing" is a basic component process of cognition used to
foreground an active representation. Previously, we have shown that
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and anterior prefrontal cortex
(PFC) are active while refreshing representations of recently perceived
stimuli (Johnson MK et al., 2005; Raye et al., in press). We have also
recently shown that refreshing stimuli such as faces and scenes leads to
top-down modulation effects in posterior areas responding preferentially
to one stimulus class (relative to the other) during perception (e.g., fusiform face area [FFA], parahippocampal place area [PPA], and parts of
middle occipital gyrus, lateral precuneus, retrosplenial cortex, and inferior occipital gyrus; Johnson MR et al., submitted). According to present
models (e.g., of working memory), such effects should be mediated by
modulatory control signals originating in PFC. Using methods established by Rissman et al. (2004), the present analysis sought to detect functional connectivity changes evoked by refreshing either a face or a scene
stimulus. Participants (N=15 healthy young adults) saw pictures of faces
and scenes, followed shortly by either a cue to refresh (think back to) one
of the pictures, or a repeated presentation of one picture. Significant
changes in functional connectivity were observed between our prefrontal
regions of interest (ROIs) and our posterior stimulus-selective ROIs
depending on whether the target stimulus was refreshed or repeated, and
whether it was a face or a scene. These results generally support models
of cognition that postulate prefrontal modulation of posterior perceptual
regions for the maintenance and manipulation of mental representations.
F99
AGE-RELATED SLOWING ON EVEN SIMPLE COGNITIVE TASKS
MAY BE DUE TO THE RECRUITMENT OF ADDITIONAL
PROCESSES Julie A. Higgins, Marcia K. Johnson; Yale University — Young
(YA, Mean = 20 yrs) and older (OA, Mean = 74 yrs) adults read three
words presented simultaneously in a single column. For Task 1, after the
words disappeared, participants either read one of the words presented a
second time or were cued to think of (refresh) one of the words. We
investigated response times on these simple reflective (refreshing) and
perceptual (reading) tasks as a function of what the participants expected
to do next (Task 2). Half expected to see the word set again before having
to refresh or read a new word on Task 2 (2X), while the other half did not
(1X). On Task 1, OA were slower overall and were disproportionately
slower to refresh relative to YA, replicating previous findings (Johnson et
al., 2002). For YA, response times to refresh and to read a word again
were longer in the 1X compared to the 2X condition. This suggests that
additional processing (e.g., rehearsal) was engaged in anticipation of performing Task 2 without the benefit of seeing the set again, and had the
effect of slowing basic reflective and perceptual processes. In contrast,
OA response times to refresh and read a word again did not differ
between the 1X and 2X conditions suggesting that OA may have been
engaging in rehearsing in both conditions. It is possible that age-related
slowing on even very simple cognitive tasks may be partially due to the
recruitment of additional processes by older adults.
F100
MONITORING AND MANIPULATION OF WORKING MEMORY
CONTENTS IN THE N-BACK TASK: AN ERP STUDY Scott
M.
McGinnis1, Hyemi Chong1, Jenna L. Riis1, David A. Wolk2, Phillip J.

Memory: Memory Systems

Holcomb3, Kirk R. Daffner1; 1Harvard Medical School/Brigham and Women's
Hospital, 2University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 3Tufts University — We
investigated mechanisms underlying the allocation of working memory
(WM) resources in healthy young subjects utilizing event-related potentials (ERPs). The n-back is a challenging task that requires frequently
resetting the contents of WM. Each event is both a potential target and a
stimulus to be processed for future target/non-target discriminations. An
event thus requires the contents of WM to be monitored to identify targets and manipulated to prepare for decisions about upcoming events.
The amplitude of the P3 component can serve as an index of the amount
of processing resources allocated to the updating of working memory.
Young healthy adult subjects performed a visual n-back task with 3 levels
of difficulty (0-back, 1-back, 2-back). Subjects responded to target letters
with a button press. Results indicated a decline in performance
(decreased hits, increased RT) with increasing WM load, largest between
the 1-back and 2-back conditions. For non-targets, P3 amplitude
increased with increasing n-back demand, the largest increase occurring
between 1-back and 2-back. In contrast, for targets, P3 amplitude was
smaller in the 2-back compared with the 0-back and 1-back, which elicited P3s with similar amplitudes. These data suggest that n-back performance depends on 2 aspects of updating WM that may compete for
resources: (1) target/non-target discrimination, and (2) mental manipulation of stimuli in preparation for future decisions. Increased appropriation of resources for mental manipulation may lead to decreased
resources available for discrimination, reflected in both the decline in
behavioral performance and reduction in P3 amplitude to targets.
F101
PREFRONTAL AND HIPPOCAMPAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE
ACTIVE MAINTENANCE OF ITEM AND RELATIONAL
REPRESENTATIONS IN WORKING MEMORY Brian T. Miller1,
David Badre1, Alex Konkel2, Neal J. Cohen2, Mark D'Esposito1; 1Helen Wills
Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 2Beckman Institute,
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign — Previous evidence suggests
that the hippocampus may be critical in the formation of memory for
relations between items. Moreover, hippocampal lesion patients are
impaired in relational memory performance even following brief retention intervals. While the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is implicated in maintenance processes necessary to bridge such temporal gaps, these WM
deficits in patients with intact PFC underscore a gap in our understanding of prefrontal and hippocampal contributions to the maintenance of
relational representations and the consequence of these mechanisms on
long-term memory formation. In the present fMRI investigation, participants performed blocks of delayed-match-to-sample trials (DMS phase)
followed by a surprise subsequent memory test. During the DMS phase,
triplets of novel visual stimuli were presented with instructions to
remember – over a brief delay - either the identity or the spatial configuration of the items. Since the goal was to assess the relationship between
WM maintenance activity and subsequent memory, it was important to
obtain a measure of delay period activity on trials for which there was no
short-term test, and no re-exposure to items. Only a limited number of
randomly presented DMS trials had a test with most being partial trials
ending immediately after the delay. Behaviorally, high performance on
test stimuli and sustained activity in bilateral PFC and hippocampus for
untested trials of both item and spatial conditions indicated that participants were maintaining information on each trial. These estimates permit
subsequent memory analyses of the contribution of delay activity in these
regions to relational and item memory formation.
F102
AGE-RELATED
INABILITY
TO
SUPPRESS
IRRELEVANT
INFORMATION: A SPECTRAL STUDY OF GAMMA BURSTING
DURING A WORKING MEMORY TASK. Wesley Clapp1, John Kelley2,
Kevin McEvoy2, Mark D'Esposito2, Adam Gazzaley1; 1UCSF, 2UC Berkeley,
Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute — This study investigated the balance
between enhancement of relevant and suppression of irrelevant face

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

stimuli in a working memory task performed by younger and older
adults. Subjects participated in a delayed-response task, where they were
asked to view sequentially presented faces and scenes with instructions
to passively view the stimuli, remember only the faces, or remember only
the scenes. In previous fMRI and EEG (ERP) studies implementing this
task, older adults demonstrated short-term memory impairment. Importantly, this memory deficit correlated with subjects’ inability to suppress
irrelevant information (Gazzaley et al., Nature Neuroscience 2005).
There exists a strong link between induced gamma-band responses and
attentive, sensory stimulus processing. Recently we demonstrated that
gamma bursting in young subjects was increased in response to relevant
faces and decreased in response to irrelevant faces relative to passively
viewed stimuli. Enhancement and suppression indices were generated by
subtracting the response to passively viewed stimuli from the relevant
stimuli and subtracting the response to irrelevant stimuli from the passively viewed stimuli, respectively. Using these indices it was shown that
younger subjects successfully suppress irrelevant information. The
present study reveals that healthy older adults show no significant
enhancement or suppression effects. When compared between groups,
older adults show a significantly smaller suppression index than younger
subjects, suggesting that the older subjects were unable to suppress irrelevant information. This finding strongly supports past ERP and fMRI
results and suggests gamma bursting associated with memory and attention processing may serve as another neural marker for cognitive aging.

Memory: Memory Systems
F103
SPATIAL SOURCE MEMORY ROCS SUPPORT A CONTINUOUS
(SINGLE-PROCESS) MODEL OF MEMORY Julie A. Grimes, Scott D.
Slotnick; Boston College — The dual-process model assumes memory is
based on familiarity or the all-or-none process of recollection while the
single-process unequal variance signal-detection model assumes memory
is a continuous process. In source memory paradigms, these models
make disparate predictions with regard to the shape of the receiver operating characteristic (ROC; a plot of hit rates vs. false alarm rates) and ztransformed ROC (zROC). The dual-process model predicts the source
ROC is linear and zROC has positive curvature while the unequal variance model predicts the source ROC is curved and zROC is linear. In this
study, we designed the experiments to maximize the process of source
‘recollection’ in an effort to find evidence supporting the dual-process
model (should it exist). During study, twenty line drawings of objects
were presented on the left or right side of the screen (objects were
repeated in the second experiment). Participants were instructed to
remember each object and its spatial location, while maintaining central
fixation. During test, participants were presented with studied (old) and
new objects. Participants made two judgments indicating: 1) confidence
that each object was old or new and 2) confidence that each object had
been presented on the left or right. Source memory ROCs for both experiments were curved and source memory zROCs were linear (or showed
negative curvature). These results support the unequal variance model of
memory retrieval and are inconsistent with the dual-process model. The
implications for interpreting neuroimaging results, which typically
involves assuming the dual-process model is valid, are considered.
F104
TOPOGRAPHIC ERP DIFFERENCES FOR PRIMACY AND
RECENCY RECALL Petter
Kallioinen,
Sverker
Sikström;
Lund
university — Recall for items in a list is typically better for items in the
beginning and end of the list. These findings are known as primacy and
recency effects and are thought to reflect different memory mechanisms.
Brain responses during item presentation measured with ERP, event
related potentials, typically differ between items later remembered and
forgotten. This is called the subsequent memory effect, SME. In our

213

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

experiment participants studied words in a list learning task were memory was tested with free recall. The behavioral results show a marked primacy and recency effect. The SME for primacy words had a somewhat
left lateralized parietal center whereas corresponding effect for recency
words had a right frontal center. These topographies of SME have been
described earlier in the literature but not in relation to primacy and
recency effects.
F105
LEVELS OF PROCESSING EFFECTS ON THE PERCEPTUAL
SENSITIVITY OF FAMILIARITY MECHANISMS: AN ERP STUDY
Christian Groh-Bordin1,2, Hubert D. Zimmer2; 1Clinical Neuropsychology
Unit, Saarland University, Saarbruecken, Germany, 2Brain and Cognition
Group, Saarland University, Saarbruecken, Germany — Early models of recognition memory already differed in how far familiarity mechanisms
were supposed to code perceptual and conceptual information respectively. Recently, this debate has been renewed due to divergent findings
in event-related potential (ERP) studies, where the mid-frontal old/new
effect (FN400) - typically associated with familiarity - has shown a differential sensitivity to an item’s perceptual changes from study to test. In
our study, we investigated the effects of a levels-of-processing (LOP)
manipulation on the emergence of FN400 effects for perceptually modified items to further specify the conditions under which familiarity codes
perceptual stimulus attributes. Previous behavioral studies indicated that
shallow encoding enhances perceptual specificity effects, and we
expected this enhancement to be visible also in a modulation of ERP old/
new effects. Two subject groups studied a series of visually presented
objects by assessing the size of each picture either on the screen (shallow
encoding) or in reality (deep encoding). In a subsequent recognition
memory test, old items previously seen in the study phase together with
new items were presented. For half of the old items, color and orientation
were changed from study to test. Preliminary analyses indicated a considerable mid-frontal old/new effect in both subject groups. However,
contrary to our expectations, this component was not affected by perceptual changes in the shallow, but only in the deep encoding group. This
pattern suggests that familiarity is able to code perceptual stimulus features, but this coding may require the active encoding of these attributes
into a comprehensive memory trace.
F106
SEPARABLE FORMS OF REALITY MONITORING SUPPORTED BY
ANTERIOR PREFRONTAL CORTEX Jon S. Simons1, Richard N.A.
Henson2, Sam J. Gilbert3, Paul C. Fletcher1; 1University of Cambridge, UK,
2MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, 3Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, UK — Reality monitoring refers to the ability to discriminate between information that was generated internally, as opposed to that derived from the outside world, at
the time of encoding. In the cognitive literature, two different tasks have
often, interchangeably, been used to assess this ability: memory for perceived vs. imagined stimuli; and memory for participant- vs. experimenter-performed tasks. We aimed to examine activation associated with
these two reality monitoring tasks in the same participants using fMRI, to
investigate whether the network of regions we have previously shown to
play a general role in source memory (involving anterior prefrontal cortex and other regions) might also be engaged during these forms of reality monitoring. When contrasted against a semantic baseline, both reality
monitoring tasks did indeed engage the previously observed lateral anterior prefrontal network. However, when the two forms of reality monitoring were contrasted against one another, the only area of the brain to
show significant activation was medial anterior prefrontal cortex, in
which signal was higher during recollection of self/experimenter status
than perceived/imagined status. One hypothesis is that this result
reflects differences in the degree to which the reality monitoring tasks
require processing of self-referential information. Further analyses
sought to understand which stages of the retrieval process these different
anterior prefrontal regions might support: evidence from retrieval cue

214

Memory: Memory Systems

manipulations and effective connectivity analyses suggests that the lateral anterior region may be involved in pre-retrieval processes whereas
the medial anterior region might modulate activity in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex during post-retrieval monitoring.
F107
DISSOCIATION OF AUDITORY AND VISUAL SOURCE MEMORY
FOLLOWING A RIGHT POSTERIOR MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE
LESION. Jan Peters1, Benno Koch2, Michael Schwarz2, Irene Daum3;
1International Graduate School of Neuroscience, Ruhr-University Bochum,
2
Municipal Hospital Dortmund, 3Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, RuhrUniversity Bochum — The present single case analysis of memory performance in a patient with an ischemic lesion affecting posterior but not
anterior right medial temporal lobe (MTL) indicates that recollection can
be disrupted in a domain-specific manner. The patient showed estimates
of recollection and familiarity in the normal range. Also, in a novel recognition memory paradigm, memory for spoken words (auditory condition) and pictures of objects (visual condition) was unimpaired. While
memory for visual source (texture/color of the background against
which pictures appeared) was also within the normal range, auditory
source memory (male/female speaker voice) was at chance level (z = 2.08). Critically, the patient also showed a highly significant increase in
source accuracy difference between the auditory and the visual condition, indicating abnormally reduced auditory source memory. This dissociation is consistent with recent fMRI evidence of anterior/posterior MTL
dissociations depending upon the nature of source information (visual
texture/color vs. auditory speaker voice). The findings are in good agreement with the view of dissociable memory processing by the perirhinal
cortex (anterior MTL) and parahippocampal cortex (posterior MTL),
depending upon the neocortical input that these regions receive.
F108
THE LIMITS RECOLLECTION DRAWS ON MEMORY Bertram
Opitz; Experimental Neuropsychology Unit, Saarland University — A
well
known phenomenon is the memory enhancment after deep processing of
the to be learned material. This deep processing advantage can be
explained by dual-processing accounts of recognition memory: deep
encoding, i.e. encoding in a semantically meaningful way, leads to recognition based on enhanced recollection. It has also been suggested that
repeated presentation also leads to improved memory performance
based on recollective processes. The present study investigated whether
this repetition induced recollection improvement acts on top of the recollection enhancement due to deep processing. Thus, ERPs were recorded
during recognition judgments to new words and old words which had
been studied shallowly or deeply and were presented once or three times.
Results revealed that recognition is significantly enhanced for deeply
studied words and for repeated words, thereby confirming previous
results. In addition, ERP data indicate significant effects of Depth of processing and repetition on the parietal old/new-effect reflecting recollection processes, whereas no differences were present in the early frontal
old/new-effect, the ERP correlate of familiarity. Interestingly, the effects
of Depth of processing and repetition were non additive. Instead, an
increased parietal old/new effect was only found for repeatedly presented words under shallow encoding. For deeply studied words, in contrast, such a repetition related memory enhancement was not observed.
This suggests, that recollection is an all-or-none process and, therefore,
limits the memory enhancement that can be achieved.
F109
SELECTIVE ATTENTION DEMAND MEDIATES RULE-BASED
CATEGORIZATION DEFICITS IN FOCAL BASAL GANGLIA
LESION PATIENTS Shawn Ell1, Andrea Weinstein2, J. Vincent Filoteo3,
W. Todd Maddox4, Rich Ivry2; 1University of Maine, 2UC Berkeley, 3UC San
Diego/VASDHS, 4University of Texas — Patients with basal ganglia pathology have been found to be impaired on category learning tasks, but the
extent of this deficit is unknown. One consistent finding has been that
basal ganglia dysfunction impairs learning in rule-based tasks – i.e., cate-

Memory: Memory Systems

gorization tasks where learning is thought to depend upon the use of an
explicit, hypothesis-guided strategy. Recent data suggest that, in individuals with Parkinson’s disease (PD), this impairment may be limited to
rule-based tasks that place demands upon selective attention (Filoteo et
al., in press). The goal of the present study was to extend this work to
patients with focal basal ganglia lesions. Six patients (4 left side, 2 right
side) were tested on two rule-based categorization tasks. The unidimensional task places demands upon selective attention because participants
must learn to attend to the relevant stimulus dimension while ignoring
an irrelevant dimension. In contrast, the conjunction task places minimal
demands upon selective attention because participants must attend to
both dimensions. The patients were impaired on the conjunction task, but
not the unidimensional task. Quantitative, model-based analyses suggest
that this accuracy deficit may be due to the use of suboptimal decision
strategies. These results are opposite those observed in PD patients and
raise the intriguing possibility that focal basal ganglia lesions and disorders that alter dopamine systems (i.e., PD) might have opposite effects on
rule-based category learning.
F110
COMPLEMENTARY ROLES FOR THE HIPPOCAMPUS AND
NUCLEUS
ACCUMBENS
IN
ENCODING
OF
NOVEL
INFORMATION: EVIDENCE FROM INTRACRANIAL EEG Nikolai
Axmacher1, Michael Cohen2, Juergen Fell1, Sven Haupt1, Christian Elger1,
Thomas Schlaepfer1, Volker Sturm3, Charan Ranganath2; 1University of Bonn,
Germany, 2University of California at Davis, 4University of Cologne,
Germany — The ability to detect and encode novel stimuli is fundamental
to survival in dynamic environments. Human neuroimaging studies
have shown that the medial temporal lobe (MTL) region is involved in
novelty detection and encoding of items into long-term memory, and
recent electrophysiological data in animal models suggest that neurons in
the ventral tegmentum and nucleus accumbens facilitate memory for
novel items. We attempted to bridge the gap between these two literatures by using electrophysiological recordings from the human MTL and
nucleus accumbens to identify the neural mechanism of memory
enhancement for novel items. Intracranial EEG was recorded from epilepsy patients with electrodes implanted in the MTL and from patients
with electrodes in the nucleus accumbens undergoing deep brain stimulation for therapy-refractory depression. We found that contextual novelty enhanced event-related potentials (ERPs) in the hippocampus and
rhinal cortex. Hippocampal ERPs were accompanied by an increased
power and phase concentration in the theta frequency range, while we
found only an effect on theta phase concentration in the rhinal cortex.
Furthermore, there was a selective subsequent memory effect on hippocampal and rhinal ERPs for contextually novel but not standard items. In
the nucleus accumbens, we found a significant enhancement of ERPs
during processing of contextually novel items, but no subsequent memory effect. Our findings support recent models that processing of novel
items activates dopaminergic regions, which in turn modulate encoding
processes in the MTL.
F111
BRAIN ACTIVITY THAT PREDICTS MEMORY FORMATION
BEFORE AN EVENT: SPOKEN VERSUS SEEN WORDS Leun
J.
Otten, Angela H. Quayle, Bhamini Puvaneswaran; Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, University College London — It has been assumed that laying
down a new memory primarily relies on the cognitive and neural processes set in train when an event is encountered. Recently, we have
shown that brain activity elicited by a cue before an event can predict
whether the event will later be recollected. Memory formation thus seems
influenced by the neural context in which an event occurs. We found this
effect for seen, but not spoken, words. One explanation is that as the cue
was always visual, the requirement to switch modalities prior to spoken
words prevented the preparation of processes relevant for effective
encoding. Here, we test this possibility. EEG was recorded from the
scalps of 24 healthy young adults while they performed an incidental

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

semantic-encoding task on an intermixed series of spoken and seen
words. Each word was preceded by a cue signalling the modality of the
upcoming word. Spoken words were preceded by auditory cues, and
seen words by visual cues. A recognition memory test incorporating
remember/know judgments was performed after a delay. As observed
previously, a negative-going, frontally-distributed modulation just before
visual word onset predicted later recollection. Crucially, when stimulus
modality was kept constant between cue and word, the same effect
occurred for spoken words. Prestimulus effects were present regardless
of whether successive trials involved the same, or a different, modality.
Thus, neural context plays an important role in memory formation
regardless of input modality. With an unpredictable stimulus sequence,
this context is set up on a trial-by-trial basis.
F112
INCREASED HUMAN HIPPOCAMPAL THETA ACTIVATION
RELATED TO GOAL-DIRECTED NAVIGATION REVEALED BY
SPATIALLY-FILTERED MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY (MEG)
Linda Johnson1, Brian Cornwell1, Tom Holroyd1, Christian Grillon1; 1National
Institute of Mental Health — Consistent with animal studies of hippocampal theta rhythms, recent studies using intracranial EEG in patients and
MEG in healthy human participants have found a relationship between
theta activity (4-8 Hz) and spatial navigation. It is unclear whether theta
increases reflect spatial memory processes or, more generally, sensorimotor integration processes. With a virtual reality analog of the widely-used
Morris water maze in rodents, nine healthy human participants (6
women) “swam” around a pool while neuromagnetic data were collected
with a 275-channel whole-head MEG system at 1200Hz. Participants navigated as quickly as possible to a submerged, hidden platform that never
changed location, which could be learned by using distal visual cues on
the surrounding walls. To control for sensorimotor neural processes, participants were instructed to “swim” aimlessly on separate trials in the
same pool with different visual cues and without a platform. To localize
theta activity related to goal-directed navigation, spatial filtering analyses
(synthetic aperture magnetometry [SAM]) were conducted on 1-sec windows (normalized to a resting baseline) during virtual swimming in both
conditions. SAM analyses revealed robust left hippocampal theta activity
1-2 sec into trials with a platform relative to control trials, suggesting that
perception of relevant spatial cues elicited memory retrieval processes
necessary to begin navigating in the correct direction. These data are consistent with evidence of a role for hippocampal theta oscillations in spatial memory processes. We will present further analyses to characterize
the time course of hippocampal theta during navigation and to identify
any relationships with behavioral performance.
F113
NEURAL CORRELATES OF CONCEPTUAL IMPLICIT MEMORY
AND THEIR CONTAMINATION OF PUTATIVE NEURAL
CORRELATES OF EXPLICIT MEMORY Joel Voss1, Ken Paller1;
1Northwestern University Interdisciplinary Neuroscience Program — During
episodic recognition tests, meaningful stimuli such as words can engender both conscious retrieval (explicit memory) and facilitated access to
meaning that does not rely on the awareness of remembering (conceptual
implicit memory). Neuroimaging investigations of one type of memory
are frequently subject to the confounding influence of the other type of
memory, thus posing a serious impediment to theoretical advances in
this area. We used minimalist visual shapes (squiggles) to evaluate this
problem. Subjective ratings of squiggle meaningfulness varied idiosyncratically, and behavioral indications of conceptual implicit memory
were evident only for stimuli given higher ratings. These effects did not
result from perceptual-based fluency or from explicit remembering. Distinct event-related brain potentials were associated with conceptual
implicit memory and with explicit memory by virtue of contrasts based
on meaningfulness ratings and memory judgments, respectively. Frontal
potentials from 300-500 ms after the onset of repeated squiggles varied
systematically with perceived meaningfulness. Explicit memory was held

215

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

constant in this contrast, so these potentials were taken as neural correlates of conceptual implicit memory. Such potentials can contaminate
putative neural correlates of explicit memory, in that they are frequently
attributed to the expression of explicit memory known as familiarity.
These findings provide the first neural dissociation of these two memory
phenomena during recognition testing, and underscore the necessity of
taking both types of memory into account in order to obtain valid neural
correlates of specific memory functions.
F114
INFLUENCE OF CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE ON VISUAL
OBJECT DISCRIMINATION Morgan Barense, Kim Graham; Medical
Research Council, Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit — Although
recent
studies have highlighted the key role played by the perirhinal cortex in
complex object processing, it is not currently clear whether this region
also contributes to semantic processing of objects. To address this issue,
object processing for meaningful (e.g., familiar real world objects) and
novel (e.g., barcodes, blobs, greebles) stimuli was investigated in individuals presenting with a significant loss of conceptual knowledge in the
context of semantic dementia (SD), a progressive condition that affects
anterior and medial temporal lobe (MTL) regions (including perirhinal
cortex). The performance of this group was contrasted with that of participants with non-progressive focal lesions to the MTL (including perirhinal cortex) who typically show less impaired semantic memory. Subjects
were administered a series of object discrimination tasks involving either
meaningful or novel stimuli. When the objects possessed a high number
of overlapping features, the two patient groups were impaired relative to
controls on discriminations of both meaningful and novel stimuli. The
two patient groups, however, demonstrated different profiles of impairment on meaningful compared to novel discriminations. Although they
were impaired on both types of discriminations, the deficit in individuals
with focal MTL damage was attenuated by the use of meaningful stimuli.
By contrast, performance in the SD group did not benefit from the use of
meaningful stimuli. These findings suggest that perceptual representations of complex familiar and novel objects (dependent upon perirhinal
cortex) interact with higher-order abstract conceptual representations
(dependent on antero-lateral temporal regions).
F115
MEMORY NETWORKS USED TO SUPPORT RETRIEVAL UNDER
CONDITIONS OF FULL AND DIVIDED ATTENTION Erin
Skinner1, Myra Fernandes1, Cheryl Grady2,3; 1University of Waterloo, 2Rotman
Research Institute, Baycrest Center for Geriatric Care, 3University of
Toronto — We used a multivariate analysis technique, Partial Least
Squares (PLS), to identify distributed patterns of brain activity relating to
verbal recognition memory, when performed under full attention (FA) or
two different divided attention (DA) conditions during retrieval. Behaviourally, recognition was disrupted when a word- but not digit-based
distracting task was performed concurrently with retrieval. PLS was used
to identify patterns of brain activation that together co-varied with the
three memory conditions. Results identified a FA network consisting of
left medial frontal, left parahippocampal, right anterior cingulate, left
cuneus, and several sub-cortical regions, whereas the DA-digit condition
was associated with right superior frontal activity. The DA-word condition was not reliably associated with either pattern. A second analysis
identified patterns that co-varied with recognition accuracy. Increases in
memory performance in the FA and DA-digit condition were related to
increases in a network consisting of right medial frontal, left middle, inferior, and superior frontal regions, and the right precuneus, whereas
decreases in memory performance were related to increases in middle
occipital, bilateral cuneus, left fusiform, and left cerebellar regions. This
pattern of brain-behaviour correlations was not found in the DA-word
condition, in which memory was disrupted. Results indicate that 1) attentional manipulations that do not disrupt memory (DA-digit) alter the network used to sub-serve retrieval, though successful memory is associated
with activation of the same set of brain regions as FA, and 2) those DA

216

Memory: Memory Systems

conditions that disrupt memory (DA-word) interfere with recruitment of
both retrieval-related and performance-related networks.
F116
IMPAIRED FAMILIARITY AND INTACT RECOLLECTION
FOLLOWING ANTERIOR TEMPORAL-LOBE REMOVAL THAT
AFFECTS THE PERIRHINAL CORTEX BUT SPARES THE
HIPPOCAMPUS Ben Bowles1, Carina Crupi1, Seyed Mirsattari1, Susan
Pigott1, Andrew Parrent1, Jens Pruessner2, Andrew Yonelinas3, Stefan Köhler1;
1University of Western Ontario, 2McGill University, 3University of California,
Davis — Whether recognition memory is guided by one continuous
strength process or by two different processes, each with distinct functional characteristics and neural bases, is widely debated in the literature.
According to the most popular dual-process view, the two recognition
processes, recollection and familiarity, are supported by the hippocampus and perirhinal cortex, respectively. Influential support for this view
comes from the observation that selective hippocampal damage can lead
to deficits in recollection while leaving familiarity unimpaired. If the two
processes are truly independent, however, it should also be possible to
establish the opposite dissociation following temporal-lobe damage that
affects perirhinal cortex but spares the hippocampus; such evidence is
currently missing. Here we examined recollection and familiarity in MA,
a patient who acquired precisely this type of lesion in the left hemispheres as a result of surgical treatment for intractable epilepsy. Using
the remember-know procedure in two experiments and receiver operating characteristics (ROC) in another, we show that patient MA exhibits
consistently impaired familiarity with recollection in the normal range. In
a fourth experiment involving response deadlines, MA’s performance
was impaired when a response was required quickly but normal when
more time was allowed. In line with the idea that familiarity is available
earlier than recollection, this finding provides further converging evidence for a familiarity deficit. These results indicate that the familiarity
component of recognition can be selectively impaired. They also support
the view that recollection and familiarity rely on distinct medial temporal
lobe structures.
F117
THE HUMAN PERIRHINAL CORTEX: INVOLVEMENT IN VISUAL
PERCEPTION IS TASK SPECIFIC Ingrid Olson1, Alan Plotzker1,
Youssef Ezzyat1; 1University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA — A
recent
and controversial proposal based on findings from monkeys is that the
perirhinal cortex is involved in high-level perceptual processing (Buckley
et al., 2001; Bussey et al., 2002;Murray & Bussey, 1999). This hypothesis
has been tested in human patients with large MTL lesions extending into
hippocampal, perirhinal, and temporal polar cortices, and the results
show that they exhibit a pattern of behaviors similar to that reported in
monkeys with focal perirhinal lesions (Barense et al., 2005; Lee et al.,
2006; Lee et al., 2005a; Lee et al., 2005b). These findings have been controversial because at least one group has failed to replicate these findings
(e.g. Squire and colleagues), and memory impairments may have contributed to the pattern of performance. To overcome these problems, we
tested two patients with spared hippocampi and parahippocampal cortices, but unilaterally damaged perirhinal cortex. Subjects were shown two
faces and asked to choose which face was (Exp 1) older or (Exp 2) more
beautiful. The results show that patients were as fast and as accurate as
controls, even when the task was difficult and the stimuli had a high
degree of feature overlap. Next, subjects were asked to choose which of
two faces (Exp 3) or two dot patterns (Exp 4) was most similar to a sample stimulus. The results show that patients were slower and less accurate then controls at all levels of difficulty. These findings show that the
perirhinal cortex is involved in disambiguating visual stimuli in some
tasks but not others.

Memory: Memory Systems

F118
ANALOGY: AN FMRI ANALYSIS OF HIPPOCAMPAL LEARNING
WITH AND WITHOUT AWARENESS Anthony Greene, Keith Hice;
University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee — Three theories attempt to describe
the role of the hippocampus in acquiring complex associations. Configural Association Theory contends that the hippocampus binds groups of
stimuli into a unitary representation. The Declarative Memory Model
maintains that learning complex associations requires explicit awareness
which in turn requires the hippocampus. Relational Learning Theory
asserts that the hippocampus acquires complex associations as abstract
relationships but does not represent the items per se. We report that the
capacity for analogy or transfer is implicit and entails differential hippocampal activity. Our analogy task requires acquisition of a transverse patterning set, and then tests to see if the relations transfer to an unrelated
set. Participants are presented with pairs of faces and learn that A>B
(given faces A&B choose A) and B>C. Only the experimental group is
trained on the transverse patterning pair C>A. All are concurrently
trained on an unrelated set X>Y and Y>Z. At test all trials are unreinforced: A?B, B?C, A?C, X?Y, Y?Z, X?Z. Analogy was observed when the
experimental group chose Z>X at greater frequency than controls who
always chose X>Z. Fast ER-fMRI revealed differential hippocampal
hemodynamic responses for both transverse patterning acquired at study
and analogy expressed at test. The hemodynamic response for analogy
occurred in both analogy-aware and -unaware participants. Configural
Learning Theory would not predict transfer or at least not transfer which
involves differential hippocampal activity. The Declarative Memory
model predicts differential hippocampal involvement only when there is
explicit awareness.
F119
A DEVELOPMENTAL FMRI STUDY OF HIPPOCAMPAL
FUNCTION:
RECOGNITION
MEMORY
IN
TYPICALLY
DEVELOPING CHILDREN AND CHILDREN OF DIABETIC
PREGNANCIES Lyric Jorgenson1, Ruskin Hunt1, Kathleen Thomas1;
1
Institute of Child Development - University of Minnesota — Adult neuroimaging studies indicate the hippocampus to be an essential component of
the neural circuitry underlying explicit memory. However, relatively few
neuroimaging studies have investigated the role of this structure in the
developing brain. The current study used fMRI to investigate hippocampal activity during a continuous recognition memory task in typically
developing 9 and 10 year old children and in children who were infants
of diabetic pregnancies (IDMs). IDM children are hypothesized to be at
risk for atypical hippocampal development due to prenatal iron deficiency. During the continuous recognition memory task, stimuli varied in
familiarity (either abstract or concrete) and repetition lag (lag 2 or lag 5)
during an event-related fMRI design. Combined group results demonstrated that new objects activate right hippocampus and bilateral parahippocampus when compared to previously seen (old) objects. The
hippocampus also showed significantly greater activity for a lag of 5
when compared to a lag of 2. The hippocampus did not show differential
activation for abstract versus concrete stimuli. In separate analyses, the
magnitude of the new versus old effect was found to differ between control children and the IDM sample. Furthermore, IDM children showed
differential activation of the hippocampus for concrete versus abstract
objects, which was not observed in the combined group analysis. The
observed effect of new greater than old in children is consistent with the
current adult neuroimaging literature. This study provides additional
insight into the processing of novel and familiar information and the role
of prenatal experience for the developing hippocampus.
F120
IMPACT OF BRAIN DERIVED NEUROTROPHIC FACTOR
VAL66MET
POLYMORPHISM
ON
HIPPOCAMPAL
AND
STRIATAL LEARNING: EVIDENCE FROM FMRI Dima Amso, Fatima
Soliman, Juliet Davidow, Todd Hare, Sarah Getz, Alexander Millner, Kevin

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

Bath, B. J. Casey; Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill
Medical College of Cornell University — A common single nucleotide polymorphism in the human Brain Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF)
gene, resulting in a valine (Val) to methionine (Met) substitution at codon
66 in the prodomain (Val66Met), has been shown to lead to hippocampaldependent memory impairment in mouse (Chen et al., 2006) and human
(Egan et al., 2003). BDNF is implicated in the neuronal remodeling that
supports learning and memory processes. This work uses fMRI to examine the role of BDNF in hippocampal and striatal learning. Adult participants were genotyped for the Val66Met polymorphism and scanned,
using a spiral in/out sequence on a GE 3T scanner, as they participated in
a learning task that integrates association- and frequency-based learning
(Amso et al., 2005). Participants are presented with sequential cue and
target stimuli and simply respond to target identity. The paradigm is
such that 2 cues predict 3 targets with varying probabilities. Simultaneously, we vary the frequency of target presentation, independent of
associations with cues. Responses to novel and frequent items are initially equivalent and become slower to novel, and faster to frequentlypresented items, as the structure is learned. Consistent with previous
work (Amso et al., 2005), we show increased caudate activity to infrequent relative to frequent targets and increased hippocampal activity to
infrequent relative to frequent cue-target associations. Current data also
suggest that Met carriers show impairments specific to hippocampaldependent associative learning. Results will be discussed in the context of
interactions between hipopcampal and striatal learning systems, as well
as their supporting cellular and molecular mechanisms.
F121
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL
EVIDENCE
FOR
TRANSFER
APPROPRIATE PROCESSING: ROLE OF MEMORY FOR
PERCEPTUAL GROUPING PROCESSES, GLOBAL SHAPES, AND
LOCAL CONTOURS IN VISUAL OBJECT COGNITION Haline E.
Schendan1,2, Marta Kutas3; 1Tufts University, 2Massachusetts General
Hospital-NMR Martinos Center; Boston University, 3University of California,
San Diego — Categorization of visual objects entails object model selection, matching a percept to representations of structural knowledge in
long-term memory, but the representational format is largely unknown.
People categorize previously experienced objects more quickly and accurately than new objects. Transfer appropriate processing accounts
attribute this memory benefit to reactivation of identical neural processes
from the initial to later encounters. In two experiments, event-related
potentials (ERPs) to degraded objects were recorded during an indirect
memory test to isolate transfer of perceptual processes from overlap of
visual features between experiences. Results revealed transfer of both but
at different times. In direct support of transfer appropriate processing
accounts, an occipitotemporal P200 showed implicit memory modulation
to items for which similar perceptual grouping processes were repeatedly
engaged but not to items that merely reinstantiated features. After 500
ms, memory modulation of a late positive complex, indexing secondary
categorization processes and recollection, was sensitive to local contour
changes. In between, a frontocentral N350, indexing object model selection and implicit memory, showed memory modulation when the same
global shape and parts were reactivated, regardless of local contour differences. The representations supporting model selection include knowledge beyond local contours and about higher-order perceptual
structures. The overall ERP findings show the format of visual memory
representations varies across time with the specific processing and memory system engaged.
F122
MEDIAL
TEMPORAL
LOBE
AND
BASAL
GANGLIA
CONTRIBUTIONS TO LEARNING AND FLEXIBLE TRANSFER
Daphna Shohamy, Anthony D. Wagner; Stanford University — Converging
evidence suggests that the medial temporal lobe (MTL) and the basal
ganglia (BG) support two distinct memory systems. The MTL supports
rapid learning of single episodes. The basal ganglia (BG) support feed-

217

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

back-based incremental learning of stimulus-response associations.
Recent fMRI studies suggest both systems may contribute to learning,
either in parallel, or in a competitive interaction. These findings raise
important questions regarding the consequences for learning based on
one system vs. the other, in terms of the subsequent representation of
knowledge. To address this issue, we used functional imaging (fMRI) to
examine MTL and BG activity while subjects engaged in a two-phase
learning and flexible transfer task. Subjects first engaged in a feedbackbased associative learning task, followed by a transfer phase, where subjects were probed to flexibly use previously learned knowledge in a new
context. Results indicated changes in both MTL and BG during learning,
with a negative relation between them. Furthermore, MTL activity during learning was correlated with subjects’ ability to flexibly transfer. Flexible transfer was not correlated with BG activity. These results suggest a
tradeoff between neural systems during learning, with greater MTL
activity related to decreased BG activity. Which system is more engaged
during learning has important implications for the representation of
knowledge. Specifically, greater recruitment of MTL mechanisms during
associative learning is related to enhanced flexibility at transfer. By contrast, BG-based learning mechanisms appear to contribute more generally to incremental, stimulus-response learning.
F123
EFFECTS
OF
PRELIMBIC
CORTEX
LESIONS
ON
INTERDIMENSIONAL TRANSFER IN A BILATERAL CLASSICAL
CONDITIONING TASK Kristin Mauldin, Robin Thomas, Stephen Berry;
Miami University — We investigated whether infusion of Procaine into
the prelimbic cortex impairs interdimensional transfer on a unidimensional categorization task. Using a bilateral classical conditioning paradigm, rabbits categorized bivariate auditory stimuli by blinking either
their right or left eye. The learning phase required the rabbits to categorize the tones according to a simple, unidimensional rule. The conditioned stimuli varied in starting pitch and magnitude of upward sweep
in frequency. The relevant dimensions were counterbalanced during the
learning phase. Once the rabbits had reached criterion the rule changed
requiring them to categorize to the previously irrelevant dimension.
Much like the WCST, this task should depend upon the areas responsible
for flexible rule switching, namely the prelimbic cortex in the rodent. For
the pre-training group, Procaine was infused into the prelimbic cortex
(Brodmann’s Area 32) before any training had begun. For the post-training lesion group, Procaine was infused after the initial training but before
the interdimensional transfer. Learning rates were compared between the
lesion groups and a sham control that had implants but no Procaine. Preliminary results are presented here.
F125
TASK CONTEXT AND MEMORY ACCESSIBILITY IN FREE
RECALL Sean Polyn1, Neal Morton1, Dov Kogen1, Kenneth Norman2,
Michael Kahana1; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2Princeton University — A
series of free-recall experiments investigated the role of task information
in guiding memory retrieval. Words were encoded using one of three
judgments: pleasantness, size, and living / nonliving. In some lists the
encoding task was consistent throughout, while in others the identity of
the encoding task switched within the list. A robust "switch-cost'' (an
increased reaction time to respond to an item presented after a taskswitch) was observed during the encoding period, usually taken as evidence that a task representation is being updated. Analyses of recall transitions and serial-position effects suggest that the context of the encoding
task exerts a strong influence on the organization of memory. Specifically, subjects were more likely to make transitions during recall among
items encoded with the same task. Furthermore, we have identified a
"recall switch-cost''; an increased inter-response latency when subjects
make recall transitions between items studied with different tasks. In certain cases, a shift in encoding task caused enhanced recall of succeeding
items, suggesting a reduction in proactive interference from items studied before the shift. This pattern of results suggests that the encoding task

218

Memory: Memory Systems

contributes strongly to subjects' inner mental context and --- through this
--- influences how memories are accessed during retrieval. Finally, we
report the electrophysiological correlates (measured using EEG) of these
task-related effects, including event-related analyses of task-related activity during encoding, and of within-task and between-task transitions
during recall.
F126
DISSOCIATING THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF RECOGNITION
MEMORY IN HEALTHY OLDER ADULTS USING PICTURES AND
WORDS Joshua D. McKeever1,2,3, Brandon A. Ally1,2,3, Jill D. Waring1,2,3,
Ellen H. Beth1,2,3, Andrew E. Budson1,2,3; 1Edith Nourse Rogers Memorial
Veterans Hospital, Bedford MA; 2Boston University, Boston MA; 3Brigham &
Women’s Hospital, Boston MA — Behavioral studies of recognition memory have shown increased recollection of pictures over words. Research
suggests that this picture superiority effect is also evident in healthy
older adults. However, reports debate whether older adults base recognition memory decisions on an increased sense of familiarity with the test
item or on specific recollection of the studied item. Event-related potentials (ERPs) have proven useful in dissociating these memorial processes.
A recent study from our laboratory involving young adults showed that
although studied words enhanced early frontal positivity associated with
familiarity, studied pictures enhanced the parietal effect associated with
recollection. An electrophysiological investigation into the memorial processes of older adults might elucidate which processes allow them to
remember, and whether those processes differ for pictures versus words.
Using methodology from our previous study, we systematically varied
pictures and words at study and test. Seventeen young adults and seventeen older adults performed four study-test phases (Word-Picture, Picture-Word, Word-Word, Picture-Picture), each consisting of 50 study
items and 100 test items (50% old). Data are currently being analyzed. We
hypothesize that older adults will show enhanced parietal activity for
studied pictures compared to words, suggesting that older adults also
exhibit greater recollection for pictures versus words. However, in a comparison with young adults, we hypothesize that although the early frontal effect associated with familiarity will be similar in older adults, the
parietal effect associated with recollection will be less robust in older
individuals. Results will be discussed in light of neuroimaging data and
cognitive theories of aging.
F127
DOES PARIETAL CORTEX SUPPORT EPISODIC MEMORY?
EVIDENCE FROM FOCAL LESION PATIENTS Patrick
Davidson,
David Anaki, Elisa Ciaramelli, Melanie Cohn, Alice Kim, Kelly Murphy, Angela
Troyer, Brian Levine, Morris Moscovitch; Rotman Research Institute,
Baycrest — Functional neuroimaging studies often show considerable
activity across the parietal lobe during episodic memory tasks, leading
some researchers to suggest that parietal cortex (both medial and lateral
regions) plays a heretofore underappreciated role in episodic memory.
We tested this hypothesis by examining episodic memory in twelve focal
parietal lesion patients (who showed minimal aphasia and neglect). We
focused on the lateral posterior parietal region, because medial parietal
lesions often extend into the posterior cingulate and retrosplenial regions,
which are well established as critical for episodic memory. In our examination of the patient cases, we found little evidence that damage to lateral
posterior parietal cortex yields severe episodic memory impairment.
There was some evidence, however, that lateral posterior parietal damage may impair some aspects of retrieval or post-retrieval processing. We
discuss how the focal lesion data relate to functional neuroimaging data,
in order to evaluate several hypotheses about what role, if any, parietal
cortex may play in episodic memory.
F128
SIMULATING PROPERTIES OF ABSTRACT CONCEPTS Christine
Wilson1, W. Kyle Simmons2, Alex Martin2, Lawrence Barsalou1; 1Emory
University, 2National Institute of Mental Health — How do we understand
the abstract concepts that structure our complex world? Previous func-

Memory: Other

tional neuroimaging evidence suggests that abstract concepts are processed exclusively in left-lateralized language systems. These
experiments, however, have often used tasks that do not require deep
conceptual processing. We propose that the meaning of an abstract concept is represented by simulating property-specific information captured
from real-world situations in which the concept was experienced. To
assess this proposal, we developed a new paradigm that required participants to process the same two abstract concepts (convince and arithmetic) repeatedly in meaningful contexts. We predicted that propertyspecific brain regions relevant to the meanings of the abstract concepts
would become active, not just language areas. One specific prediction
was that the network of brain areas involved in theory of mind tasks,
including medial prefrontal cortex and superior temporal sulcus, would
be active when participants processed the abstract concept convince,
because simulating mental states is a central property of this concept. On
the other hand, processing numerical information should be significant in
representing the abstract concept arithmetic, so we predicted that we
would observe activation in intraparietal sulcus and posterior parietal
areas when participants processed this concept. Our results confirmed
that distributed brain regions associated with the relevant properties of
abstract concepts become active when processing them. These findings
suggest that simulating the specific content of an abstract concept, as
opposed to accessing linguistic information, is critical in representing its
meaning. Furthermore, the paradigms used to study abstract concepts
should be carefully considered.
F129
PROBABILISTIC
LEARNING
OF
SOCIAL
CUES
IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA Katalina McInerney1,2, Barbara Schwartz1, Lauren
Ullrich1, Stephen Deutsch1; 1Georgetown University Medical Center, 2The
Catholic University of America — Learning of stimulus-response associations in the presence of feedback is relatively intact in the weather prediction task in schizophrenia. In this task, combinations of cues predict one
of two outcomes according to a probabilistic rule such that some cues are
highly predictive of an outcome whereas others are less predictive. Probabilistic learning is thought to occur without explicit knowledge of cue
associations and to depend on striatal structures. Findings of normal
learning in the weather prediction task contrasts with many findings of
explicit memory failure in schizophrenia. We capitalized on this normal
learning capacity to explore whether people with schizophrenia could
overcome face processing deficits to learn probabilistic rules for social
stimuli. In this research, we used two tasks of probabilistic learning, one
composed of figural patterns and the other of faces. In the face version,
participants viewed photographs of faces and predicted outcomes based
on face groupings. Feedback was provided on each trial. Our results replicated earlier findings of normal learning of stimulus-response associations with figural patterns and extended these findings to learning of
associations with faces. These data suggest that learning of probabilistic
rules for social information can occur despite face processing deficits in
this population. Supported by National Alliance for Research on Schizophrenia and Depression

Memory: Other
F130
EFFECT OF STRESS ON CLASSICAL EYEBLINK CONDITIONING
IN HUMANS Denise Minnebusch1, Oliver Wolf2, Irene Daum1; 1Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, Dept. of Neuropsychology, Ruhr-University of
Bochum, Germany, 2Department of Psychology, University of Bielefeld,
Germany, — Animal studies have documented that stress influences the
acquisition of eyeblink conditioned responses (CR). While male animals
showed a stress related facilitation of acquisition, females performed
reduced learning. Studies in humans indicate that stress impairs declarative memory retrieval. The effect of psychosocial stress of delayed eye-

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

blink conditioning is as yet unknown. The aim of the present study was
to investigate the effect of social stress, triggered by a standardized psychosocial laboratory stressor (Trier Social Stress Test, TSST), on delay
conditioning of the eyelid response. Thirty-two young healthy male subjects participated in this study. Thirteen subjects were exposed to the
TSST, and the remaining subjects completed a control condition. Salvia
was collected before, immediately after, 10 min and 30 min after the TSST
or control task. All participants filled out a mood questionnaire. After
stress induction subjects learned 30 wordlist. Subjects than took part in a
classical delayed eyelid conditioning task with 60 tone-airpuff acquisition
trails (70% reinforced) followed by 10 tone-alone extinction trails. The
stress group showed significantly higher cortisol levels than the controls.
Stress induction led to a reduction in delayed recall of the words,
although this trend did not reach significance. Subjects in the control
group showed significantly higher CR rates compared to the stress group
and a steeper learning curve. The stress group showed fewer CRs in the
extinction relative to controls. The present study showed an impairment
of classical conditioning after psychosocial stress in humans, which
might be related to stress-induced temporary disruption of hippocampal
functions.
F131
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN ERP CORRELATES OF ITEM
MEMORY David Wolk1, Hyemi Chong2, Jenna Riis2, Scott McGinnis2,3, N.
Mandu Sen2, Phillip Holcomb4, Kirk Daffner2,3; 1University of Pittsburgh,
2
Brigham and Women's Hospital, 3Harvard Medical School, 4Tufts
University — We investigated age-related changes in memory retrieval
using event-related potentials (ERPs). Prior work has suggested age-associated memory loss is related to prefrontal dysfunction. Studies of young
subjects have described early (300-700 ms) ERP components, the FN400
and LPC, elicited during item recognition, which may reflect medial temporal processing. A later (800 to 1500 ms) sustained positive potential at
prefrontal scalp sites, the late frontal effect (LFE), is prominent in tasks
which require greater utilization of controlled, strategic processing. ERP
studies of aging have reported preserved early components, but a
reduced LFE, consistent with the notion that prefrontal dysfunction
underlies age-associated memory impairment. In contrast, many functional imaging studies have demonstrated increased prefrontal activity
thought to represent compensation. In this study, twenty-eight young
and 28 elderly subjects performed a difficult item memory task. Differences in ERP response to old vs. new items were examined. Memory
performance was better in young than old subjects (hits minus false
alarms: .57 versus .46). Significant early ERP effects (FN400/LPC) were
present only in the young subjects. Old subjects generated a larger LFE
than young subjects. An interaction between memory performance
(good/poor discrimination) and LFE was found in the older participants,
with the LFE being larger in poor performers. Contrary to prior ERP
studies, our results suggest that on difficult item memory tasks, old
adults may require increased prefrontal processing, perhaps related to
the use of additional memory search strategies to compensate for weak
memory traces (mediated by medial temporal activity).
F132
FAMILIARITY IS SENSITIVE TO PERCEPTUAL MANIPULATIONS
OF INTRINSIC BUT NOT CONTEXTUAL FEATURES – A
RECOGNITION MEMORY STUDY USING EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS. Ullrich Ecker, Hubert D. Zimmer; Saarland University,
Germany — In an object recognition memory experiment, we investigated
the influence of a study-test manipulation of color on ERP old-new effects
associated with familiarity and recollection. Color was either manipulated as an intrinsic feature of the object or as an extrinsic feature of the
background context. At test, subjects made a threefold decision (new,
old-same, old-different). The perceptual study-test manipulation affected
recognition memory ERPs differentially, depending on whether color
was intrinsic or extrinsic. The intrinsic manipulation of color affected the
midfrontal old-new effect associated with familiarity. The extrinsic

219

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

manipulation did not affect the midfrontal old-new effect, but rather
impacted selectively on the parietal recollection component. Although
memory performance was less accurate in the different vs. same condition, it was well above chance in all cases. Moreover, performance was
not reliably worse in the extrinsic vs. intrinsic condition, and there was
no interaction of congruency (same vs. different) and the intrinsic-extrinsic factor, suggesting that the ERP effects cannot be explained by basic
behavioral performance differences. Interestingly, a subgroup of subjects
showed a reversed parietal old-new recollection effect (correct rejections
more positive than hits). The effects on the familiarity component were,
however, uninfluenced by this group factor.
F133
A NAP CONTAINING ONLY NON-REM SLEEP FACILITATES
RELATIONAL MEMORY Hiuyan Lau, Mathew Tucker, Erin Wamsley,
Yasutaka Hirota, Sara Alger, Annie Chaklader, Raphael De Jesus, William
Fishbein; City College of New York — NREM sleep has been shown to facilitate consolidation of declarative memory. Furthermore, as demonstrated
in animal studies, hippocampal processes operative during NREM sleep
appear to play a critical role in extracting relational information common
to distinct memory traces. The present study investigated the effect of a
daytime nap containing only NREM sleep on performance of a relational
memory task. Participants learned two lists of face-object photograph
pairs (AB and BC) separately. The objects (B) were common to both lists
but paired with two different faces. After either a daytime nap or a period
of wakefulness, participants were tested on a force-choice task (AC task),
in which they had to associate faces previously paired with the same
object, followed by retests of the AB and BC tasks. An ANCOVA, with
the average score of AB and BC tasks at baseline as the covariate,
revealed that the nap group (n = 14) performed better on the AC task
than the wake group (n = 17) (F = 4.2, p < 0.05). A repeated-measures
ANOVA on average performance on AB and BC tasks found no significant interaction between condition (nap/wake) and time of test (baseline/test). The results suggest that sleep facilitates processes that
reorganize and form relational links among discrete memory traces sharing common elements.
F134
EFFECTS OF RETENTION INTERVAL ON INCIDENTAL
RETRIEVAL OF EMOTIONAL INFORMATION: AN EVENT
RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Antonio Jaeger1,2, Maria Corona1,
Michael Rugg1; 1UC Irvine, Irvine, CA, 2Federal University of Rio Grande do
Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil — Prior studies indicate that, in tests of recognition memory, ERPs elicited by correctly recognized test items differ
according to whether the items were encoded in an emotionally arousing
or an emotionally neutral study context. These prior studies employed
only a relatively brief (ca. 10 min) retention interval, however. The
present study contrasted the ERP correlates of incidental emotional
retrieval as a function of study-test delay. Pictures of emotionally neutral
objects were encoded in association with either emotionally negative or
emotionally neutral scenes. In a repeated measures design (N=19), half of
the objects were subjected to a recognition memory test 10 min after completion of the study phase, whereas the remainder were tested 24 hrs
later. After the short delay, ERPs elicited by objects paired with emotional vs. neutral backgrounds differed from around 200 ms post-stimulus, the objects paired with the emotional scenes eliciting the more
positive-going waveforms. After 24 hrs, differences between the ERPs
elicited by the two classes of object were still apparent from around 200
ms post-stimulus. Strikingly, these effects differed from those obtained 10
min after study both in their polarity and scalp distribution. The early
onset of these ERP effects suggests that they may reflect a form of memory independent of the conscious recollection of the associated study contexts. The qualitative differences in these effects, as a function of retention
interval, raises the possibility that the encoded objects were subjected to
consolidation processes that differed according to the emotional
attributes of their study contexts.

220

Memory: Other

F135
INFLUENCE OF APOE ?4 AND AGE ON ENTORHINAL CORTEX
VOLUME AND MEMORY RECALL IN OLDER PILOTS Maheen
Adamson1, Art Noda1, Greer Murphy2, Michael Weiner3, Joy Taylor1;
1Stanford University/VA Palo Alto Health Care System, 2Stanford University,
3
UC San Francisco/VA San Francisco — The present study investigates
whether APOE ?4 carrier have smaller ERC volumes compared to noncarriers. The earliest pathological signs of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) are
reported to occur in the entorhinal cortex (ERC; Braak, 1992), a region
strongly associated with memory function like the hippocampus (Squire,
1991; Rodrigue & Raz, 2004). Cross-sectional structural MRI studies show
significantly greater ERC shrinkage in mild AD patients compared to
cognitively normal older adults (Juottonen, 1998). Cognitively normal
older carriers of Apolipoprotein E (APOE) ?4 allele, a genetic risk factor
for AD, show decreases in hippocampus size over time (Moffat, 2000)
compared to non-carriers. In contrast, such decreases in ERC have not yet
been detected (Du, 2006). Cross-sectional findings from our cohort of
healthy older pilots showed that ?4 carriers perform worse than non-carriers during immediate memory recall. Surprisingly, there were no differences in hippocampus size in this cohort. Because ERC is also implicated
in memory recall, the present study investigates whether older ?4 carrier
pilots have smaller ERC volumes compared to non-carriers. Specifically,
we calculated ERC volumes from structural MRI images of 45 pilots aged
50-75 years and examined the effect of age, APOE ?4 and their interaction. We also computed correlation coefficients among ERC volume, hippocampal volume and immediate vs. delayed memory recall. This study
explores the anatomical differences related to AD pathology that may cooccur with differences in memory performance in healthy older adults
who perform complex tasks and are genetically at risk for AD.
F136
MAKING A CASE FOR VERBAL ENCODING ASYMMETRIES:
ABSTRACT VERSUS VERIDICAL SYSTEMS IN THE LEFT AND
RIGHT CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES Karen M. Evans, Kara D.
Federmeier; University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign — We investigated the
implications of hemispheric encoding biases in two continuous recognition experiments in which study words were lateralized to one visual
half-field (thus biasing the encoding stage to one hemisphere) and test
words (to which participants made a manual recognition judgment) were
presented centrally. Letter case was consistent in some study-test repetitions (Same Case: house-house; HOUSE-HOUSE), but inconsistent in others (Switched Case: house-HOUSE; HOUSE-house). Two groups of
participants viewed identical word lists, but were given different instructions regarding the Switched Case test words. Participants in Experiment
1 were told to accept both Same and Switched Case test words as
repeated. Under these instructions, repeated words whose study presentation had been biased to the left hemisphere (LH) were recognized with
equal accuracy and speed for Same and Switched Case repetitions; in
contrast, words preferentially encoded by the right hemisphere (RH)
showed a strong disadvantage for Switched Case repetitions relative to
Same Case repetitions. Participants in Experiment 2 were told to accept
only the Same Case repetitions, and to reject Switched Case test words.
Same Case repetitions were recognized more accurately when their study
presentation had been biased to the LH; Switched Case test words, however, were rejected more accurately when the study presentation had
been biased to the RH. The results of both experiments are consistent
with proposals that the LH is biased to encode verbal material abstractly,
whereas the RH is biased to encode verbal material in a veridical manner
that emphasizes form-based as well as semantic information.
F137
PROCEDURAL-BASED CATEGORY LEARNING IN PATIENTS
WITH PARKINSON'S DISEASE J. Vincent Filoteo1, W. Todd Maddox2,
David Salmon1, David Ing2, David Song1; 1UCSD, 2University of Texas — Previously we found that Parkinson's disease (PD) patients are impaired in
procedural-based category learning when category membership is

Memory: Other

defined by a nonlinear relationship between stimulus dimensions but are
normal when the rule is defined by a linear rule. We suggested that PD
patients' impairment was due to a deficit in recruiting striatal 'units' in
order to represent complex nonlinear rules. In the present study, we further examined the nature of PD patients' procedural-based deficit in three
experiments designed to examine the impact of (1) category discontinuity, (2) delayed feedback, and (3) increased category number. Results
indicated that PD patients were impaired only under discontinuous category conditions but were normal when there was a delay between the
response and feedback, and when the number of categories was
increased from two to four. The lack of impairment in the delayed feedback condition suggests that the nigro-striatal dopamine reward signal
involved in procedural-based category learning is normal in medicated
PD patients. The lack of impairment in the four category condition suggests normal integrity of striatal medium spiny cells involved in procedural-based category learning. In contrast, and consistent with our
previous finding of a nonlinear deficit, the finding that PD patients were
impaired in the discontinuous condition suggests that these patients are
impaired when an increased number of striatal 'units' are necessary to
represent the categories. Theoretically, this deficit might be related to
dysfunctional communication among medium spiny neurons within the
striatum. A plausible mechanism involving deficient striatal interneuron
activity is discussed.
F138
VISUAL ANTIPRIMING AND PRIMING PREDICTED BY
NEURALLY
PLAUSIBLE
MODELS
OF
OBJECT
IDENTIFICATION. Pradeep Ramanathan1, Nicholas A. Ketz1, Rebecca G.
Deason1, Carmen E. Westerberg2, Chad J. Marsolek1; 1University of Minnesota,
2
Northwestern University — Long-term repetition priming is well known
as facilitated processing of stimuli due to recent processing of the same
stimuli. We have recently reported a concurrent effect, long-term
antipriming, which is impaired processing of some stimuli due to recent
processing of others. For example, visual identification of a desk not only
enhances subsequent identification of that desk but can also impair subsequent visual identification of a piano, presumably due to their representations being superimposed. We examined whether biologically
plausible computational models of visual object identification that make
use of superimposed representations of objects naturally produce both
priming and antipriming effects. We further examined whether the
antipriming that occurs in these models mimics the object identification
errors produced when antipriming is exhibited in human behavioral
experiments. Recurrent multi-layer neural networks were first trained,
using LEABRA++, to identify the same set of line drawings of familiar
objects that have been used in previous behavioral experiments. These
networks were then tested in simulated experiments that followed the
behavioral priming and antipriming protocol. Significant priming and
antipriming effects occurred in the networks following one relearning
trial for each of a subset of originally trained (hence “familiar”) visual
objects. These results closely followed the behavioral results, with the
priming effect stronger than the anti-priming effect. Results indicate that
long-term priming and antipriming for visual objects likely reflect ongoing adjustments of superimposed representations, which are simulated
readily in neurally plausible LEABRA++ models.
F139
THE
CONTROL
OF
RECOLLECTION
IN
DIRECTED
FORGETTING: AN ERP STUDY Shu-ching Lee1, Shih-kuen Cheng1,
Daisy L. Hung2, Ovid J. L. Tzeng2,3; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
National Central University, Taiwan, 2Institute of Neuroscience, National
Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, 3Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica,
Taiwan — This study incorporated item-method directed forgetting paradigm with exclusion task to examine the strategic control of recollection.
At study, subjects were presented with Chinese two-character words followed by an “R” cue or an “F” cue, which instructed the subject to
remember or to forget the preceding word. At test, subjects engaged in

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

two blocks of exclusion tasks. The to-be-remembered (TBR) and to-beforgotten (TBF) items were designated as targets and non-targets respectively in the first task, and vice versa in the second block. ERPs recorded
during the test phase were compared across the response categories of
hits to targets, correct rejections to non-targets, and correct rejections to
new items in the two exclusion tasks. The hit rate was higher when the
TBR items were designated as targets as opposed to when the TBF items
were designated as targets. In test phases, the left parietal ERP old/new
effect -- the electrophysiological correlate of recollection -- was observed
for hits to targets in both exclusion tasks, and was reliable for correct
rejections to non-targets only when the TBF items were designated as targets. These findings lend support to the claim that subjects were able to
adjust retrieval strategies according to the level of target memory, so as to
maximize the efficiency of retrieval performance.
F140
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INDICES OF HUMAN SPATIAL
MEMORY: USING A SPATIAL GRID TASK TO INVESTIGATE
EGOCENTRIC
AND
ALLOCENTRIC
REPRESENTATIONS
Jonathan Murphy, Richard Roche, Ciara Wynne, Sean Commins; National
University of Ireland, Maynooth — We report the findings of two experiments investigating spatial memory using a new computer-based test of
spatial relations comparing egocentric and allocentric viewpoints. In
Experiment 1, eighteen participants were asked to remember the locations of eight visual objects, presented one at a time, together with two
landmarks on a 3D spatial grid. 128-channel electroencephalography was
used to record ERPs while participants performed a recognition test of
object location from a number of orientations around the environment.
Landmark presentations cued orientation, and included 0 degrees (same
viewpoint as study phase), 90 degrees right, 90 degrees left and 180
degrees rotation. Early perceptual differences were found in parietal P2
where left and right rotations evoked contralateral peaks. Rotated (allocentric) trials elicited more parietal positivity than 0 degrees (egocentric)
during the landmark cue, but a larger parietal P300 was found during
object presentation at 0 degrees. Experiment 2 tested for the implicit coding of spatial location. Ten participants performed the same task, but
responses were based on old/new judgments of the objects - no instruction to encode spatial location was given. Distractors were presented in
the test block as ‘new’ objects. Latency and amplitude differences were
observed for study objects in correct locations versus incorrect. Source
analyses for both experiments are also reported illustrating various subcortical generators reflecting egocentric and allocentric differences.
F141
COMPUTATIONAL MODELLING OF FAMILIARITY AND
RECOLLECTION: A DUAL-PROCESS SINGLE-TRACE ACCOUNT
OF EPISODIC MEMORY. Andrea Greve1, David I. Donaldson2, Mark
C.W. van Rossum1; 1University of Edinburgh, 2Stirling University — Dual
process theories of episodic memory state that retrieval is contingent
upon two independent processes: familiarity (providing a sense of oldness) and recollection (the recovery of events and context). Neuroimaging studies have reported distinct neural signatures for familiarity and
recollection, lending further support to dual-process theory. However, it
remains unclear whether these signatures reflect activation of distinct
memory traces or different retrieval mechanisms operating on a single
memory trace. This question is important because the alternative explanations have very different implications. The first option necessitates
storage of two distinct memory traces, which further requires accounting
for how these traces are encoded and linked at retrieval. By contrast, the
second alternative does not demand distinct traces. To date it is unknown
whether empirical findings can be accounted for by distinct retrieval processes accessing a single memory trace. Here we present a computational
model that uses a single neuronal network to store memory traces, with
two distinct and independent retrieval processes accessing the memory
store. The model is capable of discriminating old from new items after a
single exposure, and exhibits ROC curves analogous to those found in

221

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

empirical data. The putative familiarity and recollection processes exhibit
distinct characteristics in the model, for example, diverging in capacity
and sensitivity to sparse and convoluted patterns. By demonstrating that
a dual-process single-trace model can account for a range of empirical
findings, this work highlights the importance of distinguishing between
neuronal processes and the neuronal representations upon which they
operate.
F142
TRAINING
MATTERS:
MEASURES
OF
CROSSMODAL
ATTENTION AND MEMORY IN LAW ENFORCEMENT Kasee
Page, Corey Thibeault, Tim Riley , Justin Smallfield, Jill Meyer, Jonathan Page1;
Minnesota State University, Mankato, MN — Police-officers must pay close
visual and auditory attention to information in their surroundings since
they may later have to report on specific items from one or both of these
sensory modalities. This is also true during high-speed pursuits where
the police driver must keep an eye on the road and the vehicle being pursued, while simultaneously listening to his/her partner and the policeband radio. Multi-tasking requirements in this environment raise an
important question, especially when it comes to remembering events and
the sequence of those events: Does training facilitate the shifting of focus
and the subsequent recall of information? We tested personnel from the
London Metropolitan Police Service to see if various levels of driving
training influenced memory recall during an attention-shifting task. Participants were presented standard memory items consisting of pictures
and words (from the Snodgrass and Vanderwart series) and policerelated memory items containing actual pursuit videos and police-radio
transmissions (provided by the Metropolitan Police). Additionally, and
simultaneously, participants were instructed to attend to auditory tones
and colored circles presented as distracters in the opposite modality of
the memory items. Event-related potentials were measured to the presentation of the distracters to ensure participants were indeed paying attention to both tasks. We found that training did have a significant effect on
memory for police-related items. This difference was attributed to training since concentration (measured using event-related potentials) and
natural ability (measured by comparing memory for the standard items)
were ruled out as possible explanations for the results.
F143
BEHAVIOURAL AND ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES
OF CONTEXTUAL PROCESSING IN EPISODIC MEMORY Jennifer
L. Moore1, Sarah Cassidy1, Emma Joyce1, Sabrina Boll2, Richard A. P. Roche1;
1
National University of Ireland, Maynooth, Ireland 2University of Mainz,
Germany — Here we report three sets of experiments which investigate
the influence of both local and global context upon episodic memory and
retrieval. Experiment 1 (n=120) investigated the impact of contextuallysparse versus contextually-rich environments on memory retrieval.
Results suggest that re-instantiation of the learning context, even when
contextually-sparse, can elicit facilitation of recall for episodic information learned in that context. Experiment 2 investigated local context by
varying the backgrounds in a standard Visual Paired-Associates task.
Eighty participants completed a Visual Paired Associates task with a
local contextual background to each pair. All pairs were learned and
tested in a block wherein contextual cues were either congruent or incongruent. Participants showed improved accuracy and faster reaction times
in the congruent context condition compared to the incongruent context.
Experiment 3 (n=12) investigated the electrophysiological correlates of
local context by varying the backgrounds in a standard Visual PairedAssociates task. The resultant ERP waveforms reflected contextuallybased processing, and were enhanced in context-congruent trials. Taken
together, the findings of these experiments suggest that measures of hippocampal-based episodic memory may be particularly susceptible to
facilitation following reinstantiation of context.

222

Memory: Other

F144
THE INFLUENCE OF PRIOR MORAL INFORMATION ON
FEEDBACK BASED LEARNING Priyanka Khanna, Catherine E. Myers,
Mauricio R. Delgado, Martin J. Guthrie, Mark A. Gluck; Rutgers UniversityNewark — Previous studies suggest that perceptions of social and moral
character can influence the mechanisms involved in trial and error affective learning (Delgado et al., 2005). It is unclear, however, how such
declarative moral knowledge impacts simple non-affective discrimination learning. In a discrimination learning task, for example, subjects
learn to choose the correct object in a pair through trial and error. The
goal of this study was to examine performance in this simple learning
task when previous social information presents a conflict with typical
feedback systems. During the decision phase, subjects were presented
with a pair of objects and asked to select the correct one. For each pair of
objects, one of three partners offered advice on which object to choose.
The three partners were depicted to be of praiseworthy, neutral, or suspect moral character, and this declarative information was relayed to the
subjects prior to the experiment via written biographies. Irrespective of
their moral posture, the partners’ advice was always 50% correct. Early in
training, subjects tended to follow the praiseworthy partner’s advice,
even though the advice was random, thus bypassing feedback due to current declarative information. Pre- and post-test analysis showed that participants’ ratings of the praiseworthy partner dropped from “very
trustworthy” to about the same as the bad and neutral partners. In accordance, most participants learned to choose the correct object irrespective
of advice by the end of training. These results suggest that previous
declarative information can influence simple discrimination learning
tasks.
F145
THE ROLE OF SENSORY AND COGNITIVE PROCESSES IN
REPETITION PRIMING IN MUSIC Sean Hutchins, Caroline Palmer;
McGill University — Repetition priming has been shown in many
domains, but its explanation in terms of sensory processes (short-term,
arising from physical stimulus characteristics) or cognitive processes
(slower, arising from learned associations) is unknown. Hutchins and
Palmer (2006) documented facilitation for repeating tones in short melodies; singers exhibited faster production latencies for tones heard earlier
than for non-repeated tones. However, this study did not disentangle
sensory and cognitive contributions to repetition priming. We describe
tests of pitch repetition priming that contrast sensory and cognitive
explanations by altering the physical match between prime and target
tones. As in Hutchins and Palmer (2006), musically untrained participants heard a short melody at a fixed rate (500 ms interonset intervals)
and sang the pitch of the melody’s last tone as quickly as possible. The
tone to be sung (target) was either heard earlier in the melody (primed)
or not, but with different physical (timbral) properties. Singers in both
experiments who responded quickly to the stimulus showed larger repetition priming effects (correlation = -.43, p < .01). Singers formed a bimodal response distribution, with some singers responding closer to one
beat after the target tone (near 500 ms), and some responding closer to
two beats (1000 ms). Faster subjects showed significant repetition priming, whereas slower subjects did not; reanalysis of Hutchins and Palmer’s
(2006) data showed the same results when the prime and target tones
were physically identical. These findings implicate cognitive associations,
rather than a direct sensory match, as responsible for repetition priming
effects in music.
F146
WHY ARE SOME PEOPLE'S NAMES EASIER TO LEARN THAN
OTHERS? Peter C. Pantelis1, Marieke K. van Vugt1, Michael J. Kahana1;
1
University of Pennsylvania — We examined the role of face similarity in
the learning of novel name-face associations. Sixteen faces were synthesized in a four-dimensional face space (Wilson et al, 2002), which had
dimensions that were verified using multidimensional scaling. We found
that subjects more easily learned the names of distinctive faces. When

Memory: Other

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

cued with a face at test, subjects’ accuracy at recalling the proper name
decreased monotonically with the number of studied faces present within
a small neighborhood of the target face. Reaction time showed the opposite effect. Furthermore, recall errors tended to be names associated with
faces that were similar to the target face. These effects were specific to the
face set being learned rather than a general property of the face space.
F147
ADAPTIVE CODING OF REWARD VALUE IN THE HUMAN
NUCLEUS ACCUMBENS AND PREFRONTAL CORTEX Nico
Bunzeck1, Emrah Duzel1,2; 1University College London, London, UK, 2Otto von
Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany — The ability of neurons to contextually scale their response properties is called ‘adaptive coding’ and
has been suggested to be a nearly universal feature of neural activity.
Currently, little is know about adaptive coding of reward value and its
relation to prefrontal functions in human. Using fMRI we show that the
outcome of predicted reward value is adaptively coded in the ncl. accumbens, the medial superior frontal gyrus, an orbital part of the middle frontal gyrus and the hippocampus. The results give insight how efficient
representation of reward might contribute to reinforcement learning and
even more complex behaviour such as decision making. Furthermore,
they support the notion of dynamic and adaptive properties of prefrontal
neurons. Finally, although inferential previous studies including animal
research suggest that this effect (at least in the ncl. accumbens) might be
linked to dopaminergic neuromodulation.
F148
PUNISHMENT BASED LEARNING CORRELATES WITH A
PUTATIVE INDEX OF SEROTONIN IN HEALTHY YOUNG
ADULTS Priya Bolikal1, Catherine E. Myers1, Roshani Patel1, Lauren
Ropp1, Nathaniel Daw2, Mark A. Gluck1; 1Rutgers University-Newark,
2University of London — The neurotransmitter serotonin may be involved
in regulation of mood, and many current antidepressant medications
appear to act by upregulating brain serotonin levels. Montague et al.
(1996) have suggested that dopamine plays a role in learning to obtain
reward, whereas Daw et al. (2002) have suggested that serotonin may
play a complementary role in learning to avoid punishment. To investigate the role of serotonin in learning in healthy young adults, we created
a probabilistic task, in which subjects learn to obtain reward on some trials, and learn to avoid punishment on other trials. For one group of subjects, the reward and punishment learning trials were intermixed; for a
second group of subjects, the reward and punishment learning trials
occurred in separate blocks. In the intermixed condition, a correlation
was found between punishment-based learning and behavior correlated
with the harm avoidance (HA) score on Cloninger’s Tri-dimensional Personality Questionnaire (TPQ), which has been postulated to be an index
of serotonin function. In the blocked condition, this correlation was no
longer evident. Neither condition showed a correlation between rewardbased learning and the novelty-seeking (NS) score of the TPQ, which has
been postulated to be an index of dopamine function. This suggests that,
even in healthy adults, there may be a correlation between serotonin levels and learning to avoid punishment. One implication is that individuals
with disrupted serotonin levels may be impaired at learning to avoid
punishment, which might be one contributing factor in depression.

223

Monday, May 7, 1:00 - 3:00 PM

224

Memory: Other

Poster Session G
Higher level cognition: Disorders
G1
P300 ASYMMETRY AND POSITIVE SYMPTOMS’ SEVERITY: A
STUDY IN THE EARLY STAGE OF A FIRST EPISODE OF
PSYCHOSIS Louis Renoult1, Marie Prévost1, Mathieu Brodeur2, Claire
Lionnet3, Ridha Joober1, Ashok Malla1, J.Bruno Debruille1; 1McGill University,
2Université de Montréal, 3Douglas Hospital Research Center — The amplitude
of the P300 event-related potential (ERP) has been reported to be reduced
over left compared to right temporal sites in schizophrenia patients. This
left-temporal P300 reduction has been associated with positive symptoms’
severity and gray matter reduction in the left superior temporal gyrus.
Moreover, P300 asymmetry and related anatomical changes seem to
increase with the evolution of the disease. We investigated a group of
patients with a first episode of schizophrenia spectrum psychosis, a group
of non-schizophrenia first-episode psychosis and a group of normal controls to see if P300 amplitude asymmetry over temporal sites already exists
at the time of presentation for treatment. All subjects had their ERP
recorded during an auditory oddball task (Debruille et al., 2005). Relative
to normal control subjects, no P300 asymmetry was found in any of the
FEP groups, possibly because of relatively recent onset of their symptoms
and their young age. Nevertheless, a correlation between P300 asymmetry
itself (the subtraction of the amplitude of the P300 at the left temporal site
from the amplitude of the P300 at the right temporal site) and positive
symptoms' severity was already present in the schizophrenia spectrum
FEP group. On the other hand, P300 asymmetry was correlated with worse
global functioning scores (GAF) in the schizophrenia spectrum FEP
patients, a good predictor of poor outcome. Globally, these results
strengthen both the specificity of the P300 asymmetry index to schizophrenia and its sensitivity to the disease progression.
G2
DISSOCIATIONS
BETWEEN
SENSORY,
MOTOR,
AND
CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE OF MANIPULABLE OBJECTS
Bradford Z. Mahon1,2, Gioia A.L. Negri3, Alina Menichelli4, Anna Sverzut4,
Alfonso Caramazza1,2, Raffaella Rumiati3; 1University of Trento, Italy, 2Harvard
University, 3SISSA International School for Advanced Studies, Trieste, 4Azienda
Ospedaliera Ospedali Riuniti di Trieste; SISSA International School for
Advanced Studies, Trieste, Italy — An unselected group of 37 patients with
unilateral lesions was administered four tasks involving the same 29
manipulable objects: Object Naming (Task 1); Pantomime Recognition
(Task 2); Object Use (Task 3) and Pantomime Imitation (Task 4). A group
of neurologically normal participants (n = 35) matched to the patient
group on age and education was also administered the same tasks with the
same objects. Within the group of patients, we observed significant positive correlations between performance on Tasks 2 and 4, and between
Tasks 1 and 3. These correlations are consistent with Embodied Cognition
Theories stating that the same neural representations subserve both action
recognition and action production (Tasks 2 and 4) and object recognition
and action production (Tasks 1 and 3). However, dissociations in performance across tasks within patients (referenced to control performance)
lead to different conclusions. We observed patients who were differentially impaired on Task 2 but not on Task 3, as well as the reverse dissociation. A second double dissociation was observed between patients who
were impaired for Task 3 but who were within the normal range on Task 1,
and patients who were impaired for Task 1 but within the normal range on
Task 3. The dissociations between tasks observed within the single case
analyses cannot be accounted for by Embodied Cognition Theories. This

conclusion has important consequences for interpreting functional neuroimaging evidence demonstrating that motor relevant structures are
automatically activated when subjects observe the actions of other individuals as well as manipulable objects.
G3
PACING TIME: MODULATION OF TIME ESTIMATION AND
REPRODUCTION BY STN DEEP BRAIN STIMULATION IN
PARKINSON´S DISEASE Lars
Wojtecki1,
Saskia
Elben1,
Lars
1
1
1
Timmermann , Silke Jörgens , Stefan Groiss , Martin Südmeyer1, Markus
Ploner1, Volker Sturm2, Michael Niedeggen3, Alfons Schnitzler1; 1HeinrichHeine University Duesseldorf, 2University of Cologne, 3Freie Universität
Berlin — Motor timing is an important issue of basal ganglia function. As
time estimation can be impaired in Parkinson´s Disease (PD) basal ganglia
may also participate in cognitive representation of time. Recent studies
provided evidence for a frequency dependent modulatory impact of deep
brain stimulation (DBS) on cognitive circuits involving the subthalamic
nucleus (STN). It is not known whether DBS frequency settings modulate
time estimation in patients with PD. We examined a time production and
reproduction paradigm for time intervals of 5 and 15 seconds, unpaced
tapping and time discrimination for time intervals around 1200 milliseconds in a double-blind randomised design in 12 PD-patients three or more
months after bilateral electrode-implantation into the STN. 12 healthy subjects served as controls. After overnight withdrawal of dopaminergic medication we randomly changed stimulation frequency between no
stimulation, 10 Hz and &#8805;130 Hz . Statistical analysis showed underestimation in time production and reproduction especially in the 15 second
interval in PD patients and a significant increase of this effect by low frequency stimulation compared to no stimulation and &#8805;130 Hz stimulation. Tapping tasks and time discrimination in the 1200 ms range were
not significantly different between the groups. This study provides first
evidence for a modulatory effect of different frequency settings in STNDBS on time representation tasks in the 5 to 15 seconds domain but not for
tasks in the one second range. The basal ganglia seem to participate in the
cognitive representation of longer time intervals and STN-DBS modulates
these non-motor aspects of timing.
G4
MEMORY FOR ACTION EVENTS IN SUBJECTS WITH ASPERGER
SYNDROME Tiziana Zalla1, Elena Daprati2, Pauline Chaste3, Daniele Nico4,
Marion Leboyer3; 1Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France, 2IRCCS Fondazione
Santa Lucia, Roma, Italy, 3Hospitalo-Universitaire de Psichiatrie, Créteil, France,
4
Università La Sapienza, IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Roma, Italy — Theoretical models claim that the same cognitive mechanism required for
attributing thoughts and feelings to others is also necessary for attributing
mental states to self (Frith and Happé, 1999). However, while the inability
to attribute mental states to others has been extensively documented in
individuals with autism, fewer studies have addressed the issue whether
self-knowledge processing is preserved. Studies in cognitive psychology
have shown that recall of sentences describing previously performed
actions is enhanced compared to recall of heard-only action-phrases
(enactment effect, see Engelkamp, 1998, for a review). First-person knowledge which is constitutive of the autobiographical memory should therefore benefit of the enactment effect. In the present study, we investigated
the ability of a group of subjects with Asperger syndrome in remembering
whether they or another person had performed certain actions. Preliminary results show that although the enactment effect is present in patients
with autism, their ability in consciously discriminating performed and
observed actions might be selectively disrupted as compared to a matched

225

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

control group. These findings suggest the automatic/implicit nature of
the enactment effect is relatively spared in individuals with Asperger
syndrome while a defective source-memory might reflect an impairment
at the level of the conscious processing of self-knowledge.
G5
POWER SPECTRAL ANALYSIS REVEALS DECREASED DELTA
SYNCHRONISATION IN SCHIZOPHRENIA AND BIPOLAR
DISORDER DURING AN AUDITORY ODDBALL TASK Patricia
Bestelmeyer; University of Aberdeen — The auditory P300 has been proposed to be a potential trait marker for schizophrenia. However, it has
been shown that this P300 abnormality is not specific to schizophrenia
but can also be found in patients with other types of psychiatric illnesses
such as bipolar disorder. The purpose of this study was to explore which
EEG frequency band(s) may be responsible for the P300 amplitude
decrease in these psychiatric conditions and to determine whether the
pattern of abnormal spectral dynamics in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder can dissociate the two illnesses. The P300 amplitude and eventrelated (de-) synchronisation (Pfurtscheller & Aranibar, 1977) in response
to oddball (OB) trials in the ranges of delta (0.1-4 Hz), theta (4-8 Hz),
alpha-1 (8-10 Hz) and alpha-2 (10-12 Hz) were analyzed in 22 patients
with schizophrenia, 19 bipolar patients and 37 healthy controls. All participant groups showed strong correlations between the P300 amplitude
and the magnitude of synchronisation in the delta range but no other frequency band. Further, patients with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
displayed significantly decreased delta synchronisation compared with
healthy controls to OB trials. No other spectral abnormalities in the studied frequency ranges were observed in these patient groups. As with the
P300 amplitude, investigating the spectral properties of the EEG was not
able to distinguish between the two psychiatric groups which adds to the
accumulating evidence from other areas (e.g. genetics) that there is substantial overlap between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
G6
THE INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION OF THE
HUMAN BRAIN IS ALTERED IN AUTISM Daniel Kennedy1, Eric
Courchesne2; 1UCSD, 2UCSD; Children's Hospital Research Center, San
Diego — A cardinal characteristic of autism is the imbalance between
socioemotional incapacity and disinterest on the one hand and often
spared or even heightened cognitive capacity and interest in non-social
objects on the other. In control subjects, neuroimaging studies have demonstrated that two distinct large-scale brain networks seem to support
these two distinct functional domains. One of these networks, known as
the Task-Positive Network (TPN), activates during externally-directed
attention-demanding tasks, while the other network, termed the TaskNegative Network (TNN) or default mode (Raichle et al., PNAS, 2001),
activates during social, emotional and self-reflective tasks. Since autism is
largely characterized by deficits in TNN-type processes (i.e., social, emotion, self-reflective) but relatively less impaired, entirely spared, or even
heightened in TPN-type processes (i.e., cognitively-demanding tasks not
of a social, emotional, or self related nature), we hypothesized that this
may be due to dysfunction of the TNN but spared functioning of the
TPN. By examining the intrinsic organization of these two networks in 9
autism and 9 control subjects using resting state functional connectivity
MRI (fcMRI), we confirmed our hypothesis of disturbed TNN but
entirely spared TPN organization, and also demonstrate an altered relationship between the two networks. Furthermore, we find that one region
of the TNN, the medial prefrontal cortex, is particularly abnormal in
autism. Follow-up analyses of this region revealed significantly reduced
functional connectivity with the nucleus accumbens. Together, we suggest that these findings relate to the interesting pattern of spared and
impaired abilities in autism. (Supported by R01 MH36840).

226

Higher level cognition: Disorders

G7
FUNCTIONAL REORGANIZATION FOLLOWING SEMANTIC
MEDIATION TREATMENT WITH OVERLEARNING IN A CASE OF
PHONOLOGIC ALEXIA Jacquie Kurland1, Carlos R. Cortes1,2, Anne J.
Sperling1,3, Susan Lott1, Elizabeth H. Lacey1, Malle A. Tagamets1,2, John
VanMeter1,5, Rhonda B. Friedman1; 1Georgetown University Medical Center,
2University of Maryland School of Medicine, 3National Institute of Mental
Health, 5Center for Functional and Molecular Imaging — Patients with Phonologic Alexia read semantically rich words (e.g, nouns) more accurately
than semantically impoverished words (e.g., functors), suggesting preserved semantic route reading in the face of damaged access to phonology. Patient YCR, a 50-year-old man with Phonologic Alexia, two years
post left parieto-temporal stroke, participated in a behavioral treatment
designed to recruit the preserved semantic route to improve the reading
of difficult words . Two sets of 20 words were trained to criterion; one
trained set was then “overlearned” by receiving continued treatment for
eight additional weeks. Another set of 20 words was not trained. To
assess neural treatment-related functional reorganization, fMRI scans
were obtained pre-treatment, post-treatment, and post-overlearning. Pretreatment, there was equivalent accuracy across the three sets, and no statistically significant difference in activation profiles across sets. Posttreatment, accuracy on the two trained sets increased. Both sets of trained
words recruited larger and more significant clusters of activation in the
right hemisphere, located in right inferior frontal cortex (including
Broca's area homologue) and right inferior parietal lobe, compared with
untrained words. Post-overlearning, YCR showed greater left hemisphere (LH) activation, including perilesional activation in superior parietal lobe, when reading overlearned words compared to untrained
words. Contrasts of both overlearned words and trained-but-not-overlearned words, vs. untrained words, demonstrated a shift in activation to
left anterior superior temporal gyrus, suggesting that some generalization had occurred to non-overlearned trained words. This study demonstrates functional reorganization resulting from cognitive retraining and
suggests an advantage for LH recruitment in alexia recovery.
G8
PARAMETRIC INDUCTION OF ANIMACY EXPERIENCE:
APPLICATIONS TO AUTISM Natacha Sofia Santos1, Nicole David1,2,
Ralf Tepest1, Wolfgang Huff1, Fritz Lehnhardt1, Kai Vogeley1,3; 1University of
Cologne, Germany, 2University of Tuebingen, Germany, 3Research Center
Juelich, Germany — To identify the relevant aspects of animacy perception
and clarify impairments in mentalizing ability commonly observed in
autistic patients we have performed a parametric study in which a series
of computer-generated animations with different degrees of animacy
were presented. A group of patients with Asperger syndrome (N=25)
was compared with a group of healthy subjects (N=25). All participants
watched 3D animations of two spheres moving on a black background.
These animations were constructed by systematically and parametrically
varying potentially relevant kinetic properties for animacy perception
(e.g. direction of movement, approach of one sphere to the other, duration of approach, reaction of second sphere, etc.). In this way the participant’s perception of animacy varied from ”low” (the spheres were
perceived more as physical objects) to “high” (the spheres were perceived as having human-like behaviors). After each animation the subject
rated the degree to which animacy was experienced by making a judgment from “physical” to “personal” (1-4). The task did not depend on
capacities of verbalizing social expressions. Results corroborated our
prior hypothesis that Asperger subjects perceived the stimuli more
“physically” than the healthy subjects. Furthermore, animacy parameters
such as the duration of interaction between characters were perceived
differently for the groups: autistic patients needed stronger physical signals before they perceived animacy. The results of this parametric study
confirm that autism is associated with mentalizing difficulties and clarify
which animacy-kinetic cues contribute to this impairment. This paradigm
constitutes a suitable tool to study the neural correlates of animacy experiences.

Higher level cognition: Disorders

G9
DTI TRACTOGRAPHY EVIDENCE FOR A SUBCORTICAL
CIRCUIT IN A CASE OF VISUOMOTOR APRAXIA Karl
Doron1,
2,3
4
1,3
1
Mitchell Glickstein , Megan Steven , Michael Gazzaniga ; University of
California, Santa Barbara, 2University College London, UK, 3Sage Center for
the Study of the Mind, UC Santa Barbara, 4Dartmouth College — Visuomotor apraxia (VMA) is a parietal lobe syndrome characterized by the
impaired use of visual information during goal-oriented movement. In
the past this deficit has been assumed to be caused by disconnection of a
cortico-cortical circuit linking visual to motor cortical areas. Here we
studied an alternative circuit originally proposed in a 66 year old patient
(Classen et al, 1995) who developed visuomotor apraxia with no obvious
damage to cortex or cortico-cortical fibers. MRI scans in this case had
revealed a subcortical lesion involving the right somatosensory thalamus
and the posterior limb of the internal capsule. In order to study the possible fiber connections that may have caused the deficit, the lesion was replicated in stereotaxic space and used as part of probabilistic tractography
on DTI data collected from 20 neurologically healthy controls. Results
show a direct fiber pathway passing through the site of the lesion, connecting the right parietal lobe to the lateral edge of the right cerebral
peduncle. We suggest that the visuomotor deficit in this case was caused
by interrupting the connections between the parietal lobe and the pontine
nuclei, thus blocking dorsal stream visual information to the cerebellum.
G10
A COMPUTATIONAL MODEL OF IMPAIRMENTS IN COGNITIVE
CONTROL IN CHILDREN WITH CHROMOSOME 22Q11.2
DELETION SYNDROME Carter Wendelken1, Joel Bish2, Tony Simon3;
1
Center for Mind and Brain, UC-Davis, 2Ursinus College, 3M.I.N.D. Institute,
UC-Davis — Individuals with Chromosome 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome
(DS22q11.2) have impairments in visual attention, numerical cognition,
and executive function that negatively impact their development and
have been linked to risk for later psychiatric illness. Data from a modified
Stroop test, a SNARC task, which manipulates spatial and numerical conflict, and the Attention Networks Test (ANT) showed that children with
DS22q11.2 produced greater response costs than typical controls to incongruity on all tasks. However, children with DS22q11.2 also demonstrated
an unusual adaptation to congruent stimuli but did not produce the
“Gratton Effect”, which is an adaptive response to the second of two contiguous incongruent trials in the ANT. We used connectionist computational modeling to examine this pattern of results. A previously
developed connectionist model of cognitive control (Botvinick et al.,
1999) was fit to the data of typical controls in each task. This model posits
that "control" or "context" units bias processing in the circuits that transform sensory information into response decisions, and further posits that
the detection of conflicting information affects subsequent processing.
We show that while the basic model can account for the data of controls,
it is insufficient to account also for the pattern of results children with
DS22q11.2. However, a small change to the model, involving the separation of top-down control into two components, allows for both sets of
data to be explained. This change suggests that a lack of task-specificity
in top-down control may explain the cognitive impairments exhibited by
children with DS22q11.2 in the studied tasks.
G11
SUBCORTICAL APRAXIA: TRANSITIVE AND INTRANSITIVE
GESTURES DISSOCIATE WITH RECOVERY AND LANGUAGE
Maryellen McClain1, Stephanie K. Daniels2, Monique G. Cola1, Pamela C.
DeGeorge2, Anne L. Foundas1; 1Tulane University Health Sciences Center,
2
New Orleans VA Medical Center — Apraxia is a disorder of learned
skilled movement unrelated to elemental neurologic or emotional/
behavioral disturbance. The praxis neural system is generally lateralized
to the left hemisphere in right-handed individuals in a widely distributed
network. The role of subcortical structures, and the degree to which
praxis dissociates from language, remains unresolved. Using a comprehensive neuropsychological test battery and neuroimaging protocol, we

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

examined a series of five left hemisphere damaged (LHD), right-handed
male stroke patients in the hyperacute (3-5 days) post-stroke phase and at
one month. All patients had subcortical lesions on diffusion-weighted
MRI. Acutely, apraxic patients were more impaired on transitive (toolbased) than intransitive (emblematic) gestures, consistent with cognitive
apraxia models. No significant improvement was seen at one month in
either transitive or intransitive gestures, and lesion volumes did not
change significantly. Detailed analysis of the relationship between
apraxia and language test performance in the hyperacute phase revealed
a significant correlation between apraxic production of intransitive gestures and the Western Aphasia Battery (WAB) total score (p=.04), and a
strong trend toward a significant correlation (p = .06) with the Boston
Naming Test (BNT). These correlations were not present at one month.
These patients had lesions localized to posterior subcortical white matter.
These results suggest that disconnection of the inferior parietal lobule
(gesture representations) from frontal gesture production centers yields
transient deficits of gesture production, and persistent deficit in intransitive limb movements. The relationship between intransitive gestures and
language tasks suggests that conceptual knowledge may underlie the
cognitive representations of intransitive gestures.
G12
ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN HIPPOCAMPAL VOLUME AND
COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN CHILDREN WITH CHROMOSOME
22Q11.2 DELETION SYNDROME Tracy DeBoer1,2, Zhongle Wu1,2,
Yukari Takarae1,2, Vy Nguyen1,2, Leeza Gabriel1,2, Tony J. Simon1,2;
1University of California, Davis, 2M.I.N.D. Institute — Children with Chromosome 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome (including Velocardiofacial/
DiGeorge syndromes) exhibit learning difficulties, marked impairments
in the domain of visuospatial cognition, and are at an elevated risk for
psychopathology. Although the specific mechanisms remain unknown, it
is hypothesized that this genetic microdeletion alters neural structure and
function, which results in the observed phenotype. Previous investigations in this population have found global reductions in both grey and
white matter volumes (e.g., Simon et al., 2005). These reductions have
been identified as significant predictors of overall cognitive performance
and behavioral disturbance (Bearden et al., 2004). However, there are
conflicting reports regarding structures within the medial temporal lobe
and their relation to the cognitive/behavioral phenotype (cf. Debbané et
al., 2006; Kates et al., 2006). The aim of the present investigation was to
assess abnormalities of the amygdala and hippocampus in 7- to 14-yearold children with DS22q11.2 and explore associations with cognitive abilities. Neuroanatomical guidelines were used to define borders of the
amygdala and hippocampus bilaterally and volumes were calculated
based on manual tracings of the regions (see Schumann et al., 2004). After
controlling for total grey volume reductions, a significant decrease in hippocampus volume, but not amygdala volume, was observed in the
DS22q11.2 group. Critically, these volumetric reductions were significantly related to behavioral performance on standardized cognitive tests
assessing verbal, performance, and full scale IQ. These findings suggest a
possible underlying pathophysiology for the cognitive deficits observed
in this syndrome.
G13
DOPAMINERGIC MODULATION OF RESPONSE INHIBITION
NEUROCIRCUITRY Meghan Campbell1, Kevin Black1, Dana Perantie1,
Johanna Hartlein1, Susan Loftin1, Deanna Barch2, Tamara Hershey1;
1
Washington University School of Medicine, 2Washington University — Title:
Dopaminergic modulation of response inhibition neurocircuitry.Authors:
Campbell, M., Black, K., Perantie, D., Hartlein, J., Loftin, S., Barch, D., and
Hershey, T. Background: Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative
disease caused by a marked reduction in dopamine and is associated
with deficits in cognitive control. Although dopaminergic medications,
such as levodopa, alleviate the motor symptoms, cognitive impairment
remains. The purpose of this study was to determine the role of dopamine on response inhibition in PD. Methods: During fMRI scanning, 12 PD

227

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

and 17 healthy control (HC) participants completed the Go/No-Go task
of response inhibition for both pre- and post-infusion scans of saline and
levodopa. Behavioral and task-driven regions of fMRI activity were analyzed for possible drug, group, and drug by group interactions. Results:
There were no significant group or drug effects on task performance,
except a decrease in response time with levodopa (p <.05). For the fMRI
activity, however, there were significant task by infusion by drug interactions in the left inferior operculum and left prefrontal gyrus (ps <.05) and
significant task by infusion by drug by group interactions in the medial
frontal gyrus and left putamen-thalamus region (ps<.05). For the PD
group, fMRI task-related activity in the medial frontal gyrus and left
putamen-thalamus correlated during levodopa infusion and were positively associated with non-target accuracy, whereas fMRI activity in these
regions was inversely related to levodopa levels for HC participants.
Conclusion: These results indicate a selective, modulatory role of dopamine in the neurocircuitry involved in response selection and inhibition.
Furthermore, these results suggest that the modulatory effects of dopamine are influenced by the integrity of the dopaminergic system.
G14
AN FMRI CASE STUDY IN PERSISTENT POST CONCUSSIVE
SYNDROME Alina K. Fong-Ichimura, Mark D. Allen, James Larsen, Tyler
Owens, Rachel Kramer; Brigham Young University — In this study, we promote the use of functional imaging as an assessment tool in clinical neuropsychology by means of imaging strategies which optimize the
similarity of cognitive tasks performed within the physical and temporal
limitations of the scanning environment to those performed on standardized paper and pencil tests. We present data from 26 unimpaired control
subjects on fMRI analogs of six of the most commonly used tests in contemporary neuropsychological batteries. These include Raven’s Progressive Matrices, Trails A and B, Facial Recognition Task (Wechsler Memory
Scales-III), Verbal Fluency, Verbal Memory (Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Task), and the Boston Naming Test. We then use this data to address
a current controversy about the physiological basis of Persistent Post
Concussive Syndrome (PPCS), and at the same time highlight the usefulness of our approach on a single subject basis. We present data from a
representative PPCS patient three years post-injury. We compare his performance on a battery of traditional neuropsychological assessments with
his fMRI data from our six protocols. There is a striking correspondence
between the selective deficits he shows on standardized neuropsychological assessments and the deviations present in his fMRI data. These data
not only demonstrate the usefulness of fMRI in addressing theoretical
issues surrounding PPCS, they also contribute to the development of
functional imaging as a viable tool in clinical settings.
G15
THE EFFECT OF DUAL-TASK ENGAGEMENT ON RESPONSESELECTION INTERFERENCE IN AGING AND ALZHEIMER’S
DISEASE Elena K. Festa, Brian R. Ott, William C. Heindel; Brown
University — Previous studies suggesting that one of the earliest cognitive changes in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) may be a breakdown in inhibitory processing have utilized tasks (such as the Stroop task) that
primarily involve competition at the sensory-selection stage, rather than
tasks (such as the Simon task) that primarily involve competition at the
response-selection stage. In the Simon task, stimulus-response pairings
are either spatially congruent or spatially incongruent, and participants
must inhibit pre-potent responses to location information. The purpose of
this study was to investigate (1) the relative deficits in response-selection
inhibitory processes with aging and AD and (2) the effect of dual-task
engagement of the visuomotor response system in a continuous tracking
task on the magnitude of the Simon effect. Under single-task conditions,
the young and elderly control groups demonstrated comparable Simon
effects while the AD group demonstrated a significantly larger Simon
effect, suggesting a breakdown in response-selection inhibitory processes
with AD but not age. Under dual-task conditions, all groups exhibited
overall slowing of response times, consistent with reduced attentional

228

Higher level cognition: Disorders

resources for the task. Although the visuomotor task did not influence
the Simon effect in either control group, the AD group demonstrated a
normalization of the level of interference that was driven by a relatively
smaller increase in response times to the incongruent than the congruent
condition. These results suggest that AD patients display increased sensitivity to the interference of pre-potent responses that can be minimized
by continuous engagement of the response selection system through a
secondary tracking task.
G16
A COMPARISON OF SVM AND GLM IN THE ANALYSIS OF FMRI
DATA FROM INDIVIDUALS WITH AUTISM Arielle
Schmidt,
Catherine Hanson, Stephen Hanson; Rutgers University — There is increased
interest in using support vector machine (SVM) classifiers to analyze
fMRI data. SVM classifiers may be more sensitive to differences in brain
activity than a general linear model (GLM) analysis because SVM can
generalize more accurately and is successful in classifying datasets with
high dimensionality. In this study we compare analysis of fMRI data
using an SVM classifier with that produced by GLM. The data were
obtained from individuals with autism as they performed tasks in which
a cue (eye gaze or arrow) was used to direct attention. Our expectation
that the SVM classification would show greater sensitivity to differences
in brain activity than did a GLM analysis was confirmed. Since a prominent trait of autism spectrum disorders is the inability to interpret facial
cues and expressions, the increased sensitivity of SVM analysis allows us
to better quantify the underlying differences in brain activity in autistic
individuals.
G17
REFLEX SYMPATHETIC DYSTROPHY (RSD) AND OBSESSIVECOMPULSIVE DISORDER (OCD): NOVEL EXPERIMENTAL
APPROACHES Lisa E. Williams, Vilayanur S. Ramachandran; UCSD — Reflex
Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD) is a chronic syndrome wherein pain
resulting from a relatively trivial injury becomes amplified (partly
through sympathetic mechanisms) and persists long after the initial
injury has healed. Based on an evolutionary hypothesis we irrigated the
ears of these patients with cold water to produce vestibular caloric stimulation accompanied by nystagmus, which produced a striking reduction
of pain. No such reduction occurred in two placebo control conditions
(body-temperature stimulation; ice applied to the forehead). Multiple
stimulations in a short amount of time induced a longer period of
reduced pain. We postulate that caloric stimulation activates vestibular
neurons which then “mask” the sympathetic pain in the adjacent insular
cortex. We are currently testing whether repeated caloric stimulations
will permanently abolish pain and whether other kinds of chronic pain
(e.g., thalamic pain) improve after stimulation. We also explored the role
of the mirror neuron system in OCD characterized by obsessive ritual
hand washing after the patient touches a shoe or doorknob. We found
this revulsion and urge to wash occurred even when the patient watched
another person touch a doorknob, implicating the mirror neuron system
in the anterior cingulate and/or insula in empathy for disgust. Additionally, the patient felt dramatic relief from anxiety and revulsion when
washing her own hand after watching someone else touch the knob. Paradoxically, a lesser reduction of revulsion/compulsion occurred if someone else touched a doorknob and washed his own hand. We are now also
including skin conductance response as a measure of physiological
arousal.
G18
TEMPORAL AND FRONTAL BRAIN REGIONS IMPLICATED IN
DYSLEXIC CHILDREN’S AUDITORY WORD PROCESSING
DEFICITS – AN FMRI STUDY Marc F. Joanisse1, Randy Lynn Newman2,
Amy S. Desroches1; 1The University of Western Ontario, 2Acadia
University — Children with dyslexia demonstrate phonological processing difficulties, which have been proposed to be the source of their reading impairment. However, whereas several neuroimaging studies have
identified brain regions implicated in dyslexic children’s reading deficits,

Higher level cognition: Disorders

much less is known about the neural bases of these children’s spoken language deficits. The address this, we examined phonological impairments
using fMRI at 4T. Dyslexic and control children performed a picturesound matching task. On ‘Match’ trials, a picture was shown and the corresponding spoken word was played (picture: CONE, word: cone); on
the mismatch trials we manipulated the phonological relationship of the
target and foil: ‘cohort’ mismatch (CONE; comb); ‘rhyme’ mismatch
(CONE; bone); and ‘unrelated’ mismatch (CONE; fox). A key feature of
this task was that it provided an implicit measure of phonological ability
that emphasized online processing, namely the generation and maintenance of phonological representations and their comparison to an auditory stimulus. Statistical maps were constructed to identify groupwise
differences in overall task activation, as well as differences in regions that
showed greater response to mismatch stimuli. We observed key differences in activation in both STG and IFG regions, indicating weakened
access to phonological perception and memory mechanisms in dyslexic
children. We also observed that the dyslexic children showed stronger
activation in inferior occipitotemporal regions, suggesting they relied
more strongly on semantic processing to compensate for weakened phonological processing. The data are discussed with regard to models of
auditory word recognition and phonological deficits in developmental
dyslexia.
G19
POSITIVE
CHANGES
FOLLOWING
NEUROFEEDBACK
TRAINING IN HIGH FUNCTIONING ASD CHILDREN. Jaime
Pineda, Lee Edwards, David Brang, Dong Suk, Jennifer Tom, Carly Birnbaum,
Judith Kaye, Ashley Rork; University of California, San Diego — Autism
spectrum disorders (ASD) occur with wide variation in symptoms and a
devastating impact on social skills. The social behaviors affected resemble those associated with mirror neuron activity during the performance
and observation of actions, and may be how humans understand the
actions of others. An EEG index of mirror neuron activity is the 8-13 Hz
mu rhythm measured over sensorimotor cortex. The present study investigated the impact of neurofeedback training (NFT) on high mu rhythm
(10-13 Hz) in ASD children. NFT was administered to 14 high-functioning subjects randomly assigned to control or experimental groups. The
control group (n=7) received NFT in response to muscle movement and a
random artificial mu-like signal. The experimental group (n=7) received
feedback in response to muscle movement and increases in mu power.
Pre-training assessments included the ADI, ADOS, WASI, QEEG, the
TOVA, Apraxia Imitation Scale, Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist,
and Mu Suppression Index. Most ASD subjects exhibited abnormal EEG
phase correlation and coherence at temporal sites and inconsistent asymmetries at other sites. Following approximately 15 hrs of training, mu
suppression indices showed a distinguishable change in control and
experimental conditions, especially in the social perception condition
where suppression averaged 32.47% for experimentals. Experimental
subjects also improved significantly in their performance in their overall
ADHD scores and in their total omission errors, while control subjects
performed worse. In summary, these data indicate that NFT produces
positive changes in ASD children that are reflected in cognitive and
behavioral measures specific to training sensorimotor rhythms.
G20
DEFICIENT INTRAPARIETAL SULCUS ACTIVITY DURING
NUMBER COMPARISON IN INDIVIDUALS WITH DOWN
SYNDROME Elizabeth Reynolds1,2, Joseph Pinter3, Kami Koldewyn2, Lien
Le2, Kristina Backer2, May Tang2, Susan Rivera2; 1University of California, Los
Angeles, 2University of California, Davis, 3University of California, Davis,
Medical Center — Areas of the human brain in and around the left intraparietal sulcus (IPS) activate during a variety of mathematical tasks
including calculation, estimation and numerical comparison. Additionally, IPS gray matter reduction has been associated with impaired calculation ability. We utilized functional MRI (fMRI) to explore whether
abnormal function in the IPS underlies the numerical processing deficits

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

typical in Down syndrome (DS). Participants were a group of individuals
with DS (mean age=22.73 yrs) and a group of typically developing (TD)
individuals (mean age=15.97 yrs). In the scanner, participants performed
a number comparison task which required an overt verbal response. Participants were either asked to make a magnitude judgment between two
2-digit Arabic numerals of a fixed 8-unit numerical distance (experimental) or a luminance judgment between two numbers of identical magnitudes (control). The DS group made significantly more errors than the TD
group; however, both groups understood the task and performed with
greater than 70% accuracy. Analysis of activation during magnitude relative to luminance judgments revealed areas in the left superior parietal
lobule, IPS, superior and middle frontal gyri and middle temporal gyrus
active in the TD group. The DS group had peaks of activation in bilateral
anterior cingulate gyrus, left superior frontal gyrus and right fusiform
gyrus and cerebellum. Strikingly, the DS group lacked any IPS activation.
These data suggest that the numerical information processing difficulties
experienced by individuals with DS may be due to a lack of functional
specialization for magnitude comparison commonly found in TD individuals.
G21
ABNORMAL FMRI ACTIVATION RELATED TO AUDITORY
HALLUCINATIONS AND THOUGHT DISORDER: IMPLICATIONS
FOR SCHIZOPHRENIA. Cynthia Wible1, Duke Han2, Ryu Hashimoto1,
Alex Preus1; 1Harvard Medical School, 2Loyola University — Auditory hallucinations are common in schizophrenia and are usually experienced as
voices. Patients also often have thought disorder or loose associations.
Because of the linguistic nature of these symptoms, we hypothesized that
measures of thought disorder would be correlated with abnormal activity
in the temporal lobe regions subserving lexical/semantic processing. We
hypothesized that measures of auditory hallucinations would be associated with abnormal activity in speech perception/production regions. A
semantic priming task was used in conjunction with fMRI procedures.
Eleven chronic schizophrenic and matched control subjects were aurally
presented with pairs of semantically related and unrelated words.
Results showed that thought disorder was correlated with abnormal
activity in the posterior left middle temporal, a region thought to be
involved in conceptually driven lexical selection or in the link between
auditory word forms and semantic representations. Auditory hallucinations were also correlated with activity in this middle temporal region,
and in addition with activity in the inferior parietal and inferior/middle
frontal region. These regions are part of speech comprehension/production networks. Results will be compared to those in the literature and we
will present a theory that also accounts for symptom clustering patterns
and other symptoms such as delusions and flat affect.
G22
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL PROCESSING OF SINGLE WORDS IN
TODDLERS AND SCHOOL-AGE CHILDREN WITH AUTISM
SPECTRUM DISORDER Sharon Coffey-Corina1, Patricia Kuhl2, Denise
Padden2, Geraldine Dawson2; 1UC Davis, 2University of Washington — Four
groups of children participated in an event-related potential (ERP) study.
Two groups of children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD),
as well as 2 groups of age-matched typically developing children. One
group consisted of toddlers, 19-20 months old, the other 9- 10 year olds.
Data was collected from 20 scalp electrodes using electro-caps. Participants listened to 3 types of words, words whose meaning was comprehended by the child, words the child did not know, and words that were
played backwards. Ten different words were in each group, each word
was played 6 times, for a total of 180 trials. Stimulus duration was 1000
msec, ISI was 2000 msec. Both groups of children with ASD were subdivided into higher and lower functioning based on behavioral scores of
degree of autism and IQ. Analyses of ERP waveforms further elucidated
differences between these groups. In both age groups, children with
higher functioning autism had similar ERP patterns to typically developing children. Children in the lower functioning autism group showed sig-

229

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

nificant differences between typically developing and higher functioning
autism subjects. These differences were evident at an early window
between 100- 250 msec for the older children, but not until 300-500 msec
for the younger toddlers.
G23
SOCIAL COGNITION IN FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA:
CONVERGING KNOWLEDGE, EXECUTIVE, EMPATHY, AND
MOTIVATIONAL DEFICITS Paul Eslinger1, Peachie Moore2, Shweta
Antani2, Chivon Anderson2, Katie Kwok2, Murray Grossman2; 1Penn State
College of Medicine, 2University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine — Introduction. Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) patients with prominent socialexecutive impairments show progressive loss of social comportment and
goal-directed behavior. We tested the hypothesis that profound social
impairments in FTD are related to pathophysiology in multiple frontaltemporal systems mediating social knowledge, executive resources,
empathy and motivation. Methods. FTD patients diagnosed with prominent social-executive impairments through a specialty care clinic completed measures of social cognition (Theory of mind, social dilemmas),
executive functions (Visual Verbal test, Trail Making, Stroop), inventories
for empathy and apathy (with parallel caregiver ratings) as well as brain
MRI for morphometric analyses. Results. In comparison to age-matched
controls as well as other FTD clinical subgroups, FTD patients with
social-executive impairments showed significant loss of social knowledge, depletion of executive resources, apathy, and decline in empathic
concern as well as perspective-taking. These domains were significantly
inter-related but were not correlated with depression. Voxel-based morphometry identified specific regions of atrophy in prefrontal and lateral
temporal cortices related to social knowledge, empathy and apathy. Conclusion. FTD patients with clinical diagnosis of prominent social-executive impairments show not only degraded social knowledge but also
depletion of executive, interpersonal-empathic, and motivational
resources. This pattern of findings was not evident in other FTD subgroups and was related to multiple sites of atrophy in predominantly
right orbital and mesial frontal cortex as well as right inferior and lateral
temporal cortex. Results support a social cognition model encompassing
interacting social knowledge with executive, empathic and motivational
resources in a large-scale neural network involving right frontal and temporal regions.
G24
CONSTRAINT-INDUCED PHONOLOGICAL RETRAINING IN
SEVERE FLUENT APHASIA: A CASE REPORT David A. Medler1,
Jeffrey R. Binder1, Kyle Capizzi2, Sara Berentsen2; 1Medical College of
Wisconsin, 2University of Wisconsin — We present behavioral and fMRI
data on the effectiveness of a targeted therapy for phonological impairment in fluent aphasia. A 48-year-old right-handed woman (IR) with a
large left parietotemporal infarct presented with severe phonemic
paraphasia. Following traditional therapy, IR showed normal performance on lexical decision and semantic tasks, but exhibited profound
impairment on reading aloud (0% accuracy) and speech repetition tasks
(9% accuracy). IR was given intensive training (3 hours per day for 15
days) on nonword repetition with shaping induced by auditory feedback;
when repetition accuracy reached 70%, training on reading aloud of
words and nonwords was initiated. Reading performance improved
steadily, exceeding 50% accuracy, and generalized to novel items. To
investigate neurophysiological changes associated with this behavioral
improvement, IR performed a reading aloud protocol during fMRI before
and after training. In the pre-training scan, activation occurred bilaterally--with modest left hemisphere lateralization--in posterior frontal and
posterior parietal areas. In the post-training scan, there was generally
more activation, particularly in left prefrontal, perisylvian, and ventral
temporal regions near the lesion, including several activation foci bordering on the lesioned area. These differences were quantified by computing
lateralization indexes (LIs) for the whole hemisphere as well as for frontal
lobe, temporal lobe, and perisylvian (IFG/SMG/STG) ROIs. Whereas the

230

Higher level cognition: Executive functions

whole brain LI was unchanged, activation in the temporal lobe and perisylvian regions shifted substantially to the left post-training, suggesting
that relearning depends primarily on enhancement of processing in
spared LH regions, particularly in perilesional areas.

Higher level cognition: Executive functions
G25
THE EFFECT OF THE ASSOCIATION STRENGTH BETWEEN
ACTION AND TARGET ON FRN AND P300 IN A GUESSING
TASK Nai-Shing Yen1,2, Ying-Ru Lai1, Kaun-Hua Chen1, Hui-Kuan
Chung1, Tzu-Hsin Yeh1; 1National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan,
2
National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan — Previous research suggests that the Feedback-Related Negativity (FRN) is sensitive to reward
valence while P300 is sensitive to reward magnitude (Yeung & Sanfey,
2004). In the present study, FRN and P300 are examined in a guessing
task in that participants were asked to guess which of the four cards
would be presented next. We recorded ERPs for correct/incorrect feedback with a time window from 150ms pre-feedback to 550ms after-feedback. The association between action (pressing a specific button) and
target (a specific card which was chosen) was manipulated to see if FRN
and P300 would be related to the association strength. In the strong association condition (n = 5), the card order was fixed throughout the game.
In the weak association condition (n = 5), the card order was randomly
arranged on each trial. The results showed that FRN peaked around
270ms for incorrect feedbacks in both conditions, which was consistent
with previous studies. However, the magnitude of FRN was identical in
both conditions, which indicating that FRN is insensitive to the strength
of action-target association. In contrary, a larger P300 for correct feedback
was found in the weak association condition. It is important to note that
although the P300 effect was considered to be related to feedback magnitude, in our study the P300 reflected a valence processing because it was
magnified for correct feedback. This is consistent with Hajcak et al.
(2005). Furthermore, we demonstrated that weaken the association
between action and target would attenuate the P300 effect.
G26
SUCCESSES AND FAILURES OF COGNITIVE CONTROL ARE
PREDICTED BY PRE-TRIAL FMRI ACTIVITY Andrew
B.
Leber,
Nicholas B. Turk-Browne, Marvin M. Chun; Yale University — While cognitive control affords great flexibility in adapting to new goals and task
challenges, task switching costs show that the exertion of control is not
always entirely successful. How can the degree of success be predicted?
In this study, we examined the possibility that pre-trial fMRI activity
might reflect the current capability to implement control. Subjects were
scanned while performing task switching; on each trial, a cue informed
them to make either a parity or magnitude judgment on a subsequent target digit presented 1000 ms later. This procedure yielded robust behavioral costs of switching. A fronto-parietal and cingulate “task-switching
network” was identified by contrasting the BOLD responses associated
with switch vs. repeat trials. Within this network, greater BOLD signal in
the single volume immediately preceding the task cue predicted smaller
task switching costs; specifically, greater pre-trial activity led to a selective decrease in response time on switch trials. Using a data-driven
approach, we then searched the whole brain for regions exhibiting this
behavioral interaction with pre-trial activity, again finding only regions
in the task-switching network. Further analyses ruled out contributions
of recent trial history, instead linking the result to gradual shifts in tonic
states. We conclude that one’s moment-to-moment capacity to mobilize
cognitive control is directly measurable in the neural activity within the
control network, and this activity serves as a key predictor of cognitive
control success.

Higher level cognition: Executive functions

G27
CUE VALIDITY MODULATES RESPONSE-RELATED CONFLICT
IN A GO-NOGO INHIBITION OF RETURN TASK David
Prime,
Pierre Pierre Jolicoeur; Université de Montréal — In spatial-cueing experiments with uninformative cues, reaction-time to cued-location targets is
facilitated, relative to uncued-location targets, at short cue-target stimulus onset asynchronies (SOAs) and inhibited at longer SOAs. This latter
effect is called inhibition of return (IOR). Explanations of IOR can be
broadly classified into two groups, perceptual/attentional and responseselection/motor. In the present study we utilized event-related potentials
(ERPs) to investigate the effect of IOR on response-selection related processes. In a visual cue-target paradigm with a long cue-target SOA participants were required to make speeded responses to frequent Go-targets
and to withhold responses from infrequent NoGo-targets. In addition to
the expected IOR reaction time effect, we observed that the fronto-central
NoGo N2 was significantly larger for uncued-location targets than for
cued-location targets. Consistent with previous studies, a dipole source
estimate localized the N2 to anterior cingulate cortex. Recent evidence
suggests that the NoGo N2 arises from a conflict monitoring process sensitive to competition between response alternatives. If so, the current
results indicate that withholding the response on NoGo trials elicited
greater conflict on uncued trials than on cued trials. This suggests that
IOR may arise in part from relatively greater response activation for
uncued targets than for cued targets. Possible mechanisms will be discussed.
G28
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES
OF
EVENT
SEGMENTATION: HOW DOES THE HUMAN MIND PROCESS
ON-GOING ACTIVITY? Richard Sharp1, David Donaldson2; 1University
of Edinburgh, 2University of Stirling — Research using videos of everyday
activities and fMRI has identified a network of brain regions that are sensitive to the perceptually salient boundaries between events (Zacks et al.,
2001). Here we present an electrophysiological investigation into the neural correlates of event segmentation using scalp recorded Event-Related
Potentials (ERPs). Three studies investigate the influence of top-down
knowledge (e.g. activity goal) and bottom-up influences (e.g. object
involvement), on event segmentation. Task knowledge levels were
manipulated by showing participants videos of activities that were familiar (e.g. making the bed), unfamiliar (e.g. setting up a microscope), or
recently learned (building a table). In each case participants were
required to view the videos passively, and then to view whilst making
coarse and fine grained segmentations. Segmentation points were
extracted and overlaid onto passive viewing data to allow ERPs to be
formed time-locked to the segmentation boundaries. Analysis of coarse
grain segmentation revealed a modulation over right-frontal electrodes,
relatively positive going during the processing of unfamiliar activities
and negative going during the processing of familiar and recently
learned activities. In addition, fine grained segmentation was associated
with a modulation over left parietal electrodes, negative going during
familiar and unfamiliar objects relative to recently learned. The ERP differences demonstrate the activation of topographically dissociable neural
components associated with fine and course grained event segmentation.
Moreover, these ERP components are differentially sensitive to the
amount of knowledge and experience that participants have about the
activities being viewed.
G29
DIFFERENTIATING
THE
FUNCTION
OF
POSTERIOR
DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND MID DLPFC:
BIASING POSTERIOR CORTEX VERSUS SELECTING BETWEEN
REPRESENTATIONS. Anson Whitmer, Marie T. Banich; University of
Colorado at Boulder — This experiment examined the hypothesis (Milham,
Banich, & Barad, 2003) that posterior regions dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (pDLPFC) (BA 8/6) and mid-DLPFC (BA 9/46) play distinct roles in
attentional selection. It is posited that pDLPFC is critical for top-down

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

biasing towards task relevant processing by activating regions of posterior cortex (e.g. V4) that process task-relevant information (e.g. color
information). In contrast, it is hypothesized that mid-DLPFC (BA 46/9) is
involved in selecting which of the specific representations are task-relevant representations and should be used to guide behavior. To investigate this hypothesis we used a cued Stroop task. In this task, participants
saw a cue 10.5 seconds before a stimulus. The cue indicated whether they
were to identify the ink color of the subsequently presented word or the
color represented by the subsequently presented word. Consistent with a
role in top-down biasing towards task relevant processes, posterior
DLPFC was more activated before than during presentation of the stimuli. Further supporting the idea that pDLPFC is biasing activation
towards posterior areas processing the task-relevant dimension in the
prestimulus period, color processing areas were activated after a cue to
identify the ink color and word processing areas were activated after a
cue to identify the color names by the word. Also, in line with midDLPFC’s hypothesized role of selecting between specific representations,
mid-DLPFC was more activated at the time of stimulus presentation than
in the pre-stimulus period. These data provide strong evidence differentiating the functions of mid and posterior DLPFC in attentional control.
G30
DISSOCIABLE NEURAL MECHANISMS OF INTERFERENCERESOLUTION: PERCEPTION AND MEMORY Derek
Nee,
John
Jonides; University of Michigan — The ability to select relevant from irrelevant information is paramount to goal-directed behavior. Information
can take various forms from perceptual representations, to memory representations, to motor representations. The efficiency of working memory
is thought to depend upon the capacity to select among these representations. Previous work has suggested that the processes that select among
different forms of representations are separable. However, the mechanisms by which we select appropriate representations and resolve interference from irrelevant representations remain unclear. Here, we modify
a verbal item-recognition task to include either distracting perceptual
information or distracting memorial information. Interrogating proberelated activity related to perceptual versus memory lures produced a
dissociable pattern of results. Whereas perceptual lures activated posterior regions of the brain including occipital and temporal cortex, memory
lures activated medial and lateral frontal regions, as well as posterior
dorsal parietal cortex. These results suggest distinct mechanisms of control depending upon the nature of interference.
G31
PROCESSING OF TASK-IRRELEVANT INFORMATION WITH
POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER (PTSD) Myeong-Ho Sohn1,
Jeong Ryu2, Donghoon Lee3, Byeong-Taek Lee4, Byung-Joo Ham5, In-Kyun
Lyoo6, Namhee Choi7; 1George Washington University, 2Yonsei University,
3
Indiana University, 4Seoul National University, 5Hallym University, College
of Medicine, 6Seoul National University, Medical School, 7Seoul Women's
College of Nursing — Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) develops after
a terrifying ordeal that involves (the threat of) physical harm. Among
other symptoms, people with PTSD repeatedly relive the trauma in their
thoughts during the day and in nightmares. These flashbacks consist of
images, sounds, smells, or feelings, and are often triggered by ordinary
occurrences (i.e., a door slamming or a car backfiring on the street) that
are salient enough to draw attention and yet not the focus of the current
task. In this fMRI study, we asked whether the flashback memory of
PTSD is related to the prefrontal function that filters out or suppresses
task-irrelevant information. Using a spatial version of the negative priming task, we compared a group of survivors of the 2003 subway explosion
in Taegu, Korea, with a control group. Behaviorally, the PTSD group did
not show any sign of positive or negative priming effects, while the positive priming effect was more evident than the negative priming effect in
the control group. The behavioral results suggest that the ability to filter
out distracting information may have been impaired in the PTSD group.
The imaging results of the control group revealed that the activations in

231

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

the frontal-parietal circuits were higher when greater processing load
was required to process disctractors. However, this pattern was not
observed in the PTSD group. The imaging results, consistent with the
behavioral results, also suggest that the flashback memory of PTSD may
be due to inability to suppress or filter out task-irrelevant information.
G32
MULTITASKING
OF
ATTENTION
AND
MEMORY
IN
PREFRONTAL CORTEX. Adam Messinger1, Mikhail Lebedev2, Jerald
Kralik1, Steven Wise1; 1National Institute of Mental Health, 2Duke
University — We recorded single neurons in the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (PFdl) of two rhesus monkeys. On each trial, a visual cue appeared
initially either up, down, left or right of a central fixation point. The cue
then moved smoothly to another of these positions, which the monkey
had to attend covertly, during a delay period, to detect a subtle luminance change. Brightening of the cue instructed a saccade to its initial
position, called the remembered location. Dimming instructed a saccade
to the cue’s final position, called the attended location. Two-way
ANOVA (main effects) showed that neuronal firing rates during the
delay period were significantly modulated by the remembered location
only (10% of 957 neurons), the attended location only (30%), or both
(17%). We calculated each neuron’s preferred direction (PD) for attention
and for memory by vector averaging the firing rates over the four locations. Of the neurons tuned to both attended and remembered locations,
many (35%, 57/165) had memory PDs that were nearly opposite their
attention PDs (150-180 degree differences), twice what would be predicted for a uniform distribution. Thus, this subpopulation of PFdl neurons did not have just one preferred location, but instead were tuned to
both a remembered and an attended location. That is, the cells discharged
when the monkey remembered one location or attended to a distinct,
often diametric location. The results indicate that some PFdl neurons can
simultaneously contribute to the processing of attentional and mnemonic
signals, a phenomenon known as multitasking.
G33
NEURAL CORRELATES OF RESPONSE INHIBITION DEPEND
UPON THE WORKING MEMORY LOAD OF THE TASK. Stephanie
Powell1,2, Sunaina Fotedar1, Joanna Blankner3, James Pekar1,4, Martha
Denckla1,4, Stewart Mostofsky1,4; 1Kennedy Krieger Institute, 2St. Louis
Children's Hospital, 3Tennessee College of Medicine, 4Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine — Studies have shown that the neural correlates of
motor response inhibition may be task-dependent. This study compared
fMRI activation during Go/No-go tasks with different working memory
demands. Sixteen adults (10F, mean age=27.2 years) completed two
event-related fMRI Go/No-go tasks: 1) a “Simple” task which minimized
working memory demands by using only two stimuli with wellingrained stimulus response association (green=go; red=no-go), and 2) a
“Multicolor” task in which 13 different colored stimuli (excluding green
and red) were used (3 no-go, 10 go). For both tasks, Go-activation was
seen in left primary sensorimotor cortex, right cerebellum and bilateral
occipital cortex. For the Simple task, No-go activation was seen in right
pre-SMA (BA6), right middle frontal gyrus (BA9/10), left motor cortex
(BA3/4), left caudate, bilateral occipital cortex, and right posterior cerebellum. For the Multicolor task, No-go activation was evidenced in
broader frontal areas bilaterally and right anterior/posterior cerebellum.
Contrast between the two tasks revealed greater Multicolor No-go activation in right inferior frontal (BA47), left premotor (BA6), bilateral
occipito-temporal (BA19) and right anterior/posterior cerebellar areas.
The results suggest that the neural correlates of response inhibition vary
with task demand, with greater prefrontal and cerebellar activation noted
under conditions of higher working memory load. For both tasks, No-go
activation in the pre-SMA, middle prefrontal areas and anterior cerebellum suggests the involvement of these regions in motor responses inhibition. Increased Multicolor No-go activation in inferiolateral prefrontal
cortex suggests the importance of this region when there is increased
demand for working memory to guide response inhibition.

232

Higher level cognition: Executive functions

G34
PROBING THE ROLE OF POSTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX IN
ECONOMIC DECISION-MAKING WITH MICROSTIMULATION
Benjamin Hayden, Vinod Venkatraman, Michael Platt; Duke University
Medical School — Neurons in posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) signal both
the expected value of orienting to visual targets and the motivational consequences of orienting to those targets (McCoy et al. 2003). These data
suggest that PCC serves to bind motivational information to locations in
space. If so, then microstimulation during the period prior to choice
should increase the likelihood of choosing the target associated with
stimulation. Moreover, stimulation or during reward delivery should
increase the frequency of monkeys choosing the stimulated target on
future trials. We recorded choices made by three monkeys confronted
with two spatially distinct targets associated with equal rewards. On a
subset of trials, we delivered microstimulation to sites in PCC. We found
that microstimulation prior to choice biases choices towards the contralateral target. Moreover, we found that microstimulation during the
reward period increases the probability of choosing the contralateral target on future trials. These results suggest that artificial activation of PCC
neurons enhances the motivational salience of contralateral space, thus
supporting the idea that PCC binds value to spatial locations.
G35
DEPRESSIVE FEEDBACK UTILIZATION: THE ERROR-RELATED
NEGATIVITY AS AN INDEX OF THE ‘CATASTROPHIC
RESPONSE TO PERCEIVED FAILURE’ Robert
Buzan,
Michelle
Phillips, Scott Meek; University of South Carolina — Brain
event-related
potentials (ERPs) were used to investigate whether the error-related negativity (ERN) can serve as an index of the ‘catastrophic response to perceived failure’ (Elliott et al., 1996) present in depressed individuals. Prior
research has demonstrated that the error-related negativity ERP component occurs in response to perceived errors and negative feedback and
may be suppressed in depressed individuals who commit consecutive
errors. It may also serve as an index of the strong emotional response to
negative feedback exhibited by depressed individuals. The present study
served to extend these findings in a college-aged population using a twostimulus autobiographical deception paradigm modified to include feedback. Task difficulty was varied by manipulating the time available to
respond. HD-ERPs were recorded with a High-density geodesic sensory
net (Electrical Geodesics, Inc), and then analyzed using principal components. The ERN was identified in both deceptive conditions, and during
conditions in which errors occurred. Evidence from this study is used to
explore the relationship of inter-trial feedback on subsequent deceptive
responses.
G36
ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES UNDERLYING THE VALUATION OF
SOCIAL INFORMATION Michael Platt, Breanna Gawrys, Benjamin
Hayden; Duke University Medical School — Socially relevant information is
essential for adaptive decision-making and is thus intrinsically valuable.
Nonetheless, the mechanisms underlying decisions about social information remain almost completely unknown. The goal of the present study
was to determine whether the value of social information follows the
same economic principles as other types of consumable goods. Here we
show that humans temporally discount the opportunity to view photographs of members of the opposite sex Moreover, the degree of discounting is inversely correlated with the physical attractiveness of the
photograph, a result analogous to magnitude effects on discounting of
monetary rewards. . These results suggest that the value of viewing social
information is processed in a similar fashion to other rewards including
money. To test this ideafurther, we quantified the financial value of the
opportunity the view photographs of other people using a pay-per-view
task. People implicitly paid money to view photos of physically attractive
people, but needed to be paid to view photos of physically unattractive
people. Finally, we measured the effort subjects would exert for the
opportunity to view photographs. Again, effort scaled with physical

Higher level cognition: Executive functions

attractiveness. Collectively, these results indicate that a common set of
principles guides decision-making about social information and other
goods like food or money. These observations intimate that similar neural mechanisms process social and non-social rewards.
G37
NEURONAL OSCILLATORY ACTIVITY RELATED TO MOTOR
PREPARATION AND EXECUTIVE CONTROL Elisa Dias1, Stephan
Bickel2, Pejman Sehatpour1, Daniel Javitt1; 1Nathan Kline Institute, 2Institute
of Anatomy, University of Zurich, Switzerland — Modulation of neuronal
synchronization may be a fundamental process underlying motor preparation and executive control. In this study, we analyzed the modulation
of oscillatory activity during performance of AX- continuous performance tasks (AX-CPT) that create different expectancies of response that
are reflected in the evoked potentials. AX-CPT is frequently used in neuropsychiatric evaluation, and schizophrenia patients show specific deficits in performance. Neuronal activity was recorded with a high-density
array of scalp electrodes while subjects performed parametric variations
of AX-CPT. Oscillatory activity was analyzed by time-frequency decomposition. Changes in expectancy of response clearly modulated oscillatory activity of alpha and beta frequency bands. The most conspicuous
effect was a fronto-central beta event-related desynchronization (ERD)
that increased with time in the period between cue and probe presentation, suggesting preparatory activity. This ERD increased with the probability of a response and was correlated with reaction time. Gamma
oscillatory activity was strongest in the frontal pole, but was not much
modulated by task conditions. Beta activity desynchronization has been
associated with motor and preparatory activity, and possibly attentional
mechanisms, which are also influenced by modulation of gamma activity. Our data indicate that AX-CPT provides a good model for investigating the underlying oscillatory activity related to these functions. In
addition, studies of modulation of oscillatory activity in executive control-challenging tasks such as AX-CPT may be a good way to evaluate
neuronal dysfunction underlying executive control deficits and preparatory abnormalities in pathological conditions such as schizophrenia.
Support: MH49334 and MH01439
G38
CAUSAL CONNECTIVITY WITHIN A COGNITIVE CONTROL
NETWORK DURING PERCEPTUAL DECISION MAKING Michael
Cole, Walter Schneider; University of Pittsburgh — A consensus from across
hundreds of published studies indicates that a common set of cortical
regions is involved in many kinds of cognitive control demands (Wager,
et al., 2004). These regions include dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC), anterior cingulate cortex / pre-supplementary motor area
(ACC/pSMA), dorsal premotor cortex (dPMC), anterior insular cortex
(AIC), and posterior parietal cortex (PPC). Previous work has shown 1)
these regions form a functional network, as defined by correlations in
fMRI activity during resting state, and 2) activity within this network is
strongly modulated by response selection difficulty during visual search
(Cole, Schneider, in preparation). We used Granger causality, a measure
of effective connectivity, to determine the influences among the nodes of
this cognitive control network during task performance. Further, we separated the motor from the decision making stage in a visual line search
task to distinguish motor response selection from decision making in
general. Results using fMRI indicate that the network is modulated by
abstract, non-motor decision making as decision difficulty increases (i.e.
as foils become more similar to targets), as well as (to a lesser extent) all
other events in the visual search task. The Granger causality analysis
indicated a dominant causal influence from ACC/pSMA to DLPFC, supporting a view that ACC/pSMA monitors the need for cognitive control
and boosts DLPFC activity as necessary. These results suggest that each
event is evaluated by the network, the need for control is determined,
and activity is increased (via ACC/pSMA to DLPFC connectivity) as necessary for task performance.

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

G39
TIME COURSE DISSOCIATION OF BRAIN ACTIVATIONS
RELATED TO INTERFERENCE AND RESPONSE INHIBITION IN
CHILDREN AND ADULTS M. Rosario Rueda, Purificacion Checa;
Universidad de Granada — Two important processes related to the ability
to monitor our actions in order to accomplish goals and instructions are
the inhibition of prepotent but inappropriate responses and the suppression of irrelevant information. The paradigms more widely used to study
these two processes include Go-Nogo tasks, in which holding the
response to particular (Nogo) trials is required in a context of frequent
responses to similar stimuli, and Conflict tasks, in which relevant information is presented together with competing stimulation. Electrophysiological studies conducted with either Go-Nogo or Conflict tasks have
shown quite overlapping effects in the ERPs, suggesting that both processes may be related to the same underlying brain mechanism. In our
study, we have combined the two paradigms in a single task in order to
examine possible differences in the time course of the brain activations
related to the two processes. Our data show that both response inhibition
and interference suppression processes manifest in similar ERPs components (N2 and a more pre-frontal negative component). However, we
found differences in the time course for each of these two processes. This
time course dissociation is similar for 12 year olds children and adults
despite a general delay of the ERP components shown by the children.
G40
CONTEXT AFFECTS BEHAVIOR AND BRAIN ACTIVITY DURING
SACCADE TASKS Kara A. Dyckman, Jazmin Camchong, Jennifer E.
McDowell, Brett A. Clementz; University of Georgia — The present study
evaluated the effect of context on behavior and brain activity in an antisaccade task. FMRI and eye movement data were collected while 36 participants completed three runs in a block design: (1) fixation alternating
with pro-saccades, (2) fixation alternating with anti-saccades, and (3) proalternating with anti-saccades. Using Independent Component Analysis,
a set of task-related data-driven regressors was derived, which were then
used in GLM analyses. Brain activity associated with anti- was compared
to activity associated with pro-saccades under both single task (runs 1
and 2) and mixed task (run 3) conditions. Brain areas consistently found
to be associated with anti-saccades, including cuneus, precuneus, lateral
and medial FEF, SEF, PFC, basal ganglia, and thalamus showed significantly greater percent signal change during the fixation/anti- compared
with the fixation/pro-saccade run. During the pro/anti run, however,
only SEF, FEF, and precuneus showed greater activation during the antisaccade trials. This is a clear demonstration that the saccade-related neural circuitry is affected by context. Behavioral results suggest that performance on saccade tasks is also affected by context. Participants made
more direction errors on pro-trials that followed anti-trials than on protrials that followed fixation. Results from this study indicate that SEF,
FEF, and precuneus, which showed anti-saccade-related activity during
both comparisons, may be more important for supporting this more complex behavioral response. Other brain regions, such as PFC, however,
which showed anti-saccade-related activity during only the single task
comparison, may be more involved in executive control and context
updating processes.
G41
MIGHT
NEGATIVE
PRIMING
MASK
THE
CONFLICT
ADAPTATION EFFECT? Julie Bugg; Washington University — A fascinating question in cognitive neuroscience concerns how the brain controls cognitive control. Conflict monitoring theory (Botvinick et al., 2001)
posits that the anterior cingulate monitors for conflict, heightening control on the basis of its detection. The conflict adaptation effect, wherein
performance is faster on incompatible trials that are preceded by another
incompatible trial (i.e. II trial) as opposed to a compatible trial (i.e. CI
trial), supports the existence of a conflict driven control mechanism.
However, recent findings indicate that such adaptation effects may be
limited to complete repetition II trials (Mayr et al., 2003), leading to the

233

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

notion that repetition priming is the basis of the effect. On the other hand,
conflict adaptation may indeed be occurring on non-repetition II trials,
but is being masked by opposing factors such as negative priming. To
examine this possibility, 62 undergraduates completed an Eriksen
Flanker task, in which the primary methodological features of Mayr et al.
were preserved, though neutral trials were incorporated in the paradigm.
A comparison of reaction times on II non-repetition trials and NI nonrepetition trials revealed a significant 18 ms negative priming effect. In a
second experiment with a larger stimulus set, conflict adaptation was
observed for both repetition and non-repetition II trials. Along with the
findings of Ullsperger et al. (2005), the current results suggest that conflict adaptation effects are not limited to repetition trials, but rather are
revealed on non-repetition trials under conditions that reduce the likelihood of negative priming. Theoretical implications will be discussed.
G42
IS TASK SWITCHING NOTHING BUT CUE PRIMING? EVIDENCE
FROM ERPS Kerstin Jost1, Ulrich Mayr2, Frank Rösler1; 1PhilippsUniversity Marburg, 2University of Oregon — The present study measured
event-related potentials (ERPs) in a cued task-switching paradigm in
order to disambiguate cue switching and task switching on a neurophysiological level. Participants (n=16) switched between color discrimination
and shape discrimination; and each of the tasks could be signaled by two
arbitrary letter cues, allowing to compare no-switch, cue-switch, and
task-switch transitions. The cue-stimulus interval (CSI) was set to either
200 or 1000 ms. In both CSI conditions the electrophysiological correlates
of switch costs could be unambiguously split up into two components: an
early negative deflection that was attributable to a cue switch, and a late
one that was due to the actual task switch. This dissociation suggests that
task-switch costs not only represent more of the same of what is already
captured by cue-switch costs, but that task switching involves a unique
set of mental processes. In addition to this differentiation, ERPs during
the long CSI elicited a positive deflection whose amplitude varied with
the necessity to switch and was related to task performance. This result
provides evidence for active task-set reconfiguration during the cue-stimulus interval.
G43
NEURAL BASIS OF ANALOGICAL REASONING: EVENTRELATED FMRI YIELDS EVIDENCE OF PREFRONTAL
SUBSTRATE
FOR
RELATIONAL
INTEGRATION
AND
INTERFERENCE RESOLUTION Soohyun Cho, Teena Moody, Russell
Poldrack, Tyrone Cannon, Barbara Knowlton, Keith Holyoak; University of
California, Los Angeles — Integrating relational information and resolving
interference are hypothesized to be key requirements for analogical reasoning. We examined the impact on brain activations of increasing
demand for both processes during performance of a pictorial analogy
task. Each problem consists of two pairs of human cartoon characters that
can be described by four binary traits. The subject’s task was to determine
whether or not the analogy is valid, based on a subset of traits randomly
selected for each trial. Participants were instructed to solve each problem
based on relevant traits only, inhibiting processing of irrelevant traits.
Number of to-be-attended traits defines level of relational complexity (1
or 3); number of to-be-ignored traits supporting an incorrect response
defines level of interference (0 or 1). Participants were less accurate and
slower for problems requiring integration of multiple relations or interference resolution. Solution time was increased in an over-additive fashion by simultaneous demand for both processes. Regions in the left
frontal pole and the right middle frontal gyrus were selectively activated
by increased relational complexity. Distinct, but partially overlapping,
regions in the bilateral inferior prefrontal cortex were activated by interference resolution and relational integration, independently, and also by
the simultaneous increase in demand for relational integration and interference resolution. By manipulating both processes within individual
analogy problems, it proved possible to isolate prefrontal loci engaged
when demands for two component processes of analogical reasoning are

234

Higher level cognition: Executive functions

increased simultaneously. These results shed light on the core components of analogical reasoning.
G44
FREQUENT CHANGE CAN BE GOOD FOR YOU: TASK SWITCH
PROBABILITY AFFECTS COGNITIVE CONTROL Michael Bersick1,
Doreen Nessler1, Ray Johnson Jr.2, David Friedman1; 1New York State
Psychiatric Institute, 2Queens College/CUNY — Juggling multiple tasks
causes performance deficits; cognitive control models of this behavior
emphasize the role of anticipatory processes in dynamically allocating
limited resources. For example, foreknowledge of task order ameliorates
switching costs by allowing preparation of the appropriate task set. Thus,
we investigated how switching frequency affects participants’ utilization
of such task order knowledge. Sixteen young adults participated in a task
switching paradigm. In different conditions, switch and stay trials
occurred in predictable or unpredictable sequences, were preceded by
informative or uninformative cues, and were either equiprobable or nonequiprobable. The ratio of switch to stay trials varied from 1:1 (switch
after 1-3 trials) in equiprobable blocks to 1:3 (switch after 3-5 trials) in
non-equiprobable blocks. Mixing costs (pre-switch RT minus pure task
RT) were larger for equiprobable whereas switch costs (switch RT minus
pre-switch RT) were larger for nonequiprobable blocks. Unpredictability
increased mixing costs and decreased switch costs. These data suggest
that both task sets remained more activated during equiprobable and
unpredictable blocks. Informative cues minimized mixing and switch
costs in both equiprobable and non-equiprobable blocks. A switchrelated, P3-like, positivity 400-700 ms after informative cues presumably
indexed task-set updating but was absent for predictable, equiprobable
blocks. Participants did not simply ignore predictable cues, because they
reduced mixing costs relative to similar blocks with an uninformative
cue. When task sequences are fixed and short enough to keep in working
memory any required updating of the task-related information, even on
switch trials, is apparently infrequent or minor.
G45
DECREASED RISK-TAKING DURING AMBIGUOUS DECISIONMAKING IN PATIENTS WITH SEVERE TRAUMATIC BRAIN
INJURY Shirley Fecteau1, Hatiche Kumru2, Monste Bernabeu2, Alberto
García Molina2, Teresa Loig2, Alvaro Pascual-Leone1, José Maria Tormos2;
1
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, 2Guttmann
Institute, Barcelona, Spain — Cognitive abilities related to frontal lobes
remain chronically impaired in most patients with traumatic brain injury
(TBI) despite improvements in several other cognitive functions, and can
often critically impact the patients’ independent living, and overall functional rehabilitation. In the present study, we assessed risk-taking under
ambiguity, a function related to prefrontal cortex, in 20 patients with
severe TBI and 8 healthy volunteers. Participants performed the Balloon
Analogue Risk Task (BART), which has convergent validity with realworld risk-related situations. Participants had to pump a computerized
balloon, which can explode at any moment, and to decide after each
pump whether to keep pumping or not. Money is accumulated with each
pump, but is lost in case of explosion. Participants have to decide when to
stop pumping and settle on a given pay-off. Results revealed a group difference in the number of pumps (p=0.03): patients pumped less number
of times than controls. For the amount of money earned, there was also a
group difference (p=0.007): patients earned less money than controls. The
results of Stroop interference – the control task – showed no group difference (p>.8), suggesting that the group differences on the BART task were
not due to difference in motor inhibitory control as assessed by the
Stroop test. Finally, there was no group difference in the amount of time
needed to perform the BART (p>.8). In sum, patients with TBI displayed
a risk-averse response style. Such overly cautious decision-making
behaviors can impact real-life matters and contribute to difficulties in
social rehabilitation.

Higher level cognition: Executive functions

G46
MEASURING THE EFFECT OF DUAL-TASK DEMANDS ON
PREDICTIVE SMOOTH PURSUIT EYE TRACKING IN MILD TBI
PATIENTS Rachel Kolster1,2, Sambrita Basu2, Ranjeeta Sarkar2, Richard
Ivry3, Bruce McCandliss1, Jamshid Ghajar2,4, Minah Suh4; The Cognitive and
Neurobiological Research Consortium in Traumatic Brain Injury (CNRC-TBI) ;
1Sackler Institute, Weill-Cornell Medical College, 2Brain Trauma Foundation,
3University of California, Berkeley, 4Weill-Cornell Medical College — Mild
traumatic brain injury (TBI) is known to produce subtle attentional deficits, yet these deficits are often elusive under typical assessment conditions. Predictive smooth pursuit eye movements (SPEM), which may be
dependent upon attentional processes, are often atypical in mild TBI
patients. The potential role of attention in explaining such deficits, however, has not been directly tested. To more directly assess the degree to
which such deficits are related to attention, we present a novel investigation of the impact of dual-task demands on predictive SPEM measures.
We used a highly predictable circular smooth pursuit paradigm with a
simultaneous verbal working memory task to examine the generation of
predictive SPEM under conditions of varying cognitive load in mild TBI
(n=19) and control subjects (n=10). Under higher load conditions, control
subjects showed slightly improved predictive SPEM performance. In contrast, higher load conditions led mild TBI patients to show increased
velocity error and intra-individual SPEM variability. This finding suggests that predictive SPEM measures are influenced by attention, and that
the sensitivity of these measures to mild TBI is mediated by attentional
processes. Futhermore, California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT-II) scores
correlated with the degree to which cognitive load impacted SPEM in
mild TBI patients, suggesting that increased severity of cognitive deficits
was a function of attention. Overall, our results suggest that smooth pursuit eye movements are a sensitive metric for attentional deficits in mild
TBI.
G47
THE TEMPORAL TRAJECTORY OF AGE-RELATED DECREASES
IN
EXECUTIVE
FUNCTION:
ERP
AND
BEHAVIORAL
EVIDENCE Doreen Nessler1, Ray Johnson Jr.2, Michael Bersick1, Dave
Friedman1; 1NY Psychiatric Institute, NY, NY, 2Queens College/CUNY,
Flushing, NY — Although aging negatively impacts executive control
processes such as inhibition and working memory, the time course of
these changes is not well known. Hence, these processes were examined
in young (mean age 24.7, N=16), young-old (65.9, N=13) and old-old
adults (76.9, N=16) while they performed variants of a task-switching
paradigm. Interference created by the alternative task set and, hence, the
need for inhibitory control should to be greater when task switches are
required by targets following uninformative cues and when more time
has been spent on the alternative task (non-equiprobable blocks). Working memory processes were expected to benefit performance when stay
and switch trials followed a predictable pattern. The results showed that
increases in switch costs (switch RT minus pre-switch RT) were age
invariant for uninformative compared to informative cues in equiprobable blocks. However, when the need for inhibitory control increased
(uninformative cue, non-equiprobable condition), both older groups
showed increased switch costs relative to the young. Predictable switches
decreased mixing costs (pre-switch RT minus single task RT) in equiprobable blocks for young and young-old but not old-old adults. This behavioral effect was associated with a cue-related frontal ERP negativity that
preceded targets for young and young-old but not for old-old adults,
possibly reflecting working memory processes in anticipation of the
upcoming response. In sum, inhibitory control appears to be less efficient
relatively early in the aging process, while working memory functions do
not appear to decline until relatively later in the aging process.

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

G48
ANALYSIS OF DRD4 AND DAT POLYMORPHISMS AND
BEHAVIORAL
INHIBITION
IN
HEALTHY
ADULTS:
IMPLICATIONS FOR IMPULSIVITY Eliza
Congdon1,
Jason-Flor
Sisante1, Klaus-Peter Lesch2, Turhan Canli1; 1Stony Brook University,
2
Molecular and Clinical Psychobiology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany — Impulsivity, a highly prevalent symptom in multiple psychiatric disorders, is a partially heritable trait influenced by specific biological mechanisms. In particular, dopamine is proposed to play a role in
impulsive behaviors and recent studies have implicated functional polymorphisms of dopamine-related genes in impulsive behaviors across different clinical and behavioral classifications. Despite evidence elucidating
the specific neural network underlying behavioral inhibition, the most
direct expression of impulsivity, most studies looking at the relationship
between dopamine-related genes and impulsive behavior have not isolated the impulsivity construct per se as a biologically-based and measurable endophenotype. The present study was therefore undertaken in
healthy adults to investigate the influence of two candidate dopaminergic gene polymorphisms (DRD4 and DAT) on the endophenotype of
impulsivity, which we operationalized as behavioral inhibition during
the Stop-signal task. We report significant differences in inhibitory control between individuals with at least one 7-repeat allele of the DRD4
polymorphism, as well as an interaction between DRD4 and DAT genotypes on inhibitory control. Results of the present study further support
the influence of dopaminergic variation on impulsive-related measures,
and suggest a benefit of using measures which are likely more sensitive
to the effects of such genetic variation. Results of the present study lay the
groundwork for future studies investigating the relationship between
dopamine-related genes and neural activity in brain regions known to
underlie behavioral inhibition.
G49
META-ANALYSIS OF FMRI ACTIVATION ASSOCIATED WITH
RESPONSE INHIBITION DURING PERFORMANCE OF GO/NOGO
TASKS. Daniel Simmonds1, James Pekar1,2, Stewart Mostofsky1,2; 1Kennedy
Krieger Institute, 2Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — FMRI
studies of response inhibition consistently reveal frontal activation.
Localization within frontal cortex, however, varies across studies and
appears task-dependent. Activation likelihood estimate (ALE) meta-analysis can be used to establish concurrence across fMRI studies. This study
used ALE to investigate concurrence of Nogo-activation in healthy adults
during event-related fMRI Go/Nogo tasks that contrasted Nogo with
baseline activation, to reveal regions involved in response inhibition.
Studies were selected by searching the Pubmed database; after the selection criteria were applied, six studies remained with a total of 145 subjects and 68 foci. The analysis was run in the Brainmap Search&View
program using FWHM=15mm; 5000 random permutations were generated to assess statistical significance. The ALE map was thresholded at
p=.001. ALE values were imported into AFNI and overlaid onto an anatomical template. Results showed concurrence of activation lateralized to
the right-hemisphere, with the highest concurrence seen in the rostral
supplementary motor area (pre-SMA;BA6). Concurrence was additionally seen in bilateral inferior parietal regions (BA40), right middle frontal
gyrus (BA9/46), right inferior occipital gyrus (BA19), left precentral
gyrus (BA6) and left posterior cerebellum (declive). The ALE meta-analysis indicates that a predominantly right-lateralized network is involved
in motor response inhibition. Although much attention has been focused
on the involvement of right inferior prefrontal regions in response inhibition, the ALE findings suggest greater concurrence in the pre-SMA,
important for motor response selection (including selecting not to
respond), and inferior parietal regions important for processing the
behavioral relevance of stimuli.

235

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

Higher level cognition: Other
G50
OCCIPITO-TEMPORAL
REGION
IS
SENSITIVE
TO
ORTHOGRAPHIC FAMILIARITY Jennifer Bruno, Allison Zumberge,
Frank Manis, Jason Goldman; University of Southern California — The
involvement of the left hemisphere occipito-temporal (OT) junction in
reading has been established, yet there is current controversy over the
region’s specificity for and role in the reading process. The present study
tested the hypothesis that the region is sensitive to orthographic familiarity. After localizing the OT region using block design fMRI, we employed
an event-related design with 27 adult, right-handed participants to examine phonological judgments (i.e., “does it sound like a word?”) to words,
pseudohomophones (phonologically familiar yet orthographically unfamiliar), and pronounceable nonwords (phonologically and orthographically unfamiliar). Relative to baseline, activation in OT was equal for
pseudohomophones and nonwords. Activation for both of these orthographically unfamiliar conditions was greater than that for words. Further contrasts of orthographic frequency within the word condition
revealed that it was only the highly frequent words that contributed to
this effect; the low frequency words elicited a response pattern that was
not significantly different from the nonwords and pseudohomophones.
This overall pattern of activation is not confounded with stimulus difficulty level as evidenced by reaction time differences. These findings support our hypothesis that the region is sensitive to orthographic but not
phonological familiarity. Specialization in this area for recognition of frequent letter strings may support the development of reading expertise.
G51
DIFFERENT CONTRIBUTIONS OF DORSAL AND VENTRAL
MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX TO INFERENCES ABOUT
OTHERS' THOUGHTS AND FEELINGS Adrianna C. Jenkins, Jason P.
Mitchell; Harvard University — The medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) has
been consistently observed during tasks in which participants infer the
mental states of another person (i.e., mentalize). Although emerging evidence suggests that MPFC may comprise several subregions that contribute differently to mental state inference, it is not known what
characterizes these functional distinctions. One possibility is that different cognitive processes subserve mentalizing judgments as a function of
the kind of mental state being inferred: specifically, whereas some
aspects of MPFC may respond preferentially to mentalizing about cognitive states (thoughts and beliefs), others may respond preferentially to
mentalizing about affective states (feelings and emotions). In the current
study, participants (n=20) were scanned using fMRI while reading short
vignettes describing common experiences. Following each story, a question prompted consideration of either the protagonist's thoughts or feelings. In both conditions, participants also read explicit information about
the protagonist's thoughts and feelings, allowing us to decouple the neural response associated with active mental state inference from that associated with the passive receipt of mental state information. Results
demonstrated a cognitive-affective gradient in MPFC, such that regions
were differentially sensitive to inferences about feelings vs. beliefs as a
function of their position along the ventral to dorsal axis. The results contribute to the ongoing process of identifying distinct subregions of MPFC
that subserve distinct aspects of inferring the contents of others' minds.
G52
FRONTOPOLAR CORTEX AND CREATIVE THINKING: AN FMRI
STUDY OF THE USES-OF-OBJECTS TASK Adam Green1, Jonathan
Fugelsang2, David Kraemer3, Kevin Dunbar3; 1Yale University, 2University of
Waterloo, 3Dartmouth College — Essential for scientific innovation and
artistic inspiration, the construct of creativity has historically been a
prominent subject in psychology, following largely from Hudson’s (1966)
seminal work with the uses-of-objects task. However, very little contemporary neuroscientific research has examined the neural underpinnings
of creativity. This is largely because it has been difficult to make con-

236

Higher level cognition: Other

strained, a priori predictions about brain regions that underlie this inherently unconstrained type of cognition. Here, we used a non-verbal
variant of the uses-of-objects task with performing arts and non-arts students in an event-related fMRI study. We made an a priori prediction
concerning a specific region of frontopolar cortex implicated by our
recent research examining creative thinking in verbal analogical reasoning. Within this a priori region of interest, the uses-of-objects task elicited
significantly greater activity than a matched control task. These new findings indicate a general role for the identified frontopolar region in creative thinking for both verbal and non-verbal modalities.
G53
INTENTIONALITY AND THE BRAIN: UNRAVELING THE
THEORY-OF-MIND NETWORK Anna Abraham1, Markus Werning2,
Hannes Rakoczy3, D. Y. von Cramon1, Ricarda I. Schubotz1; 1Max-PlanckInstitute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 2Heinrich-Heine University
Düsseldorf, 3Max-Planck-Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology — Much
imaging research has been directed at uncovering the neural underpinnings of theory-of-mind. While a number of brain regions are consistently activated across different experimental paradigms, there are many
unanswered questions concerning the actual contribution of each area in
the network. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging with a novel
behavioral paradigm, we tried to shed further light on this issue by
attempting to determine which areas are involved when processing mental state or intentional metarepresentations as distinct from those that are
involved as a function of the presence of any person-based information.
Using non-intentional representations such as spatial relations between
persons and objects as a contrast, a selective involvement of the medial
prefrontal cortex and the temporal poles was found in the processing of
intentional representations. The anterior superior temporal sulcus, the
precuneus and the temporo-parietal junction, on the other hand, were
implicated when processing representations that were only commonly
characterized by the sheer presence of persons. Moreover, the evidence
suggests that even without explicit references to mental states, the mere
presence of person information could, under specific conditions, evoke
default mental state reasoning. Finally, preliminary results from a parametric contrast of the intentional conditions point to the involvement of
dissociable areas in relation to processing belief relative to desire representational relations. These findings help clarify some of the issues that
are pertinent for the theory of mind domain while also paving the way
for new directions of exploration in the field.
G54
DIFFERENT BRAIN CIRCUITS UNDERLIE TIME PROCESSING
FOR ACTION AND PERCEPTION Domenica Bueti1, Vincent Walsh1,
Chris Frith2, Geraint Rees3; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University
College London, 2Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, Institute of
Neurology, University College London, 3Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience
and Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology,
University College London — In everyday life, temporal information is
used for both perception and action, but whether these two functions
reflect the operation of similar or different neural circuits is unclear. We
used functional MRI (fMRI) to investigate the neural correlates of processing temporal information for action and perception in the human
brain. Participants viewed two identical sequences of visual stimuli and
used the information differently to perform either a temporal reproduction or a temporal estimation task. By comparing brain activity evoked by
these tasks and control conditions, we explored commonalities and differences in brain areas involved in reproduction and estimation of temporal intervals. The basal ganglia and cerebellum were commonly active
in both temporal tasks, consistent with suggestions that perception and
production of time are subserved by the same mechanisms. However,
only in the reproduction task activity was observed in a wider cortical
network including right preSMA, left middle frontal gyrus, left premotor
cortex, with a more reliable activity in right inferior parietal cortex, left
fusiform gyrus, and the right extrastriate visual area V5/MT. Our find-

Memory: Memory systems

ings point to a role for parietal cortex as an interface between sensory and
motor processes and suggest it may be a key node in translation of temporal information into action. Futhermore, we discuss the potential
importance of extrastriate cortex in processing visual time in the context
of recent findings.
G55
THE INFLUENCE OF PROFICIENCY IN ARTIFICIAL GRAMMAR
LEARNING: INSIGHTS FROM COMBINED ROC AND ERP
MEASUREMENTS Juliane
Hofmann,
Bertram
Opitz;
Saarland
University — It is suggested that artificial grammar learning (AGL) is
based on two mechanims: learning item-specific information on the basis
of superficial similarity and learning by abstracting a representation of
the underlying rules. The impact of both mechanisms on newly learned
grammatical knowledge can be estimated by using Receiver Operating
Characteristics (ROCs). Aside the behavioural measurement, eventrelated potentials (ERP) could give information about the quality of the
underlying neural processes. It has been shown that a small system of
artificial grammatical rules can be syntactically instantiated by adult
speakers in a way that strongly resembles native-speaker sentence processing as reflected in similar ERP components elicited by violations in
natural and artificial grammar systems, namely an early negativity and a
P600 component. Furthermore, the participant’s proficiency level is discussed as an important factor for native-speaker-like processing. Recently
it has been proposed that highly proficient L2 speakers with nativespeaker-like ERPs rely on their grammatical rule knowledge to master
L2, whereas low proficient speakers use different strategies to compensate for their difficulties in the syntactic and phonological domain. In a
previous behavioural study we found actually that high proficient AG
learners used more rule knowledge than less proficient participants.
Thus, rule knowledge and proficiency seem to correspond. In the current
study ERPs and ROCs were measured while learning an artificial grammar. ERP data will be presented depending on the participant’s proficiency level and acquired rule knowledge. More rule knowledge and
higher proficiency should be reflected in a greater P600 component indicating controlled syntactic processes.
G56
HOW THE BRAIN TRANSLATES MONEY INTO POWER: AN
FMRI STUDY OF IMPLICIT MOTIVATION Mathias
Pessiglione1,
Liane Schmidt1, Bogdan Draganski2, Raffael Kalisch2, Hakwan Lau2, Ray
Dolan2, Chris Frith2; 1INSERM U610, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Paris, France,
2
Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, London, UK — Motivation
can be construed as a process through which an expected reward is converted into behavioural activation. Many studies have investigated
explicit motivational processes, like the estimation of an effort/benefit
ratio in order to decide whether an action is worthwhile or not. However,
it is still unclear whether humans can be motivated by potential rewards
that they are not aware of. Here we harness implicit motivational processes within a novel paradigm, where we manipulate the amount and
the visibility of the monetary reward for which subjects have to make an
effort. We show that, even when subjects cannot report how much money
is at stake, they nevertheless deploy more effort for higher amounts. This
motivational effect is underpinned by engagement of the pallidum,
which drives cortical motor areas leading to muscular effort. We conclude that our brain is able, via pallidal activation, to boost our behaviour
towards implicit rewards.
G57
WHATCHA LOOKING AT? THE NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF
ANOTHER PERSON’S GAZE TARGET Antonia Hamilton1, Stephanie
Ortigue2, Anna Bekker1, Scott Grafton2; 1Dartmouth College, 2UCSB — When
two people look at one another and then at a common object, a state of
joint attention arises, facilitating social interaction and learning. Converging evidence implicates the superior temporal sulcus in detecting the left
/ right direction of gaze, but neural sensitivity to the object of gaze, e.g. if
the eyes fixate on an orange rather than a toy, has rarely been examined.

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

In the present study, we used a repetition suppression method to localize
the neural representation of the object of gaze. Experiment 1 (20 participants) used event-related fMRI while experiment 2 (18 participants) used
the same stimuli and method during 128-channel event-related potential
recording, thus providing both spatial and temporal localizations of gaze
target. On each trial of the neuroimaging studies, participants saw an
actress look up and straight at the participant, and then towards either an
orange or a toy, one on the left and one on the right. The direction of gaze
and the identity of the gazed-upon object varied from trial to trial in a
one-back repetition suppression design. fMRI results revealed that the
superior temporal sulcus responds preferentially to observation of
human gaze shifts and encodes the direction of gaze, but the middle frontal gyrus encodes the identity of the gazed-upon object. Similarly, ERP
analysis revealed significant early effects of direction of gaze in occipitotemporal regions, and a later effect of gazed-upon object in frontal
regions. Results are discussed in relation to current theories of gaze coding and joint attention.
G58
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS IN A SEMANTIC TASK RELATE
METACOGNITION TO THEORY OF MIND (TOM) Marie Prévost1,2,
Louis Renoult1,2, Mathieu Brodeur3,2, Claire Lionnet2, J. Bruno Debruille1,2;
1
McGill University, 2Douglas Hospital Research Center, 3Université de
Montréal — The aptitude to infer mental state of others has been shown to
be linked to syntactic and semantic processes (Hale and Tager-Flusberg,
2003). The initial aim of this study was to determine if the integration of
semantic information indexed by the N400 event-related potential varies
as a function of the awareness of the mental state of another person.
Three brief questions evaluating the extent to which the subject was
aware that the examiner mind was focused on his or her behaviour during the experiment were answered by every participant. Subjects were
split into two groups, those who said they were more (ToM+) and those
who said they were less (ToM-) aware of the examiners’ mental state. The
semantic task consisted of deciding whether target words belong to the
‘animal’ semantic category. A classical N400 effect was observed for all
subjects. However, no group effect or interaction with group was found
on this ERP. The main result was a larger positivity between 600 and 1100
ms after stimulus onset in the ToM+ than in the ToM- subjects. On the
other hand, the awareness that the examiner was focused on the subject
was found to be positively correlated with the scores to the delusion
proneness items of the schizotypal personality questionnaire (Raine,
1991) Therefore, this study did not confirm the relation between semantic processes and a particular aspect of ToM ability. The awareness of others’ mental state was rather found to affect the late positivity, which is
thought to index metacognitive processes.

Memory: Memory systems
G59
INVESTIGATING ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL DYNAMICS IN
THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE DURING CONTINUOUS
RECOGNITION WITH MULTIPLE STIMULUS PRESENTATIONS
Michael Yassa, Craig Stark; Johns Hopkins University — The medial temporal lobe (MTL) is known to play an essential role in declarative memory.
Although memory encoding and retrieval can be thought of as separate
process, it has been challenging to determine whether there is structural
and functional specificity within the medial temporal lobe for these processes. We attempted to overcome difficulties associated with traditional
attempts to isolate these processes (e.g. effects of incidental encoding or
of task demands) by using a continuous yes/no recognition task of novel
and familiar scenes that presented each stimulus several times during
fMRI scanning (both experimentally-familiar and pre-experimentally
familiar scenes were used). We hypothesized that monotonic decreases in
activity over presentations would be more likely related to amount of

237

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

information encoded, whereas monotonic increases in activity would be
more likely related to amount of information retrieved (or memory
strength). Within this framework, retrieval success would be associated
with a step-function increase in activity associated with hits, regardless of
presentation number. fMRI data showed monotonic decreases in activity
(consistent with encoding) bilaterally in the parahippocampal cortex and
monotonic increases in activity (consistent with retrieval) bilaterally in
the posterior portions of perirhinal/entorhinal cortex. Data also showed
bilateral activation in the anterior portions of perirhinal / entorhinal cortex most consistent with a combination of encoding and retrieval effects.
We discuss how these dynamics give rise to learning over multiple trials.
G60
COGNITIVE PROCESSES UNDERLYING ROUTINE AND NOVEL
NATURALISTIC
ACTION
PERFORMANCE
IN
STROKE
PATIENTS Sabrina Lombardi, David Gold, Catherine Labrish, Norman
Park; York University — Naturalistic actions are defined as goal-directed,
multi-step series of actions requiring the manipulation of objects. Routine
naturalistic actions (NAs) are familiar types of actions that are performed
repeatedly over the course of a person’s life (e.g., making coffee), whereas
new tasks that are unfamiliar prior to viewing them being enacted (e.g.,
transferring from a wheelchair) are referred to as novel naturalistic
actions (NNAs). The aim of this study was to examine the cognitive processes underlying NA and NNA enactment performance. Previous
research by Schwartz and colleagues showed a similar pattern of NA performance across different groups of neurologically impaired patients,
and that accomplishment scores, the total number of errors, errors of
omission, but not commission errors (e.g., reversals) were best predicted
by general measures of cognitive impairment. Based on the similarity in
performance across patient groups, they concluded that a common factor
was responsible for impaired performance. Our NA findings with stroke
patients replicated results reported by Schwartz and colleagues. We
extended this work by showing similar patterns of NA and NNA performance and that both NAs and NNAs were affected by severity of cognitive impairment. In contrast, individual patient performances on routine
and novel measures were non-significantly correlated. Further examination of individual patient performance showed a double disassociation
between NA and NNA performance in two patients. We conclude that
NA and NNA are mediated by different cognitive processes and that
similar patterns of enactment performance may result from disruptions
of different cognitive processes.
G61
SOURCES OF INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY IN BRAIN ACTIVITY
DURING EPISODIC ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL Christa-Lynn
Donovan1, Scott Geurin1, Meghan Roarty1, Rich Mayer1, John Van Horn2,
Michael Miller1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara, 2Dartmouth College/
Psychological and Brain Sciences — Most neuroimaging studies report
common areas of activation across a group of participants to determine
brain areas that underlie the process under investigation. However, we
have previously shown extensive individual variability in brain activations during episodic retrieval. The individual activations were observed
to be stable over time at intervals of up to a year (Miller et al., 2002). This
suggests they were not just due to noise but may reflect processes that are
uniquely individual and perhaps necessary for the individual to perform
the task. Analysis of this variability can give us another level of complexity in our understanding of the neural basis underlying higher order cognitive functioning. The purpose of this study was to identify factors that
can account for variability in brain activity underlying episodic encoding
and retrieval. After the scanning session, subjects completed a battery of
questionnaires so that we could classify their encoding strategy as either
visualizing or verbalizing. Our results concerning the extensive variability of individual brain activity during episodic memory replicated our
previous study. In addition, we found that a significant portion of the
variance in task-related activity could be explained by differences in
encoding strategy, but not by differences in anatomy, as assessed by the

238

Memory: Memory systems

normalized high resolution anatomical scans. These results demonstrate
that individuals can recruit widely dispersed brain regions during an episodic memory task, and that the recruitment of any particular region by
an individual may depend on their unique mnemonic strategy.
G62
HIGH-RESOLUTION FMRI OF THE HUMAN PERIRHINAL
CORTEX DURING PAIRED-ASSOCIATE LEARNING W.
Kyle
Simmons1, Sean Matlis1, Patrick S.F. Bellgowan1, Jerzy Bodurka2, Lawrence W.
Barsalou3, Alex Martin1; 1Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, NIMH / NIH,
2
Functional MRI Facility, NIMH / NIH, 3Emory University — Recent neurophysiology findings in the macaque have demonstrated that the perirhinal cortex plays an important role in learning associations among stimuli
by binding together their representations in brain regions outside the
medial temporal lobes. Unfortunately, because standard-resolution fMRI
is subject to susceptibility-related signal artifacts in medial temporal
regions, there is little extant human fMRI evidence to date demonstrating
the perirhinal cortex’s role in associative learning. In the present study,
we examined the role of human perirhinal cortex in paired associate
learning by capitalizing on the ability of high-resolution multi-channel
fMRI to reliably measure BOLD signal in perirhinal cortex. In three training sessions prior to scanning, participants learned associations between
abstract line drawings and either photographs of unfamiliar abstract
sculptures or unfamiliar nonsense sounds. Participants were also shown
abstract line drawings that did not have paired-associates. During scanning, subjects were simply shown the abstract line drawings in a fast
event-related design, and asked to indicate if the stimulus had a visual,
auditory, or no associate. Importantly, the left perirhinal cortex was more
active when subjects made judgments about line drawings with either
auditory or visual associates, relative to judgments about line drawings
without paired associates. This finding, taken together with previous
neurophysiology studies, demonstrates that during paired-associate
learning the human perirhinal cortex binds property representations
together both within and between modality-specific regions.
G63
IDENTIFYING THE DIFFERENT COGNITIVE PROCESSES
MEDIATING FAMILIAR AND UNFAMILIAR NATURALISTIC
ACTIONS IN STROKE PATIENTS Norman Park, David Gold, Sabrina
Lombardi; York University — Naturalistic actions are multi-step actions
requiring the manipulation of objects in order to achieve a goal. Routine
naturalistic actions (NAs) are familiar actions that have been enacted
many times over the course of a person’s life (e.g., making tea), whereas
new tasks such as constructing a birdfeeder that are unfamiliar prior to
viewing, are referred to as novel naturalistic actions (NNAs). In a previous study with stroke patients, we showed that NNAs and NAs show
similar patterns of enactment performance on several measures. Both
types of action were also affected in similar ways by cognitive severity.
Despite these similarities, the correlation between NA and NNA performance by the same set of patients was statistically non-significant, suggesting that different psychological processes may mediate NA and NNA
performance. The purpose of this study was to identify cognitive processes that are differentially involved in NA and NNA enactment in
stroke patients. Based on theories of apraxia (e.g., Buxbaum, Goldenberg), we hypothesized that NA enactment is more strongly mediated
than NNA enactment by lexical/semantic cognitive processes, but that
NNAs are more strongly mediated visuospatially. We tested this hypothesis by correlating lexical/semantic and visuospatial scores and measures
of NA and NNA performance. As predicted, psychological test (visuospatial, lexical/semantic) interacted with type of action (NA, NNA).
NAs were more strongly correlated than NNAs with lexical/semantic
scores, whereas the opposite pattern was obtained for visuospatial scores.
We conclude that NAs have a stronger conceptual or semantic memory
representation than NNAs. Implications of these findings will be discussed.

Memory: Memory systems

G64
FEATURE OVERLAP AND SHORT-TERM MEMORY IN AMNESIA:
AN EXAMINATION OF THE PHONOLOGICAL SIMILARITY
EFFECT Craig Brozinsky, Charan Ranganath, Andrew Yonelinas, Neal
Kroll; University of California, Davis — According to the Complementary
Learning Systems (CLS) approach (e.g., Norman & O'Reilly, 2003), the
neocortex can support recognition for distinct items, but additionally
requires the hippocampus to discriminate stimuli with a high degree of
feature overlap. Here, we examine whether these predictions are unique
to recognition tests using long retention intervals, or extend to tests more
traditionally believed to tap verbal short-term memory. For example, the
phonological similarity effect (PSE) is a classic short-term memory phenomenon whereby memory is worse for rhyming letters than non-rhyming letters. Across three experiments, PSE's were compared between
controls and seven patients with damage to the medial temporal lobes.
First, we examined memory span for phonologically similar and distinct
letters, separately analyzing performance for the number of recalled letters and for positional accuracy. Second, we examined probe recognition
for short sets of phonologically similar and phonologically distinct letters. To ensure that the results generalized beyond closed pool lists (i.e.,
letters), we examined the group's PSEs in the third experiment by comparing recall between four-item lists of rhyming words and non-words, a
manipulation additionally intended to clarify patient's abilities to maintain novel stimuli. The results indicate that at least some aspects of the
PSE are exacerbated in medial temporal patients, and suggest a role for
medial temporal lobe regions in the short-term retention of verbal materials.
G65
EFFECTS OF COMT GENOTYPES ON PREFRONTAL AND
HIPPOCAMPAL ACTIVITY DURING SUCCESSFUL RELATIONAL
MEMORY ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL Nancy A. Dennis1, Sheena
W. Waters1, Anna Need2, Kevin S. LaBar1, David B. Goldstein2, Roberto
Cabeza1; 1Duke University, 2Institute for Genome Science and Policy, Duke
University — Genetic neuroimaging has the potential to characterize the
effect of genetic variability on mechanisms of cognitive processing. As
such its usage has potential for identifying functional markers of cognitive decline. The current study investigated the molecular pathways
underlying cognition by assessing whether differences in geneotype are
associated with both cognitive and functional differences amongst individuals for a relational memory task. Our present investigation focused
on the effect of the naturally occurring genetic variation of catechol-Omethlytransferase (COMT), a gene involved in regulating prefrontal
dopamine, which in turn modulates the response of prefrontal neurons.
The expression of the COMT ‘val’ allele compare to the ‘met’ allele has
been associated with poorer memory performance, reduced medial temporal lobe (MTL) recruitment and increased frontal recruitment during
encoding and retrieval of item memory. While previous studies have
used blocked designs, the current study uses event-related functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to assess activity associated with
successful relational memory performance at both an encoding and
retrieval. Results revealed that the COMT ‘val’ allele is associated with
decreased activity in left hippocampus and increased activity in frontal
regions for successful encoding. A similar pattern is found for successful
retrieval, with decreased MTL activity occurring bilaterally. Results suggest that the expression of the COMT gene can significantly influence
functional activations during relational memory performance. Genetic
modulation of encoding and retrieval networks may explain individual
differences in memory performance and functional activations and serve
as an indicator of early cognition decline.

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

G66
EFFECTS OF AGING ON NEURAL CORRELATES OF ITEM AND
RELATIONAL MEMORY Scott M. Hayes1, Nancy A. Dennis1, Steven E.
Prince1, Scott A. Huettel1, David J. Madden2, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke
University, 2Duke University Medical Center — Recent evidence suggests
reduced neural specialization in category specific visual processing areas
in older adults (OA; Park, 2004). In addition, OA show pronounced
impairment in relational relative to item memory (Spencer & Raz, 1995;
Zacks, Hasher, Li, 2000). Evidence for the neural correlates of age-related
impairments in relational memory is sparse, and the neurobiological substrates of age-related memory changes are a topic of debate. Thus, there
were two main goals of the current experiment: to investigate the effect of
age on category specific brain regions such as the fusiform face area
(FFA), occipital face area (OFA), and the parahippocampal place area
(PPA) and to assess age-related changes in successful encoding (subsequent memory effect) of item (face, scene) and relational (face/scene)
information. To address these issues, we presented pictures of faces,
scenes, and face-scene combinations to YA and OA while undergoing
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI). During face encoding,
YA, relative to OA, exhibited greater activation in the FFA and OFA. Furthermore, successful face encoding was associated with greater activation
in the FFA in YA relative to OA. Similarly, scene encoding and successful
scene encoding elicited greater activation in the parahippocampal place
area (PPA) in YA relative to OA. Finally, during relational memory
encoding, YA showed greater activation in FFA, OFA, and PPA. Importantly, during successful relational encoding, greater hippocampal activation was observed in YA relative to OA. Overall, these results suggest
that OAs’ memory impairment could be attributed to reduced activation
in stimulus specific processing areas and reduced hippocampal function.
G67
COGNITIVE
CONTROL
AND
EPISODIC
RETRIEVAL:
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MEASURES OF THE COMPONENTS
AND CONSEQUENCES OF SELECTIVE REMEMBERING Brice
Kuhl, Janice Chen, Anthony D. Wagner; Stanford University — Episodic
retrieval often involves selection of a target amidst interference from
competing memories. One behavioral consequence of selective retrieval
is the weakening, or suppression, of competing memories (Anderson,
Bjork, & Bjork, 1994). In a previous fMRI study, we observed that
repeated selective retrieval of target memories is associated with
decreased engagement of frontoparietal structures known to mediate
cognitive control. Moreover, dynamic changes in the engagement of frontoparietal cortices tracked the extent to which competing memories were
suppressed; these rapidly emerging dynamic changes constitute immediate neural markers that a memory was suppressed. In the present study,
electroencephalography (EEG) was used to assess the electrophysiological correlates of such dynamic changes in mnemonic competition that
occur with repeated acts of selective retrieval. Behavioral data replicated
the standard retrieval-induced forgetting effect, with practiced items
recalled better than unpracticed items, and unpracticed “competitors”
recalled more poorly than unpracticed baseline items. Initial EEG results
indicate that changes in mnemonic competition that occur with repeated
selective retrieval are reflected in the event related potentials (ERP’s) over
right frontocentral and left parietocentral sites. These ERP changes over
frontocentral sites emerged early (within 200 ms) and were sustained
throughout the act of selective retrieval, whereas changes over parietocentral sites onset later (after 300 ms), suggesting a frontally-mediated
regulation of mnemonic competition that gives rise to target remembering and competitor suppression.

239

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

G68
THE EFFECT OF THE INFORMATIONAL VALUE OF FEEDBACK ON
CAUDATE ACTIVATION Elizabeth Tricomi1, Mark E. Wheeler2, Julie A.
Fiez2; 1California Institute of Technology, 2University of Pittsburgh — Although
the caudate nuclei are involved in processing performance feedback,
much remains to be known about which aspects of feedback processing
determine activation in this region. For example, it is not known whether
the amount of information carried by feedback affects caudate activation.
To address this issue, brain activation was examined using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during a feedback-based paired
associate word learning task involving distinct trials with either two or
four response options. Importantly, with two response options, positive
and negative feedback provide equal amounts of information, since the
correct answer can be determined from either feedback type. In contrast,
with four response options, positive feedback provides more information
than negative feedback because the correct answer cannot be deduced
from negative feedback. Differential responses to positive and negative
feedback were observed in the caudate nuclei in the 4-choice condition.
However, responses to positive and negative feedback were not differential in the 2-choice condition and were similar in magnitude to the
response elicited by positive feedback in the 4-choice condition. These
results indicate that rather than simply reflecting whether feedback indicates a correct or incorrect response, the caudate signal is sensitive to the
informational value of the feedback. This suggests that caudate activation
is modulated by the degree to which the outcome of a response helps to
achieve the individual’s goal.
G69
TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF CORTICAL ERPS DURING EPISODIC
AND INCREMENTAL LEARNING Janice Chen, Daphna Shohamy,
Anthony Wagner; Stanford University — Episodic memory and incremental learning depend on distinct “memory systems”. Episodic memory –
conscious memory for events – depends on the medial temporal lobe
(MTL), whereas incremental learning – gradual acquisition of stimulusresponse regularities through error-correcting feedback over multiple trials – depends on the basal ganglia (BG). Prefrontal cortex (PFC) interacts
with both MTL and BG, and is thought to play an important modulatory
role in both forms of learning. The present study investigated the temporal profile of electrophysiological responses over PFC during episodic
and incremental learning using scalp-recorded EEG measures that permit
fine-grained temporal assessment of stimulus-locked, response-locked,
and feedback-locked ERPs. On each trial, subjects viewed a stimulus (a
visual scene) and pressed a key to predict one of two outcomes (‘dollar
bill’ or ‘dollar coin’), followed by response-contingent feedback. Stimuli
were either perfect predictors of an outcome (p=1.0) or probabilistic predictors of an outcome (p=0.7). Preliminary analyses of stimulus-locked
ERPs revealed a bilateral frontal N400 effect that differentiated between
correct vs. incorrect trials irrespective of associative condition. Feedbacklocked ERPs also revealed a frontal negative-going response during
error-correcting feedback; this negativity was greater on probabilistic
than on deterministic trials, for both negative and positive feedback.
Planned response-locked analyses will assess whether prospective signals over PFC that predict the response temporally shift over the course
of learning to occur progressively earlier. Collectively, these distinct ERP
effects suggest that modulatory mechanisms subserved by PFC contribute differentially to episodic and incremental learning.
G70
CONTRASTING ACTIVATIONS IN CORTICAL-HIPPOCAMPAL
SYSTEMS DURING ENCODING AND MEMORY OF FACE NAME
ASSOCIATIONS Melissa Robinson1, Jianli Wang1, Qing Yang1, Mark
Meadowcroft1, Xavier Golay2, Paul Eslinger1; 1Penn State College of Medicine,
2
Johns Hopkins University — Introduction. We hypothesized that conditions of face-name encoding and recognition memory would engage distinctive regions of activation in visual association cortex. Neural network
models of learning and memory suggest that sensory association and lim-

240

Memory: Memory systems

bic system structures interact differently during learning and memory
consolidation processes. In the case of face-name associations, we suspected that visual cortices would show some overlapping activation but
also distinctive features for encoding and memory phases. Methods. Five
healthy adults were presented novel face-name pairs during encoding
blocks, followed by intervening baseline and memory recognition blocks.
Each face was presented with 4 name choices during recognition. Data
were collected in a Philips 3T magnet, with analysis via SPM2 software.
Results. For both encoding and recognition memory phases, significant
activation clusters were identified in primary and secondary visual cortices, hippocampus, and prefrontal cortex bilaterally, with the largest clusters in visual cortices. Contrast analysis revealed that the right fusiform
gyrus and right hippocampus had significantly higher activity levels during encoding while the lingual gyrus bilaterally was significantly more
active during recognition memory. Conclusion. Encoding and recognition memory of face-name pairs engaged a network of structures that
included visual cortices, hippocampus, and prefrontal cortex bilaterally.
Encoding was also associated with activation increases in the right anterior and posterior fusiform gyrus and the right hippocampus. In contrast,
recognition memory was specifically associated with increased activity in
the lingual gyrus bilaterally. Findings suggest that memory consolidation
causes changes in visual cortex activity that can be distinguished from
learning and perception.
G71
THE MATURATION OF FAMILIARITY AND RECOLLECTION IN
EPISODIC MEMORY: AN ERP DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH
Marianne de Chastelaine, David Friedman, Yael Cycowicz, Cort Horton, Brenda
Malcolm; New York State Psychiatric Institute, NY — Recognition memory
is thought to be supported by two qualitatively distinct processes: an
acontextual sense of familiarity and the retrieval of contextual details
(‘recollection’). Recollection is thought to show a longer developmental
trajectory than familiarity. We employed ERPs to investigate the development of these two processes using unfamiliar and unnameable symbols.
Children (9-10 years) and young adults (20-26) memorized the same 40
items in each of 4 study-test blocks. Symbols were always shown in the
same spatial location: left/right of fixation during study and centrally
during test. Adults’ old/new and source (location) performance were
superior to that of children. The mid-frontal episodic memory (EM)
effect, the putative index of familiarity, observed only in adults, did not
vary across the 4 test blocks. For both groups, an early (300-500 ms) and
later (500-700 ms) parietal EM effect, the putative index of recollection,
increased over test blocks in association with an increase in recognition
and source performance. We suggest that, in adults, while familiarity initially appears to be the primary basis for the recognition judgment, recollection becomes increasingly relied upon as the memory traces
strengthen, consistent with their increasingly liberal decision criteria
across the 4 tests. In contrast, children appear to rely mainly on recollection to make this judgment concordant with their conservative decision
criteria across tests, suggesting they responded 'old' only when they recollected information diagnostic of an item's memory status. We conclude
that adults’ superior performance reflects their flexible and interchangeable use of familiarity and recollection according to task demands.
G72
CATEGORY-SPECIFIC
EFFECTS
OF
AUTOMATIC
AND
CONTROLLED SEMANTIC PROCESSING: AN EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL INVESTIGATION OF NORMAL AND REVERSED
SEMANTIC PRIMING EFFECTS William C. Heindel1, Victor V. Long1,
Elena K. Festa1, Jason R. Taylor2; 1Brown University, 2University of California,
Davis — The N400 is influenced both by current semantic context held
within working memory and by context-independent feature representations within semantic memory. The relative dependence of living and
nonliving object concepts on these mechanisms was examined using a
semantic priming paradigm that placed these mechanisms in direct
opposition. Participants viewed prime-target word pairs (20% related)

Memory: Memory systems

and made living/nonliving judgments to targets (50% living, SOA= 200
or 500ms). Semantic expectancy was manipulated by varying stimulusset conditions (Low-Expectancy: large set, non-repeated; High-Expectancy: small set, repeated). Expectancy-based context effects should produce reverse priming due to the high likelihood that a living prime will
be followed by a nonliving target (and vice-versa), whereas feature-overlap between related primes and targets should produce normal (automatic) priming despite the low relatedness proportion. In the LowExpectancy condition, normal behavioral priming was found at the short
SOA for living but not nonliving items, suggesting that priming for living
items is mediated by automatic processes. Normal N400 priming effects
were similarly observed for living but not nonliving targets. In the HighExpectancy condition, reverse behavioral priming was found at the long
SOA for both living and nonliving items. While nonliving items displayed a reverse N400 effect paralleling the behavioral effect, living items
continued to display a normal N400 effect. These results confirm the
presence of two independent contributions to the N400, and suggest that
living items are processed automatically on the basis of feature representations within semantic memory whereas nonliving items are dependent
on controlled processing of semantic context within working memory.

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

recently observed that in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI),
a stage of increased memory loss preceding Alzheimer’s disease, recollection is impaired but familiarity-based recognition is preserved. We tested
forced-choice and yes-no recognition using silhouette object drawings
with high target-foil resemblance, and theorized that forced-choice but
not yes-no recognition could be mediated by familiarity alone. To investigate the neural basis of familiarity in MCI, we measured atrophy in MTL
subregions, including entorhinal, perirhinal, and parahippocampal cortices and the hippocampus. These regions were drawn on structural MRI
scans according to anatomical criteria, yielding volume measures for
each region. Compared to age-matched controls, MCI patients exhibited
impaired yes-no but not forced-choice recognition, indicating a preservation of familiarity-based recognition. Furthermore, across-subject correlations between forced-choice recognition and volumes of specific MTL
regions implicated brain areas relevant for processing of familiarity signals. Results are discussed with respect to neurocognitive theories of recollection and familiarity, and to ideas about neural disruption
responsible for memory deficits in MCI.

G73
THE BENEFICIAL EFFECT OF AFFIRMATIVE RESPONSES ON
EPISODIC MEMORY ENCODING Bernhard Staresina, Lila Davachi;
New York University — It has been reported that items for which subjects
provide an affirmative response during encoding tasks will be better
remembered on subsequent memory tests than items given a non-affirmative response (Schulman, 1974; Craik and Tulving, 1975), and it has
been suggested that this effect results from enhanced elaboration/relational encoding during congruent encoding trials. In order to further
understand the processes supporting this mnemonic benefit, we used
fMRI while subjects performed two different encoding tasks and compared brain activation for encoding trials given an affirmative response
to those given a non-affirmative response. In one task (plausibility task),
subjects were asked to decide whether a given word/color combination
was plausible or implausible, while in another task (valence task), they
were asked to indicate whether the combination was appealing or unappealing. After encoding, memory for the study words and related episodic details was assessed. The behavioral results replicate previous
reports in showing that a greater proportion of affirmative responses
from both tasks were later recognized compared to non-affirmative
responses (both p’s < .02). Furthermore, this effect was statistically more
pronounced for hits accompanied with episodic detail (both p’s < .005).
Interestingly, initial fMRI analyses of the encoding trials reveal enhanced
engagement during affirmative compared to non-affirmative responses
in a set of brain regions including the anterior left inferior frontal gyrus
(LIFG). Given the putative involvement of LIFG in controlled semantic
retrieval, our data suggest that affirmative responses may enhance memory encoding by enhancing semantic elaboration or relational integration
of each encoding unit.

G75
NEURAL CORRELATES OF FAMILIARITY-BASED ASSOCIATIVE
RECOGNITION:
EFFECTS
OF
UNITIZATION
DURING
ENCODING Andy Haskins1, Andy Yonelinas1, Joel Quamme2, Charan
Ranganath1; 1University of California at Davis, 2Princeton University — Recognition memory can be supported by assessing the familiarity of an
item, and by the recollection of associated information. Recent data from
neuroimaging, human amnesics, and animal models suggest that the perirhinal cortex encodes representations that support familiarity-based
item recognition, whereas the hippocampus encodes representations that
specifically support recollection. However, some findings suggest that
the perirhinal cortex may be sufficient to support associative recognition
under some circumstances. Although associative recognition relies
heavily on recollection, there is evidence that familiarity can support
associative recognition when items are encoded as a single coherent unit,
or “unitized”. Here, we tested the hypothesis that the perirhinal cortex
can support familiarity-based recognition of unitized associations. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to examine brain
activity while participants performed two encoding tasks: one in which
they encoded noun-pairs as a single compound noun ("unitized"); and
another in which they encoded the pairs as separate lexical units in a sentence ("non-unitized"). Analysis of behavioral data from the subsequent
associative recognition test showed that unitization disproportionately
increased familiarity ratings, with little increase in recollection. fMRI
analyses identified a region in left perirhinal cortex that was more active
for unitized trials and where encoding activity monotonically increased
with subsequent familiarity ratings. Critically, activation in this region
was predictive of subsequent familiarity ratings, but not recollection.
This finding is consistent with the idea that perirhinal cortex encodes
item representations that can support familiarity-based recognition of
unitized associations.

G74
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN MEDIAL TEMPORAL VOLUME AND
RECOGNITION TESTED WITH YES-NO AND FORCED-CHOICE
FORMATS
IN
PATIENTS
WITH
MILD
COGNITIVE
IMPAIRMENT Carmen E. Westerberg1, Susan M. Florczak1, Todd B.
Parrish1, Sandra Weintraub1, M-Marsel Mesulam1, Andrew R. Mayes2, Paul J.
Reber1, Ken A. Paller1; 1Northwestern University, 2University of
Manchester — Recognition can be guided by recollection, which occurs
when retrieval is sufficient to support the full experience of remembering
an episode, or by familiarity, a restricted form of retrieval devoid of contextual recall. Both are thought to depend on the medial temporal lobe
(MTL), but the contribution of specific MTL subregions to each is highly
controversial. Recollection and familiarity may both rely on integrated
processing across MTL subregions, or alternatively, distinct areas of the
MTL may be specialized for different types of memory processing. We

G76
AN
FMRI
STUDY
OF
AGING
AND
QUALITATIVE
CHARACTERISTICS OF MEMORIES Suzanne M. Bloise, Karen J.
Mitchell, Carol L. Raye, Erich J. Greene, Shannon M. Turbidy, Marcia K.
Johnson; Yale University — We investigated age-related differences in
memory for complex pictures and associated neural activity using fMRI
and objective and subjective memory measures. In an incidental encoding task, older (n = 13) and younger (n = 16) participants studied a set of
complex photographs accompanied by short descriptive labels. Following a brief delay, participants saw a list of studied and new labels and
made three judgments of subjective experience about their memory for
each item - old/new, perceptual detail, and feelings/reactions - using a
Memory Characteristic Questionnaire (Johnson et al., 1988). Participants
were scanned during study and test. Younger and older adults showed
different patterns of neural activity at test associated with rating percep-

241

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

tual information and emotional information. We compare correlations
between brain activity during encoding and during remembering with
subjective memory ratings for younger and older adults and discuss the
implications of these correlations for age differences in the subjective
experience of remembering.
G77
CAN FORCED-CHOICE RECOGNITION PERFORMANCE BE
SUPPORTED BY IMPLICIT MEMORY? Ken A. Paller1, Joel L. Voss1, Carol
L. Baym2; 1Northwestern University, 2University of California, Davis — Explicit
memory can be assessed using yes-no and forced-choice recognition tests.
However, memory-impaired patients who perform poorly on yes-no
tests can sometimes succeed on forced-choice tests with similar foils.
These findings have been taken to indicate that familiarity-based recognition is intact in these individuals. Can forced-choice recognition in these
circumstances be supported by fluency-related implicit memory? Under
this scenario, when a studied item is presented simultaneously with similar foils, fluent processing might provide a cue to select the old item, irrespective of experiences of recollection or familiarity. We examined
recognition of kaleidoscope images in two experiments using an attentional-load manipulation during encoding (concomitant auditory N-back
odd/even judgments). Prior results suggest that such manipulations can
impact both recollection and familiarity, but sometimes not implicit
memory. Encoding under divided-attention compared to full-attention
conditions produced a drastic reduction in yes-no recognition and,
remarkably, an enhancement in forced-choice recognition. This crossover
interaction could not result merely from differential sensitivity of recollection and familiarity to attentional load at encoding. With poor encoding, subjects may alter strategies at test to preferentially rely on implicit
memory or fluency signals. We cannot rule out the possibility that poor
encoding also influences the type of information available at test. When
nameable objects were used in a third experiment, yes-no performance
was disproportionately diminished by attentional load. The crossover
interaction, however, was restricted to kaleidoscope recognition, suggesting that a potential role for implicit memory in recognition performance
may be restricted to special circumstances.
G78
BRAIN REGIONS INVOLVED IN THE RETRIEVAL OF SPATIAL
VERSUS NONSPATIAL INFORMATION IN EPISODIC AND
SEMANTIC MEMORY: AN FMRI STUDY Siobhan Hoscheidt1, Jessica
Payne2, Lee Ryan3, Lynn Nadel3; 1University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ,
2
Harvard University, Boston, MA, 3University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ — The
hippocampus is thought to be critical for episodic but not semantic memory retrieval. This difference may arise due to the confounding influence
of spatial context. To examine the role of the hippocampus in the retrieval
of spatial context, we experimentally varied spatial information in a
semantic and episodic memory retrieval task. Subjects (N=18), aged 2030, recalled 30 autobiographical events during an interview. A week later,
during an fMRI scan, participants answered “True/False” questions
regarding autobiographies and world knowledge. Varying spatial content of semantic and episodic items yielded 4 conditions: Spatial episodic,
Nonspatial episodic, Spatial semantic, and Nonspatial semantic. Images
were collected on a General Electric 3.0T Signa VH/i scanner, 30 axial
sections covering whole brain, 4mm skip 0, TR=2040, TE=30ms,
FOV=240. Data were analyzed using SPM99. Spatial compared to nonspatial conditions yielded greater hippocampal activation regardless of
memory type. These results are consistent with the notion that the hippocampus participates preferentially in the retrieval of spatial compared
to nonspatial information and suggests that this is true for both episodic
and semantic memory. However, within the hippocampus differences
were observed between memory conditions; episodic retrieval eliciting
activation in the posterior hippocampus and semantic retrieval eliciting
activation in anterior hippocampus. Other regions showed differential
activation during spatial and nonspatial retrieval in episodic but not
semantic memory tasks. These regions include the left parahippocampal

242

Memory: Memory systems

gyrus, medial frontal gyrus, precuneus, and anterior cingulate. Activation observed in the latter three regions was left lateralized for nonspatial
retrieval and bilateral during retrieval of spatial information.
G79
TRIAL-BY-TRIAL COMPUTATIONAL MODEL OF CATEGORY
LEARNING APPLIED TO FMRI DATA Emi Nomura1, W. T. Maddox2,
D. R. Gitelman1, T. B. Parrish1, M. M. Mesulam1, P. J. Reber1; 1Northwestern
University, 2University of Texas, Austin — Visual category learning can be
accomplished in a number of different ways depending on the category
structure. In rule-based (RB) learning the categories are defined by a verbalizable rule. In information-integration (II) learning the category definition is less verbalizable and depends on integrating 2 or more stimulus
dimensions. Whole-brain event-related fMRI of these learning processes
revealed distinct neural correlates in the MTL and the posterior caudate
here (31 participants; 3T GE MRI, TR=2000ms, TE=25ms, 40 3mm axial
slices) and in a previous study (Nomura et al., 2006) during successful RB
and II category learning, respectively. These structures are also components of a cognitive model of category learning: the COVIS model (COmpetition between Verbal and Implicit Systems) proposed by Ashby
(Ashby, Alfonso-Reese et al. 1998). In this model, 2 learning systems compete to provide a response: an explicit, rule-based system dependent
upon working memory and attention; and an implicit, procedural learning system. To test the psychological reality of this model, we developed
a computational model based on COVIS that attempts to represent the
cognitive state of the participant on every trial. The model assumes that
both RB and II systems attempt to learn the categories, so within a given
subject, trials (and associated fMRI activity) can be selected that more
cleanly reflect an RB or II strategy. By combining fMRI and computational modeling in this way, we are attempting to make the connection
between cognitive models of behavior and specific neural representations.
G80
NEURAL CORRELATES OF DECISION-MAKING DURING FACE
RECOGNITION Itamar Kahn1,2, Randy Buckner1,2; 1HHMI at Harvard
University, 2Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, MGH — Recognition
memory depends on the medial temporal lobe and is supported by processes associated with the recovery of information from memory. However, neuroimaging studies have also demonstrated that retrieval is
accompanied by activation in prefrontal cortex, and lateral and medial
parietal cortices that may play a role in integrating such information during memory decisions. This possibility motivated the present effort to
characterize the relation between memory and such modulatory and
decision-making processes. In the current study, we used fMRI (n=37; 3T
12-channel coil) to assess the contribution of cortical regions to recognition of previously encountered faces. At encoding, participants made
female/male gender judgment about presented novel faces. Following a
15-min retention interval, a surprise recognition memory test for the
studied faces was administered. At test, participants were required to
make recognition memory judgments by pressing one of four buttons
providing a sliding scale of how confident they were the face was
encountered previously. The neural data were assessed for effects of recognition memory, graded neural responses correlated with the subjective
perception that faces are old, and judgment confidence. Results revealed
that lateral and medial parietal responses are sensitive to the subjective
perception that the faces are old. In contrast, prefrontal responses, along
the anterior end of the inferior frontal gyrus were sensitive to confidence,
but not memory status of the faces. These results indicate that the parietal
cortex and prefrontal cortex differentially contribute to recognition memory decisions. Supported by: HHMI.

Memory: Memory systems

G81
LEFT FRONTAL CORTEX ACTIVITY DURING TASK IRRELEVANT
STIMULUS REPETITION: AN OPTICAL IMAGING AND
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS Trevor Penney1, Chun-Yu
Tse2, Kwun-Kei Ng3, Ming Lui4; 1National University of Singapore, Singapore,
2
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, 3The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, SAR, 4Northwestern University — Stimuli are typically classified
more quickly on second, as compared to first, presentation. FMRI experiments indicate that this behavioral priming effect is accompanied by
reductions in neural activity across a range of cortical areas including the
prefrontal cortex and electrophysiological studies reveal that stimulus
repetition elicits increased positivity in the event-related potential (ERP)
waveform. Proposed accounts for the repetition effect include that it
reflects tuning of neural representations and that it is a consequence of
rapid learning of previous responses. To examine the spatial and temporal characteristics of the repetition suppression phenomenon, we simultaneously recorded the event-related optical signal (EROS), a measure of
the phase changes that occur in frequency modulated near-infrared light
as it passes through activated brain tissue, from the left frontal cortex and
ERPs from midline electrode sites while participants performed a stimulus classification task. Specifically, participants classified pictures of
objects according to whether or not their real-world equivalents were
longer than one meter. Two thirds of the stimuli were repeated and these
repetitions were either immediate (50%) or followed a lag of 3-6 pictures.
Preliminary analysis of the optical data from twelve participants, collapsed over immediate and lagged repetitions, revealed that stimulus
repetitions elicited reduced left frontal activity from 350 to 400 ms after
stimulus onset. We have subsequently recorded data from an additional
16 participants and will present analyses of immediate and lagged repetitions as well as analyses of the correspondences between reaction time,
EROS, and ERP measures.
G82
EVENT-RELATED FUNCTIONAL-MRI SHOWS ACTIVATION OF
COMMON NETWORKS FOR PERSON IDENTITY WITH FACES
AND NAMES Kristy A. Nielson1,2, William L. Gross2, Amelia Gander2,
Leslie Guidotti3, John L. Woodard3,2, Michael Seidenberg3,2, Sally Durgerian2,
Stephen M. Rao2; 1Marquette University, 2Medical College of Wisconsin,
3Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science — This study examined the functional networks associated with processing faces and proper
names, and how those networks are distinguished by semantic processing for person identity. Twenty healthy adults (10 female; age = 27.6
years, s.d. = 6.71; education = 17.1 years, s.d.=2.4) performed a person
recognition task consisting of 100, 3.8 s, randomly ordered trials including 25 famous names, 25 unfamiliar names, 25 famous faces and 25 unfamiliar faces. Thirty-six contiguous 4-mm axial echo-planar images were
collected at 3.0 T (TR = 2 s; TE = 25 ms; flip angle = 77 degrees; FOV = 24
mm; matrix 64x64) with SPGR anatomic co-localization. Deconvolution
analysis extracted a hemodynamic response function for each stimulus
type, allowing area-under-the-curve analysis (4-8 s post-stimulus) by
ANOVA between conditions. Although there were activation similarities,
faces produced greater activation than names principally in right hemisphere regions (e.g., lateral occipital, inferotemporal and medial frontal),
while names produced greater activation than faces in extensive left and
bilateral regions (e.g., bilateral medial occipital and fusiform, bilateral
hippocampal, and left superior and inferior parietal, temporal-parietal
junction, insula, and prefrontal gyri). Famous stimuli of either type produced greater activation than unfamiliar stimuli in the bilateral posterior
cingulate, left superior and medial frontal gyri, left temporal pole, right
middle temporal gyrus, right hippocampal region, left insula, and the left
temporal-parietal-occipital junction. Few interactions resulted between
stimulus conditions. The study supports differential pre-semantic processing of faces and names, but common processing for accessing the
semantic associations of person identity.

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

G83
IMPAIRED CATEGORY LEARNING IN PATIENTS WITH DAMAGE
TO PREFRONTAL CORTEX David Schnyer1, Shawn Ell2, Sarah Davis3,
Todd Maddox1, Mieke Verfaellie3; 1University of Texas, 2University of Maine,
3Boston VA Healthcare System and Boston University School of Medicine —
Previous research has demonstrated that patients with damage to the
basal ganglia are impaired at rule-based (RB) category learning due to the
inefficient application of decision strategies (Ell, et al, 2006). While BG
structures play a demonstrated role in category learning, the effective
implementation of decision rules has also been shown to be critically
dependent on regions of prefrontal cortex. The current study examined
the role of prefrontal cortex in category learning. Six non-amnesic
patients with damage primarily to medial prefrontal regions were found
to be significantly impaired both in the rate of category learning as well
as the overall level of learning relative to matched controls. Additionally,
this impairment was found to extend to both the rule based (RB) learning,
previous demonstrated to be impaired with BG damage, and that based
on perceptual information integration (II). These results demonstrate that
in addition to the BG, the prefrontal cortex also plays a critical role in the
acquisition and implementation of new category learning. Work continues with additional medial and laterally damaged frontal patients in
order to more fully understand possible dissociations in the structure/
function relationships between RB and II category learning.
G84
MEMORY ENHANCEMENT BY REWARD DEPENDS ON REWARD
FEATURES Bianca Wittmann1, Emrah Duzel2,3; 1Wellcome Department of
Imaging Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, University College London,
2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, 3Otto von
Guericke University, Magdeburg — Items associated with monetary reward
have been shown to elicit higher episodic memory performance. To
investigate the features of rewarding events that are relevant for this
memory enhancement, we used two paradigms that differed in the cue
character of the study stimuli. 150 neutral words were presented in each
study, followed by a potentially rewarded number comparison task. One
third of the trials were associated with no reward, _0.20, or _0.40, respectively. Participants received feedback after each rewarded trial. In the
first paradigm, the reward status of each trial was indicated by the color
of the study word, and participants made a living/object judgement on
the word to ensure deep encoding. In the second paradigm, the reward
status was indicated by the semantic category of the word, which was
indicated by the participants. One day later, memory for all words was
tested using a remember/know procedure. In the first paradigm, there
was no improvement of either recognition or recollection by either of the
reward magnitudes. In the second paradigm, reward increased both recognition and recollection, and increasing reward was associated with
increasing memory performance. These data indicate that the strength of
the association between the study stimulus and the upcoming reward
determines the memory effects of reward, and that the magnitude of the
memory improvement relates to the magnitude of reward.
G85
MODELING WORKING MEMORY SPAN WITH AN ATTRACTOR
NEURAL NETWORK Scott Weems1, Ransom Winder2, Michael Bunting
1
, James Reggia2; 1University of Maryland, 2University of Maryland — Working memory capacity is limited to roughly four items, although capacity
varies with individual, as well as with the efficacy of the working memory task to minimize articulatory rehearsal. The goal of the current work
is to measure working memory capacity in a computational model performing a simulated running memory span task, in which rapidly presented letters are retained for later recall. Running memory span is
particularly useful because it provides a memory capacity measure generally free of rehearsal. Unlike previous modeling efforts that use a local
representation and competitive inhibition to induce capacity limitations,
our auto-associative model uses a distributed representation and activity

243

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

decay. Memory limitations in the model stem from both limited model
size (i.e., number of nodes relative to number of items to be stored), as
well as rapid decay of connection weights between nodes. These features
are intended to mirror capacity limitations due to memory interference
and forgetting in humans, respectively. Model results resemble performance in humans collected separately, with strong retention for recent
items but capacity limitations reducing availability for older items. We
conclude that limited network size and decay interactively influence
memory capacity, suggesting that working memory capacity limitations
in humans are an inherent trait of a distributed representation when the
representation is subject to interference and forgetting.

Memory: Other
G86
SLEEP AND MEMORY CONSOLIDATION FOR SEMANTICALLYRELATED VERSUS UNRELATED WORD PAIRS Jessica
Payne1,2,
2
2
1
Matthew Walker , Jeffrey Ellenbogen , Daniel Schacter , Robert Stickgold2;
1
Harvard University, 2Harvard Medical School — Whether sleep influences
the consolidation of declarative memory is of interest to both the sleepand memory-research communities. Recent studies suggest that sleep
plays a beneficial role in the consolidation of verbal declarative memories. However, these studies typically test memory after 3 hours of earlynight sleep, or after 3 hours of late-night sleep (e.g. Plihal and Born, 1997,
1999). Few verbal memory studies have shown that declarative memory
is facilitated across an entire night of sleep. Plihal and Born (1997, 1999)
used a paired-associate list-learning task in which the word-pairs were
semantically related to one another. Here, we compared performance on
these original, semantically-related word-pairs to performance on a
matched list of unrelated word-pairs after 12 daytime hours spent awake,
12 nighttime hours containing a full night of sleep, or after 24 hours as a
circadian control. Interestingly, participants recalled significantly more
unrelated words after a period of sleep than after an equivalent period of
wake. Thus, while verbal declarative memories appear to benefit from a
full night of sleep, it was the semantically unrelated words that showed
the greatest enhancement. Our results suggest that sleep might benefit
new semantic relationships, and the consolidation and integration of
these relationships into pre-existing neocortical memory stores.
G87
EMOTIONAL MEMORY DISRUPTION FOLLOWING PREFRONTAL
TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION Katherine
Vytal1,
Charles Epstein2, Andrew Ehrenberg2, Stephan Hamann1; 1Emory University,
2Emory University School of Medicine — Evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging and lesion studies implicates the left prefrontal
cortex (PFC) in positive emotion processing and the right PFC in negative
emotion processing (Davidson, 1999). We used transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) to examine the effect of transient inactivation of the
left or right dorsolateral PFC (DLPFC) on memory encoding for positive
and negative words. We predicted that stimulation of the right DLPFC
would interfere with processing of negative emotion and thus reduce the
memory enhancement typically observed for negative emotional stimuli.
We also predicted that stimulation of the left DLPFC would reduce the
memory enhancement typically observed for positive emotional stimuli.
Subjects viewed lists of emotional and neutral words presented in different quadrants of a computer screen. At 200ms and 350ms post-stimulus
onset, participants were stimulated (110% motor threshold) at three different sites: left DLPFC, right DLPFC, or vertex. Free recall, recognition,
and source memory (item location) were tested after each list. Consistent
with predictions, the expected emotional memory effect for negative
words was found for stimuli encoded during vertex TMS, but was absent
following right and left DLPFC stimulation. Enhanced emotional memory for positive words observed during vertex TMS and was reduced following left DLPFC stimulation but not right DLPFC or vertex

244

Memory: Other

stimulation. These findings are broadly consistent with theories emphasizing prefrontal emotion-related hemispheric asymmetries and suggest
that TMS can interfere with emotional episodic memory encoding.
G88
RELATIONAL ENCODING LEADS TO GREATER ENGAGEMENT
OF PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN LOWER THAN HIGHERPERFORMING ELDERLY Eric Leshikar1, Angela Gutchess2, Andrew
Hebrank1, Bradley Sutton1, Robert Welsh3, Denise Park1; 1University of IllinoisUrbana-Champaign, 2Harvard University, 3University of Michigan — The
present study examined the impact of task difficulty during encoding on
neural activations in older adults. Eighteen elderly adults incidentally
encoded 120 pairs of line-drawings in an event-related fMRI design.
Objects in each pair were either semantically related or unrelated, and
subjects were instructed to form associations between the two items
using a sentence integration task. For the unrelated condition, both
groups exhibited poorer behavioral performance in the integration task,
and poorer subsequent recognition of the unrelated pairs, relative to the
related pairs, demonstrating that the unrelated task was more difficult. A
median split based on recognition accuracy was used to divide the elderly into performance groups. Using a random effects analysis, neural
activations associated with unrelated items were contrasted with related
items. The lower-performing elderly exhibited bilateral anterior prefrontal and left dorsolateral prefrontal activity to a greater extent than the
higher-performing elderly for the encoding of unrelated compared to
related pairs. The higher-performing group showed no significant activation greater than that of the lower-performing group. In contrast to previous findings, increased cortical recruitment was associated with lowerperforming and not higher-performing older adults. The results suggest
that increased activity in frontal areas is compensatory, and that the initial level of ability of a subject combined with task difficulty may determine whether compensatory circuitry is activated by higher- or lowerperforming elderly. In this case, it appears the semantic integration task
was not so challenging that higher ability elderly required compensatory
neural activity to perform it, unlike the lower ability elderly.
G89
AN EEG STUDY OF IMPLICIT LANDMARK RECOGNITION
DURING VIRTUAL NAVIGATION Matthew Mollison, Joshua Jacobs,
Igor Korolev, Michael Kahana; University of Pennsylvania — We
studied
implicit landmark recognition by having participants take on the role of a
taxi driver in three-dimensional virtual reality (VR) environments. During the task, electrical activity on the scalp was measured at 128 locations
while we recorded their navigation throughout the environment. Eventrelated potentials (ERPs) were calculated for a time period surrounding
the appearance of target and non-target locations on the computer screen,
showing the cortical activation during the implicit recognition of these
landmarks. Statistical tests reveal that scalp-recorded stimulus-locked
voltage fluctuations are significantly more positive in the left parietal
area of the scalp during the viewing of target (match) as opposed to nontarget (mismatch) locations, and in the right frontal area with mismatch
voltage being greater than that of match events, with a deflection in the
ERP waveform beginning at approximately 400--500 ms. The topographies of the match/mismatch recognition modalities seen here are similar to the those first described in Squires et al. (1975) for the P300
recognition effect. Bayliss & Ballard (2000) found a P300 recognition
effect over a centro-parietal site in a VR task, and building on this literature, we believe that we are seeing the same effect. Our findings provide
evidence for significant differences in neural activity between two
related, but functionally different, conditions in a complex spatial navigation task.

Memory: Other

G90
THE DEFAULT MODE ENIGMA: ACTIVITY IN LATERAL
PARIETAL AND POSTERIOR MIDLINE REGIONS IS BENEFICIAL
FOR
EPISODIC
RETRIEVAL
BUT
DETRIMENTAL
TO
ENCODING Steven Prince1, Sander Daselaar2, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke
University, 2University of Amsterdam — The posterior midline region
(PMR) and lateral parietal cortex (LPC) tend to show deactivation during
demanding cognitive tasks, and have been associated with the default
mode of the brain. Understanding when default regions are activated and
deactivated clarifies the processes comprising the default mode. Interestingly, PMR and LPC activity has been associated with successful episodic
retrieval but also with unsuccessful episodic encoding. These findings
suggest that successful retrieval is a component of the default mode of
the brain, but successful encoding is not. Here, we directly tested the prediction that PMR and LPC would be more activated for hits than for
misses during retrieval but less activated for subsequent hits than for
misses during encoding. In four different fMRI experiments using faces,
scenes, word pairs, and single words we found reliable phase (encoding/
retrieval) x success (hit/miss) interactions in both PMR and LPC. Confirming our prediction, during encoding, activity in these regions was
greater for subsequent misses than for subsequent hits, whereas during
retrieval, activity was greater for hits than for misses. The results suggest
that successful retrieval is a component of the default mode whereas successful encoding is not. In fact, successful encoding is associated with a
disengagement from the default mode. These findings have direct implications for current memory models, and clarify the function of a component of the default mode network. Currently, individual trial correlation
analyses separated by mnemonic outcome (hit vs. miss) are being conducted to shed more light on default mode connectivity during encoding
and retrieval.
G91
CAN YOU FORGET ANYTHING YOU WANT? ERP CORRELATES
OF DIRECTED FORGETTING OF UNPLEASANT WORDS Anne
Hauswald, Johanna Kissler; University of Konstanz — Directed
forgetting
experiments show that people can intentionally forget material designated as unimportant. When, after learning, a list is marked as ‘to-be-forgotten’ (F-list) its contents are recalled more poorly than the contents of a
‘to-be-remembered’ list (R-list) on a surprise final recall. This effect demonstrates the costs of directed forgetting. However, benefits also occur:
When additional lists are learned after an F-list these are better remembered than those learned after an R-list. Using both behavioural and electrophysiological measures (ERPs), we address the question whether the
costs and benefits of intentional forgetting can be found with emotionally
unpleasant material. EEG was recorded from 64 channels while 22 subjects learned four lists of words varying in emotional content (neutral or
unpleasant). F-lists consisted of negative words and were followed by Rlists of neutral words. A control condition included two R-lists, the first
consisting of unpleasant, the second of neutral words. Directed forgetting occurred in spite of the unpleasant content of the words. Additionally, ERPs recorded during learning displayed an enhanced sustained
central negativity between 850 and1250 ms when a list was preceded by
an R-list which had to be held in memory. This effect was absent for lists
learned after the F-lists which subjects did not have to keep in memory.
Thus, in normal volunteers directed forgetting can extend to emotionally
unpleasant contents, resulting both in forgetting of the unpleasant material learned and enhanced memory of subsequently learned material. The
ERP results suggest that availability of memory capacity can explain the
benefits.
G92
DO MEN AND WOMEN USE DIFFERENT STRATEGIES FOR
LARGE-SCALE ENVIRONMENTAL LEARNING? Amy Shelton; Johns
Hopkins University — Sex differences in spatial skills have long been
reported in the literature (Montello et al., 1999). However, in large-scale
environmental learning, we have found only limited evidence for differ-

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

ences between men and women in behavioral performance (Fields &
Shelton, 2006; Shelton & McNamara, 2004). The present study explored
whether the similarity in behavioral performance should be taken as evidence against sex differences, or if the similarity might be due to the use
of different but equally effective encoding strategies (Lawton, 1994,1996;
Pazzaglia & DeBeni, 2001). During fMRI scans, participants learned two
different large-scale virtual environments from the ground-level and
aerial perspectives. Overall, the different encoding conditions replicated
previously observed brain distinctions. The brain activation patterns for
men and women were contrasted for each encoding type and control conditions. Despite finding no sex differences in the post-scan memory performance, results revealed significant differences between men and
women in the activation of prefrontal, parietal, and medial temporal lobe
structures. Moreover, these sex differences varied for ground-level and
aerial encoding conditions, supporting hypotheses about strategies and
spatial preferences. Measures of individual differences on other spatial
skills were also related to activation differences in these regions, but they
could not account for all of the observed sex differences. The findings
weigh in on sex difference in spatial skills but also address the more general notion of having equivalent alternative strategies for learning.
G93
UNDERSTANDING DOPAMINE FUNCTION IN COGNITIVE
SEQUENCE LEARNING: DISSOCIATION BETWEEN SEQUENCE
LEARNING AND WORKING MEMORY LOAD Monica Andrawis1,
Catherine Myers1, Martin Guthrie1, Mauricio Delgado1, Mark Gluck1, Daphna
Shohamy2,3; 1Rutgers University-Newark, 2Stanford University, 3Columbia
University — Electrophysiological studies suggest that dopamine neurons respond to unexpected rewards and cues that predict reward. This
dopamine response shifts backwards in time to signal the earliest predictor of reward among a sequence of stimuli. Parkinson’s disease (PD)
involves loss of dopaminergic neurons and may therefore disrupt learning to predict rewards based on a sequence of stimuli. Previous studies
have shown that unmedicated PD patients are impaired at learning a
sequence of stimuli (doors in colored rooms) that leads to a reward, and
their impairment increased with increasing sequence lengths. One question is whether this deficit reflects a problem with sequence learning, or
with working memory. Additionally, in the original task, punishment
may have been inadvertently provided for wrong responses during intermediate phases, rather than being withheld until the end of the sequence.
Here, we have revised the task to dissociate sequence length from memory load components of the task and to withhold all feedback until the
end of the sequence. In healthy young adults the revised task was no
more difficult than a control version with equivalent working memory
load but no sequence learning. There was no correlation between
sequence learning and dopamine function estimated by Cloninger’s Tridimensional Personality Questionnaire (TPQ). This suggests that PD
patients’ deficit on the prior task may have been due to impairments in
working memory rather than chaining. Future studies are planned to test
PD patients on this task to investigate their ability to learn a sequence in
the absence of intervening feedback.
G94
HUMAN
ENTORHINAL
NEURONS
ENCODE
ROUTE
INFORMATION Joshua Jacobs1, Michael Kahana1, Arne Ekstrom2,
Matthew Mollison1, Itzhak Fried2; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2University of
California, Los Angeles — This work studies the neuronal correlates of
route navigation in humans. We recorded single-neuron activity from
epilepsy patients while they played Yellow Cab, a spatial-navigation
video game. In this variant of Yellow Cab, subjects used a handheld joystick to drive between randomly selected stores arranged on the outside
of a square track. The center of this track was closed, limiting movement
to either clockwise or counterclockwise directions. We compared the
activity of each neuron with the subject's simultaneous behavior in the
task. We identified neurons that were preferentially active during a particular movement direction (e.g., a "clockwise cell" had a greater firing

245

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

rate when the subject was driving in a clockwise direction than when
they were driving in a counterclockwise direction). These cells were especially prevalent in the entorhinal cortex (EC). These findings indicate that
the EC plays an important role in route-based navigation, and supports
the idea that the EC plays a general role in cognition by representing contextual information.
G95
AN EXPLORATION OF DECISION PROCESSES USING
PROLONGED RECOGNITION TASKS Elisabeth
Ploran1,
Steve
Nelson2, David Donaldson3, Steve Petersen2, Mark Wheeler1; 1University of
Pittsburgh, 2Washington University at St. Louis, 3University of Stirling — Recognition requires the gradual accumulation of evidence in support of
memory decisions, yet is often associated with the experience of a sudden
insight or realization. We examined activity associated with the moment
of recognition, and the time course of activity leading up to recognition.
Masked word and picture items were revealed gradually over 14 seconds
and subjects responded with a button press at the moment they could
identify the items. Subjects verified their earlier recognition decision with
a second button press at the end of the trial. Recognition decisions were
spread across a relatively wide temporal window to account for the low
temporal resolution of fMRI. We compared within-trial recognition and
verification events to identify regions that were more active during the
moment of recognition than verification. We then sorted trials based on
the time of recognition and extracted time courses over the entire length
of the trial. Using a hierarchical cluster analysis, we found three notable
patterns of activity. First, activity in some visual regions increased gradually as the amount of visual information increased, peaking activity near
the end of the trial regardless of recognition timing. Second, activity in
bilateral inferior parietal lobe, thalamus, and precuneus gradually
increased up to the point of recognition. Third, bilateral anterior insula /
frontal operculum, anterior cingulate, and caudate showed transient
activity at recognition. The findings indicate three distinct neural processes related to recognition: perceptual accumulation, evidence accumulation, and the moment of recognition.
G96
WHEN
UNWANTED
MEMORIES
INTRUDE:
REACTIVE
CONTROL OVER STOPPING RETRIEVAL Benjamin J. Levy, Michael
C. Anderson; University of Oregon — Preventing an unwanted memory
from entering awareness makes that memory harder to recall later
(Anderson & Green, 2001). This finding has been explained by the
recruitment of executive control mechanisms that inhibit the avoided
memory and make it less accessible. Subjects frequently report, however,
that on some trials they fail at this suppression task and the unwanted
memory “intrudes” into conscious awareness. Here we investigate how
these “intrusions” relate to successful inhibition by adapting the “think/
no think” (TNT) procedure. Specifically, after each trial we had subjects
report to what extent the corresponding memory came to mind. In Exp. 1,
we found that subsequent memory impairment was predicted by the rate
at which subjects’ intrusions declined in frequency with practice at suppressing these memories. This suggests that the ability to down-regulate
intrusions may be key to successful inhibition. In Exp. 2, we attempted to
manipulate the frequency of intrusions by varying the prepotency of the
to-be-suppressed memory. As expected, strengthening initial learning
successfully increased the frequency of intrusions. Finally, in Exp. 3 we
used fMRI to identify the neural markers of the intrusion experience,
allowing us to characterize the pattern of activity related to both successful inhibitory control and failed inhibitory control for control-related
regions (e.g., lateral prefrontal cortex) and neural targets of suppression
(e.g., hippocampus).

246

Memory: Other

G97
THE
EXPRESSION
OF
HIPPOCAMPALLY-DEPENDENT
LEARNING IN NREM SLEEP AND ITS RELATION TO SLEEP
MENTATION Erin J. Wamsley, John S. Antrobus; The City College of New
York — Despite accumulating evidence that consolidation of declarative
memories is facilitated by the neural “replay” of experiences during
sleep, little empirical work has addressed the speculation that dreaming
may represent a cognitive component of this memory consolidation.
Here, we experimentally induced hippocampally-mediated memory
reactivation during NREM sleep and observed the effects of this manipulation on EEG and heart-rate conditioned responses (CR’s) as well as on
dream content. “Trace” conditioning is a hippocampally-dependent task
which provides a simple model of declarative memory. In contrast, traditional “Delay” conditioning is not hippocampally dependent. Prior to
sleep, subjects underwent either Trace or Delay differential auditory fear
conditioning. The conditioned stimulus cue (CS+) and control cue (CS-)
were then presented to subjects during stage 2 NREM sleep. Dream
reports were elicited following each cue presentation. Both Delay-conditioned and Trace-conditioned participants exhibited conditioned
responses (CR’s) during post-training sleep. Brief (<5 sec) EEG arousals
were more likely to occur in response to the CS+ than to the CS- in both
Trace and Delay participants (F1,35=6.21, p=.02). Delay participants also
exhibited conditioned heart rate acceleration (t18=2.14, p=.04, post-stimulus beats 4-6), whereas Trace participants exhibited conditioned K-complex responses (t17=2.05, p=.05). In Trace-conditioned participants,
where CR’s were hippocampally-mediated, dreamed emotions were significantly more negative in response to the CS+ as compared to the CScue on early trials (t17=2.66, p=.02). These findings strongly support the
hypothesis that hippocampally-dependent declarative learning can be
accessed during NREM sleep, and suggest that hippocampally-mediated
memory reactivation directly influences qualitative characteristics of
ongoing sleep mentation.
G98
SLEEP DEPENDENT CONSOLIDATION OF SEMANTIC AND
NON-SEMANTIC
DECLARATIVE
INFORMATION:
THE
IMPORTANCE OF ADEQUATE ENCODING Matthew
Tucker,
William Fishbein; The City College of New York — The present study examined the effect of a daytime nap containing exclusively non-REM sleep on
semantically unrelated paired associates and two non-semantic declarative memory tasks (the Rey-Osterrieth complex figure task and a spatial
maze learning task). Additionally, for the paired associates task we
assessed depth of stimulus encoding as a modulator of the effect of sleep
on memory – 1/3 of the word pairs were studied with immediate retest
(“tested” word pairs), while the remaining word pairs were studied without immediate retest (“studied” word pairs). The results show that recall
of studied word pairs was similar for nap and wake subjects (p=.2). However, for tested word pairs nap subjects showed a significant improvement in performance compared to wake subjects (p=.02). Overall, nap
and wake subjects demonstrated similar improvement on the two nonsemantic declarative memory tasks. However, performance on both tasks
was enhanced after a nap if subjects encoded the tasks strongly (<50th
percentile) during the learning session (p values<.05). This encoding
effect was also observed for the paired associates task (p<.05). Overall,
the results indicate that NREM sleep facilitates performance on semantic
and non-semantic declarative memory tasks if information is adequately
encoded prior to sleep, either through immediate testing (as with the
paired associates task), or through other possible factors (e.g., heightened
motivation, greater intelligence, etc.). These findings suggest that in addition to the memory domain tested, depth of encoding and subject variables should also be considered as potentially important modulators of
the effect of sleep on memory.

Linguistic processes: Lexicon

G99
SLEEP AND TIME OF DAY EFFECTS IN AN EXPLICIT
SEQUENCING TASK AND A DECLARATIVE MEMORY TASK.
Aysha Keisler1, James Ashe2, Daniel Willingham1; 1University of Virginia,
2Veterans Affairs Medical Center — The role of sleep in memory and learning has received considerable interest in recent years. However, it is difficult to separate the effects of sleep from the effects of time of day and
fatigue. The current research attempts to detangle these factors. Using
handheld computers, we measured learning multiple times across two
days on an explicit sequencing task and a declarative memory task. By
observing performance at many different times of day before and after
sleep, we were able to separately asses the contributions of each factor.
We discuss the relative contributions of sleep and time of day in explicit
and declarative learning.

Linguistic processes: Lexicon
G100
SEX DIFFERENCES IN VISUAL FIELD LATERALIZATION: WHERE
ARE THEY? Christine Chiarello1, Laura K. Halderman1, Suzanne Welcome1,
Janelle Julagay1, Christiana M. Leonard2; 1University of California, Riverside,
2University of Florida, Gainesville — It is frequently claimed that women
have a more bilateral organization for language as compared to men.
However, experimental support for this conjecture has been mixed.
Although sex differences are sometimes obtained in visual half-field
experiments, they rarely replicate, and a recent large-scale study found
little evidence for sex differences in functional lateralization (Boles, 2005).
The Biological Substrates for Language Project affords the opportunity to
investigate this issue in another large-scale study. Male and female participants completed seven divided visual field lexical tasks (word and
nonword naming, lexical decision, masked word recognition, semantic
decision, verb and category generation). The predictors of reaction time
and accuracy asymmetries were examined for each task using multiple
regression in a preliminary analysis of 110 participants. Of 14 total regressions, only two found a significant effect of sex: women had larger asymmetries for lexical decision accuracy, and smaller asymmetries for
category generation accuracy, as compared to men. We will report findings from our total sample of 200. Our data thus far provide little support
for the view that women have reduced behavioral asymmetries as compared to men. Although there are clear individual differences in lateralization, sex does not appear to be a major contributing factor. We
attribute prior findings of sex differences to small sample sizes that may
not be representative of the population.
G101
ARE VOWELS AND CONSONANTS PROCESSED DIFFERENTLY?
ERP EVIDENCE WITH A DELAYED LETTER PARADIGM Manuel
Carreiras, Margaret Gillon-Dowens, Marta Vergara, Manuel Perea;
Universidad de La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain — Previous patient data have
shown a dissociation for consonant and vowel processing, suggesting
that they are categorically different at some processing level (e.g., Caramazza et al, 2000). Specifically, vowels may increase prosodic processing
while consonants may increase lexical-semantic processing. In the
present study, Event Related Potentials (ERPs) were recorded to investigate the neuronal basis of consonant and vowel processing while reading
words and pseudowords in a lexical decision task. The stimuli were displayed in three different conditions: a) simultaneous presentation of all
letters (baseline condition); b) presentation of all letters, except that two
internal consonants were delayed for 50 ms (delayed consonant condition); and c) presentation of all letters, except that two internal vowels
were delayed for 50 ms (delayed vowel condition). The behavioral results
showed that, for words, lexical decision times in the delayed consonant
condition were longer than in the delayed vowel condition, which, in
turn, were longer than in the baseline condition. For nonwords, there

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

were no significant differences across conditions. The ERPs showed that,
starting as early as 150 ms, words in the delayed consonant condition
produced a larger negativity than the delayed vowel condition. This negativity was sustained up to 550 ms after target presentation. In contrast,
ERPs for pseudowords were virtually the same in the two delayed letter
conditions. Latency differences were found between the baseline and the
two delayed letter conditions, both for words and pseudowords. We
examine the implications of these results for models of reading.
G102
HEMISPHERE DIFFERENCES IN THE TIME COURSE OF
PHONOLOGICAL AND ORTHOGRAPHIC PROCESSES: A
BACKWARD MASKING INVESTIGATION. Laura
Halderman1,2,
2 1
2
Christine Chiarello ; University of Pittsburgh, University of California,
Riverside — Backward masking was used to investigate how the right and
left cerebral hemispheres recognize visually presented words pre-lexically. Target words (e.g. crew) were backward masked by nonwords that
were orthographically and phonologically similar (e.g. CRUE), orthographically similar (e.g. CRAE), phonologically similar (e.g. KROO), or
unrelated (e.g. FAMS). The stimuli were presented to either the right or
left visual field using the divided visual field technique. Two SOAs, 20
ms and 60 ms, were investigated to track how orthographic and phonological processes change over time. Participants identified the target
word using a two-alternative choice response (e.g. crew/grew). The
results revealed the right hemisphere gained access to both phonology
and orthography during the earliest moments of word recognition (20 ms
SOA). However, the right hemisphere was benefited to a greater degree
by orthographic similarity than by phonological similarity at both the
short and longer SOAs. The left hemisphere also demonstrated access to
phonology and orthography during the initial moments of word recognition. The effect of both orthographic and phonological similarity (e.g.
CRUE) was not greater than the effect of each type of similarity alone
(e.g. CRAE or KROO) until later moments of word recognition (60 ms
SOA). This suggests the left hemisphere does not summate these two
forms of information until slightly later during word recognition at
which point a deeper representation is available. The results suggest each
hemisphere makes a meaningful contribution to word recognition prior
to lexical access.
G103
LEFT POSTERIOR SUPERIOR TEMPORAL GYRUS PARTICIPATES
SPECIFICALLY IN ACCESSING LEXICAL PHONOLOGY William
Graves1, Thomas Grabowski2, Sonya Mehta2, Prahlad Gupta2; 1Medical College
of Wisconsin, 2University of Iowa — Patients with Wernicke aphasia have
an inability to understand or produce meaningful speech. Careful testing
usually reveals intact semantics, suggesting that the deficit lies in a disruption in either the mapping from semantics to phonology, or in the
phonological representations themselves. Previous studies suggest that
the word frequency effect (where lower frequency words elicit longer
reaction times than higher frequency words) arises at the level of lexical
(word-level) phonological access in word production. In the current fMRI
study we used repetition priming and neural adaptation in an auditory
pseudoword repetition task as a semantics-free model of the word frequency effect. In each run (group of trials), half the stimuli were presented for the first time and half were repeated from the previous run, for
a total of six exposures across the runs. The task was to repeat each
pseudoword aloud as quickly and accurately as possible. As expected,
we observed repetition priming in terms of decreased reaction time and
adaptation in terms of reduced neural activity. To test if the areas exhibiting neural adaptation are relevant to real word production, we submitted
these results to a conjunction analysis with data from a separate fMRI
experiment which manipulated word frequency in picture naming
(Graves et al., in press). The sole activation to survive this conjunction
was in the left posterior superior temporal gyrus, suggesting that this
area participates specifically in accessing lexical phonology.

247

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

G104
DOES THE VWFA COMPUTE AN ABSTRACT ORTHOGRAPHIC
REPRESENTATION? - AN ERP STUDY Cristina Rosazza, Qing Cai,
Yves Paulignan, Tatjana Nazir; Institut des Sciences Cognitives, CNRS, Lyon,
France — The visual word form area (VWFA) is a region in the occipitotemporal cortex that is particularly responsive to visual words. It is supposed to compute an abstract representation of graphemes that is insensitive to variations of surface features such as position, font and size
(Cohen & Dehaene, 2004). However, given that words are generally presented in a horizontal, familiar format, it is not clear whether the VWFA
computes an abstract representation independently of variations in format. The aim is to study the effects of format variations on the recognition of orthographic stimuli (words, pseudowords, consonant-strings) by
analysing event-related potentials (ERPs) in a lexical decision task. If
word recognition is based on the computation of an abstract representation that is independent from surface variations, ERPs should show similar sensitivity to orthographic stimuli displayed vertically and
horizontally. Our results showed that the N1 discriminated stimulus format irrespective of the type of letterstring. In the latency range 190240ms, ERPs to horizontal letter-strings started to differ as a function of
lexicality in the left occipito-temporal area, with the strongest negativity
observed for words, followed by pseudowords and then by consonant
strings. Corresponding ERPs to vertical letter-strings, by contrast, did not
capture the difference between words and pseudowords. In particular,
the interaction between format and type of letter-string was significant
and left-lateralized. The findings suggest that the VWFA is tuned to the
visual familiarity with which letterstrings are encountered in a specific
format (Dehaene et al., 2005), rather than computing an abstract representation of graphemes.
G105
VOWEL PROCESSING IN VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION: ERP
EVIDENCE FOR EARLY PHONOLOGICAL REPRESENTATIONS
IN SKILLED READING Jane Ashby; University of Massachusetts at
Amherst — It is commonly accepted that skilled readers rely on orthographic processing to identify words during silent reading. According to
this view, if skilled readers activate phonological representations for
common words, they do so mainly for purpose of post-lexical processing.
In contrast to this claim, the present study indicates that skilled readers
are sensitive to subtle phonological information quite early in word recognition. Participants silently read single 5 letter words in a masked
priming paradigm; they saw a forward mask, the prime (45 ms), a backward mask, and the target (800 ms). The primes were orthographically
matched pseudowords that had a phonologically similar or different
vowel than the target word. Participants were instructed to read the target words silently. They made semantic judgments to filler items. Analyses of ERP waveforms revealed that the phonological similarity of the
prime’s vowel to the target’s vowel modulated waveforms beginning
around 150 ms post-target onset. This broadly distributed increase in
negativity in the vowel-different condition, compared to the vowel-similar condition, peaked at 200 ms and persisted until 300 ms. Greater negativity for targets in the vowel-different condition also appeared
significant around 500 ms post-target onset. This result suggests that
skilled readers activate phonological representations early in word recognition even when reading relatively simple words. Furthermore, it
appears that these early representations can be biased toward particular
phonological vowels by the surrounding consonant context.
G106
CORTICAL ASYMMETRY IN A WORD-READING TASK: THE
EFFECTS OF WORD FREQUENCY ON NEURAL ACTIVATION IN
BILINGUAL CHILDREN. Noemi Aznar-Bese, Arturo E. Hernandez;
University of Houston — Previous studies have proposed an extensive network of structures subserving the processing of word reading in monolingual children. In addition, several behavioral studies indicate
significant differences in the processing of high- versus low-frequency

248

Linguistic processes: Lexicon

words in both monolinguals and bilinguals. A prior fMRI study in our
laboratory revealed larger frequency effects in a first language than a second language in bilingual adults. In this fMRI study, we examined the
differential neural response to the processing of visually presented highand low-frequency words in bilingual children (ages 8-14). Our results
reveal significant frequency effects related to the age of acquisition of the
second language that are reflected in hemispheric asymmetries when
reading high- versus low-frequency words. High-frequency words in the
participant’s first language (Spanish) revealed a strong lateralized pattern of activation in the right hemisphere that included several areas of
the middle frontal and superior temporal gyri. In a second language
(English), high-frequency words recruited a similar area in the right middle frontal gyrus in addition to the left primary auditory cortex (BA 41).
While low frequency words in the first language didn’t reveal any suprathreshold positive activation, low frequency words in the second language also activated the primary temporal cortex (BA 41). These results
indicate differential effects in children and adults suggesting that word
reading in a second language progresses from a primary stage centered
in phonological decoding to a more integrated system as language proficiency is attained.
G107
FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF GRAMMATICAL CLASS:
AMBIGUOUS AND UNAMBIGUOUS NOUNS AND VERBS
Martha W. Burton, Donna Krebs-Noble, Rao P. Gullapalli, Rita S. Berndt;
University of Maryland School of Medicine — Grammatical class distinctions among words are critical elements of lexical knowledge that support language’s most important function: its ability to create infinite
combinations of words to produce meanings. Although there has been
much interest in how grammatical class is mapped onto brain regions,
the results of aphasia studies and those of neuroimaging have yielded
ambiguous results due to inconsistency in lesion site location and differences in tasks and stimulus selection. The current fMRI study compared
auditory grammaticality judgments of carefully matched ambiguous and
unambiguous nouns and verbs preceded by either “the” or “to.” Behavioral data indicated that accuracy was high across conditions, but there
was a significant interaction between ambiguity and class in which participants were less accurate on ambiguous noun trials than any other
type. Neuroimaging results showed that regions associated with auditory
processing (bilateral superior temporal gyri) were significantly activated
by all conditions. Unambiguous nouns and verbs activated a network of
regions typically associated with language processing, but did not differ
in magnitude of percent signal change. Only the posterior superior temporal gyrus indicated a marginally significant difference in which unambiguous verbs were more activated that unambiguous nouns.
Ambiguous noun phrases produced significantly greater percent signal
change that was correlated with accuracy in the left inferior frontal gyrus,
but few other differences in language areas. The results suggest that significant grammatical class effects may depend on task and stimulus factors that were not tested in the current study, including stimulus
inflection and semantic characteristics. Supported by NIH R01DC00262.
G108
STAGES IN LEXICAL ACTIVATION: MEG CORRELATES OF
REPETITION PRIMING David Poeppel1, Diogo Almeida2; 1Universtity of
Maryland College Park, 2University of Maryland College Park — Despite suggestive results (e.g. Pylkkänen & Marantz, 2003; Beretta et al. 2005;
Fiorentino & Poeppel, in press), the functional interpretation of the M350
as an index of lexical activation remains unclear (see Pulvermüller et al.,
2004 for earlier lexicality effects in the evoked MEG signal). For instance,
Embick et al (2001) and Stockall et al. (2004) report conflicting findings
about M350 modulation by lexical frequency. This might stem from the
prevalent use of factorial designs in which only a small number of variables are manipulated. Such designs result in distinct list compositions
for each condition. Therefore, the attribution of differences between conditions to the experimental manipulation relies on the assumption that

Linguistic processes: Lexicon

(most of) the confounding variables are controlled across lists. Yet the
number of variables that is normally controlled in experiments is much
smaller than the number of variables shown to influence performance in
lexical tasks (Cutler, 1981; Balota et al. 2004). In order to circumvent this
concern, priming paradigms are typically used, with each item serving as
its own control. Few such experiments are reported using MEG (eg.
Pylkkänen et al. 2001). A medium-distance repetition priming experiment embedded in a continuous lexical decision task was conducted
while subjects were undergoing MEG recording. Data from 10 subjects
show, as expected, reaction time facilitation. Moreover, the M350
response shows systematic latency reduction associated with word repetition. This supports the view that the M350 reflects the activation of lexical representations. Supported by R01 DC05660 to David Poeppel.
G109
LEXICAL ACCESS IN SIGNERS: MEG EVIDENCE Diogo Almeida1,
Joseph Hill2, Jon Sprouse3, Deborah Chen Pichler2, David Poeppel3;
1Universtity of Maryland College Park, 2Gallaudet University, 3University of
Maryland College Park — MEG experimentation on lexical access has
shown that a particular response, the M350, is elicited by visual (eg.
Stockall et al., 2004) and auditory words (Bowles & Poeppel, 2005), but its
interpretation remains controversial. If the M350 reflects lexical search or
activation, as proposed by Pylkkänen & Marantz (2003), then it should be
found for sign languages as well. We tested this hypothesis in a comparative MEG study between native deaf users of American Sign Language
(ASL) and monolingual hearing English speakers. We predicted the M350
would be elicited in signers responding to ASL signs, but not in English
speakers responding to the same material (analogous reports are found in
the N400 literature, where non-linguistic strings of characters do not elicit
the response – see Kutas & Federmeier, 2000 for review). We employed a
medium-distance repetition priming paradigm in a continuous lexical
decision task conducted while subjects were undergoing MEG recordings. This priming paradigm allows for each item to serve as its own control, and also attenuates some of the effects that strategy and low level
sensory coding have on immediate priming (eg. Pallier et al, 2001). Data
from 7 deaf and 16 hearing participants show robust priming in reaction
time latencies for both populations, both for signs and non-signs, even
though the hearing population displays very poor discrimination in the
lexical decision task. Correlates of this priming effect are found in the
MEG data, but differ in dipolar distributions across populations. Supported by R01-DC05660 to David Poeppel.
G110
VIOLATING
INFLECTIONAL
EXPECTATIONS
&
MORPHOLOGICAL (IR)REGULARITY: AN ERP STUDY John
Drury1, Karsten Steinhauer1, Michael Ullman2; 1McGill University,
2Georgetown University — The study of (ir)regularity in morphology has
been a centerpiece in debates regarding the neurocognitive basis of language. Previous event-related potential (ERP) studies have manipulated
inflection and (ir)regularity in different ways to create violation paradigms. For example: (i) (ir)regularization of (ir)regulars (e.g., The torpedo
*sinked/sank the ship or He *blunk/blinked his eyes); (ii) uninflected
verbs in contexts demanding inflection (e.g., He *walk/walked over
there; He *dig/dug a hole); or (iii) inflected forms in contexts where
inflection is not permitted (e.g., The man will *worked/work...). Interpretation of previous ERP results is problematic because all studies have
confounded differences in form with the violation itself. Here we used a
symmetric 2x2x2 design (Good/Bad x Regular/Irregular x +/-Inflected),
which allows the possibility of comparisons in which the target verb form
is identical across bad/good contrasts, and additionally allows comparisons of the sort examined in some previous studies. Preliminary analyses
suggest that both regular and irregular stem violations (*kick vs. kick;
*find vs. find) showed a LAN/P600 pattern. Regular inflectional violations (*kicked vs. kicked) also showed an early negativity followed by a
subsequent positivity. Although this negativity was also left lateralized,
it was considerably more broadly distributed than the negativities elic-

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

ited by the stem violations, extending substantially into the right hemisphere. Strikingly, irregular inflection (*found vs. found) showed only a
late positivity. These and other results will be discussed in relation to previous findings in the context of competing models of inflectional (ir)regularity and morphological processing.
G111
MORPHOLOGICAL STRUCTURE IN THE MENTAL LEXICON
Sarah VanWagenen; UCLA — Two competing perspectives on the nature
of lexical representations have emerged. The morphological perspective
asserts that there exists an abstract level of representation, distinct from
semantics and form around which the lexicon is organized. The similarity
perspective adopts a view of lexical representations as mappings
between semantics and form. Relationships between lexical items are
similarity- rather than identity-based. While previous repetition priming
experiments have sought to empirically distinguish these perspectives,
the problem of high correlation between semantic/formal relatedness
and morphological relatedness has often made results difficult to interpret. Our two priming studies avoid this confound by 1) using pairs of
stimuli which are morphologically related, but not semantically or phonologically related and 2) employing a paradigm shown to yield morphological effects in the absence of semantic and phonological effects. Both
studies use a lexical decision task in a delayed repetition priming paradigm where an average of twenty items intervene between prime and target. The first study establishes that words that are unrelated except for
sharing a derivational affix show facilitatory priming effects (t(65) = 3.47,
p < .001), whereas semantically or formally related words showed no
priming effects. The second study shows that derivational affixes only
prime each other when the affixed stem is semantically consistent with a
free stem, even when the semantic contribution of the affix is consistent
in prime-target pairs. These results cannot be accounted for in a similarity
based model of lexical representation, rather, they support a morphologically organized model of the mental lexicon.
G112
KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER OF SECOND LITERACY BETWEEN
TRADITIONAL AND SIMPLIFIED CHINESE CHARACTER
READING: AN ERP STUDY Yi-Min Tien1,2, Daisy L. Hung2, Ovid J. L.
Tzeng2,3; 1Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, 2National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan — Learning to
read is essentially learning to map between the spoken form and print
form of the language. Recent research has shown that learning to read
two alphabetic languages such as Spanish and English concurrently rests
on common phonological processes; thus these phonological skills can be
transferred from one language to the other (Durgunoglu, 2002 for a
review). Chinese provides a case of high contrast for alphabetic systems,
because Chinese character typically represents a syllable morpheme.
Reading a character may activate both meaning and pronunciation. We
address the issue of biliterate knowledge transfer across two syllablemorphemic scripts by adopting traditional (Wr1)and simplified (Wr2)
Chinese characters. These two scripts represent virtually the same spoken
language but simplification of Chinese characters may cause lost or preservation of orthographic, phonological, and/or lexical semantic knowledge. Behavioral as well as event-related potentials (ERPs) were used to
examine brain activities of skilled reader of Wr1 who have only limited
experience of reading Wr2. Participants were asked to do lexical recognition task for both Wr1 and Wr2. The results revealed that Wr2, in comparison to Wr1, elicited a P200 in pseudo-characters and non-characters but
not real characters, while Wr2 elicited an N400 in real characters only.
Our research suggests Wr1 readers adopt orthographic knowledge and
lexical-semantic knowledge to decode Wr2. Whether there is possible
meta-linguistic knowledge involved were discussed.

249

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

G113
MEASURES OF "PARTIAL WORD KNOWLEDGE" IN CHILDREN
AND ADULTS: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS STUDY
Gwen Frishkoff, Charles Perfetti; University of Pittsburgh — We present data
from two experiments in which adults (18+ years) and children (8-10
years) made lexical decisions to words that varied in degree of familiarity. To represent the full spectrum of word knowledge among adults, we
used very rare words (such as “nutant”) that were matched in orthographic form with low-frequency words (such as “abject”). Words in turn
were orthographically matched with pseudowords. Response times and
d’ measures of accuracy were computed on each trial. Performance on
each measure — as well as scores on several reading and language
assessments — were then stastically related to the ERP effects. Adults
and childern showed similar ERP components that were sensitive to
familiarity and language skill, including a left anterior “N3”, a frontal
“MFN/fN400” and a parietal “P600” component. In adults, there was a
Lexicality and Vocabulary Skill at ~600ms over posterior temporal sites.
High-skilled, but not average or low-skilled, subjects showed differentiation between familiar and unfamiliar words over this region. Children
did not show this effect, but rather showed a right-hemisphere effect that
differentiated words that were not consciously recognized as words (i.e,
“misses”) and pseudowords. We relate these findings to theories of
vocabulary development and concepts of graded or “partial” word
knowledge.

Linguistic processes: Other
G114
USING NEURAL NETWORK MODELS TO MODEL CEREBRAL
HEMISPHERIC DIFFERENCES IN PROCESSING AMBIGUOUS
WORDS Larry Manevitz1, Orna Peleg1, Zohar Eviatar2, Hananel Hazan2;
1University of Haifa, 2Haifa University — Neuropsychological studies have
shown that both cerebral hemispheres process orthographic, phonological and semantic aspects of written words, albeit in different ways. The
left hemisphere (LH) is more influenced by the phonological aspect of
written words whereas lexical processing in the right hemisphere (RH) is
more sensitive to visual form. In addition, homonyms (e.g., bank) were
found to result in different time-lines of meaning activation in the two
hemispheres: The LH quickly focuses on a single salient meaning,
whereas the right hemisphere maintains alternate meanings. We explain
these phenomena by postulating that in the LH, orthography, phonology
and semantics are interconnected. In the RH, however, phonology is not
connected directly to orthography and hence its influence must be mediated by semantic processing. This hypothesis was tested using dual computational neural network models, architecturally derived from
Kawamoto's [1993] model. The LH network incorporates Kawamoto's
version in which the entire network is completely connected. In the RH
network, direct connections between orthographic and phonological
units were removed. The two networks successfully simulated the time
course of lexical disambiguation in the left and right hemispheres. We
conclude that asymmetries in written word processing are due to RH
inability to derive phonology directly from print.
G115
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
EVIDENCE
ON
PRELEXICAL
PHONOLOGICAL PROCESSING IN PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN.
Barbara Wagensveld1,2, Nina Davids1,2, Ludo Verhoeven1, Miranda van
Turennout1,2; 1Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen,
The Netherlands, 2F. C. Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands — In normal language development, children
show the ability to attend to the sounds of language as distinct from their
meaning. This so-called phonological awareness is assumed to gradually
develop from awareness of rhyme, to awareness of syllables and individual phonemes. The present ERP study investigates the neural representa-

250

Linguistic processes: Other

tion of prelexical phonological information in preschool children using
an adaptation paradigm in combination with the mismatch negativity
(MMN). Pre-school children (5 years of age) passively listened to series of
high frequent words presented in isolation while EEG recordings were
being made. A trial consisted of three identical repetitions of the context
word followed by a fourth critical target word. All words were monosyllabic and contained three phonemes. To examine the nature of phonological representations, phonological overlap between context and target
words was varied in four experimental conditions. Target words either
differed in onset, nucleus or offset, or were identical to the context words.
Comparing MMNs elicited by identical words with the measures of the
three overlap conditions provided evidence for the neural coding of onset
and rhyme specific information. The results showed that compared to the
identical condition, MMN’s were elicited by all phonological mismatch
conditions. The latency of the MMN was modulated by the moment at
which mismatching phonological information became distinguishable.
These data indicate that preschool children are already able to discriminate between small changes in consonants and vowels, independent of
their position in the word, providing a basis for early development of
phonemic awareness.
G116
FUNCTIONAL-ANATOMICAL ORGANIZATION OF PREDICATE
METAPHOR PROCESSING Evan Chen1, Page Widick1, Anjan
Chatterjee1; 1University of Pennsylvania — In this functional MRI study, we
tested the hypothesis that the processing of predicate metaphors has the
same right hemisphere laterality as postulated for the processing of nominal metaphors. The greater portion of the research on the cortical organization of metaphorical language has focused on determining the
hemispheric laterality of nominal metaphor processing. Deficit-lesion
and neuroimaging studies on metaphors like “This job is a jail” point to
the right hemisphere as the primary locus, though this conclusion is not
uncontested (e.g., Giora et al., 2000, Rapp et al., 2004, Schmidt et al., in
press). It is not clear, however, if this hemispheric advantage also exists
for predicate metaphors of implicit motion like “The man ran for office.”
This experiment examined predicate metaphors as compared to literal
sentences of motion like “The man ran for the bus” in an event-related,
functional MRI study of 14 college-aged normal participants. Our results
demonstrated greater activation in the left inferior frontal cortex and left
temporal lobe for predicate metaphors, while no differences were seen in
the right hemisphere homologues. Greater activation for literal sentences
was seen bilaterally in both the occipital-temporal and medial occipital
cortices. Based on these results, we conclude that the processing of predicate metaphors has a left hemisphere advantage, contrary to the original
hypothesis. We discuss how the results support a more general functional-anatomical organization principle for abstract motion processing
that has been demonstrated at the word-level in which greater abstraction proceeds anteriorly along the lateral occipital temporal cortex.
G117
DISTINCT PATTERNS OF ACTIVATION FOR CORRECT AND
PARAPHASIC RESPONSES BY PATIENTS WITH APHASIA IN A
FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING STUDY OF
OVERT NAMING Whitney Anne Postman1,2, Rasmus Birn1,3, Randall
Pursley1,4, John Butman1,4, Joe McArdle1,2, Jiang Xu1,2, Allen Braun1,6;
1National Institutes of Health, 2National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, 3Neurocircuitry Section, National Institute of
Mental Health, 4Signal Processing & Instrumentation Section, Center for
Information Technology, 6Chief, Language Section, National Institute on
Deafness and Other Communication Disorders — Patients with aphasia due
to stroke can achieve varying degrees of language recovery. Yet the neural mechanisms underlying recovery, specifically the contributions of
perilesional and contralesional brain areas to language performance in
chronic stages post-stroke, remain unclear. To address this issue, we compared chronic aphasic patients’ accurate to inaccurate responses within a
single scan session by tracking their performance during data acquisition

Linguistic processes: Other

on a trial-by-trial basis. In this event-related single-trial fMRI study using
Blood Oxygen Level Dependent imaging, three patients with aphasia due
to left middle cerebral artery infarction at least 3 years prior to testing,
named 144 object drawings overtly and without delay into a fiber-optic
microphone through which their responses were recorded. All patients (2
female, age range 48-68 years) were right-handed native English speakers
with nonfluent aphasia but excellent comprehension. Four age-matched
control subjects also participated. Patients achieved 53% to 75% correct
responses. Analysis of the functional images registered to each patient's
structural brain images, revealed that while both correct and incorrect
responses were associated with perilesional activation, incorrect
responses were consistently associated with greater activity in contralesional areas. In particular, the right inferior frontal gyrus was activated
for paraphasic responses, but neither for patients’ correct responses nor
controls’ responses. These results demonstrate the feasibility of measuring activation for accurate and inaccurate performance during a scan session. They support the hypothesis that right-hemisphere activation
represents maladaptive effort when left perilesional areas are insufficient
rather than a compensatory mechanism for long-term effective language
recovery.
G118
CEREBRAL ASYMMETRIES FOR CO-REFERENTIAL PROCESSING:
AN ERP STUDY Natalie Kacinik1, Peter Gordon2, Tamara Swaab1;
1University of California, Davis, 2University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill — A
series of recent eye-tracking and ERP experiments have shown that coreferential priming effects for repeated names can be disrupted if the
greater discourse model is not conducive to the establishment of co-reference (e.g., Camblin et al., in press; see Ledoux et al., 2006, for a review;
Swaab et al., 2004). Specifically, a repeated name penalty (RNP) was
found to occur for repeated names when the antecedent was linguistically prominent (e.g., Mary ate dinner after Mary came home from work)
compared to when it was non-prominent as part of a conjunctive phrase
(e.g., Mary and John ate dinner after Mary came home from work). The
present study combined lateralized presentation of critical names while
recording ERPs in order to investigate hemispheric differences in constructing discourse-level representations of sentence meaning. Of particular interest was determining which visual field would show a larger
RNP, suggesting greater involvement of the corresponding contralateral
hemisphere in building a discourse model. Although we did not find the
expected posterior and centrally distributed RNP N400 effect for either
visual field, the later 500-800 ms time window showed a more pronounced anterior negativity for single names than names repeated after a
conjunctive phrase. Furthermore, this effect was larger when names
occurred in the LVF/RH than when they were presented in the RVF/LH.
This result is interpreted as an indication that the RH recruited additional
resources in the course of processing the more difficult to integrate single-name condition.
G119
SPATIOTEMPORAL CHARACTERISTICS OF LARGE-SCALE
SYNFIRE CHAINS FOR LANGUAGE PROCESSING Friedemann
Pulvermuller1, Yury Shtyrov1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit,
Cambridge — We report here a new brain signature of memory trace activation in the human brain revealed by magnetoencephalography and
distributed source localization. Memory circuits distributed over distant
cortical areas can activate these areas in a fine-grained temporal order,
similar to the spatio-temporal patterns previously known from local cortical circuits called synfire chains. The large-scale spatio-temporal patterns can be picked up in the source images underlying magnetic brain
responses. We found that acoustic signals perceived as speech sounds
elicited a well-defined spatio-temporal pattern of sequential activation of
superior temporal and inferior frontal cortex, whereas the same identical
stimuli, when perceived as noise, sparked the same areas without a significant difference in activation delays. The strength of local cortical
sources reflected additional lexical, semantic and syntactic features of

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

speech. We conclude that spatio-temporal patterns, especially cortical
activation latencies in the millisecond range, represent a brain code of
memory circuits.
G120
IS THE MISMATCH NEGATIVITY TO PHONEMIC STIMULI
CONTEXT-DEPENDENT? Nina Davids1,2, Holger Mitterer3, Ludo
Verhoeven1, Hans van Balkom1, Jan de Moor1, Miranda van Turennout1,2;
1Behavioural Science Institute, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2F.C.
Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Max
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands — Previous research has shown that the mismatch negativity (MMN) is sensitive
to phonological changes in a series of speech stimuli. A major methodological advance in measuring the MMN is the oddball paradigm with
multiple deviants. In this paradigm, frequent, standard stimuli are intermixed with different types of infrequent, deviant stimuli. The present
study investigates whether the inclusion of different types of deviant
stimuli affects the phoneme-related MMN. ERPs were recorded from 12
participants while they passively listened to series of speech stimuli.
Stimuli included standard /i/ sounds. To create different contexts, standard stimuli were intermixed with either two phonemic (/u/ and /y/)
and a pitch deviant, or three different pitch deviants. The results showed
that the pitch deviants elicited an early negativity (100-150 ms) overlapping with the N1, which increased in amplitude for larger pitch differences. Interestingly, the early negativity elicited by pitch deviants in the
context of other pitch deviants did not differ significantly from the negativity elicited in the context of other phonemes. In contrast with the early
negativity observed for pitch deviants, phonemic deviants elicited a clear
MMN in the typical MMN time window 150-200 ms. Although the phonemic deviants (/y/ and /u/) differed in phonemic distance with the
standard (/i/), the MMNs elicited by the phonemic deviants were equivalent. Our results indicate that the MMN elicited by phonemes is reasonably independent of other deviants presented in the same oddball series.
G121
THE INTERPLAY OF PROSODY, SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS IN
SENTENCE PROCESSING: AN ERP-STUDY Sara Bögels, Dorothee
Chwilla, Roel Kerkhofs, Herbert Schriefers; NICI, Radboud University
Nijmegen — In this study we measured Event-Related Potentials while
participants listened to locally ambiguous Dutch sentences like (1) “De
verpleegster hielp de zieke te lopen” (The nurse helped the patient to
walk) and (2) “De verpleegster hielp de zieke te vervoeren” (The nurse
helped to transport the patient) with either a prosodic break (PB) right
after the first verb (“hielp”) or no PB. In (1), a PB suggests that the NP
“zieke” (patient) is not the object of “hielp” (helped), but this syntactic
expectation is eventually contradicted by the verb “lopen” (walk)
because it is intransitive. By contrast, in (2), PB fits with the eventual syntactic analysis while the absence of PB might trigger an incorrect analysis.
Steinhauer and colleagues (1999) in a similar comparison in German
reported a biphasic N400/P600 pattern. As expected, the PB elicited a
Closure Positive Shift. More importantly, in sentences with a PB, no
biphasic pattern but only an N400 effect was found for a prosody-syntax
mismatch as in (1), compared to the match in (2). This “pure” N400 effect
suggests that the PB provides such a strong cue for a certain syntactic
parse that - in case of a mismatch - the disambiguating verb is picked up
as a semantic anomaly, without triggering revision. Thus, a mismatch of
prosodic and syntactic information does not necessarily trigger a syntactic reanalysis (as reflected by the absence of a P600 effect), but can lead to
a semantic integration problem when an unexpected intransitive verb is
encountered.
G122
GAZE DURING CONVERSATIONAL EXCHANGE David
H.
McFarland, Rose-Hélène Sigouin Université de Montréal; Université de
Montréal — Conversational turn taking requires precisely coordinated
movements between conversational partners acting alternately as speakers and as listeners. Wilson and Wilson (2005) have suggested that cou-

251

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

pled endogenous neural oscillators in the brain of speakers and listeners
act as timing devices for these precisely timed moments. We also know
that visual attention (gaze) is a key aspect of normal conversational
exchange and shifts in gaze of speakers towards listeners create brief
“micro collaborations” (Bavelas et al., 2002). It could be predicted, therefore, that gaze and shifts in gaze play a regulating role in turn taking collaboration and interactional synchrony. To address this issue, we studied
the timing and orientation of gaze patterns in 8, French speaking, conversational dyads (16 subjects). Audio and split-screen video recordings
allowed for reliable measures of direct gaze and gaze away. Results
revealed that subjects spent a great deal of the time looking directly at
their conversational partners, particularly while listening (95% of total
listening time; 77% of total speaking time). However, rapid shifts in gaze
were common and were often associated with turn taking and other conversational elements such as gestures, pauses, and hesitations. Different
but consistent patterns and timing of gaze shifts were observed for turn
taking transitions from speaking to listening vs. listening to speaking and
there was a very tight temporal correspondence between gaze shifts and
turn and utterance initiation. The implications of these data in understanding the cognitive-linguistic and motor factors that underlie conversational turn taking and interpersonal synchrony will be discussed.
G123
MEG AS A MEASURE OF NEURAL PLASTICITY IN VERB
LEARNING Stefanie Enriquez-Geppert, Markus Junghöfer, Pienie
Zwitserlood, Christian Dobel; University of Münster — We demonstrated in
an earlier study (Dobel et al., 2007) how novel words become integrated
into existing conceptual-lexical networks by employing a statistical learning procedure (Breitenstein & Knecht, 2002). In the present study, we
were interested if the same learning principles lead to successful acquisition of novel action verbs. Photos of actions involving different actors
were paired with meaningless pseudowords. More frequent pairing of an
action with a specific pseudoword resulted in stable connections of action
and newly learned pseudowords. These effects were further investigated
with MEG measurements before and after learning. In the pretest, presentations of actions primed by pseudowords were clearly accompanied
by an M400. For actions primed by German verbs a weaker M400 was
found if word and action didn’t match compared to a match. Most importantly, after learning the M400 upon actions primed by learnedpseudowords was clearly attenuated compared to the pretest. Thus, statistical learning of novel action verbs resulted in neurophysiological
responses similar to words of one’s native language. We take these
results as evidence that statistical learning is an effortless and fast way to
integrate new verbs into existing networks of lexical and conceptual representations.
G124
INTERACTION BETWEEN SEMANTIC AND SYNTACTIC
PROCESSING
IN
SPECIFIC
LANGUAGE
IMPAIRMENT:
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE Fabrizio Pizzioli1, Bruno
Rossion1, Marie-Anne Schelstraete1, Hiroko Nakano2; 1Université catholique de
Louvain, 2Saint Mary's College of California — Children with SLI show difficulties in thematic processing; here we used event related potentials
(ERP) to investigate how these children use semantic and syntactic information on-line in oral sentence comprehension. Four groups were tested:
14 French speaking children with SLI (M=10y), 14 children matched on
chronological age, 14 matched on receptive vocabulary scores (M=7y)
and 20 young adults. ERP were recorded while participants listened to
sentences some of which contained anomalous verbs. We monitored the
latency and amplitude of the N400 component, a marker of semantic integration and the P600, often associated with structural syntactic re-analysis. Relative to their context the verbs were: (a) congruous (e.g. The
fireman extinguished the fire…), (b) incongruous and semantically unrelated (e.g. The tree extinguished the fire…), (c) incongruous but thematically related (e.g. The fire extinguished the fireman…), and (d)
syntactically violated (e.g. The mother fed/food* the baby). We reported

252

Linguistic processes: Other

a dissociation in the modulation of N400 and P600 during sentence comprehension in SLI: in contrast with the three control groups, they failed to
show a P600 in response to incongruous but thematically related verbs
(c); nonetheless they showed a P600 -though reduced- in response to the
categorical violation at the verb (d). On the contrary the N400 effect to
incongruous unrelated verbs was the same in patients and controls. Data
suggest an abnormal interaction between semantics and syntax in children with SLI: they consistently used semantic information but not the
structure dictated by syntax, although they retain a certain capacity to
process syntax.
G125
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR EARLY CASE
INVARIANCE
IN
WORD
RECOGNITION
USING
AN
ADAPTATION PARADIGM Marina Mariol, Corentin Jacques, Marie-Anne
Schelstraete, Bruno Rossion; Catholic University of Louvain (UCL) — Fluent
readers can recognize words across changes in size, case, font and retinal
location while maintaining a high sensitivity to the letter identity and letter position within the word. The present experiment attempts to evaluate the time course of invariant word recognition using an adaptation
paradigm. We recorded brain potentials during repeated stimulation of
the same stimulus in the same case, same stimulus in a different case and
another stimulus in the same or different case. By manipulating orthogonally the identity and case of primes and targets we evaluate the invariance of this code. The results show that when subjects are presented with
the same stimulus (RAGE/RAGE) we observe a maximal reduction in the
electrophysiological signal, at the N170 level in occipital regions, that
could correspond to the suppressed response of neurons with repetitive
stimulus presentation, a phenomenon termed “mnemonic filtering”. This
reduction is also observed when the same stimulus but in a different case
(i.e., rage/RAGE) is presented even if smaller than that found for strictly
identical stimuli whereas the presentation of another stimulus in the
same (i.e., COUP/RAGE) or different case (i.e., coup/RAGE) do not produce any reduction in the recorded signal. Our findings are threefold: we
observed adaptation both for identity and for cross-case in occipital
regions around 170 ms and this adaptation occurs in left but not right
regions. Altogether these results show that an invariant representation
for size and case is reached around 170 ms, left lateralised in occipital
regions.
G126
DOES THE BRAIN DIFFERENTIATE BETWEEN INTENTIONAL
AND CAUSAL INFERENCES IN TEXT? Robert Mason, Marcel Adam
Just; Carnegie Mellon University — Cortical activity associated with the
generation of an inference was measured using fMRI. Participants read
three-sentence passages that differed in whether or not an inference was
to be drawn. Critically, the source of the inference was either based on a
protagonist’s intention or on a physical consequence of a character’s
action. Activation in Theory of Mind (ToM) brain regions was expected
for the protagonist intention passages. The physical consequence passages could possibly activate imagery processing areas to a greater
extent. Cortical activity related to the reading of the critical inference sentence demonstrated a recruitment of a common cortical network for the
both types of inferences. This general inference-related activation
appeared in the typical discourse-level language processing areas: bilateral inferior frontal gyrus, bilateral anterior temporal gyrus and left posterior temporal gyrus. Activation was also present in the medial frontal
gyrus, which has been found to be active in ToM tasks. The activation of a
ToM region in general inference processing precluded an ability to find
that region as being more active in the intentional passages than the
physical passages, however intentional inference related activation was
present in the cortex in an area superior to the medial frontal gyrus and
slightly anterior to the right temporo-parietal junction (also a ToM
related region). This could indicate that adjacent tissue was recruited due
to the ToM regions already being used. Additionally, the physical pas-

Linguistic processes: Other

sages recruited the left parietal lobe whereas the intentional did not, suggesting a greater involvement of visuo-spatial processing.
G127
THE INFLUENCE OF IMPLICIT CAUSALITY ON THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF COREFERENCE: AN EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL STUDY OF READING Kerry Ledoux1, Barry Gordon1,
Mikael Roll2,3, Tamara Swaab2; 1Johns Hopkins University, 2University of
California, Davis, 3Lund University — Implicit causality is a feature of certain interpersonal verbs by which information about the cause of events
described by a verb is conveyed implicitly as part of the verb’s meaning.
We presented participants with sentences containing verbs that were
biased towards the person mentioned in the first noun phrase (NP1) or
towards the person mentioned in the second noun phrase (NP2). Following the verb phrase, coreference was established by means of a pronoun
or a repeated name (the critical word, see examples below), in a manner
either consistent or inconsistent with the implicit causality bias of the
verb. Sentences were presented visually; participants read the sentences,
and answered comprehension questions about them. The critical word
elicited a greater positivity (P600) when it was inconsistent with the
implicit causality bias of the verb; this effect was larger for repeated
names than for pronouns. N400 repetition priming effects were observed
to repeated names in both consistent and inconsistent verb conditions.
These results have important implications for theories of discourse processing generally and for the establishment of coreference specifically.
Verb consistent: NP1 bias: At the track meet Sharon disappointed Murray
because Sharon/she did not give her best effort. NP2 bias: During the
trial Vivian accused Dwight because Dwight/he had been seen near the
scene of the crime. Verb inconsistent: NP1 bias: At the track meet Sharon
disappointed Murray because Murray/he had very high expectations.
NP2 bias: During the trial Vivian accused Dwight because Vivian/she
hadn’t found a better suspect.
G128
NEURAL
CORRELATES
OF
CONTINUOUS
SPEECH
COMPUTATION INVESTIGATED BY MEANS OF FREQUENCYTAGGED NEUROELECTRIC RESPONSES. Marco Buiatti1, Marcela
Peña2,3, Jacques Mehler2, Ghislaine Dehaene1,5; 1INSERM, U562, SHFJ/CEA,
Orsay, France, 2International School for Advanced Studies, Trieste, Italy,
3
Escuela de Psicología, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Chile, 5Service
de Neuropédiatrie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Bicêtre (AP-HP), Paris,
France — In order to learn a language, humans have to discover words
and structural regularities from continuous speech. Our recent investigations suggested that structural properties of words are easily uncovered
when continuous speech conveys subliminal acoustic cues (i.e. 25 ms
gaps) at the word boundaries, while such learning is much harder when
cues are absent. In the present study we investigate the neural correlates
of online word segmentation by studying the electrophysiological
responses to 9 min streams of artificial speech with a trisyllabic structure,
either with or without subliminal acoustic cues. Steady-state power
responses at the tag frequency of presentation of single syllables, of bisyllabic and trisyllabic words were therefore evaluated. We show that the
introduction of pauses in the continuous speech elicits two effects: 1) a
steady-state response at three-syllable frequency, and 2) the suppression
of steady-state responses at one- and two-syllable frequencies, typically
emerging with nonsense random streams. This suggests that word perception induces both an enhancement of power at the frequency of the
perceived word, and an inhibition of power increase at alternative word
frequencies. Indeed, as hypothesized, we observe a significant correlation
between steady-state responses at trisyllabic word frequency and overtly
learned words. When pauses are absent, the suppression of the steadystate response only arises at one-syllable frequency, suggesting that subjects may become aware of the presence of a multi-syllabic structure, but
are not able to identify its elementary components.

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

G129
FIRST
LANGUAGE
ATTRITION
IN
SPANISH-ENGLISH
BILINGUALS: EVIDENCE FROM FMRI Talia Daley1, Kevin Shapiro2,
Lauren Moo1,2, Albert Costa3, Alfonso Caramazza2; 1Massachusetts General
Hospital, 2Harvard University, 3Universitat de Barcelona — Most fMRI studies of bilingualism have investigated subjects with a dominant native language and a non-dominant second language acquired later in life. Less
attention has been devoted to studying "balanced" bilinguals who are
equally (or nearly equally) fluent in two languages. Studying such subjects may allow us to disambiguate effects of language dominance and
order of acquisition from effects related to linguistic competence. In this
experiment we studied balanced bilinguals whose first language was
Spanish, but who had spoken English since childhood and who currently
spent most of their time speaking English. The subjects' language abilities
and habits were assessed with a detailed questionnaire. Participants then
performed an fMRI task in both languages, requiring simple noun and
verb inflection. The task consisted of two English blocks, during which
subjects completed noun phrases of the form "one table / two ..." and
verb phrases of the form "he speaks / they ...,” and two Spanish blocks
with similar phrases such as "una mesa / dos ..." and "él habla / tú ...".
Preliminary analyses revealed greater extent of activation during Spanish
trials compared to English trials. This pattern is consistent with the phenomenon of first language attrition, which has been documented behaviorally but not previously with functional imaging. Moreover, parametric
analyses showed that activation in premotor speech areas was modulated
by the age of acquisition of English and by the amount of time subjects
currently spent speaking Spanish. This analysis also revealed greater activation for English trials in the left inferior frontal gyrus for subjects who
spent more time speaking Spanish.
G130
EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS AND PARAFOVEAL PREVIEW
EFFECTS IN READING FROM RIGHT-TO-LEFT Horacio A. Barber1,
Shir Ben-Tzvi2, Shlomo Bentin2, Marta Kutas3; 1University College of London,
2
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 3University of California, San Diego — ERP
indices of parafoveal perception (preview) during reading were obtained
in a group of 27 native Hebrew speakers. Six-word Hebrew sentences
were presented word-by-word on a computer screen at fixation, flanked
2 degrees bilaterally by letter strings. All words but the fourth were
flanked by pseudowords. The fourth word in each sentence was flanked
by a pseudoword on one side; the flanker on the other side was a
pseudoword on 1/3 of the trials (Pseudoword) and a word on 2/3 of the
trials, left or right visual field. This so-called preview word was the same
as the upcoming fifth word at fixation (Identity) or Unrelated to it. Relative to both Unrelated and Pseudoword conditions, Identity preview
words elicited larger P2 (170-285 ms) and smaller N400 (400-450 ms)
amplitudes, indicating some perceptual-semantic analysis. Critically, this
preview effect was reliably larger when the flanker words appeared to
the right than to the left of fixation. This interaction is consistent with the
attentional asymmetry observed during reading in writing systems with
right-to-left reading, using eye-tracking techniques, but contrasts with
results of visual half field studies showing RVF-left hemisphere superiority in Hebrew.
G131
A FREQUENCY ANALYSIS OF EEG RESPONSE TO SPEECH
MODULATED BY M-SEQUENCE Hiroshige
Takeichi1,2,
Sachiko
Koyama3, Andrzej Cichocki1; 1RIKEN, 2University Tokyo, 3Hokkaido
University — We have developed a technique for assessment of natural
verbal comprehension, using electroencephalography (EEG) and msequence modulation (Takeichi et al., Neuroscience Research, in press).
The technique is superior to the conventional methods in that it is less
susceptible to measurement artifacts, efficient without repeated presentations for signal averaging, and suitable for non-time-locked continuous
mental processes. Scalp EEGs were recorded from eight right-handed
Japanese speakers while they were listening to a 51s long news which

253

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

had been modulated in amplitude by an m-sequence. By computing a circular cross correlation function between the EEG and the m-sequence and
by applying independent component analysis (ICA) to the function, a
correlation peak at 400 ms delay was found to discriminate the EEG
response to comprehensible native speech from the responses to incomprehensible time-reversed or Spanish speech. Here we report a frequency-based reanalysis of the data: an individual component response
was estimated for each subject as a product of the separation matrix
derived from the group data and the individual cross correlation function
between the individual EEG and the m-sequence. The individual component response was estimated and examined for each of the delta, theta,
alpha, beta, and gamma band frequency ranges by pre-processing the
individual EEG with finite impulse response (FIR) band-pass filters. As a
result, a phase offset between the forward and the time-reversed stimuli
in the beta frequency range was the most prominent feature that was
common to all the subjects. Supported by RISTEX, JST.
G132
HIGHER ORDER LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE IN SEMANTIC
DEMENTIA Peter Garrard; University College London — The traditional
neuropsychological approach to analysing connected speech in patients
with language disorders is “top down”: output is described in terms of
known dimensions, selected in advance for their likely importance (such
as the lexical characteristics of the words used, or the syntactic features of
the passage). Such analyses have demonstrated the influence of lexical
frequency, concept imageability, and grammatical complexity, on the
spoken output of patients with semantic dementia (SD) - a focal neurodegenerative condition characterised by the disintegration of word and
object meaning. In the early stages of SD, spontaneous speech is characteristically fluent and well-formed, and superficially indistinguishable
from that of controls. In this study I present a series of analyses on transcripts of ‘Cookie Theft’ picture descriptions from SD patients (n=21) and
controls (n=16) using a range of “bottom up” approaches taken from the
fields of computational linguistics, stylometry and authorship attribution. I compare the techniques of principal components analysis, crossentropy and n-gram analysis, and their success in identifying consistent
differences between patient and control transcripts. By varying the
amount of information represented in the input (for instance, by lemmatising texts or replacing word tokens with grammatical descriptors), the
importance of lexical, grammatical and morphosyntactic properties to
higher order structure is revealed. From correlations between the values
of dimensions discovered using such bottom-up approaches and measures of the degree of semantic disintegration, I argue for the existince of
an overarching representational system supporting syntax and other
aspects of higher order structure, as well as word meaning.
G133
SPATIOTEMPORAL IMAGING OF LEXICAL MEDIATION IN
ASSIMILATION CONTEXT EFFECTS David
Gow1,2,
Jennifer
Segawa1; 1Massachusetts General Hospital, 2Salem State College — Phonological processes including assimilation create lawful, language-specific
alternation in how certain phonemes are pronounced in specific contexts.
These processes pose potentially serious challenges to word recognition
processes that must frequently discriminate between potential lexical
candidates that differ by a single phonetic feature. Research to date has
shown that listeners’ ability to compensate for lawful phonological variation depends on gradient feature change when modification creates
potential lexical ambiguity (e.g. when “cone” is pronounced “comb”), but
not when modification creates a nounword (e.g. “bone” pronounced
“bome”). In this experiment we examined the role of lexical mediation in
these effects using multimodal imaging techniques. Subjects were tested
twice in a paradigm in which they heard fully, partially or non- assimilated words in two word phrases such as “cone/comb pile” or “bone/
bome pup” and then made a 2AFC decision based on visual depictions of
two phrases presented after the auditory stimulus. In one session EEG
and MEG data were collected simultaneously, and in another fMRI data

254

Linguistic processes: Other

were collected. Subjects showed reliable context effects, compensating
only in appropriate contexts, and showed stronger effects for full assimilation noncompetitor conditions. Activation analyses showed increased
superior temporal activation after lexical activation consistent with lexical mediation in non-competitor conditions. The contextual viability of
assimilation modulated inferior frontal activation. Gamma phase synchrony and Granger causality analyses were used to identify the components and causal interactions within the transient networks that
produced these results. The findings are discussed in the context of current models of spoken word recognition and speech processing.
G134
THE EFFECT OF PHONOLOGICAL NEIGHBORHOOD ON
READING AND OBJECT NAMING: AN FMRI STUDY Goulven
Josse1, Ferath Kherif1, Anna Woollams2, Cathy Price1; 1Wellcome Department
of Imaging Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, University College London,
UK, 2Medical Research Council - Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit,
Cambridge University, UK — INTRODUCTION: Several imaging studies
have shown that activation in left posterior temporal and inferior parietal
regions is higher for reading than picture processing (Vandenberghe et
al., 1996; Chee et al., 2000; Bookheimer et al. 1995). Activation in the same
regions has also been reported for listening to words with high relative to
low phonological neighbours (Okada and Hickock, 2006; Prabhakaran et
al. 2006). We therefore hypothesized that increased activation for written
words relative to pictures reflects different demands on phonological
processing. During reading relative to object identification, for example,
there is more competition from phonological processing of visually similar words (monkey, money, monk). In order to test this hypothesis, we
used fMRI to investigate whether activation differences for reading relative to object naming are modulated by Phonological Neighborhood
(PN). METHODS: Twenty-four right-handed adults (half females) were
scanned at 3T while reading and naming 84 items with varying PN. Standard procedures in SPM5 were used to identify the main effect of reading, object naming and PN. RESULTS: Activation in the left posterior
superior temporal sulcus was higher for (a) reading relative to object
naming; and (b) written words with low relative to high PN. CONCLUSION: The results suggest that increased activation for reading relative to
object naming reflects the demands associated with translation of orthography to phonology, particularly when low frequency elements are
involved.
G135
A BRAIN FMRI STUDY OF THE STROOP EFFECT IN NATIVE
JAPANESE SPEAKERS Emily Coderre, Christopher Filippi, Paul
Newhouse, Julie Dumas; University of Vermont — The Japanese orthography consists of two scripts: kanji, which uses logographic symbols
adopted from Chinese, and kana, which uses phonetic symbols. Research
has shown that kanji and kana are processed differently. Kana is similar
to phonetic languages like English, but kanji seems to require a completely different processing strategy. Previous work done with the Stroop
task in Japanese has proposed that there are differences in Stroop effects
for the two scripts. This study investigates the Stroop effect in kanji and
kana using fMRI to better understand how logographic and phonetic languages are processed in the brain. Nine native Japanese speakers performed the Stroop task both in kanji and kana scripts during fMRI. Both
scripts individually produced significant Stroop effects in the behavioral
reaction time data. The imaging data for both scripts showed brain activation in the anterior cingulate gyrus, an area involved in inhibiting automatic processing. A direct comparison was also done between the Stroop
effects in kana versus kanji. Though behavioral data showed no significant difference between the Stroop effects, there was a small area of
increased activation in the anterior cingulate gyrus for kana versus kanji.
The results of the present study suggest that there are processing and
brain activation differences between logographic and phonetic scripts in
Japanese.

Linguistic processes: Other

G136
PHONEMIC PERCEPTION IN CHILDREN: AN FMRI AND DTI
STUDY Lisa Conant, Einat Liebenthal, Anjali Desai, Jeffrey Binder; Medical
College of Wisconsin — Speech perception entails recoding of the acoustic
waveform into more abstract phonemic representations, resulting in categorical perception (CP), i.e., better discrimination across than within phonemic categories. Categorical discrimination of phonemes has been
demonstrated as early as infancy; however, evidence exists suggesting
that developmental changes in category representations may continue at
least into early childhood. In the current study, brain activation patterns
associated with the discrimination of phonemic stimuli (P), specifically
CV syllables, were compared with those associated with the discrimination of acoustically matched nonphonemic stimuli (NP) using fMRI in 15
typically developing children, aged 7-12 years. Diffusion tensor imaging
was examined in a subset of 13 children. Discrimination performance
confirmed that P were perceived categorically whereas NP were not.
Phonemic discrimination was associated with primary foci in the left and
right superior temporal gyri (STG) and the left inferior frontal gyrus
(IFG), where activation was also positively correlated with a CP index
(CPI). For NP, the main focus was in right STG. Discrimination of P relative to NP was associated with greater activation in left STG and IFG.
Fractional anisotropy was correlated with the CPI in a region of the left
inferior longitudinal fasciculus near left MTG. Thus, similar to previous
findings in adults, children aged 7-12 demonstrated CP of speech, which
was associated with a strongly left lateralized pattern of activation even
at this early stage of speech processing. In contrast, in the nonphonemic
condition, the children showed greater right lateralization of activation in
fronto-temporal regions than the adults.
G137
CAN MANIPULATING INTENTION CHANGE FRONTAL
LATERALIZATION FOR WORD PRODUCTION DURING
APHASIA TREATMENT? Bruce Crosson1,2, Keith McGregor2, Michelle
Benjamin2, Yu-Ling Chang2, Anna Bacon Moore3, Kaundinya Gopinath4, Kyung
Peck5, Christina Wierenga6, Ashley Wabnitz7, Megan Gaiefsky1, David Soltysik8,
Christina Cavanagh2, Leslie Gonzalez Rothi1, Richard Briggs4, Keith White2;
1Gainesville VA Medical Center, 2University of Florida, 3Atlanta VA Medical
Center; Emory University, 4University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
5Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 6University of California, San Diego,
7National Institutes of Health, 8Medical College of Wisconsin — Intention
entails selection and initiation of action. Like attention, intention involves
lateralized processes and affects cognitive activities, such as language.
The current study used fMRI to determine if an intentional manipulation
(complex left-hand movement) during treatment changed lateralization
of word production in nonfluent aphasia patients. Five patients with
chronic nonfluent aphasia performed overt, event-related category member generation during BOLD contrast fMRI at 3 Tesla, both before and
after an intention-based treatment. Conceptually, the treatment was
designed to engage right-hemisphere intention mechanisms that would
facilitate participation of right lateral frontal structures in word production. Patients initiated picture-naming trials with a complex left-hand
movement (opening a box then pushing a button on an apparatus inside
the box). The button press initiated presentation of a picture on a computer monitor, which the patient attempted to name. Patients received 30
treatment sessions, each with 50 picture-naming trials. Two patients with
bilateral frontal activity before treatment showed increased right-hemisphere lateralization of lateral frontal activity after treatment; both
showed significant improvement in word finding during treatment. One
patient with bilateral frontal activity before treatment failed to show
increased right-hemisphere lateralization of frontal activity after treatment; this patient showed no improvement during treatment. Two
patients showed complete lateralization of lateral frontal activity to the
right hemisphere before and after treatment; both showed significant
improvement during treatment. In summary, for patients with bilateral
frontal activity before treatment, the treatment was successful when

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

accompanied by the targeted shift in lateralization and not successful
when this shift did not occur.
G138
LINGUISTIC AND NON-LINGUISTIC FOCUS EFFECTS IN
COREFERENTIAL PROCESSING: AN ERP INVESTIGATION
Clinton Johns1, Peter Gordon2, Tamara Swaab1; 1University of California,
Davis, 2University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill — Referential and coreferential processes are essential to discourse comprehension; readers and
listeners must be able to determine who is doing what to whom, or coherence would rapidly break down. Understanding the elements of these
operations is therefore fundamental to our understanding of discourse
processing, as it is clear that referential factors modulate how words are
processed. Previous research has shown that some classic effects of repetition priming with repeated name coreference (when two instances of a
name refer to the same person) are not found when the discourse model
does not support repeated name coreference. Specifically, repetition
priming effects on the N400 component of ERPs are not observed when
the antecedent name is in linguistic focus, despite presentation of the
same word only seconds earlier. This processing difficulty has been
dubbed the Repeated Name Penalty (Gordon et al., 1993). The current
study used ERPs to investigate whether the effects of linguistic focus
could be dissociated from effects of non-linguistic attentional focus. Linguistic focus was manipulated by varying the syntactic structure in
which the antecedent was embedded (e.g., “Chantel bought groceries…”
vs. “Chantel and John bought groceries…”); non-linguistic focus was
manipulated by reversing the initial letters of the antecedent (e.g. “Chantel” vs. “hCantel”). Results show that linguistic focus and stimulusdriven highlighting affected coreferential processing of the repeated
names differently. It was found that enhancing focus on antecedents by
non-linguistic means did not result in the repeated name penalty, suggesting that the different types of focus elicited different processing operations.
G139
N400 PRIMING EFFECTS FOR REGULAR AND IRREGULAR VERBS
ARE INTACT IN LEFT FRONTAL PATIENTS Jary Larsen1, Timothy
Justus1, Jennifer Yang1, Paul de Mornay Davies2, Diane Swick1,3; 1VA
Northern California Health Care System, Martinez, CA, 2Middlesex University,
London, UK, 3University of California, Davis — The English past tense
exemplifies a long-standing controversy between dual-system theorists,
who argue for distinct neural systems for regular and irregular morphology, and single-system theorists, who argue that a single connectionist
network that maps form and meaning can account for both. Previous
studies in left anterior aphasic patients suggested dissociations between
regular and irregular verbs, with impairments in the former but not the
latter, implicating left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) processes (Tyler et al.,
2002). We present behavioral and event-related potential data from 12
patients with LIFG lesions and 12 age- and education-matched controls in
a unimodal design employing four types of auditory priming relationships: two between past-tense forms and present-tense forms (regular
and irregular) and two between words with only formal (phonological
and orthographic) overlap. Patient behavioral data revealed overall accuracy was only modestly compromised, with no difference between the
two verb types. RT data revealed that the patients demonstrated less
priming than controls for both verb conditions. Although behavioral
priming differences were evident for verbs, the patients did not demonstrate a significant reduction in the N400 priming effect. Preliminary ERP
analyses suggest that at both early (350-550 ms) and late (550-750 ms)
windows, there were no group differences in the N400 priming effect.
Importantly, the magnitude of priming for regular and irregular verbs
did not differ between the groups. Our ERP data suggest that the LIFG
does not make differential contributions to the processing of regular
verbs and irregular verbs, at least as indicated by the N400 component.

255

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

G140
LANGUAGE IN WONDERLAND: LINGUISTIC PROCESSING
DURING NATURAL STORY LISTENING Jonathan Brennan1, Yuval
Nir2, Uri Hasson1, Rafael Malach2, David Heeger1, Liina Pylkkanen1; 1New
York University, 2Weizmann Institute of Science — The neural correlates of
language processing were studied in a naturalistic setting by having 9
subjects listen to 5 minutes of the story ‘Alice in Wonderland’ during
fMRI. To identify areas associated with linguistic processing, the corresponding text was tagged for lexical, semantic and syntactic factors. Data
were aligned to the Talairach coordinate system and averaged across subjects. Low-level auditory factors were excluded from analysis by convolving the absolute value of the sound-wave with a hemodynamic impulse
response function (HRF), and removing this component from the data.
Each linguistic factor was convolved with the HRF and used to fit (via
regression) the fMRI data at each voxel. The linguistic predictors we
highly correlated with activity in known language areas. Word frequency
and imageability correlated positively with activity in the Middle Temporal Gyrus, consistent with previous findings (cf., Prabhakaran et al., 2006;
Frost et al., 2005). Syntactic complexity, measured by Gibson’s (1998)
memory cost, best explained activity in language-related regions. It was
positively correlated with a left-hemisphere network including Wernicke’s area, the Superior Temporal Gyrus, areas in the pre-motor cortex,
and Inferior Frontal Gyrus. We also investigated what brain regions were
sensitive to the function/content word contrast, which has been difficult
to study due to length and frequency confounds. Our method successfully separates the effect of word class from other correlated stimulus factors. Function word density, but not content word density, correlated
positively with the same network as syntactic memory cost, further supporting the role of these areas in syntactic processing.
G141
DRAWING
INFERENCES
DURING
DISCOURSE
COMPREHENSION: AN ERP STUDY Martin
Paczynski1,
Tali
Ditman1, Kana Okana2, Gina Kuperberg1,4; 1Tufts University, Medford MA,
2
New York University, 4Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA — The
current study utilized event related potentials (ERPs) to examine the time
course of brain activation during the generation of causal bridging in
simple discourse. ERPs were measured as twenty-three right-handed
participants read 159 three-sentence scenarios and judged the causal
relatedness between each final sentence and its preceding context on a
three-point scale. Scenarios were either highly causally related, intermediately related (where the final sentence only followed logically if participants drew a causal inference from information provided in the context)
or unrelated (where the final sentence did not follow logically from the
context). To control for the effects of lexico-semantic association, all three
conditions were matched for semantic similarity values using Latent
Semantic Analysis. A significantly larger negativity between 325-400msec
was evoked by critical words (independently pre-determined) in both the
intermediately related and unrelated scenarios, relative to the highly
related scenarios. This negativity was distributed more anteriorly than
the classic N400 and may have reflected participants’ engagement of
working memory in attempting to generate bridging causal inferences to
achieve discourse coherence. There was a trend towards a greater negativity to critical words in the unrelated relative to the intermediately
related scenarios, suggesting that a failure to generate such bridging
inferences may have led to some increased difficulty in integrating critical words into their discourse context.
G142
SEX DIFFERENCES IN THE EFFECTS OF DELAYED AUDITORY
FEEDBACK: TIMING AND COGNITIVE EFFECTS David
Corey,
Vishnu Cuddapa; Tulane University — Persistent Developmental Stuttering
(PDS) is characterized by dysfluencies in language. Delayed auditory
feedback (DAF; amplified and delayed presentation of a speaking person’s voice) induces dysfluency in normally-fluent people. Sex differences exist in both the incidence of PDS (M:F ratio 4:1 to 5:1) and in the

256

Linguistic processes: Other

effects of DAF (men are more susceptible than women). Sex differences in
DAF effects also show developmental shifts similar to developmental
shifts in the male:female ratio among people with PDS. Planum temporale (PT; auditory association cortex) anatomy is also associated both PDS
and with sex, and PT anatomy is associated with DAF effects among people who stutter. These relationships suggests a possible etiological factor
in PDS: sex differences in PDS incidence may be caused by underlying
sex differences in auditory processing. As part of a research program
designed to evaluate this proposition, sex differences were evaluated in
fluent subjects speaking with no amplified feedback, and feedback conditions with the following delays: 0ms, 180ms, 230ms, 280ms, 330ms, and
380ms. For each DAF condition, fluency was measured when reading
and during conversational speech. Fluency was significantly affected by a
Delay-x-Condition-x- Sex interaction (p<0.005) indicating that (1) males
were more susceptible to DAF effects than females, (2) DAF effects were
stronger during conversation than reading, and (3) sex differences in the
relationship between delay length and fluency varied significantly with
speech task. Results suggest that in addition to timing of auditory processing, cognitive processes (as evidenced by reading task demands) may
also be a factor in DAF effects.
G143
INVESTIGATING RECEPTIVE COMPENSATON OF PLACE
ASSIMILATION: DO´S AND DONT´S IN AN ODDBALL
PARADIGM. Ludger Elling, Pienie Zwitserlood, Kambiz Tavabi, Christian
Dobel, Markus Junghöfer; University of Münster — The regressive place
assimilation is a phonotactically natural misarticulation. Such adaptions
of the place of articulation towards the anterograde context may yield
phonemic category changes in the speech signal. To explain the compensation of according mismatches on the recipients’ side, the regressive
inference model (RI) and the featurally underspecified lexicon (FUL)
have been suggested, among others. To find evidence in favour of either,
we varied two requirements of phonotactical naturalness, legality and
viability. Effects in terms of competing models were excluded by both
using pseudoword stimuli and neutralising acoustic cues with a crosssplicing procedure. To investigate neural correlates of place assimilation
we evaluated the magnetic mismatch negativity (MMNm) which provides a passive measure of discriminability on all levels of speech processing. A clear MMNm was visible for the factor legality with higher
mismatch amplitudes upon changes from illegal to legal conditions. This
effect was, however, opposed to the predictions of the FUL model. There
was also no significant interaction of viability and legality, despite the
prediction according to RI. Further investigations of the stimuli in a gating paradigm revealed differences of the recognition points between
assimilated and nonassimilated stimuli. Given their strength and direction, they did not provide an alternative explanation for latency differences of the MMNm in terms of an artefact. The gating data instead
indicated influences on the MMNm due to coarticulatory cues. These
results shed new light on a preceding study of place assimilation and
may guide future attempts.
G144
NON-INVASIVE MAPPING OF LANGUAGE AND MEMORY
CORTEX WITH FMRI AND MEG Thomas
Thesen1,2,
Carrie
R.
McDonald2, Chad E. Carlson1, Ruben I. Kuzniecky1, Ming-Xiong Huang2,
Mazyar Ahmadi2, Don J. Hagler2, Jeff D. Stout1, Kate I. Nearing1, Anders M.
Dale2, William B. Barr1, Orrin Devinsky1, Eric Halgren2; 1New York
University, 2University of California, San Diego — Mapping of language
and memory is an important procedure performed before resection of
tumors and epileptic tissue in order to avoid the removal of eloquent cortex. Wada testing and direct cortical stimulation are the most widely used
clinical methods; however, they pose significant risks and discomfort to
the patient. Non-invasive functional brain imaging methods such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and magnetoencephalography
(MEG) have the potential to identify cortical language and memory areas
with minimal risk to the patient. For this purpose, we devised a language

Linguistic processes: Other

protocol involving a semantic decision task for use with MEG and fMRI.
Novel and repeated word stimuli were presented visually at an ISI of
600-1500ms while participants were instructed to either respond to
repeating words or to infrequent target words (i.e., animals). Experimental paradigms were designed to be analogous between MEG and fMRI
modalities with the exception that a block design was used for fMRI and
an event-related design for MEG. Consonant strings and false font
sequences were used as non-language control stimuli and contrasted to
the novel and repeated word activations to reveal language and memoryspecific cortex, respectively. Of particular interest were Wernicke’s area
in the posterior superior temporal gyrus and Broca’s area in the inferior
frontal gyrus. In a subset of patients, validation of language localization
was achieved with direct cortical stimulation and Wada testing. Results
from both imaging methods are compared and their suitability discussed
with respect to replacing invasive mapping techniques.
G145
EXAMINING IMPLICIT PHONOLOGICAL PROCESSING USING A
PICTURE-WORD MATCHING TASK AND FMRI Randy
Lynn
Newman1, Marc Joanisse2, Amy Desroches2; 1Acadia University, 2The
University of Western Ontario — Studies of phonological processing have
typically employed metalinguistic tasks such as rhyme judgment and
phoneme monitoring. However, such tasks tend to be contaminated by
working memory and attention. The current study proposes a different
approach to assessing the brain mechanisms of everyday phonological
processing. Neurologically healthy adults performed a picture-sound
matching task requiring them to match a picture to a spoken word. The
degree of phonological overlap between pictures and words was manipulated across 4 conditions: match trials in which the correct word was
presented (picture: CONE, word: “cone”); cohort mismatch trials in
which the initial segment of the word matched that of the picture (CONE;
“comb”); rhyme mismatch trials in which the word and picture shared
the same rime (CONE; “bone”); and unrelated mismatch trials where
there was no overlap (CONE; “fox”). To perform this task, participants
had to generate and maintain the phonological representation of the picture in anticipation of the spoken word probe. Statistical maps constructed to identify overall task activation implicated both STG and IFG
in the formation and maintenance of phonological word forms. We next
identified regions showing increased activity in response to mismatch
stimuli. Key differences emerged in IFG, STG and inferior occipitotemporal regions as a function of the phonological overlap between the
expected and probe words. Further analyses examined how activity in
these regions is modulated by the phonological relationship between the
target and distractor. Results are discussed with regard to models of
auditory word recognition.
G146
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
MEASURES
AND
SELECTIVE
ATTENTION TO ACOUSTIC AND PHONEMIC CUES Priya
Patel1,2, Martin Duff1,3, Hilary Gomes1,4, Brett Martin3; 1The City College of
New York, CUNY, 2Graduate Center, CUNY, 3The Graduate Center, CUNY,
4
The Graduate Center,CUNY — Classic research in attention has shown
that people can selectively attend to one speaker while ignoring another.
This ability has been explored electrophysiologically with an eventrelated potential associated with selective attention, the Nd. Most of these
studies, however, have employed simple auditory cues to differentiate
information streams; only a few have used phonemic cues. This study
compared Nds elicited when channels were defined by simple and by
phonemic cues. Four conditions were presented that differed in the type
of cue separating the streams and the characteristics of the target: place
(ba/da, target-phoneme); place (ba/da, target-stimulus of longer duration); voice (ba/pa, target- phoneme); frequency (1000Hz/2000Hz, target-duration). Participants (7 adults) were instructed to attend to one of
the two streams in order to detect a target embedded within the attended
channel while ignoring stimuli in the unattended channel. Preliminary
behavioral data suggests that participants perform better when attending

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

to CVs then tones as demonstrated by higher accuracy and shorter reaction times. The ERP data showed that Nds (defined as ERP difference
between the unattended and attended standard stimulus) were elicited in
all conditions, but were larger when the target was defined by a phonemic cue than when it was defined by an acoustic cue.
G147
DISCOURSE CONGRUITY OVERRIDES SEMANTIC PRIMING
DURING SPOKEN LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION: AN ERP
STUDY Lara Polse1, Tamara Swaab1, Peter Gordon2, Christine Camblin2;
1
UC Davis, 2University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill — In a previous
study we used eyetracking and ERPs to examine the interplay of lexical
association and discourse congruence during reading (Camblin et al., in
press). With both methodologies main effects of discourse congruence
and association were found. However, under natural reading conditions
with eyetracking, manipulations of discourse congruence eliminated
associative priming in the target region. This indicates that the speed
and/or the naturalness of the input may modulate the influence of discourse context on lexical priming. This was tested in the present study,
where we manipulated associative priming and discourse congruity to
examine the extent to which discourse level representations can affect
associative priming in naturally produced connected speech. Short passages were aurally presented and were created from associative word
pairs culled from existing norms. The terminal word in the third sentence
varied in terms of overall discourse congruence and lexical association
with a preceding prime word (e.g., “The movie was applauded by adults
and CHILDREN/TODDLERS,” preceded either by a context referring to
a Disney film or to a holocaust documentary). Within a stimulus set the
last sentence was identical up until the critical word, and this sentence
was congruent when read in isolation. The preceding context, however,
made the critical final word congruous or incongruous at the discourse
level. ERP results showed early main effects of discourse congruence, but
no effects of association. The results are consistent with the idea that discourse context can override effects of lexical association in spoken language comprehension.
G148
LEXICAL
AND
SUB-LEXICAL
READING
PROCESSES:
BEHAVIOURAL AND NEUROBIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR
MATHEMATICAL INDEPENDENCE Jacqueline Cummine, Gordon
Sarty, Ron Borowsky; University of Saskatchewan — The present study evaluated both behavioral (i.e., naming accuracy) and neuroanatomical (functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging, fMRI) evidence for the relationship
between sub-lexical and lexical systems in basic reading processes. Dualroute models of reading (e.g., Coltheart and colleagues) assume mathematical independence between lexical and sub-lexical systems whereby
regular words can be read correctly by both lexical and sub-lexical systems, whereas irregular words are read by the lexical system, and nonwords are read by the sub-lexical system. Following Castles, Bates and
Coltheart (in press), an equation was derived for predicting regular word
reading accuracy that assumes mathematical independence between lexical and sub-lexical systems. During a blocked and gapped MRI experiment participants (N=10) named letter-strings aloud and accuracy scores
were recorded. Regression analyses were run to examine the extent to
which actual regular word (e.g., hint) naming accuracy could be predicted given irregular word (e.g, pint) and nonword (e.g., bint) or
pseudohomophone (e.g., pynt) naming accuracy, and confirmed the
mathematical assumption of independence between lexical and sub-lexical systems. The independence of functional neural systems was confirmed by examining fMRI activation maps that separate unique versus
shared regions of activation, whereby there was significant unique activation for each stimulus type as well as significant shared activation
between stimulus types. The present study provides strong support for a
mathematically independent dual-route model (i.e., both behaviorally
and functionally) of basic reading processes.

257

Monday, May 7, 5:30 – 7:30 PM

258

Linguistic processes: Other

Poster Session H
Higher level cognition: Executive functions
H1
AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF DENIAL AND DECEPTION
Christopher P. Said1, Christopher D. Moore1, Jonathan D. Cohen1, Alexander
Todorov1; 1Princeton University — Previous imaging studies of deception
may have confounded cognitive arousal with deception. Because lie conditions may be perceived by participants to be more salient than truth conditions, classifiers trained on simple comparisons between truth and lie may
in part be relying on different levels of arousal and associated cognitive
processes between conditions, and thus may carry a high risk of false positives in applied settings. In this fMRI experiment, 13 subjects participated
in a mock crime in which they “stole” a high-value money pouch and a
low-value money pouch, while not stealing another high-value pouch and
another low-value pouch. While in the scanner, subjects denied taking
both the stolen pouches (lie condition) and the unstolen pouches (truth
condition) to a naive experimenter who they believed was using an online
classifier to detect lies. Critically, subjects believed that they could lose the
money from any pouch the experimenter believed they were lying about,
regardless of whether the experimenter was correct. Our results show
brain regions significantly responsive to both the lie condition and higharousal condition, suggesting that some regions previously implicated in
deception may be driven by arousal.

with two stimuli, BOLD activations in the anterior cingulate and prefrontal
cortex were measured. Although general comparisons were made between
truthful and deceptive responses as well as switch vs. no-switch trials two
further comparisons were made to address specific hypotheses. It has been
debated whether or not the anterior cingulate activity observed during
fMRI studies of deception is related to attention-switching alone or to both
attention-switching and conflict resolution. In the current study, deceptive
switch trials were compared to no-switch trials to answer this question.
Some fMRI researchers argue that the anterior prefrontal cortex, specifically Brodmann’s Area 10, is involved in the act of deception. ECD models
of HD-ERP data have supported this supposition (Vendemia, 2003). Ramnani and Owen (2004) argue that this area is activated when an individual
must make simultaneous considerations of multiple relations. When an
individual deceives, these multiple relations may occur between situational context, goal-driven behavior, divergence of the deceptive information from truthful information, and a variety of internal states. Given the
generalist nature of these “simultaneous considerations”, it is no surprise
that several researchers have identified activation in this region during the
act of deception. Prefrontal activity during deceptive responding was contrasted with prefrontal activity during truthful responses in switch and noswitch conditions. The findings are discussed as they relate to early attentional mechanisms and decision making during deceptive responses.

H2
NEURAL CORRELATES OF PERCEPTUAL DECISION-MAKING IN
HUMANS AND MONKEYS Jack Grinband, Joy Hirsch, Vince Ferrera;
Columbia University — Although homology between monkey and human
brain has been demonstrated in early sensory regions, it remains unknown
whether functional homology extends to higher cognitive centers of the
brain. The goal of our study was to identify the neural networks involved
in making perceptual decisions and to determine the extent of homology
present between humans and monkeys by studying both species under
identical conditions. We trained two rhesus macaques to perform a speed
categorization task. The stimulus consisted of randomly generated, coherently moving dots. The speed of the motion was randomized on each trial.
Subjects indicated whether they perceived motion as "fast" or "slow" by
making a saccade to one of two targets. The position of the targets was randomized from trial to trial to dissociate the categorical "fast/slow" decision
from the motor response. Correct trials were reinforced with a juice
reward. Five human subjects performed the identical task, also using saccadic responses and receiving juice rewards. Event-related fMRI was performed to identify task related neural activity. Humans showed significant
activation related to the difficulty of the decision in anterior insula, medial
frontal gyrus, ventral striatum, and dorsomedial thalamus, consistent with
our previous results (Grinband, Hirsch, Ferrera. 2006. Neuron 49, 757-763).
A comparison of the human and monkey data indicates that monkeys may
use different brain regions from humans during perceptual decision making.

H4
THE INFLUENCE OF CULTURE ON EXECUTIVE FUNCTION: AN
ERP STUDY Xiaoqin Mai1, Chao Liu1, Roma Sharma1, Twila Tardif1, Yuejia
Luo3; 1University of Michigan, 2Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China — Executive functioning plays a crucial role in early stages of mastering new
skills. Recent studies have found that Chinese preschoolers outperform
their U.S. counterparts on measures of executive function. However, we
still do not know the behavioral and neural mechanisms of this cross-cultural difference and whether it applies to Chinese and US adults as well.
To explore this phenomenon, 19 Beijing and 19 Ann Arbor college students
were asked to perform a Stroop-like task in which they pressed a key in
the direction a certain color [e.g., green] of fish was pointing (Congruent
condition), and pressed a key in the opposite direction for fish of another
color [e.g., red] (Incongruent condition). EEGs were recorded from 128
scalp sites using identical equipment and procedures across laboratories.
In both groups, the reaction time was longer, and accuracy was lower in
Incongruent than in Congruent conditions. Interestingly, US students
responded faster than Chinese students for both conditions. ERP results
showed that P300 amplitudes were also higher for US students than for
Chinese students, which might suggest that US students devoted more
resources to the task. We also observed two negative components, N240
and N430. The amplitude of these components is greater for Incongruent
than for Congruent condition in both groups. This Stroop task requires
subjects not only to inhibit a response, but also to execute a rule-guided
action. Thus, N240 might reflect the processes of inhibitory control, and
N430 may be related to executing the non-habitual behavior.

H3
ANTERIOR CINGULATE AND PREFRONTAL ACTIVITY AS
CORRELATES
OF
ATTENTION
SWITCHING
AND
CONSIDERATION
OF
MULTIPLE
RELATIONS
DURING
TRUTHFUL AND DECEPTIVE RESPONSES: A BOLD IMAGING
STUDY Carmen Sanchez, Scott Meek, Michelle Phillips, Veena Nair, Adam
Craig, Laura Jelsone, Laura Smarandescu, Deepa Vijayakumar, Jennifer
Vendemia; University of South Carolina — In a study with college-aged students (N=20) using directed deceptions during a sentence verification task

H5
DIFFERENCES IN THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF RESPONSE
TIME VARIABILITY IN CHILDREN WITH ATTENTION-DEFICIT/
HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER. Stewart Mostofsky1,2, Daniel Simmonds1,
Stacy Suskauer1,2, Sunaina Fotedar1, James Pekar1,2, Martha Denckla1,2; 1Kennedy
Krieger Institute, 2Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — Increased
intra-individual response time (RT) variability is consistently found in
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). It correlates with measures of response inhibition, another implicated deficit in ADHD. This

259

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

study used fMRI to examine whether the neural correlates of efficient
Go/Nogo task performance differ between children with ADHD and
typically-developing (TD) controls. Twenty-four each of ADHD (15M)
and TD (14M) children, ages 8-12 years, completed a Go/Nogo task with
minimal cognitive demands. Stimuli were presented rapidly with a
Go(green):Nogo(red) ratio of 3:1. The groups were matched on commission errors and RT variability, measured as: (standard deviation of RT)/
(mean RT). Variability correlated with commission errors (r=.43,p=.001)
and was more pronounced in ADHD (r=.54,p=.003). Correlational analyses revealed that lower variability in both groups was primarily associated with Go-activation in anterior cerebellum (culmen), with Nogoactivation in superior medial premotor areas (BA6/8) and with Go- and
Nogo- activation in bilateral parietal regions (BA7/40). Higher variability
in controls was associated with Go-activation in left postcentral gyrus
(BA3) and with No-go activation in right middle frontal gyrus (BA46)
and caudate, while in ADHD was associated with Go- and Nogo-activation in bilateral temporal regions, bilateral sensorimotor regions (BA3/4),
anterior cingulate, bilateral inferior/orbitofrontal gyri (BA47/11) and
insula. These findings suggest that the functional correlates of RT variability differ between TD and ADHD children, such that children with
ADHD with less efficient performance do not sufficiently recruit parietal
and medial premotor regions important for guiding and selecting/inhibiting responses; they instead rely on regions important for sensory-association processing, error-monitoring and higher-order cognitive control.
H6
THE DEVELOPMENT OF COGNITIVE CONTROL: AN ERP
INVESTIGATION IN CHILDREN, YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS
David Friedman, Yael M. Cycowicz, Cort Horton, Doreen Nessler, Marianne de
Chastelaine; New York State Psychiatric Institute - CEPL — Cognitive control becomes increasingly efficient throughout childhood into early adulthood and begins to lose its efficacy in old age. One such control process,
response conflict detection, is critical for inhibiting inappropriate, competing responses. The amount of response conflict was assessed by measuring medial frontal negativity (MFN) amplitude in a flanker task in
children (mean age = 9.5), young (23.3) and older (71.0) adults. A central
arrow pointed to the right or left and flankers were congruent (C) or
incongruent (I) with its direction. In the Same (S) and Opposite (O) conditions, subjects pressed a button corresponding, respectively, to the same
or opposite direction of the central arrow. Children were less accurate
than young and older adults. For all, RT showed I>C and O>S; this latter
difference was greater in older than young adults and children. MFN
showed I>C for older adults and children, but not young adults, whereas
O>S for young and older adults but not children. Hence, when response
conflict was moderate (incongruent flankers), children and older adults
detected that conflict appropriately. However, when response conflict
was heightened (O condition), children did not detect that conflict adequately, whereas older adults did but with large RT costs. These data
suggest that conflict detection is relatively mature for moderate levels of
conflict by the mean age of 9.5 and does not show age-related change. By
contrast, the ability to deal with heightened levels of response conflict to
inhibit inappropriate responses appears to undergo protracted development and is altered with aging.
H7
NEURAL DYNAMICS OF COGNITIVE CONTROL: EFFECTS OF
ALCOHOL Ksenija Marinkovic, Sheeva Azma; Harvard Medical School,
Boston — Moderate alcohol intoxication impairs executive functions by
interfering with cognitive control: the ability to evaluate competing
demands of a task and inhibit maladaptive responses. Healthy subjects
took part in both alcohol (0.6 g/kg ethanol for men, 0.55 g/kg women)
and placebo conditions as they participated in a modified 4-color Stroop
task that combined reading and color naming. MEG signals were
recorded from the whole head (Elekta Neuromag). Noise-normalized distributed minimum norm inverse solutions were constrained to each person’s cortical surface reconstructed from high-resolution anatomical MRI
scans and averaged across subjects.Alcohol lowered response accuracy

260

Higher level cognition: Executive functions

overall. It attenuated early visual sensory processing and increased difficulty of semantic and contextual integration. In contrast to low-conflict
conditions, incongruous stimuli elicited activity in distributed prefrontal
regions indicating optimization of motor planning and execution. Alcohol reduced the prefrontal activity particularly on high-conflict trials, and
increased contributions of the supplementary motor and anterior cingulate regions overall. This suggests compensatory engagement of this circuitry, reflecting increased effort in response selection, preparation and
execution. The dorsal anterior cingulate area was engaged under alcohol
conditions during the later stages of processing encompassing response
execution and performance monitoring. Its activity was increased on
error trials, particularly under alcohol. The observed impairment of cognitive control may provide insight into deleterious effects of alcohol on
the strategic decision-making process in situations evoking inhibitory
control, and could help elucidate the neural basis of the inability to
refrain from drinking and the subsequent development of alcohol abuse
and dependence. Supported by AA13402, ABMRF. P41RR14075, MIND.
H8
DELAY DISCOUNTING DEPENDS ON GENERAL INTELLIGENCE:
EVIDENCE FOR SEPARABLE COMPONENTS AND DISSOCIABLE
NEURAL MECHANISMS Noah A. Shamosh, Colin G. DeYoung, Deidre L.
Reis, Jeremy R. Gray; Yale University — Delay discounting (DD), which
reflects preference for smaller, sooner rewards over larger, delayed ones,
may depend on differences in working memory capacity (WMC; Hinson,
Jameson, & Whitney, 2003). Because WMC is strongly associated with
general intelligence (g), the relative influences of WMC and g on DD
remain unclear. To tease apart these influences, we analyzed data from
101 participants who completed measures of intelligence and WMC, and
were then scanned with fMRI during a demanding working memory task
(3-back). Although both g and WMC were associated with DD (r(99)=.42, p<.001 and r(99)=-.24, p=.017, respectively), g showed a unique association with DD (beta=-.45, t(98)=3.84, p<.001) whereas WMC did not
(beta=.043, t(98)<1). In the scanner, neural activity during the 3-back task
was correlated with performance (p<.05, FWE) in three regions of interest
within bilateral anterior prefrontal cortex (BA 10) and right superior parietal cortex (BA 7). Higher g was associated with greater activity during
the 3-back in all three regions. Critically, activity only in the left BA 10
region of interest was associated with DD, and this activity partially
mediated the g-DD relation (standardized indirect effect =-.061, p=.038).
The results suggest that DD depends on g, not WM capacity specifically,
and that dissociable neural mechanisms mediate this relation. The specificity of these mediating mechanisms suggests that integration of complex, goal-relevant information may play a more important role in DD
than does executive control of attention.
H9
IMPAIRED RESPONSE SWITCHING ON SACCADE TASKS IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA Cosima Franke, Benedikt Reuter, Lisa Schulz, Norbert
Kathmann; Humboldt-Universität Berlin — To specify deficits of action control in schizophrenia we studied the effects of switching between rightward and leftward prosaccades and antisaccades. Previous research with
healthy subjects suggested that task switch effects (between pro- and
antisaccades) reflect the persistence of a task-specific production rule and
refer to the level of task selection, whereas response switch effects
(between leftward and rightward saccades) point to the persistence of a
specific motor program, referring to the level of response selection. The
present study investigated task switching and response switching in 20
schizophrenia patients and 20 control subjects. Groups did not differ concerning task switch effects. In contrast, response switching entailed a
stronger enhancement of error rates in patients, suggesting a specific deficit on the level of response selection in schizophrenia. In addition,
response switch effects for healthy subjects were smaller than in previous
studies, presumably due to a longer inter-response interval in the present
study. A second study is being conducted to investigate the effects of different inter-response intervals on response switching both in schizophrenia patients and healthy subjects.

Higher level cognition: Executive functions

H10
MODULATION OF THE FEEDBACK RELATED NEGATIVITY BY
EXPECTATION AND LEARNING IN A CATEGORIZATION
TASK. Dan Lopez-Paniagua, Marc Richard, Mark Towne, Carol Seger;
Colorado State University — The feedback related negativity (FRN) is an
event related potential (ERP) component that follows the receipt of negative feedback during learning, and is believed to signal activity in the
medial prefrontal brain regions involved in performance monitoring.
Moreover, medial prefrontal regions are modulated by ascending
dopaminergic projections that signal violations of reward expectancy. We
examined how the FRN was modulated by feedback expectancy and
learning using a simple categorization task. On each trial, subjects viewed
individual pictures of college students, decided for each which of two
sections of a course he or she typically attended, and then received feedback as to whether the decision was right or wrong. Pictures of eight different college students were studied; two had a deterministic relationship
with the course sections (always attended section 1 or always section 2),
four had a probabilistic relationship (In section 1 80% of trials and in section 2 20% of trials, or vice versa) and two were random (50% of trials in
each section). We examined the feedback related negativity (FRN) which
was time-locked to the receipt of feedback, and found that the FRN was
modulated by feedback expectancy rather than the mere presence of negatively valenced feedback.
H11
COGNITIVE
BENEFITS
AND
NEURAL
PROCESSING
FOLLOWING EARLY AND CONTINUED ARTS TRAINING IN
DANCE Melody Berens1, Ioulia Kovelman1,2, Katherine White1, Mark
Shalinsky1,3, Ryan Gramacy1, Laura-Ann Petitto1; 1Dartmouth College, 2MIT,
3Harvard MGH — A hotly debated topic is whether early extensive Arts
training (e.g., dance) affords advantages to other higher cognitive abilities. Studies have supported this hypothesis (e.g., Schellenberg, 2004), but
the existence and duration of such cognitive benefits remains unclear.
Experiment 1 asked whether early, extensive, and maintained dance
training yields long-term cognitive benefits. Experiment 2 used NearInfrared Spectroscopy (Hitachi ETG-4000), which, like fMRI, measures
hemodynamic change, to investigate neural processing in Dancers and
Non-Dancers. “Dancers” had (i) >8 years dance training, (ii) begun before
age 7, (iii) training into adulthood, (iv) professional performances, and
(v) reported dance pleasurable. Experiment 1- 30 participants (15/group),
tasks: (a) Language, (b) Attention (SRC & Flanker), (c) Dance/Walk Perception, (d) Verbal/Nonverbal measures. Significant results: Dancers
performed more accurately than Non-Dancers on the SRC task (p < .03)
and faster on the Dance/Walk Perception task (p < .015). Experiment 217 participants (8 Dancers, 9 Non-Dancers), task: Dance/Walk Perception. Significant results: Group x hemisphere interaction revealed that
Dancers had greater Right than Left hemisphere Parietal activation; NonDancers showed the reverse pattern (p < .02). Notably, both groups
exhibited similar activation patterns on Walk, with lateralization differences emerging only on Dance. Significance: While predicted that Dancers would exhibit superior perception of dance movements, surprisingly,
Dancers were faster than Non-Dancers when processing walking, revealing facilitation in processing of biological motion that extended to everyday walking. Extensive training in the Arts may afford long-term
advantages to other higher cognitive abilities; such training may also
alter neural processing.
H12
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF ERROR DETECTION
IN PERFORMING MUSICIANS Clemens Maidhof, Martina Rieger,
Wolfgang Prinz, Stefan Koelsch; Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences — Playing a musical instrument at a professional level
is a highly demanding task requiring the constant monitoring of ones
own actions in order to achieve correct performance. By using auditory,
visual and somatosensory feedback, it is possible to detect and subsequently correct errors. Because of the precision required for music perfor-

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

mance, monitoring and detecting errors should be highly developed
processes in musicians. Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate
the neurophysiological correlates of error detection in performing musicians. Twelve pianists participated in an experiment comprising an active
performing condition and a passive perception condition. In the action
condition, they were asked to play fast tone sequences bimanually on an
E-Piano. Event-related potentials (ERPs) for random auditory feedback
manipulations (shifts of one semitone) and ERPs for self-made errors
were computed. In the perception-condition, the task was to listen to
those sequences, also containing random pitch manipulations of one
semitone. Analogously, ERPs for these pitch manipulations were computed. The results of the action-condition showed that feedback manipulations elicited an early feedback error-related negativity (feedback ERN),
while pitch manipulations in the perception-condition also elicited a
potential similar to the feedback ERN, but which was considerably
smaller than in the action-condition. This implies that error detection
mechanisms appear to be enhanced by action-related expectations. The
ERPs in response to the self-made errors showed a positive deflection
beginning already prior to the onset of the tone, suggesting that not all
error-related mechanisms during piano performance do rely on auditory
feedback.
H13
IS MENTAL EFFORT AVERSIVE? SOME BEHAVIORAL AND
PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGIC EVIDENCE Zev
Rosen1,
Matthew
2,1 1
2
Botvinick ; University of Pennsylvania, Princeton University — Behavioral and economic theories have long maintained that actions are chosen
so as to minimize demands for exertion or work, an idea formalized in
Hull’s well-known law of least effort. The data supporting this idea pertain almost entirely to physical effort. However, the same principle is also
often assumed to apply to mental effort. We set out to evaluate the validity of this assumption. In two behavioral experiments, participants chose
freely between courses of action associated with different levels of cognitive demand. Both experiments revealed a marked bias in favor of the
less demanding course of action, even among participants who were
unable to report the basis of their decisions. Two further experiments
leveraged the finding that a skin conductance response (SCR) occurs
prior to actions linked with aversive outcomes. During performance of
our choice task, participants displayed an elevated SCR just prior to opting for the high-effort course of action. Based on these findings, as well as
convergent neuroimaging evidence, we propound a law of least mental
effort.
H14
TESTING IMPULSIVE DECISION MAKING WITH THE NOVEL
TIME CONFLICT TASK Ahmed Moustafa1, Mike Cohen2, Michael
Frank1; 1University of Arizona, 2University of California Davis — We present
a novel "time conflict" (TT) task for assessing the neural mechanisms of
impulsive decision making. Subjects are presented with a clock face
whose arm makes a full turn over the course of 5s. They are instructed to
press a key at some point before the arm makes a full turn. They score
points after each response. Reward magnitude increases while the
reward probability decreases over time within each trial. Depending on
the task block, the integrated expected value either decreases (DEV),
increases (IEV), or stays constant (CEV). This manipulation results in conflict between reward frequency and magnitude as time elapses: In the
IEV condition, the longer the subject waits, the less likely s/he will
receive a reward, but the larger the potential gain. In contrast, in the DEV
condition faster responses will yield more points on average. In pilot testing, subjects adaptively modulated reaction times, responding faster for
DEV and slower for IEV, relative to CEV. Post-experiment debriefing
showed that subjects were unaware of differential change of reward frequency and magnitude. Our neurocomputational model suggests that the
ability to slow RT's for high conflict decisions depends on the subthalamic nucleus. We will present data from Parkison's patients on and off
deep brain stimulators (DBS). Our computational model predicts that

261

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

DBS should cause impulsive responding by preventing patients from
slowing RTs in IEV relative to CEV, together with intact abilities to speed
responses in DEV.
H15
NO-GO N2 AND RESPONSE INHIBITION IN GERIATRIC
DEPRESSION. Richard Katz1, Filip DeSanctis2, Christopher Murphy1,
Glenn Wylie3, George Alexopoulos1, John Foxe2; 1Weill Medical College of
Cornell University, 2The Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research,
3Kessler Medical Rehabilitation Research and Education — Depression
is
associated with executive dysfunction. Frontostriatal dysfunction leads
to development of depression and executive dysfunction in the elderly.
The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is believed to play a central role.
Here we use event-related potentials (ERPs) to measure prefrontal dysfunction using the no-go N2 ERP component, in depressed and nondepressed older adults. The no-go N2 is believed to be generated by the
ACC and may vary in amplitude based on the degree of neuronal activity
required for response inhibition. We recruited 8 older adults with major
depression (mean age=73 yrs) and compared them with 8 age-matched
controls. ERPs were acquired from 64 scalp electrodes during a go/no-go
task. The N2 amplitude was smaller for depressed subjects (1.04mv) compared to controls (2.37mv), p=0.012. The depressed group had a 100ms
lag in RT compared to controls. Accuracy between the two groups were
relatively the same. To our knowledge, this is the first report of low N2
amplitude during performance of a go/no-go task in geriatric depression. This finding is consistent with clinical and neuroimaging evidence
of frontostriatal dysfunction in geriatric depression.
H16
MOTIVATIONAL INFLUENCES ON RESPONSE INHIBITION
MEASURES Lauren Kaplan, Tor Wager; Columbia University — Psychological research has placed great emphasis on understanding inhibitory
control, largely because of its integral role in normal cognition and
behavior, as well as its apparent deficit in ADHD and other clinical disorders. The stop-signal paradigm is a promising task for assessing the ability to inhibit responses. However, the models typically employed to
analyze performance on this task do not effectively disentangle the ability
to inhibit responses from strategic biases related to speed-accuracy
tradeoffs. In the present study, we conceptualize stop-signal performance
as a decision-making task involving strategic allocation of resources. In a
series of experiments, monetary rewards and losses were varied systematically to manipulate strategy in several variants of the stop-signal task.
To separate the influence of strategic bias from measures of inhibitory
control ability, we develop a model analogous to the receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) for stop-signal performance. Varying reward contingencies and modeling both reaction time (RT) and stop-signal distributions using ex-gaussian functions, we calculate response curves for
varying strategic go-speed / stop-accuracy tradeoffs. Participants slowed
responses and made fewer false alarms as payoffs favored accuracy over
speed. SSRT estimates also varied as a function of strategic control, overestimating stop latency when speed was favored and underestimating
stop latency when accuracy was favored. We present an improved measure of inhibitory control that may provide more accurate and reliable
measures of individual differences in inhibitory capabilities.
H17
THE ROLE OF THE BODY IMAGE IN THE MONITORING OF
ACTION IN SCHIZOPHRENIA. A CONTROLLED STUDY USING
VIRTUAL
REALITY
AND
INTERACTIVE
MULTIMEDIA
TECHNIQUES. Elise Lallart1, Roland Jouvent1, Xavier Lallart2; 1La
Salpetriere Hospital, 2Ville Evrard — Patients with delusions of control are
not normally aware of the consequences of their actions and encounter
difficulties correcting their movements. As a result, they think that they
are a passive instrument in the hands of an external will and therefore
attribute their actions to others. The delusion of influence is another
example of a lack of congruence between the intended actions and their
sensory consequences. In a more general view, several authors consider

262

Higher level cognition: Executive functions

the disruptive mechanism of attribution of actions as one of the essential
etiopathogenic mechanisms of schizophrenia. In this study we evaluate
the efficacy of the monitoring of action in a group of schizophrenic subjects (PANSS) compared with controls. We use new interactive technologies, which offer the opportunity to involve the user’s body in a virtual
environment while seeing herself/himself performing the actions. Therefore the subject is not only an agent during the test, but also sees himself
being the actor. We were interested to see if the visual perception of the
body as a whole would reinforce the monitoring of the action. Consequently, we alternated two conditions: a control condition and a second
one in which we hide the central part of the body. In this latter condition,
the subject only sees his arms moving. The results show that the alteration of the body image modifies the performances in normal subjects.
Nevertheless, schizophrenics are less perturbed when they don’t see the
totality of their body image, suggesting a defect in whole body integration.
H18
A LATERALIZED NON-VERBAL STROOP TEST Nooshin
Yashar1,
1
3
1
Michelle Fourney , Dena Elperin2, Herzberg Kristin , Nancy Sin , Leonardo
Fernandino1, Eran Zaidel1; 1UCLA, 2Department of Psychology, UC Berkeley,
3Department of Psychology, SUNY Albany — We constructed a non-verbal
test, pairing colors (red, yellow) with emotional cartoons (angry face,
happy face). The tasks were to identify the color or to identify the emotion. We studied the following properties of the test: (1) speed asymmetry
between Color and Emotion identification, (2) asymmetry of the Stroop
effect between the two tasks, and (3) adequacy of the speed and automaticity accounts of the Stroop effects. Happy and angry cartoon faces were
surrounded by red or yellow backgrounds. One of the four combinations
was presented tachistoscopically to the left or the right visual hemifield.
Subjects were asked to indicate the color or the emotion by a two-choice
button press. Experiment 1 showed an overall left visual hemifield
advantage, a task asymmetry (Color faster than Emotion), an asymmetric
Stroop effect (larger in the Emotion task), and no correlation between the
task asymmetry and the Stroop effects. Experiment 2 replaced the cartoons with real emotional faces. There was no Stroop effect in either task.
Experiment 3 repeated experiment 1 and asked participants to rate their
degree of familiarity with the association between the colors and cartoons. The results replicated experiment 1 and showed no correlation
between degree of familiarity of the color/cartoon association and the
Stroop effects. The Stroop effect is diluted by the spatial separation of the
color and the cartoon face, as well as by non-verbal responses. Nonetheless, there was a significant Stroop effect, which was not due to either
speed or automaticity differences between the two tasks.
H19
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DEMAND-RELATED ACTIVATION AND
DEACTIVATION: EVIDENCE FROM TASK-SWITCHING IN
YOUNG, MIDDLE-AGED, AND OLD ADULTS Cindy Lustig1, Denise
Head2, William E. Janes2, Randy L. Buckner3,4; 1University of Michigan,
2
Washington University in St. Louis, 3Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
4
Harvard University, Harvard Medical School, and Massachusetts General
Hospital — Tasks with high demands for controlled, effortful processing
typically activate frontal-parietal networks, and can be especially difficult
for older adults. We report data from a study contrasting behavioral reaction times (RT) and fMRI activations during conditions that vary the
demand for control in young (24 yrs, n= 44), middle-aged (49 yrs, n = 41),
and old adults (74 yrs, n=90). In the low-control condition, participants
perform the same task throughout the run. In the high-control condition,
participants switch tasks at unpredictable intervals in response to a cue.
Age and control demand were associated with increased RT and frontalparietal response. Aging was associated with greater load-sensitive
responses in dorsal prefrontal cortex (left BA 6/44). More ventral regions
(bilateral BA 45/47) were not significantly activated by young adults. By
contrast, middle-aged participants activated these regions in the highdemand condition, and older adults showed even greater demand-

Higher level cognition: Executive functions

related increases in activation. Medial prefrontal and posterior cingulate
regions showed little response in any group in the low-demand condition. Young and middle-aged adults deactivated these regions in the
high-demand condition, but older adults did not. Correspondence
between regions showing increased activation as a function of old age
and those showing increased activation as a function of control demand
suggests that older adults may recruit controlled processing at nominally
lower levels of demand, but like young adults, can increase activation in
response to increased demand. Age differences in deactivations may
reflect either compensatory strategies or a failure to inhibit task-unrelated
processing. Support Contributed By: NIH and HHMI
H20
PREPARATORY ATTENTION AND READINESS FOR COGNITIVE
CONFLICTS And Turken1, Diane Swick1,2; 1VA Northern California
Health Care System, Martinez, CA, 2UC Davis Neurology Department — We
investigated the relation between preparatory activity, as reflected in the
contingent negative variation (CNV), an event-related potential (ERP)
component that occurs in anticipation of oncoming stimuli, and performance in a cognitive conflict task. Electroencephalographic signals were
recorded from 20 subjects while they performed a variant of the Stroop
task with congruent and incongruent trials and low and high conflict
conditions. An instruction cue preceding the stimulus by 1400 ms indicated which of two stimulus dimensions should be attended to on each
trial. Mean amplitude of the late CNV (1000-1400 ms), at fronto-central
electrodes was used as an electrophysiological marker of task set preparation. Faster reaction times on both congruent and incongruent trials
were associated with larger CNV amplitudes, consistent with higher levels of cognitive and motor readiness. In the high conflict condition only,
the CNV difference between fast and slow response trials was significantly larger when stimuli were incongruent. In order to control for the
contribution of motoric aspects of preparation, congruent and incongruent trials matched for reaction time and trial history were compared.
CNV amplitude was larger on incongruent trials than congruent trials
only in the high conflict condition, indicating that a higher level of preparation is required to maintain the same performance level when conflicts
occur. These results are consistent with the idea that higher levels of preparatory brain activity reflected by the CNV is associated with better performance, particularly when conflict monitoring and resolution are
required.
H21
HOLD YOUR HORSES! TESTING THE RACE MODEL OF
RESPONSE INHIBITION Fenna Krienen, David Badre, Mark D'Esposito;
University of California, Berkeley; Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute — The
ability to inhibit unwanted or irrelevant thoughts and actions is central to
cognition. Response inhibition has been conceptualized as a general, central capacity and as independent of the pathway that leads to the emission of a response. Deriving from this perspective, recent neuroimaging
and neuropsychological evidence implicating the right inferior prefrontal
cortex in the inhibition of an already initiated manual response (the stopsignal task) has led to the proposal that the right inferior prefrontal cortex
is the site of a general capacity inhibitory system. Critically, however, the
assumption that the stop-signal task or other inhibition-based tasks are
reflective of a central inhibition faculty remains to be tested in a withinsubjects design. Additionally, a broad range of actions has not yet been
systematically tested using the same paradigm. Here, we investigate the
hypothesis of cross-modal differences in response inhibition. Subjects
responded to Go signals and attempted to inhibit the initiated response to
occasional Stop signals. Stimuli required either spatial or semantic judgments (Content), and subjects responded with manual key presses or verbal utterances (Output). Initial results suggest that correlations in stop
signal reaction time (SSRT) may differ between Content and Output. We
consider the implications of these results for the independence assumption between going and stopping processes in the stop signal task, the
central capacity formulation of response inhibition, and the validity of

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

drawing inferences about inhibitory performance in one domain based
on performance in another.
H22
DOES MULTI-TASKING AFFECT ACTION MONITORING?
Adrian Willoughby, Diane Swick; VA Northern California Health Care System,
University of California, Davis — Because multi-tasking is commonplace in
today's hectic society, much research has focused on the effects of performing more than one task simultaneously. Typically, these studies
investigate whether performance of one task affects performance on
another. However, it is also important to know whether monitoring processes are impaired. That is, not only could multi-tasking lead to the commission of more errors, but a compromised error detection system could
result in errors having more serious consequences. The Error-Related
Negativity (ERN) has been proposed as an electrophysiological correlate
of several monitoring processes, including error detection and conflict
monitoring. Therefore, examining its behaviour under dual-task conditions may help elucidate both its underlying psychological processes and
whether these processes can, in fact, be compromised by performing a
concurrent task. Participants performed an arrow flanker task both in isolation and during the delay period of a Sternberg memory task. Dual-task
difficulty was manipulated by using a memory load of either four or
seven letters. Preliminary results with eight subjects do not show any significant difference in the amplitude of the ERN across either the single- or
dual-task conditions or across the different memory loads in the dualtask condition. A tentative conclusion is drawn that the psychological
processes underlying the ERN do not share the same resources as those
required by the Sternberg memory task and are not affected by the reallocation of attention between the two tasks.
H23
DISSOCIATING LEVELS OF COGNITIVE CONTROL IN FRONTAL
CORTEX HIERARCHY: EVIDENCE FROM PATIENTS WITH
FOCAL LESIONS Joshua Hoffman, David Badre, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick,
Fenna Krienen, Jeffrey Cooney, Mark D'Esposito; University of California,
Berkeley, Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute — The prefrontal cortex (PFC)
supports flexible, goal-directed behavior. However, the organization of
the PFC remains unknown. One hypothesis is that the PFC is organized
hierarchically, based on the level of abstraction at which multiple representations compete to guide selection of action. In a recent fMRI study
consistent with this hypothesis, we demonstrated that increases in competition among alternative (a) responses, (b) response-relevant features of
a cue, (c) response-relevant dimensions of a cue, and (d) overlapping context-to-dimension mappings were respectively associated with discreet
regions of activation in progressively anterior regions of PFC. The
present study sought to test the necessity of the PFC sub-regions, identified with fMRI, in selection at different levels of representation (a-d).
Neurological patients with focal lesions of lateral PFC were tested on a
behavioral version of the tasks used in the fMRI study. Behavioral data
were analyzed using an observer independent method in which patient
structural data are normalized to a canonical space and then group lesion
overlap maps are generated. These maps are then weighted by each
patient’s behavioral performance relative to controls. Initial results suggest that the site of injury along the posterior to anterior axis of PFC may
determine the pattern of impairment on tasks taxing sub- and superordinate levels of the hierarchy. These results provide important insights
toward a general understanding of the organization of PFC and cognitive
control processes that it supports.
H24
TEMPORAL DYNAMICS AND REPRESENTATIONAL SELECTION
IN FRONTAL POLAR CORTEX David Badre, Mark D'Esposito; Helen
Wills Neuroscience Institute, UC Berkeley — Neuroimaging evidence has
associated activation in frontal polar cortex (FPC) with second-order control functions, like subgoaling, integration of internal representation, and
the selection of abstract action representations. In parallel findings, activity in FPC is also distinguished from more posterior PFC subregions in

263

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

that it commonly demonstrates a sustained, as opposed to transient,
response that spans multiple trials. This has lead to the attribution of
state-based functions to FPC. However, higher-order representations, by
virtue of their abstractness, tend to be relevant over longer periods, and
so it is unclear if FPC is distinguished from posterior PFC regions based
on its temporal dynamics or the representations that it processes. In the
present experiment, control demands were manipulated at two levels of
representation by varying (1) the number of dimensions of a cue relevant
to a response and (2) the relative overlap of contextual cue-to-dimension
mappings. These manipulations were pitted in a factorial design against
the latency over which these representations were relevant to the selection of a response. Preliminary analysis suggests that activity in FPC, as
well as in lower-order PFC subregions, is determined by the level of representation to be selected rather than the frequency with which representations are updated. These initial results suggest that hierarchy in PFC
may be ranked based on representational abstractness rather than temporal dynamics.
H25
ISOLATING INHIBITION IN THE STOPPING OF MOTOR RESPONSES Chelan Weaver, Michael Anderson; University of Oregon — Motorstopping tasks such as the stop-signal paradigm have been developed to
measure people’s ability to stop prepotent motor responses, a capacity
long assumed to involve inhibition. Although this paradigm clearly
quantifies an aspect of stopping, it has never before been shown that the
facility measured by this task is implemented by inhibitory control. In
cognitive tasks, as discussed by Anderson and Spellman (1995), it is possible to isolate the contribution of inhibition by measuring the aftereffects
on a supposedly inhibited representation to determine whether the ability to use that representation is degraded. Anderson & Spellman (1995)
developed the independent probe method as a tool for dissociating the
effects of inhibition from other sources of performance decrements, such
as associative interference, that might contribute to impaired responding.
Incorporation of the logic of the independent probe into an adapted stopsignal task confirmed the involvement of inhibitory control in the revocation of a motor response. These findings provide a novel measure of inhibition, measuring the aftereffects of inhibition rather than stopping
speed. This paradigm also enables identification of the separate contributions of response-specific inhibition and generalized slowing due to alerting effects of the stop tone. By establishing that response inhibition is a
component of motor stopping with an independent probe, this work provides a new measure of inhibition that is parallel to that developed in the
study of cognitive inhibition, providing an important first step toward
understanding response inhibition across domains.

Higher level cognition: Other
H26
NEURAL EVIDENCE THAT WORKING MEMORY LOAD BOOSTS
LEARNING IN A BLOCKING PARADIGM Christian
Luhmann,
Nicholas Turk-Browne, Marvin Chun; Yale University — Blocking is a classic
phenomenon in which learning is suppressed when events are completely predictable on the basis of prior learning. Associative learning
theory, which is based on the notion of prediction error, has been
employed as the traditional explanation of the blocking effect: blocking
occurs because predictable events do not produce any error. However,
critics of associative theory have demonstrated that performing a difficult
secondary task during causal-associative learning attenuates blocking.
These critics conclude that concurrent load disrupts the application of
high-level rules, supporting a non-associative account of blocking. The
current event-related fMRI experiment sought to distinguish between
these alternative accounts of blocking and to understand the impact of
load on learning. Subjects completed two runs of a causal-associative
learning task, one with load and the other without load. Blocking was

264

Higher level cognition: Other

only observed in the behavioral judgments in the absence of load. Likewise, BOLD activation in right prefrontal cortex exhibited the traditional
blocking effect without load. In contrast, under concurrent load, the neural blocking effect in this region was significantly reduced. Critically,
activity in this region also conformed to a variety of additional predictions from associative learning theory, confirming that, as in previous
studies, this region reflects prediction error. These results suggest that
working memory load interferes with the suppression of learning typically observed when an outcome is fully expected, supporting a modified
associative account in which working memory-dependent processes (e.g.,
attention) are critical for learning.
H27
MAPPING FUNCTIONAL CORRELATIONS IN THE BRAINS OF
TWINS Philippe Pinel1, Fabien Fauchereau2, Thomas Bourgeron2, Denis
LeBihan3, Stanislas Dehaene1; 1INSERM Unit 562, 2Institut Pasteur, 3CEA — Exploring the genetic influence on cerebral activation patterns is a recent
challenge of neuroimaging. Previous research has shown that targeted
individual polymorphisms in certain genes of interest may modulate
fMRI responses in task-related brain areas. On the other hand, other
papers have demonstrated genetic influences on brain anatomy. However, there is still no study of the effect of overall genetic similarity on
functional brain organization, especially for high-level human cognitive
functions such as language or arithmetic, even if several studies stressed
the importance of genetic factors in related disabilities. To address this
issue, we studied fMRI data of three populations of healthy male subjects
characterized by their degree of genetic similarity: monozygotic (MZ)
twins who share 100% of their genes, dizygotic (DZ) twins who share, on
average, half of their genes, and unrelated subjects who present different
patterns of polymorphisms. Given that we are in the early stages of mapping genetic influences onto fMRI activations, we developed a functional
paradigm that covers a broad variety of cortical territories, from sensorymotor processing to higher-level cognitive functions: parietal activations
sustaining ocular saccades and number manipulation, superior temporal
activations related to recognition of sounds, human voice or speech comprehension, and inferior temporal activations related to various categories (e.g., faces, houses, and words). We report here the correlation, both
at the overall circuit level (overall correlation of functional substrates)
and at the voxel level for each functional task, between MZ, DZ and unrelated pairs of subjects.
H28
PERSPECTIVE-TAKING IS DIFFERENT FROM EVALUATING SELF
AND OTHERS: AN ERP STUDY Elizabeth J. Simon1,2, Heather Henkell1,2,
Sarit A. Golub1,2, Elizabeth Diamond1, Margo Kakoullis1, Ray Johnson Jr.1,2;
1
Queens College/CUNY, 2The Graduate Center of CUNY — Theory of Mind
(ToM), defined as the ability to make inferences about another person’s
mental state, may use one’s own mental processes as a model. Imaging
studies of ToM have found different patterns of brain activity when comparing self-evaluation to either perspective-taking or evaluating another
person. It remains unclear whether perspective-taking is different from
one’s opinion/evaluation of the other person. An event-related potential
(ERP) study was conducted in which participants viewed personality
trait words and evaluated, in different conditions, whether the word
described themselves (Self), a person close to them (Close Other), or a
person not close to them, but they still knew (Non-Close Other). In the
two perspective-taking conditions, participants made responses by putting themselves in the Close Other’s and Non-Close Other’s shoes. Reaction times were not significantly different across conditions. Recordings
from 83 scalp sites revealed a differential pattern of activation in which
medial frontal activity preceded that in the anterior prefrontal cortex in
the 700 ms leading up to the response. These spatial and temporal patterns differed as a function of perspective (self, other evaluation, perspective-taking). The patterns were also different depending on whose
perspective was being taken (Close Other, Non-Close Other). These data
fit with previous findings that both these frontal areas are involved in

Higher level cognition: Other

self-referential and ToM tasks. The differences between the Close Other
and Non-Close Other conditions will be discussed in terms of overlap
with the Self. The results indicate that perspective-taking and evaluating
others involve different cognitive processes arising from different brain
areas.
H29
OBSERVING OTHERS' ACTIONS TOWARDS AND AWAY FROM
HARMFUL OBJECTS: AN FMRI STUDY India Morrison1, Patric Bach2,
Steven Tipper2; 1Sahlgrenska Hospital, Gothenburg University, 2University of
Wales, Bangor — Recent neuroimaging and behavioral evidence indicates
that the brain uses some of the same mechanisms during the observation
of others' pain as it does during the direct experience of pain. These studies have explored observers' responses to painful events happening to
other people, when the other person is a passive target of painful stimulation. So far, no study has investigated the effects of pain observation
when the painful event is the consequence of the observed person's own
action. In the present fMRI study, subjects viewed short clips of others'
hands grasping or withdrawing from objects which were either noxious
or innocuous. We found that the type of action and the noxiousness of the
object affected reaction times and influenced the hemodynamic responses
in dissociable pathways, reflecting affective motor, and sensory components of pain representation (such as anterior cingulate, insula, and secondary somatosensory cortices). These findings imply that when pain
observation occurs in the context of goal-directed agent-object interactions, the underlying neural processing supports a multi-component,
behavior-centered representation of the other person’s action that incorporates not only its sensorimotor features, but also the action’s motivational and affective aspects.
H30
EVENT-RELATED RESPONSES TO WORDS: THE EFFECTS OF
CLASS, CONTEXT & TIMING. Lea Pilgrim, Rhonda B. Friedman;
Georgetown University — Studies using event-related potentials (ERPs)
have identified a negative component—the N400—thought to reflect
semantic processing. Research has generally found a reduced N400 for
closed class compared to open class words. Here we consider the effects
of word class, context and timing on reading. All three variables have
been shown to affect word reading; however their possible interaction
has not yet been examined. ERPs were recorded from electrodes at 64
scalp locations while subjects silently read 340 open class and 174 closed
class words, presented one-at-a-time, for 400ms each. Words were presented in two contexts: sentence and word-list, with two SOAs (stimulus
onset asynchrony): 800ms and 1200ms. To ensure subjects were attending
to the stimuli, they answered sentence- or word-related questions orally
after presentation of each sentence or list. Our results showed a significant three-way interaction between word class, SOA and context. The
mean amplitude of the N400 was smaller for closed compared to open
class words in the sentence context (with no effect of short versus long
SOAs for closed class words). However, closed class words showed a significantly larger N400 (comparable to open class words) in the word-list
context compared to sentence context. This negativity was even larger at
the longer SOA. We discuss these findings in relation to the processing of
different word classes in normal readers. In addition, we consider how
these findings impact on our model of reading deficits in phonological
alexics.
H31
THE EFFECTS OF CONTENT ON DEDUCTION: A MULTI-VOXEL
PATTERN ANALYSIS OF NEURAL SIMILARITY. Martin
Monti1,
2
1
1
2
Lawrence Parsons , Daniel Osherson ; Princeton University, University of
Sheffield — The ability to draw secure inferences from previously
acquired information is a distinguishing feature of human intellect. We
recently proposed (Parsons et al. 2006) that deductive reasoning engages
a distributed network of regions that is (a) disjoint from regions traditionally associated with linguistic processing, and (b) organized into: (i) logic
regions containing a deductive calculus and sensitive to the formal struc-

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

ture of argument (e.g. BA10, 8medial, BA6,7,40,47); and (ii) regions selectively engaged by the specific lexical content of an argument (possibly
responsible for maintaining the identity of different phrasal constituents
within an argument). In a single trial fMRI experiment healthy individuals assessed the validity of a set of 8 logic forms (half invalid). Each structure was presented twice with contents referring to features of an
imaginary face and twice with contents referring to features of an imaginary house. Using a novel multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) we compared patterns of activation within each region across trials with identical
logic but different content versus trials with similar content but different
logic. Observed patterns of neural similarity supported the classification
(i) versus (ii) above. For the regions in (i), greater similarity of activation
patterns was associated with arguments of the same formal structure. For
the regions in (ii), with a sole exception, greater similarity of activation
patterns was associated with arguments of the same lexical content.
H32
SELF-REFERENTIAL EVALUATIONS OF TRAITS AND VALUES
DO NOT RELY ON EPISODIC MEMORY: AN ERP STUDY Heather
Henkell1,2, Elizabeth J. Simon1,2, Kristen Gillespie1, Yael Diamond1, Ray Johnson
Jr.1,2; 1Queens College/CUNY, 2The Graduate Center of CUNY — The role of
memory in self-referential decisions (e.g., whether a trait adjective is selfdescriptive) is not well understood. According to the “computational
view,” these decisions rely on episodic retrieval whereas the “abstraction
view” proposes dependence on retrieval of trait summaries abstracted
from episodic memories (Klein et al., 2002). Because distinguishing
between these theories is difficult using behavioral data, we assessed the
role of episodic retrieval processes using event-related potentials (ERPs).
We looked for the presence of the parietal episodic memory (EM) effect,
an ERP component shown to reflect the use of recollective processes during episodic retrieval. Recordings were made from 83 electrodes while
participants made evaluations about three types of stimuli: 1) whether
traits (e.g., honest) described them, 2) whether they agreed or disagreed
with value items (e.g., murder) and 3) whether personal facts (e.g., occupation) applied to them. Non-self-relevant semantic decisions (active/
passive) were made as a control. Reaction times varied across conditions
(personal facts < traits < values). ERPs elicited by evaluations of all three
types of stimuli elicited activity in medial brain areas associated with processing of the self (e.g., anterior prefrontal cortex, ACC, precuneus) in the
600 ms preceding and 150 ms after the response. Personal facts elicited
the typical parietal EM effect, indicating these decisions were based on
recollective processes. In contrast, no parietal EM effect was found for
evaluations about either traits or values, suggesting they are not based on
specific episodic memories. Hence, these results do not support the computational view of self-referential decisions.
H33
NEURAL CORRELATES OF REWARD EXPECTANCY DURING
INSTRUMENTAL LEARNING Samantha Crowe, Charlene Wu, James
Blair; National Institute of Mental Health, Mood and Anxiety Disorders
Program, Bethesda, MD — To investigate the brain regions involved in
reward expectancy during instrumental learning, we used event-related
fMRI (1.5 Tesla) to examine BOLD responses in healthy adults (N = 18)
while they performed a conditional discrimination task. During the task,
correct behavioral responses (button presses) to visual stimuli received
point rewards. Each stimulus had a corresponding correct button such
that there were 4 button choices for each set of 4 stimuli. Our goal was to
examine cue- and reinforcement-dependent activity in the amygdala and
medial orbitofrontal cortex as a function of learning. The ISI between cue
and reinforcement was jittered (from 1.0 to 8.5 seconds) to allow the differentiation of cue- and reinforcement-dependent activity. Specific and
distinct learning-related activity was seen in both the amygdala and
medial orbital frontal cortex.

265

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

H34
ANTICIPATING SELF-REFERENTIAL PROCESSING ELICITS A
UNIQUE PATTERN OF BRAIN ACTIVITY: AN ERP STUDY Ray
Johnson Jr.1,2, Elizabeth J. Simon3,2, Heather Henkell3,2, Elizabeth Diamond3,
Robin E. Winkler3; 1Queens College, 2The Graduate Center of CUNY, 3Queens
College/CUNY — Recent studies have shown that a network of midline
brain areas (medial prefrontal, ACC, precuneus) appears to play a central
role in self-referential processing. Because these areas have been found to
be active during baseline scans when there is no task-related processing,
Raichle and others have suggested that such self-referential processing
occurs in a “default” state. Given this characterization, we wanted to
identify the brain processes associated with transition into this state
when anticipating self-referential processing. We recorded event-related
potentials (ERPs) from 83 sites while participants made forced-choice
judgments about personality trait adjectives (e.g., optimistic), which were
presented at S2, in an S1-S2 paradigm with a 2 second inter-stimulus
interval. Four equiprobable S1 cues indicated whether the subsequent
trait judgment was to be about: Self, Close Other (person they are close
with), Non-Close Other (person they know, but are not close with) or
Semantic (active/inactive). The judgments about others required participants to answer from the perspective of their Close and Non-Close Other.
We found that, within 200 ms after onset of the “Self” cue, brain activity
diverged from that elicited by the other three cues, with the initial (200600 ms) ERP difference located over central scalp (Cz). In the remaining
1400 ms before presentation of the trait adjective, the response to the
“Self” cue was characterized by ERP differences over midline centralparietal (i.e., precuneus) and right prefrontal scalp. Thus, the data indicate that particular brain processes are invoked during the necessary
transition into the “default” state.
H35
RAPID TRYPTOPHAN DEPLETION ALTERS VALUATION OF
SOCIAL IMAGES IN THE MACAQUE MONKEY Karli
Watson,
Michael Platt; Duke University — Behavioral decisions reflect the expected
value of available options. Recent studies suggest that manipulation of
neuromodulatory systems can alter both mood and social behavior, thus
raising the question of whether these systems alter valuation of social
stimuli during decision-making. To address this question, we used a payper-view choice task to measure the value of orienting towards different
classes of social images. On each trial a male rhesus macaque fixated a
central yellow square. After a delay, two targets (T1, T2) were illuminated and, following the offset of the central stimulus, the monkey was
free to shift gaze to either target. Juice delivery followed gaze shifts to T1
while both juice and display of a social image followed gaze shifts to T2.
Social image pools were comprised of faces of familiar male macaques;
sexual image pools were comprised of photos of female perinea. Varying
the reward and image outcomes for orienting to T1 and T2 permitted us
to estimate the value of different classes of images in common fluid units.
In control conditions, male monkeys paid a fluid premium to view
images of female perinea and the faces of dominant individuals, but were
indifferent to images of subordinates. We found that rapid tryptophan
depletion, which decreases serotonin concentration in the central nervous
system, decreased valuation of faces, but not female perinea. These findings suggest that serotonin selectively contributes to the reward valuation of social stimuli but not sexual stimuli.
H36
THE STRUCTURE OF A NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL BATTERY
ACROSS
HEALTHY
ELDERS
AND
THOSE
WITH
QUESTIONABLE DEMENTIA AND ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Karen
Siedlecki, Yaakov Stern; Columbia University — An exploratory factor analysis was conducted on 16 variables designed to assess different cognitive
abilities in a sample of healthy older adults. Four factors emerged corresponding to language, memory, processing speed, and visual-spatial/
reasoning constructs. This four-factor solution was cross-validated in a
second sample of healthy elders. The invariance of the four-factor model
was subsequently examined across three groups- a group of healthy eld-

266

Higher level cognition: Other

erly, a group of patients diagnosed with questionable dementia (QD),
and a group of patients diagnosed with probable Alzheimer’s Disease
(AD). Results of the invariance analysis suggest that the model is not
invariant across the three groups, implying that the meaning of the constructs may be changing. Specifically, preliminary analyses suggest that
the memory construct may represent something different in the QD and
AD group as compared to the healthy elderly group, consistent with the
underlying pathology in early AD.
H37
LACK OF SEX DIFFERENCES IN OBJECT RECOGNITION AND
NAMING: AN FMRI STUDY. Cheryl Garn, Mark D. Allen, Doug
Richards, Kerry Jeffs, Lauren Ford; Brigham Young University — We explore
sex differences in picture naming focusing specifically on two categories
of objects, hand-manipulated (HM) and plant-edible (PE), because recent
studies suggest that these are the two categories of objects most likely to
lead to the largest sex-based disparities in naming performance (Capitani, Laiacona, and Barbarotto, 1999). We ran two experiments: a behavioral task measuring vocabulary size and an fMRI task involving picture
naming. It was hypothesized that females would show a greater vocabulary size for PE items and more areas of activation in fMRI compared to
males. Twenty-eight males and 30 females participated in the vocabulary
size study. Twenty-six participants (13 male and 13 female) participated
in the fMRI study. All participants in both studies were right handed and
had no previous neurological or psychological brain damage. There were
no intellectual differences between groups for either study (as shown in
standardized test scores). Sex differences were not significant in vocabulary size overall. However, a within group analysis of females showed
significantly greater vocabulary size for PE objects compared to HM.
Based on the fact that females show greater vocabulary size for PE items,
we might have expected more activation in areas involved in language
retrieval and selection for these items, but that wasn’t the case. fMRI data
showed no significant sex differences or category differences. These finding contribute to a body of evidence failing to find significant sex differences on language tasks.
H38
INDUCED AND TRAIT DIFFERENCES IN EEG PHASE
SYNCHRONY AND POWER FOR EXPERIENCED MEDITATORS
VERSUS NON-MEDITATORS Barry Oken, Dan Zajdel, H. Jaskirat Wild;
Oregon Health and Sciences University — Objective. This study examined
electroencephalogram (EEG) differences between experienced meditators
and non-meditators. Our specific goal is to explore phase synchrony and
power differences in the EEG for these two groups before, during, and
after meditation (for the meditators) and relaxation (for non-meditators).
We also seek to replicate Lutz et al’s (2004) findings of meditationinduced increases in amplitude and phase synchrony in the gamma
band. Methods. Participants included 12 Zen Buddhists (mean lifetime
meditation experience = 12119 hours), and 12 matched control non-meditators. Participants listened to a 15-minute audio recording. Next, meditators were instructed to practice loving kindness meditation (Metta
Bhavana), and controls were instructed to relax for 30 minutes. Finally,
observers again listened to a 15-minute audio recording. In all conditions,
participants’ eyes were open half the time and closed the remainder of
the time. EEG was recorded for the entire session. Results and conclusions. Analyses to be reported explore differences between the meditators versus controls, as well as meditation/relaxation-induced changes in
both groups. Specifically, we are examining power and phase synchrony
the alpha (8-13 Hz), beta (13-20 Hz), and theta (4-8 Hz) frequencies. The
gamma band, defined by Lutz et al (2004) as 25-42 Hz, will also be examined. Analyses suggest differences in alpha power for meditators versus
non-meditators, and that differences between the pre-, during, and postmeditation/relaxation conditions may be specific to the experienced
meditators. To be reported are further analyses that explore specific
effects including amplitude differences as well as gamma band synchrony.

Higher level cognition: Other

H39
NEURAL RESPONSES OF SATED AND UNSATED SMOKERS ON
A SEQUENTIAL INVESTMENT GAME Pearl Chiu, Terry Lohrenz,
Read Montague; Baylor College of Medicine — The addictive properties of
nicotine have been linked to anomalous dopamine release in striatal brain
regions associated with reward response and prediction error signals. In
the current study, neural responses to monetary gain and monetary loss,
and to prediction error and counterfactual learning signals were examined in sated and unsated smokers during a sequential investment task.
Specifically, smokers participated in an investment game that required
viewing price histories from historical stock markets and choosing percentages of an initial $100 endowment to invest in market fluctuations.
Upon concluding the task, participants were paid the actual amount held
in their portfolio. Individuals played the game on two separate days: a
“Sated” day (i.e., smoke as usual), and an “Unsated” day (i.e., abstain
from midnight prior to the laboratory appointment). On both days, brain
hemodynamic responses were acquired using fMRI. Preliminary analyses suggest differential striatal responses to gain and loss in the Sated and
Unsated conditions. The data are discussed with regard to implications
for understanding the neural substrates of addictive disorders and normative decision-making.
H40
WHO KNOWS BABY BEST? INVESTIGATING GENDER
IDENTIFICATION IN BABIES Rebecca L. Bevans, Eric S. Clapham,
Aaron T. Karst, Saloni Sharma, C. Mark Wessinger; University of Nevada,
Reno — The current study used gender-specific cues to explore the relation between contextual information and gender choice when viewing
neutral baby faces. In the absence of contextual information it is
extremely difficult to correctly choose the gender of infants. In order to
determine and better understand the influence of context on genderchoice we manipulated contextual cues in a modified priming paradigm.
That is, gender-specific contextual cues were briefly presented with forward and backward masking in order to reduce explicit processing. Subsequently, a gender-nonspecific infant face was presented as the target
stimulus and participants were required to indicate if the face was female
or male. Contextual cues ranged from pink and blue color blobs, boy
printed in blue and girl printed in pink and vice versa, to gender specific
toys such as dolls and action figures. Despite assurances from participants that they would be able to accurately identify infant faces as male
or female, this was not the case. That is, in the absence of contextual information, gender choice was at chance. The presence of gender-specific
contextual cues (girl printed in pink) strongly influenced gender choice.
Interestingly, contradictory information (i.e. girl printed in blue) disrupts
these cueing effects. Taken together, these data support the notion that
gender specific contextual cues are necessary when determining gender
infants. Such data will help us better understand how individuals recognize and classify infants.
H41
EXPERTISE AND PERSPECTIVE EFFECTS ON VISUALIZATION
IN ACCOMPLISHED ATHLETES Jian Li1, Kenneth Kishida1, Dongni
Yang1, Read Montague1, Arturo Hernandez2; 1Baylor College of Medicine,
2
University of Houston — In order to elucidate the neurobehavioral mechanisms underlying socially relevant mental imagery, we have studied the
effects of expertise and perspective taking on the visualization of complex motor tasks using highly trained athletes and functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). Specifically, we recruited professional and
college-level athletes (46 subjects) from soccer, football, and baseball and
had them perform mental imagery of various sports related motor tasks.
The spectrum of motor-tasks was taken from each of the sports that the
various subjects specialize in. Subjects watched video clips that showed
athletes performing specific tasks from each of the three sports mentioned as well as video clips of intricate ballet dances. Prior to viewing
the video clip, subjects were instructed to attend to the actions of a specific individual, which they would subsequently be instructed to visual-

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

ize from either the first- or third-person perspective. Brain responses
measured during the visualization phase of the task revealed distinct patterns between visualization from first-person perspective and visualization of the same actions from the third-person perspective. Furthermore,
visualization evoked BOLD responses were different depending on the
expertise of the subject regarding the specific sport of the action visualized.
H42
IS “WE” AS BIG AS “ME”?: THE P300 AND SELF CONSTRUAL
ACROSS TWO CULTURES Richard Lewis, Eric Tang, Yumi Ando, Carol
Huang, Sharon Goto; Pomona College — Perceptions of the self in relation to
others have been identified as a crucial component of cultural variation
(see Markus & Kitayama, 1991). For example, Asians are characterized as
having an interdependent self-construal, viewing themselves as more
interconnected with others, in contrast to more independent European
Americans with autonomous, separate selves. Differences in self-construal result in interdependents giving more importance to ingroup
members, seeing them as closer to, and even part of the self. Gray et al.
(2004) have recently shown that the magnitude of the P300 can serve as
an index of stimuli that are self-relevant. The goal of the present study
was to use the P300 to test Markus and Kitayama’s model of Asians viewing their ingroup as more self-relevant than European Americans. So far,
8 Asian Americans and 11 European Americans have been tested on an
oddball P300 task where they were to detect a red stimulus among black
distractor stimuli consisting of people’s names. The names of ingroup
members were among the distractors. No differences were found in the
magnitude of the target items at Pz between the Asian and European
Americans, t (17) = 1.2, ns. As expected, Asian Americans had significantly larger P300 amplitudes to ingroup members than did European
Americans, t (17) = 2.90, p = .01. These data suggest that Interdependent
Asians view ingroup members as more self-relevant than do Independent European Americans. Implications with respect to cultural theory
and methodology will be discussed.
H43
IMPLICIT
RACIAL
PREJUDICE
DIRECTS
MOTIVATED
ATTENTION TOWARDS OUT-GROUP CUES Catherine
Norris1,
Matthew Longo2, Bennett Bertenthal3, John Cacioppo3; 1University of Wisconsin
- Madison, 2University College London, 3University of Chicago — Previous
research on early neural responses to in-group and out-group cues has
found that the P2 component of the ERP, which is associated with motivated attention, is larger to Black than to White faces, regardless of individual differences in implicit or explicit racial attitudes. In the current
study, we examined the relationship between racial attitudes and both
neural and behavioral responses on a task involving speeded responses
to observed simple finger movements of a Black or a White hand, or to
symbolic cues. ERP data revealed that only individuals high in implicit
prejudice as measured by the IAT exhibited a larger P2 to the Black than
the White hand. This finding extends previous research, as our hand
stimuli have few distinguishing characteristics and less social impact
than the faces that are commonly used to study racial bias. In other
words, motivated attention to out-group cues occurs in response to
weaker stimuli in individuals with high than low implicit prejudice, as
the presence of a Black hand elicits a larger P2 than the presence of a
White hand in individuals with high implicit race bias. In sum, our
results indicate that implicit (but not explicit) racial attitudes guide attention towards even rudimentary out-group cues, resulting in larger attention-related ERP components.
H44
SEMANTIC INTEGRATION IN REAL-WORLD AND CARTOONWORLD MOVIE CLIPS: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE
Courtney Brown1, Tatiana Sitnikova2,3, Gina Kuperberg1,2, Phillip Holcomb1;
1
Tufts University, 2Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
3Harvard Medical School — In three experiments, we used event-related
potentials (ERPs) to examine neural correlates of comprehending real-

267

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

world and cartoon-world events, depicted in short, silent movie-clips.
The real-world events displayed people carrying out every-day activities;
the cartoon events displayed characters carrying out activities portrayed
in popular animation series (e.g., ‘Tom and Jerry”). In Contrast 1, final
movie scenes were preceded by congruous (versus incongruous) movie
contexts (e.g., real-world: an actor rolled dough after shaving; cartoonworld: a character blew up a balloon after slipping on a banana peel). In
Contrast 2, congruous final scenes were compared to impossible final
events that violated the functional constraints of the conveyed central
action (e.g., real world: an actor applied shaving cream and then stroked
a rolling pin across his face – this object had no functional properties
required for shaving; cartoon: a character fell off a cliff and was suspended in mid-air – this character had no means for levitation). Our findings were similar between real-world and cartoon-world stimuli,
suggesting that participants engaged the same real-world comprehension
mechanisms. In Contrast 1, incongruous final events evoked an anteriorly-distributed N400 effect. This might reflect participants’ first-pass
attempt to semantically integrate final scenes into preceding context. In
Contrast 2, impossible final events evoked a reduced N400 effect but a
large parietal Late Positivity effect. We interpret the Late Positivity as
reflecting a second-pass reanalysis in which the semantic properties of
people and objects are evaluated against the functional semantic constraints dictated by the central action (e.g., shaving or levitating).
H45
CONTEXT MOTIVATES COMPREHENDERS’ ATTEMPTS TO
MAKE SENSE OF NOVEL EVENTS: EVIDENCE FROM EVENTRELATED POTENTIALS (ERPS) Tatiana
Sitnikova1,
Martin
Paczynski2, Gina R. Kuperberg2,1; 1Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, 2Tufts University,
Medford, MA — We and others have recently reported that a Late Positivity with a parietal maximum is evoked by both verbal and video depictions of events violating functional constraints of real-world actions (e.g.,
in a sentence, “To make good documentaries the cameras must wash …”,
cameras are inanimate and lack the functional properties required for
washing; in a movie-clip showing a man applying shaving cream and
then stroking a rolling pin across his face, the rolling pin lacks the functional properties required for shaving). We have hypothesized that the
Late Positivity might reflect a second-pass reanalysis in which functional
semantic properties of the people and objects are evaluated against the
central action. We have also suggested that this second-pass functionallybased semantic analysis may be critical for comprehenders to make sense
of novel events and that it is neurocognitively distinct from a first-pass
semantic integration reflected by the N400. The present study aimed to
further characterize the process reflected by the Late Positivity by determining whether it is evoked by novel events taken out of context. ERPs
were recorded while participants viewed 2-sec-long videos depicting
either familiar or novel events without their preceding contexts. Novel,
relative to familiar, events evoked an increased N400, but no Late Positivity. We suggest that this N400 reflected participants’ first-pass attempt to
grasp the meaning of movie-clips. The absence of the Late Positivity
effect suggests that any second-pass functional semantic analysis only
comes into play when comprehenders are given contextual cues that
more exhaustive processing may be worthwhile.
H46
BLUFF AND DOUBLE BLUFF: AN ERP STUDY ON DECEPTION
IN SOCIAL CONTEXT Natalie Sebanz1, Ricardo Carrion2, Julian
Keenan3; 1Rutgers University Newark, 2Rutgers University New Brunswick,
3
Montclair State University — It is generally assumed that our ability to
deceive others relies on theory of mind and requires the ability to keep
actual and fictitious states of affairs apart. Yet, few studies have investigated the cognitive and neural processes of deception in a dyadic setting.
In the present study, event-related potentials (ERPs) were measured
while participants played a game together with another person. Their
task was to deceive the other about the identity of a figure projected onto

268

Higher level cognition: Other

the other’s forehead. Thus, both bluff (lying) or double-bluff (telling the
truth to mislead the other) were possible. In a “choice” condition, participants could choose whether to lie or tell the truth. In a “forced” condition, a cue indicated whether participants should lie or tell the truth.
ERPs were analyzed time-locked to the onset of a cue signaling participants to make a choice or telling them what to do. In the forced condition,
lying was associated with a negative deflection 400-600ms after the cue
(N450), while telling the truth was associated with a positive deflection
(P450). In contrast, in the choice condition, telling the truth was also associated with a negative deflection (N450). This suggests that telling the
truth with the intention to double-bluff involves similar processes as the
intention to tell a straight lie.
H47
DECISION FIELD THEORY AS A BRIDGE BETWEEN NEURAL
MODELS AND COMPLEX DECISION BEHAVIOR Ryan K. Jessup,
Jerome R. Busemeyer; Indiana University — Diffusion processes, and their
discrete time counterparts, random walk models, have demonstrated an
ability to account for a wide range of findings from behavioral decision
making research for which the purely algebraic and deterministic models
often used in economics and psychology cannot account. Recent studies
in which researchers record single cell neural activity from non-human
primates during perceptual decision making tasks have revealed that
neural firing rates closely mimic the accumulation of preference theorized by behaviorally-derived diffusion models of decision making (Gold
& Shadlen, 2001, 2002; Hanes & Schall, 1996). Here we present decision
field theory (Busemeyer & Townsend, 1993; Busemeyer, Jessup, Johnson,
& Townsend, 2006), a connectionist model of decision making that implements diffusion processes, as a bridge linking lower-level neural recordings and more complex behavioral findings from psychology and
economics (Roe, Busemeyer, & Townsend, 2001; Johnson & Busemeyer,
2005). Proposed neural correlates of this model include a basal ganglia
network of lateral inhibition (Plenz, 2003) and orbitofrontal reward representations (Schultz, 1998; see Frank & Claus, 2006, for a similar proposal)
connected via parallel circuits (Alexander, DeLong, & Strick, 1986).
H48
PARTIAL DIRECTED COHERENCE (PDC) AS A MEASURE OF
CHANGES IN FLOW OF NEURAL INFORMATION DURING
COMPLEX VISUAL PROCESSING – ELECTROCORTICOGRAPHIC
DATA OF EPILEPTIC PATIENTS Minna Silfverhuth, Adam O. Hebb,
Heracles Panagiotides, Jeffrey G. Ojemann; University of Washington, Seattle,
WA — Goal. The flow of neural information in brain sites involved in
higher visual processing, such as face and object processing is still the
subject of debate. Our aim was to apply partial directed coherence (PDC)
as a measure of flow of information or ’causality’ or ’connectivity’ in a
sense of following directional frequency relationships between channels
or areas [1,2]. Methods. Electrocorticographic (ECoG) recordings from
four locations in the inferior temporal cortex, i.e., occipito-temporal (O),
posterior temporal (PT), mid-temporal (MT), and anterior temporal (AT),
from epilepsy patients (N=4) has been used to study the processing of
faces in an event-related paradigm. Artifact-free data segments timelocked to the onset of face stimuli were entered into a PDC analysis (Matlab, Biosig, model order=5) that yielded directional relationships between
ECoG time series recorded at the four regions of interest. Pre-stimulus
(baseline) PDC values was compared to activation PDC in statistical analysis of pooled group data (threshold p=0.05 or 0.001). Results. Directional
relationships from posterior to anterior regions were revealed as well as
feedback loops in the opposite directions. The flow of information is
based on different frequency bands between locations. Conclusions. PDC
is a relatively new measure associated to flow of information in brain.
Particular interest is on ‘binding’ mediated within certain frequency
bands. In conclusion, PDC may reveal new views onto cognitive interrelations inside the brain areas during complex visual processing.

Higher level cognition: Problem solving

Higher level cognition: Problem solving
H49
FLUID REASONING IN DEVELOPMENT: CHANGES IN BRAIN
FUNCTION Samantha Wright1, Bryan Matlen1, Carol Baym1, Silvia
Bunge2; 1University of California, Davis, 2Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute,
University of California, Berkeley — Fluid reasoning, or the capacity to
solve novel problems, is central to the development of human cognition.
While this ability is known to develop gradually throughout childhood
and adolescence, little is known about the underlying brain changes that
facilitate this reasoning. The present study examines neurodevelopmental changes on a reasoning task devised for use in younger children: a
visual analogy task in which participants must identify semantic relationships between drawings of common objects. In the current study, children aged 6-12 (current N=4) and young adults (current N=17) are tested
on 80 visual analogy problems during event-related fMRI data acquisition. On REL-1 problems, participants must identify the object that is
most closely semantically related to a cued object (e.g. a snowball is
related to a snowman). REL-2 problems follow a A:B::C:? analogy format
(e.g. shoe is to foot as glove is to…?). To probe the type of information
that children use to solve the problems, we have included perceptual and
semantic lures among the possible answers. We predict that adults will
be faster and more accurate on all types of analogy problems than children, and that younger children will initially commit more errors corresponding to perceptual lure answer choices on REL-2 problems while
older children will commit more errors related to semantic lure answer
choices. Based on our prior research with the Raven’s Progressive Matrices, we predict a positive correlation in children between performance on
REL-2 problems and activation of lateral and anterior PFC and inferior
parietal cortex.
H50
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MARKERS OF SKILL-RELATED
NEUROPLASTICITY Stephen Romero1,2, Dennis McFarland3, Robert
Faust2, Lori Farrell1, Anthony Cacace2; 1Union College, 2Albany Medical
College, 3The Wadsworth Labs — Neuroplasticity involved in acquiring a
new cognitive skill was investigated with two approaches to the analysis
of scalp-recorded electroencephalographic (EEG) activity: standard time
domain event related potentials (ERPs) and frequency domain analysis of
EEG oscillations. Electroencephalographic activity was recorded before
and after practice, while participants performed alphabet addition (i.e., e
+ 3 = g, true or false?). Participant’s performance became automated with
practice due to a switch in cognitive strategy from mentally counting-up
in the alphabet to retrieving the answer from memory. Time domain
analysis of the ERPs revealed a prominent positive peak at ~300 ms that
was not reactive to problem attributes but was reduced with practice. A
second prominent positive peak observed at ~500 ms was found to be
larger after practice, mainly for true problems. Frequency domain spectral analyses of event-related EEG oscillations yielded two distinct findings: 1) a frontal midline synchronization of Delta/theta activity that was
greater after practice, and 2) a beta band desynchronization that
increased with problem difficulty before, but not after practice. Because
the EEG oscillations were not time locked to the stimulus, they were
viewed as being independent of the time domain results. Consequently,
use of time and frequency domain analyses provides a more comprehensive account of the underlying electrophysiological data than with either
method alone. When used in combination with a well-defined cognitive/
behavioral paradigm, this approach serves to constrain the interpretations of the electrophysiological data and sets a new standard for studying the neuroplasticity involved in skill acquisition.

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

H51
MEDIAL OFC AND AMYGDALA MEDIATE APPETITIVE AND
AVERSIVE BASED OPERANT EXTINCTION LEARNING IN
HUMANS Elizabeth Finger1, Derek Mitchell2, Matthew Jones1, James Blair1;
1National Institute of Mental Health, 2University of Western Ontario — Extinction learning in humans has important applications to the development
and treatment of anxiety and behavioral disorders. Previous studies of
extinction learning have used fMRI to investigate the extinction of classically conditioned fear responses (Gottfried 2004; Phelps 2004; Knight
2004). However, aside from extinguishing classically conditioned
responses, a crucial aspect of learning involves the extinction of instrumental responses when they are no longer adaptive. In the present study,
we used event related fMRI to identify the neural regions recruited for
extinction of instrumentally learned responses during a modified passive
avoidance task. In passive avoidance learning, organisms learn to
approach stimuli associated with reward, and avoid stimuli associated
with punishment. In the current study, after a learning phase, the reinforcement value of select stimuli abruptly changed. Participants learned
to extinguish instrumental responses to previously rewarding stimuli,
and overcome avoidances to previously punished response. This novel
task design enabled us to identify the neural regions active during extinction of instrumentally learned responses compared to instrumentally
learned responses which did not require extinction. It also allowed us to
compare extinction of responses to both appetitive and aversive cues.
During failures to extinguish a previously advantageous response, differential activity was observed in frontopolar mOFC and the amygdala. Successful extinction learning (extinguishing a previous approach or
avoidance) corresponded to increased BOLD responses in the same
region of mOFC. These data suggest that the extinction of instrumental
learning, like that of classical conditioning, recruits the regions of medial
prefrontal cortex.
H52
USING COGNITIVE MODELING TO UNDERSTAND THE ROLES
OF PREFRONTAL AND POSTERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX IN
ALGEBRA PROBLEM SOLVING Jared Danker, John Anderson; Carnegie
Mellon University — Based on the findings of an ongoing research project
centered around a cognitive architecture (Anderson, 2005), we have associated prefrontal cortex with memory retrieval and posterior parietal cortex with mental representation. We explore the roles of these two regions
in the context of an algebra task in which retrieval and representation are
separated in time. The interaction between retrieval and representation is
particularly apparent in the solution of algebra equations, in which
retrieval is brought to bear via the retrieval of mathematical facts (e.g., 8 –
2 = 6) and representation is brought to bear via transformations of the
problem state (e.g., from x / 3 +2 = 8 to x / 3 = 6). In naturalistic algebra
problem solving, retrieval and representation are typically confounded.
We attempt here to see if they can be manipulated independently. While
our imaging results showed that prefrontal and parietal regions each
responded to manipulations of both retrieval and representation, an
information-processing model of the algebra task fit to the response time
data concurred with our imaging results, predicting that each manipulation should increase both retrieval and representational demands. This
simultaneously emphasizes the strong relationship between retrieval and
representation in mathematical reasoning and demonstrates that cognitive modeling can serve as a useful tool for understanding task manipulations in neuroimaging experiments.
H53
POSITIVE AFFECT AND ANXIETY INDUCED STATES
MODULATE PROBLEM SOLVING STRATEGIES Karuna
Subramaniam, Mark Jung-Beeman; Northwestern University — We
have
found that positive affect and anxious preparatory brain states modulate
problem-solving strategies. Initial findings were based on affect assessment in 79 subjects. Subjects saw 135 Compound Remote Associate problems, each of which can be solved with or without insight. Insights arise

269

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

suddenly, with an “Aha!” They require cognitive restructuring - shifting
attention from prepotent, incorrect associations to the non-prepotent, correct solution. On each trial, subjects saw 3 words (tooth, potato, heart)
and tried to find a solution word (sweet) forming a compound word with
each of the 3 words. If solved, subjects indicated whether or not they had
an insight. Behavioral results were correlated with neural activity across
27 subjects scanned while solving problems. Positive affect altered preparatory brain states to increase dorsal ACC activity (r (25) = 0.41, p <.05),
facilitating insights (r (77) = -0.34, p<.005). Anxiety decreased dorsal ACC
preparatory activity (r (25) = -0.34, p = .08) to inhibit insights (r(77) = 0.34, p<.005). We now build upon these preliminary findings to draw
strong causal inferences on how induced affect modulates problem-solving processes. We use film clips to induce positive, neutral, and anxious
states to compare activation patterns between the 3 conditions, within
and across subjects, at the preparation interval, at stimuli onset, and at
solution time points. We predict positive mood inductions (MIs) will
enhance preparatory ACC activation to increase solving and insights,
while anxiety will decrease ACC activation inhibiting overall solving and
insights, compared to neutral MIs.
H54
NEURAL CORRELATES OF THEORY OF MIND: AN EVENTRELATED FMRI STUDY Koji Jimura, Seiki Konishi, Tomoki Asari, Junichi
Chikazoe, Yasushi Miyashita; University Tokyo School of Medicine — Previous blocked-design fMRI, PET, and neuropsychological studies have suggested that multiple cortical regions including medial prefrontal cortex,
superior temporal sulcus, bilateral temporal pole, and precuneus were
involved during comprehension of other persons' mental states (theory of
mind). However, the involvement of each of these regions is still controversial. The present fMRI study devised a theory of mind task derived
from false belief paradigms that allowed event-related analysis to be
applied, and explored brain activity associated with exact cognitive processes time-locked to the successful understanding of others' mental
states. The task consisted of two phases, study and test. During the study
phase, subjects studied a brief story in which protagonists have two false
beliefs. The subjects were then asked questions about the story that had
to be correctly answered before moving to the test phase to ensure that
the subjects sufficiently learned the story. During the test phase, functional imaging was administered while the subjects were asked questions
about one of the two false beliefs (false belief condition), and about facts
related to the other false belief (control condition). In the event-related
analysis, comprehension of others' mental state and its control were
coded by transient events time-locked to subjects' responses in a general
linear model. Transient activity was observed in multiple frontal and
temporal regions in the false belief condition, compared to the control
condition. The present results suggest that multiple cortical regions cooperatively contribute to theory of mind.
H55
BRAIN MECHANISM FOR INSIGHT PROBLEM-SOLVING: A NIRS
STUDY Kazuhiro Ueda1, Machiko Konno1,2, Haruaki Fukuda1, Hiroaki
Suzuki3; 1The University of Tokyo, 2Tohmatsu Consulting Co., Ltd, 3Aoyama
Gakuin University — Some psychological theories on mental processes of
insight problem-solving have been proposed. For example, dynamic constraint relaxation theory (Suzuki et al., 2001) claims that some constraints
of a problem operate jointly to produce an impasse in an early stage
while the constraints are gradually relaxed in the process, which results
in more frequent constraint violation and insight. On the other hand,
brain activity during insight problem-solving has not been well clarified.
If the above theory is correct, the activation of some cortex areas should
correlate with the gradual increase in number of constraint violation
towards the moment of insight. This study aims to confirm this possibility. Sixteen subjects participated in our experiment and were asked to
solve T-puzzle, a kind of geometric puzzle. We made, using NIRS, event
measurements of oxygenated hemoglobin at prefrontal and left premotor/motor cortices (brain activity) and also counted the number of con-

270

Higher level cognition: Problem solving

straint violation (behavioral activity). Five subjects succeeded in this
problem-solving by themselves while eleven failed. We compared brain
and behavioral activities of successful group with those of unsuccessful
group between the first and second halves of problem-solving. An
ANOVA showed that the two groups were different both in brain activity
around left premotor cortex and in behavioral activity and, in successful
group, brain activity as well as behavioral one was gradually enhanced
towards the moment of insight. As far as we know, this is the first report
of brain activity during insight problem-solving, which is congruent with
a psychological theory.
H56
COMPUTING SOLUTIONS TO ALGEBRAIC PROBLEMS USING A
SYMBOLIC VERSUS A MODEL STRATEGY Kerry Lee, Stephanie H.
M. Yeong; National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological
University — Using pictorial models to represent algebraic word problems has been shown to reduce errors in problem comprehension (Lewis,
1989). To improve access to such problems, children in Singapore are
taught to utilise model representation from a young age. An issue that
concerns some educators is whether teaching such heuristics assists children in acquiring symbolic algebra. Because of difficulties in using conventional programme evaluation techniques, we used fMRI to evaluate
differences between the use of models versus symbolic algebra for solving such problems. In a previous study, we examined processes involved
in building model versus symbolic representations. Participants were
presented with word problems and were asked to transform them into
symbolic or model representations. The former engaged the posterior
superior parietal lobules, precuneus, and caudate more so than did the
latter. What remained unknown was whether such differences persisted
in the latter stages of problem solving. In this study, we examined processes involved in the computation of numeric solutions from either symbolic or model representations. Participants were matched on academic
proficiency and competency in the two strategies. Preliminary analyses
showed that symbolic representations activated the middle and medial
frontal gyri, anterior cingulate, caudate, and precuneus. Differences
involving greater activation in the model condition were few and were
largely restricted to occipital areas. These findings are consistent with the
view that generating symbolic representations and computing solutions
from them require greater attentional resources and may be more reliant
on proceduralised processing than do similar processes involving model
representations.
H57
FRONTO-PARIETAL NETWORK FOR INITIAL SELECTION, ACC
FOR VERIFICATION OF STRATEGIES IN AN ARITHMETIC
SEARCH TASK Masahiro Kawasaki1, Masataka Watanabe1, Takayuki
Sato1, Jiro Okuda2, Masamichi Sakagami2; 1University of Tokyo, 2Tamagawa
University Research Institute — Human can flexibly cope with first time
circumstances in complex and difficult environments. The key lies in the
efficiency to “initially select”, at first glance, few good strategies out of
millions, and to verify them step by step, whether or not they are logically correct. Previous fMRI studies could not evaluate such thinking processes, because of limits in difficulty, e.g. Tower of Hanoi, and limits in
subjective report, e.g. anagram task. Here, to dissociate the neural substrate of the “initial selection” process from the later process of “verification”, we conducted a complex arithmetic search task, under functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). In this task, a subject was given an
initial number and asked to either multiply or subtract 4 other given
numbers step by step, to achieve a goal number. Although the combination of possible strategies summed over 100, behavioral results revealed
that, after training, most subjects solved nearly half of the given problems
in 40 seconds. This data suggested that they indeed initially selected
strategies to logically verify. Furthermore, we found additional reaction
time in the first three calculation steps, besides a single mental calculation. fMRI results indicated that the anterior and dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex and parietal cortex were sensitive to this overhead reaction time, a

Emotion

candidate neural substrate of the initial selection process. Meanwhile, the
anterior cingulate cortex changed activity depending on the residual difference between the goal and the mentally calculated number, indicating
its role in evaluation at the final stage of the verification process.
H58
AN FMRI STUDY OF THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF
PERFORMANCE AND LEARNING IN AN ALGEBRAIC ISOMORPH
TASK Jon Fincham, John Anderson; Carnegie Mellon University — The
current work explores changes that occur in neural activity as students
interacted with a tutoring system that taught an algebra isomorph. Particular focus was given to brain areas involved in cognitive control (anterior
cingulate cortex, BA 32/24), problem representation (parietal cortex, BA
40/7), declarative memory retrieval (prefrontal cortex, BA 9/46), visual
encoding (fusiform area) and manual execution (primary motor cortex,
BA 4). Using a data-flow isomorph to algebra, 12 undergraduate students
were taught to solve problems equivalent to the full range of linear equations that appear in a classic Algebra 1 textbook. The interface involved
using a mouse to select appropriate parts of a diagram, appropriate operations, and keying symbolic and numeric values. Participants performed
two portions of their training within an fMRI scanner, where functional
images were acquired using a slow event-related methodology. The first
imaging session occurred early in the curriculum. The second imaging
session occurred after the full curriculum had been completed and consisted of problems structurally identical but unique from those presented
in the first imaging session. Control, retrieval, representational, visual
and manual areas all showed significantly increased activity with
increased problem complexity, reflecting greater demands for each of
those resources when solving more difficult problems. Over the course of
training, decreases in activation were shown in all these same areas with
the exception of anterior cingulate which showed no change. These
results are consistent with prior imaging work suggesting control
demands remain the same, while demands of other component processes
decrease after practice.
H59
ENDOGENOUS CONTROL IN ALGEBRAIC PROBLEM SOLVING:
AN FMRI STUDY Andrea Stocco, John Anderson; Carnegie Mellon
University — We present an experiment exploring cognitive control in
algebraic problem solving. Participants solved 128 four-term equations
and followed the same three-step strategy to solve each problem. Problems varied along two dimensions: (a) Whether the intermediate state of
each problem was displayed on the screen ("updated”) or the equation
remained the same ("non updated"); (b) Whether they contained only
parametric or only numeric terms. Therefore, the demands for retrieval
and maintenance of arithmetic and visual information were manipulated
independently, while the demand for endogenous control increased as
more representations had to be maintained. Participants performed the
task within a 3T fMRI scanner (Field of view 200mm, Repetition time
1,500ms, Flip angle 73°). The paradigm was slow event-related, with each
trial lasting 22.5s. An exploratory analysis showed that right and left dorsolateral prefrontal regions and the left insula were insensitive to the
equations being updated or not, but were selectively activated by arithmetic retrievals. A medial frontal region encompassing the dorsal cingulate was sensitive to control demands. Activity in parietal regions (BA7/
39) was compatible with both control and mental imagery demands. A
confirmatory analysis using eight predefined ROIs confirmed that the
head of the caudate nucleus was also sensitive to control demands. An
ACT-R computational model for the task succeeded in reproducing both
the behavioral and the hemodynamic data. These results support our
hypothesis that cognitive control is mainly achieved by medial and subcortical (and, possibly, parietal) regions, with other areas biasing
response selection by holding task-relevant representations.

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

H60
THE EFFECTS OF SECONDARY RULES ON THE PROCESS OF
CONSOLIDATION OF A ABSTRACT RULES Clarisse Longo dos
Santos, Virginia Penhune; Concordia University — The present experiment
is part of a set of studies looking at stages learning of abstract rules in a
Biconditional Grammar (BG), a modified version of AGL (Johnstone &
Shanks, 2001). It has been proposed that acquisition of explicit knowledge
about abstract rules could be facilitated by sleep (Wagner et al., 2004),
since consolidation might restructure the representation of recent memories. In the present study, we examined learning of a BG over two consecutive days. Consolidation and gain of explicit knowledge were
investigated. Participants (N=90) were randomly assigned to one of six
groups. In Group1 and G1b, participants were tested at night, and,
twelve hours later, in the morning. In Group 2 and G2b, participants
were tested during the day with twelve hours between sessions. In Group
3 and G3b, participants completed both sessions continuously, with a
short break after the first session. Session one included training and testing; session two included test, training and test. Participants were either
exposed to strings with SR (Groups1, 2 and 3) or without SR (G1b, G2b,
and G3b). Preliminary analyses show that more participants from
Group1 and G1b gained explicit knowledge about the BG rules after one
night of sleep. Simple passage of time did not allow gain of explicit
knowledge: participants in Group2/G2b and Group3/G3b did not show
a significant improvement from session one to session two. Also, participants not exposed to SR perform better and show more knowledge of the
BG rules.
H61
FMRI EVIDENCE ON THE NEURAL BASES OF PHYSICAL AND
SOCIAL CAUSATION Aron K. Barbey1, Phillip Wolff1, W. Kyle
Simmons2, Lawrence W. Barsalou1; 1Emory University, 2National Institute of
Mental Health — Causal knowledge provides the basis for higher-level
thought, supporting explanatory and predictive inferences that are essential for learning and controlling the environment to achieve goals.
Despite the importance of causality and its central role in the psychological literature on human thought, little is currently known about the neural bases of causal reasoning (for exceptions, see Fonlupt, 2003; Fugelsang
& Dunbar, 2004; Fugelsang et al., 2005). The present fMRI study provides
new evidence on the neural bases of causal reasoning and evaluates two
unexplored issues. First, we assess the neural systems that underlie physical and social causation, exploring whether reasoning about physical
versus social events recruits common and/or distinctive neural systems.
Second, we explore, for the first time, the neural representation of
CAUSE versus PREVENT. The experiment consisted of 12 separate
blocks of physical versus social events representing one of three conditions: cause, prevent, and control. Each block consisted of 3 realistically
rendered animations of the same 6 sec event presented from different
viewpoints. The animations were balanced across the physical and social
conditions, having a comparable number and configuration of entities
and a similar dynamic time course. At the beginning of each block, a sentence appeared that described the animations to follow. Subjects viewed
each animation and then judged whether the event represented a good,
average, or bad example of the causal relation. Our results elucidate the
neural representation of causal reasoning and suggest that physical and
social reasoning engage different brain systems.

Emotion
H62
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF PROCESSING FACES AND
BODIES IN DEVELOPMENTAL PROSOPAGNOSIA Jan Van den
Stock1, Wim van de Riet1, Julie Grèzes2, Beatrice de Gelder1,4; 1Cognitive and
Affective Neuroscience Laboratory, Tilburg University, The Netherlands,
2
Laboratoire de Physiologie de la Perception et de l’Action (LPPA), CNRS-

271

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

Collège de France, France, 4Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown,
MA — Prosopagnosia is a deficit in the ability to recognize a person by
the face. When it occurs in normal adults as a consequence of brain damage it is often associated with lesions in the occipito-temporal brain
regions. But another kind of profound face recognition is not associated
with acquired brain damage but results presumably from anomalous
postnatal development. These developmental prosopagnosics show no
evidence of brain damage and the exact etiology of their face recognition
deficits is unknown. Both kinds are characterized by face recognition deficits in combination with relatively normal object recognition skills. Brain
imaging studies investigating the neural correlates of face perception in
prosopagnosia have not reached a clear consensus. The few available
brainimaging studies of developmental prosopagnosics show little consistency as concerns the deviation from the normal pattern of activation
of the brain areas that play a role in normal face perception (eg. fusiform
gyrus and inferior occipital gyrus). So far the relative specificity of face
recognition problems in prosopagnosics has been established by comparing performance on faces vs. objects. But in view of the recent findings of
similarities in the neural basis of face and body perception it now
becomes imperative to include human bodies in the comparison upon
which conclusions of face deficits are based. We measured BOLD
responses in four developmental prosopagnosics while they were presented with images of faces, houses and bodies. The observed activation
is discussed against the background of the neural correlates of normal
face and body processing.
H63
THE IMPACT OF ANXIETY AND UNCERTAINTY ON DECISIONMAKING IN YOUTH. Kristin F. Gotimer1, Amy L. Krain1, Monique
Ernst2, Daniel Pine2, F. Xavier Castellanos1; 1New York University School of
Medicine, 2NIMH — Background: Anxiety has been defined as a response
to uncertainty regarding potential threats. This suggests that anxiety disorders may involve dysfunction in cognitive processes related to uncertainty. Research has demonstrated that individuals with excessive worry,
like those with anxiety disorders, endorse greater intolerance of uncertainty (IU) than non-worriers. Further, IU has been associated with decision-making deficits in adults. The present study aims to extend these
findings and examine how IU and anxiety impact decision-making in a
pediatric population. Methods: Children and adolescents (ages 8-17) with
and without anxiety disorders are being examined. Subjects complete a
diagnostic interview (ADIS-IV-C), questionnaires measuring anxiety and
IU, and three computerized decision-making tasks. Task #1, the HiLoGame, has been used previously in fMRI studies (Krain et al., 2006). In
Task #2, subjects are asked to choose between a known probability of
winning (choosing a red marble from a bag) and an unknown probability. Task #3 is a computerized version of the Ambiguous/Unambiguous
Diary Task (Davey et al., 1992). Results: Data collection is ongoing.
Within-subjects analyses of the decision-making tasks show that subjects
are responding as expected. Reaction times (RT) during uncertain conditions of the HiLo-Game are significantly longer than during more certain
conditions (p = .001). Diary Task RTs for rating ambiguous situations are
significantly longer than ratings of unambiguous situations (p = .019).
Preliminary analyses show a significant correlation between IU and RT
during the Marble Task (r = -0.54, p < .05). Additional results and implications will be presented.
H64
PHYSIOLOGICAL AND SUBJECTIVE MEASURES OF NEGATIVE
EMOTION REGULATION USING A STARTLE MODULATION
PARADIGM Christina Gojmerac1,2, Adam Anderson1, Darlene Floden3,
Donald Stuss2,1; 1University of Toronto, 2The Rotman Research Institute,
Baycrest, 3Toronto Western Hospital — Goals: There were two goals
focused on understanding emotion regulation: the relationship between
objective (physiological) and subjective measures; the determination of
the efficacy of different regulation strategies in the down- and up-regula-

272

Emotion

tion of negative emotions. Methods: We used a startle modulation paradigm where negative and neutral pictures were paired with the following
regulation instructions: “look”, “increase”, or “decrease” (Jackson et al.,
2000). Electromyography (EMG) was used to record eye blink responses
to the acoustic startle probe. The original paradigm was modified in
order to 1) include subjective ratings of emotional reactivity under the
three different regulation instructions, and 2) compare the effects of two
specific strategies, cognitive re-appraisal and attentional focus. Results:
Participants were able to increase their reactions to negative pictures as
measured by the magnitude of the startle eye blink response, but the
decrease instruction showed no significant effects. In contrast, participants were able to decrease their negative reactions as measured by subjective ratings of valence and arousal, but no significant effects were
observed for the increase instruction. For decrease instructions, participants tended to use attentional focus significantly more than cognitive
reappraisal, but this reversed for increase instructions. Conclusions: The
startle modulation paradigm is a useful way to objectively measure the
ability to regulate negative emotions. However, physiological and subjective measurements do not always indicate the same information with
respect to emotions. We further demonstrate that different regulation
strategies are drawn upon depending on whether the goal is to up- or
down-regulate negative emotions.
H65
EVIDENCE FOR THE WARNING SIGNAL HYPOTHESIS IN
VERBAL MEMORY PERFORMANCE Ryan Smith, David Beversdorf;
The Ohio State University — An oddball stimulus of negative valence produces an “attentional blink” resulting in decreased memory performance
for adjacent stimuli, while increased memory for the oddball is observed.
We examined memory performance while varying the valence and
semantic relationship of the word preceding the oddball. The valence of
the oddball stimulus was also varied; either emotionally neutral or negative. Significantly greater recall was associated with both increased
semantic relatedness and increased emotionality for both the oddball
stimuli and immediately preceding words. As with previous findings,
anterograde amnesia was observed for words following the oddball.
These findings lend support for the warning signal hypothesis and may
help explain the process by which memory performance is enhanced for
emotional events.
H66
DISTRIBUTED
N300
COMPONENT
FOLLOWS
N100
COMPONENT CONFINED TO THE FRONTAL ELECTRODES TO
SUGGEST IMMEDIATE AFFECTIVE PERCEPTION OF SOCIAL
ACTORS. Lasana Harris1, Susan Fiske1, Jack Gelfand2; 1Princeton
University, 2State University of New York, Oswego — Recent social neuroscience research has used functional magnetic imaging (fMRI) reduced
activity in medial prefrontal cortex (mpfc; part of the brain necessary for
social cognition, Amodio & Frith, 2006) to social group-members perceived as less human (Harris & Fiske, 2006); participants view pictures of
group members previously rated as low in perceived trait competence.
Pictures of group members (e.g. American heroes, business people, disabled people) perceived as high on either warmth, competence, or both
elicit more exclusively social emotions: pride, envy, and pity respectively
(Fiske et al., 2002). These group-members also activate an area of ventral
mpfc above the fixation baseline. However, pictures of social groupmembers that are perceived as high on neither warmth nor competence
elicit a non-exclusively social emotion, disgust, and do not activate this,
or any other area of the mpfc above baseline. The present study replicates
this task using electroencephalography (EEG). A 128-electrode cap
recorded neural activity as participants view pictures of the two types of
social actors separated by a jittered interval. We predicted very early
frontal electrode differentiation. Our results confirmed the hypothesis; in
the alpha frequency, a quick differentiation of an N100 component, and a
second subsequent N300 component that also differentiated the two
group-members, but reversed the order of magnitude now favoring the

Emotion

less human group-members. In addition, this latter component was distributed across almost the entire scalp. These findings taken with the
imaging result suggests a critical role for mpfc in the generation of this
schema-triggered affect.
H67
PHYSIOLOGICAL AND NEURAL CORRELATES OF AVOIDANCE
LEARNING DURING FEAR CONDITIONING Rita L. Jou1, Elizabeth
A. Phelps1, Joe LeDoux1, Mauricio R. Delgado2; 1New York University,
2Rutgers University, Newark, NJ — Avoiding negative outcomes is an
important motivation in every day behaviors. The goal of this study was
to investigate the physiological and neural correlates underlying avoidance learning. Specifically, we used a classical conditioning paradigm
where three different conditioned stimuli (CS) were presented. One stimulus (e.g., a blue square) predicted the delivery of a shock upon stimulus
offset (CS+), while another (e.g., a yellow square) predicted no negative
consequences (CS-). A third conditioned cue (e.g., a purple square) also
predicted delivery of a shock, but participants were instructed they could
avoid the shock if they entered the correct sequence of numbers from a
keypad (AV_CS+). After successful learning of the sequence, participants
could then terminate shock easily during subsequent stimulus presentations (AV_CS-). A conditioned response (as measured by increases in
skin conductance responses) was observed when comparing CS+ and CStrials, but also when comparing AV_CS+ and CS- trials. Further, such
responses were diminished after avoidance learning (AV_CS-). Preliminary investigations revealed increases in blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) responses in the amygdala when contrasting CS+ and CStrials, in accordance with previous studies of fear conditioning. During
avoidance learning trials, however, BOLD responses in the striatum were
increased when the motivation to avoid a potential shock was high
(AV_CS+); that is, when participants had an opportunity to influence the
outcome of the trial. Further analysis will investigate the interactions
between the amygdala and striatum during the acquisition and implementation of avoidance learning.
H68
REAPPRAISING
LOSS
AVERSION:
A
PHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATE OF THE RELATIVE OVERVALUATION OF
LOSSES Nina Curley1, Peter Sokol-Hessner1, Ming Hsu2,3, Mauricio
Delgado4, Colin Camerer5, Elizabeth Phelps1; 1New York University,
2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 3The Beckman Institute for
Advanced Science and Technology, 4Rutgers University, 5California Institute of
Technology — Loss aversion, formalized with the parameter ?, describes
the multiplicative overvaluation of losses relative to gains. While many
studies have confirmed the existence of loss aversion on a group level,
few, if any, have quantifiably demonstrated or manipulated loss aversion
on an individual level. We developed a set of 140 monetary choices to
robustly recover behavioral choice parameters for individuals. After an
initial endowment of $30, participants made choices between risky binary
gambles and guaranteed outcomes. From these choices we were able to
reliably recover accurate value parameters and demonstrate individuals’
loss aversion. We used this paradigm to investigate the effect of intentional cognitive regulation strategies on choice behavior. In the first of
two sessions, participants completed two identical sets of choices. One
set’s strategy encouraged the bracketing of choices (“portfolio”
approach), while the other set was made considering each choice in isolation (“one-choice” approach). The “portfolio” strategy reliably decreased
estimates of ? within-subjects. During the second session, participants
made choices while galvanic skin response (GSR) was recorded. When
using the “one-choice” strategy, participants showed higher arousal per
dollar to losses than gains. No such difference existed when using the
“portfolio” strategy. Furthermore, decreases in ? when using the “portfolio” strategy correlated with decreases in the difference in arousal to
losses relative to gains. The present study demonstrates the robust effect
of an intentional cognitive regulation strategy in decreasing both behav-

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

ioral and correlating physiological measures of sensitivity to losses relative to gains.
H69
NEURAL CORRELATES OF COMPASSION AND COGNITIVE
REAPPRAISAL EMOTION REGULATION STRATEGIES Helen
Weng, Gregory Rogers, Richard Davidson; University of WisconsinMadison — Little is known about the neural processes of compassion and
its regulatory effect on emotion. Compassion is compared to cognitive
reappraisal as a method of emotion regulation to negative social stimuli
using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). We hypothesize to
see similarities between groups in areas of the prefrontal cortex representing goal maintenance, but differences in areas involved in down-regulating amygdala activity. We predict increased amygdala activity in the
compassion group because compassion involves more engagement and
attention to the negative stimuli, but expect to see regulatory processes
occur after this increased attention. We predict increased insula and basal
ganglia activation, which may represent the increased interoceptive monitoring, motor planning, and reward state involved in compassion. Participants were trained for 2 weeks in either compassion meditation (N=9) or
cognitive reappraisal (N=8) and scanned with an emotion regulation paradigm. Preliminary analyses show that both compassion and reappraisal
involved increased activations in prefrontal cortex, but compassion
showed decreased activation in VMPFC. Compassion also showed
increases in amygdala activity. Compassion compared to reappraisal
showed higher activations in bilateral insula, caudate, left putamen, and
left precentral gyrus. Reappraisal compared to compassion showed
higher activation in the right inferior frontal gyrus. Compassion may be
regulating negative emotion using differing neural circuits compared to
reappraisal that support interoceptive awareness, motor planning, and
reward states.
H70
IMAGING CAUDATE RESPONSES TO REWARD AND
PUNISHMENT IN HEALTHY OLDER ADULTS Karin Cox, Howard
Aizenstein, Kate Fissell, Julie Fiez; University of Pittsburgh — Previous fMRI
studies in our laboratory have used a ‘card-guessing’ task to examine
reward-related processing. On each trial, subjects guess the value of a
playing card. Values are predetermined such that exactly 50% of subjects’
guesses are correct. Correct guesses are rewarded with monetary gain
while incorrect guesses are punished with monetary loss. The caudate
exhibits a differential BOLD response to the two outcome types: ‘Reward’
trials result in a sustained response, while ‘punishment’ trials elicit an
early positive peak followed by a drop to sub-baseline levels. In the
present study, we investigate the degree to which this activation pattern
might be preserved in older populations. Twenty older adults (51-68y)
and 13 young adults (18-28y) completed the card-guessing task. BOLD
signal timecourses were extracted from an anatomically-defined caudate
region of interest and submitted to a 3-way ANOVA, with age group
(young vs. old), valence (reward vs. punishment), and time (scan epoch
within each trial, T1-T14) as factors. A significant valence x time interaction was found in both the younger and the older adults, and the older
adults’ response pattern shared the key features that have typically been
reported for young adults. We also found a 2-way interaction of group x
time, as reflected in timecourses that appear generally blunted in the
older adults. These results indicate that this task can be used to probe
reward-related processing in older adults, though the number of subjects
should be increased to compensate for a reduction in statistical power.
H71
REPEATED EXPOSURE TO MEDIA VIOLENCE DISRUPTS A
NEURAL
CIRCUIT
THAT
REGULATES
IMPULSIVE
AGGRESSION Christopher Kelly, Jack Grinband, Joy Hirsch; Columbia
University — Although numerous studies have indicated that prolonged
exposure to media violence can contribute to individual aggressive
behavior, the nature and mechanism of this influence remains unknown.
Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we show that

273

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

repeated exposure to violent stimuli selectively diminishes responsiveness within the right orbitofrontal cortex (rOFC). The size of these
responses was inversely correlated with individual scores of trait aggression. The relationship between rOFC and aggression is consistent with
recent models of impulsive aggression, which propose that this frontal
region sends context-specific information to the amygdala to suppress
the intiation of reactive behaviors in motor planning regions such as supplementary motor regions. In accordance with this model, we found that
(1) the rOFC response attenuation was accompanied by increased
responses in supplementary motor cortex and (2) as responses in rOFC
diminished, the functional connectivity between rOFC and amygdala
decreased. These are the first findings to suggest a neural mechanism that
relates the emergence of impulsive aggression to repeated contact with
violent media.
H72
MODULATION OF THE GAZE CUEING EFFECT BY FACIAL
EXPRESSION Teresa Farroni1,2, Sara Benetti2, Enrica Menon2, Silvia
Rigato1, Katiuschia Pastrello2, Nathalie George3; 1Birkbeck College, London
WC1E 7HX, 2University of Padova, ITALY, 3CNRS UPR 640 – LENA /
Université Pierre et Marie Curie and Centre MEG-EEG, Paris, France — Three
studies were carried out in which we examined whether fearful and
happy expressions enhance the effect of another’s gaze in directing the
attention of an observer using a spatial orienting task with different techniques. Participants were presented with neutral, happy, and fearful
faces with varying gaze directions and were required to detect the
appearance of a peripheral target as quickly as possible, either by making
a keypress response (experiment 1 and 2) or by making an eye movement
(experiment 3). In all the experiments there was a gaze congruency effect:
response times (RT) were faster when the eyes gazed toward (congruent
condition) rather than away (incongruent condition) from the target location. In the first experiment there was no validity effect for the fearful
faces, while this validity effect was there for happy and neutral faces.
Fearful faces seem to induce slower valid trials and faster invalid trials as
compared to happy and neutral faces. By contrast, in the second experiment, where the expression was established simultaneously with the
gaze turning to the right or left, we find a gaze cueing effect for fearful
faces. The data of the third experiment support the hypothesis that both
emotional expressions facilitate gaze-induced attention shifting toward a
peripheral target when a more sensitive measure than RT can be used. In
sum, the results provide novel evidence for the rapid integration of facial
expression and gaze direction information and will be discussed in terms
of perception (detection) request versus acting (overt gaze orienting)
response.
H73
EFFECT OF ANTICIPATION ON MEMORY OF EMOTIONALLY
SALIENT STIMULI IN A CLINICAL POPULATION OF SNAKE
PHOBICS Allison Schaus, Deborah Kerr, Issidoros Sarinopoulos, Mai Lor,
Danielle Green, Jack Nitschke; 1University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI — Anticipatory and memory processes have been implicated in the pathophysiology of anxiety disorders. A recent study in our laboratory found that
activation in the amygdala and hippocampus during the anticipation of
aversive pictures was associated with better immediate recognition memory (Mackiewicz et al., 2006). The present event-related fMRI study
examined whether such anticipatory activation predicted memory of
anxiogenic stimuli in a clinical population. In the scanner, snake phobics
and healthy controls viewed snake, fish, and disgust videos that were
preceded by cues that were the first letter of each stimulus type: S, F, and
D. Participants then completed a recognition memory task either immediately following the scan (time 1) or one week later (time 2). Memory
data for Pr indicated that participants correctly remembered videos of
aversive stimuli more than videos of neutral stimuli. In addition, participants correctly remembered more videos at time 1 than time 2 with the
exception of phobics remembering more snake videos at time 2 than time
1. Recognition memory (Pr) of the videos was then regressed on whole-

274

Emotion

brain contrasts comparing anticipatory activation to each cue. For phobics, increased activation in the amygdala and hippocampus during
anticipation of S-F contrast predicted better recognition at time 2. For
controls, increased activation in these regions during anticipation of D-F
contrast predicted greater performance at time 1 only. These results highlight the role of the amygdala and hippocampus in anticipation and
memory in a clinical population.
H74
NEURAL CORRELATES OF COGNITIVE BIASES IN PROCESSING
OF EMOTIONAL PICTURES IN MAJOR DEPRESSION Amy
M.
Jimenez1, Avgusta Y. Shestyuk1,2, Brooks R. King-Casas3,2, Robert T. Knight1,
Patricia J. Deldin4,2; 1University of California, Berkeley, 2Harvard University,
3
Baylor College of Medicine, 4University of Michigan, Ann Arbor — Cognitive biases in processing of emotional information have long been identified as one of the core features of major depressive disorder (MDD).
However, empirical findings of preferential processing of negative information have not been consistent. Specifically, level of processing may
influence the emergence of negative biases in MDD. The current study
examined event related potentials (ERPs) during processing of neverbefore-seen positive, negative, and neutral IAPS pictures during directed
encoding (high effort) and in a yes/no recognition task (low effort) in
individuals with and without MDD. During directed encoding, thirtyeight pictures of each valence were presented for 1.5 seconds in 6 blocks.
Participants were asked to carefully examine and memorize each picture
for verbal recall following each block. At the end of the experiment, participants performed a yes/no recognition task with old and new pictures
presented for 1.5 seconds. Individuals with MDD recalled more negative
than positive or neutral images (p<.01), whereas control participants
recalled more positive than negative or neutral images (p<.01). During
directed encoding, control individuals displayed larger P3b amplitudes
to positive than negative (p<.05, Cz) or neutral (p<.01) pictures. In contrast, MDD participants exhibited greater sustained late positive component amplitudes to negative than positive (p<.01, parietal sites) or neutral
(p<.01) images. At the recognition phase, there were no group differences
in ERP amplitudes during identification of new pictures. These results
suggest that level of processing of novel information is instrumental in
eliciting a bias towards positive stimuli in healthy controls and towards
negative stimuli in MDD individuals.
H75
ANIMAL, VEGETABLE, MINERAL: IMPLICIT ACTIVATION OF
BRAIN REGIONS INVOLVED IN MENTALIZING ABOUT
OTHERS. Dylan David Wagner, Kathryn E. Demos, William M. Kelley,
Todd F. Heatherton; Dartmouth College — Recent research has characterized a network of brain regions involved in our uniquely human ability
to perceive the mental states of others. This capacity for Theory of Mind
(TOM), or mentalizing, involves a range of brain structures including
medial prefrontal cortex, temporal parietal junction, superior temporal
sulcus, and posterior cingulate. A topic of recent debate has been the
degree to which mentalizing is an automatic response. The vast majority
of tasks used to assess TOM in fMRI research have relied upon explicit
instructions to engage in mentalizing behavior, or employing material
that strongly encourages TOM processing. In the present study we examined brain activity associated with the categorization of photographs as
either animal, vegetable, or mineral. Critically, the animal category was
comprised of both images of humans and images of animals and thus
allowed an implicit assessment of mentalizing in a task condition for
which explicit judgments about the two subcategories were identical.
Several brain regions showed greater activity to the categorization of
humans relative to non-human animals, vegetables and minerals including brain regions previously implicated in mentalizing ability (MPFC,
TPJ, STS, and posterior cingulate cortex). These findings suggest that people can spontaneously engage in mentalizing in the absence of explicit
task instructions.

Emotion

H76
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL
MECHANISMS
OF
EMOTION
REGULATION FOR SUBTYPES AGGRESSIVE CHILDREN Connie
Lamm, Marc Lewis; University of Toronto — Children referred for aggressive behaviour problems may not represent a homogeneous population.
Our objective was to assess neural mechanisms of emotion regulation
that might distinguish subtypes of aggressive children from each other
and from their age matched controls. Specifically, we were interested in
subdividing children based on their underlying feelings. Aggressive children who have comorbid anxiety or depression often feel sad or fearful,
and aggress due to these underlying negative emotions. We used a go/
nogo task with a negative emotion induction, and we examined densearray EEG data together with behavioral measures of performance. We
investigated the nogo N2, a negative deflection observed about 200-400
ms poststimulus at medial frontal sites. This event-related potential
(ERP) is generally interpreted in terms of inhibitory control or cognitive
control &#9472; both vital aspects of emotion regulation. The results
revealed that aggressive internalizing children showed larger N2s and
activated more anterior regions of the cortex than both control children
and aggressive children not comorbid for aggression and internalizing
behaviour problems. These findings highlight different mechanisms of
emotion-regulation underlying subtypes of aggressive children and point
toward distinct developmental pathways and treatment strategies.
H77
HAPPINESS IS NOT IN THE EYES: EFFECTS OF EYE-GAZE AND
EMOTION ON VISUAL ATTENTION Sarah Bayless1, Roxane Itier2,
Margot Taylor1; 1Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada, 2Rotman
Research Institute, Toronto, Canada — We investigated the effect of facial
emotion on the magnitude of attentional cueing elicited by eye-gaze. In
the first experiment we used dynamic facial displays which transformed
from neutral to emotional facial expression and in which eye gaze shifted
from straight to right or left averted. This transformation took place over
120ms, and the final frame was held for 80ms. The facial expressions were
Anger, Fear, Happiness and Surprise. In the second experiment the same
stimuli were masked to reveal only the eyes (no eyebrows). Using a Posner paradigm, we measured participant’s reaction times to detect a small
target to the left or right of the face/eyes. Emotional expression and gaze
– target correspondence were evenly distributed across trials. With full
faces congruency effects (RT difference between incongruent and congruent trials) were modulated by emotional expression, with happy expression eliciting significantly smaller effects than all other emotions. For eyes
alone the modulation by emotion disappeared. The findings suggest that
threat related emotions but also surprise resulted in a larger congruency
effect compared to happy facial affect in non-anxious participants. Surprised expression shares many features with fearful expression: wideopen eyes as well as communicating an increased state of vigilance. The
results of the eyes-only experiment suggest that to perceive facial affect of
happiness, the eyes alone are not sufficient, while this is not the case for
the other emotions. The neural underpinnings of these effects will be
investigated in an fMRI paradigm.
H78
EARLY INFLUENCE OF EMOTIONAL INFORMATION ON
VENTRAL VISUAL STREAM RELIES ON A TWO-PATHWAY
NEURAL ARCHITECTURE WHICH INCLUDES THE INFERIOR
LONGITUDINAL FASCICULUS: EVIDENCE FROM MEG/DCM
David Rudrauf1,2, Antonio Damasio3, Jean-Philippe Lachaux4, Christopher
Kovach1, Jacques Martinerie2, Bernard Renault2,5, Thomas Grabowski1, Olivier
David6; 1University of Iowa College of Medicine, 2Pierre & Marie Curie
University, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3University of Southern
California, 4INSERM U280, Lyon, France, 5MEG Center Paris, Hôpital de la
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 6INSERM U594 France — Visual
attention
can be modulated by the emotional effects of stimuli prior to full visual
processing. Two classes of models have been proposed to account for
such modulation: 1. “two-stage models”, which include serial processing

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

along the ventral visual stream (VVS), followed by secondary feedbacks
to the VVS from structures involved in emotion processing (such as the
amygdala and the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC)); 2. “two-pathway models”,
which also include parallel short-cut pathways (SCPs) reaching directly
the emotion processing structures. The retino-tectal pathway is one possible SCP candidate. Anatomical evidence suggests however that the inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF), and perhaps the inferior occipitalfrontal fasciculus, might constitute alternative or complementary SCPs.
We investigated which type of neural architecture is the most likely to
operate in the human brain, using dynamic causal modeling (DCM)
applied to MEG evoked responses. 15 subjects were recorded in MEG
while presented with arousing visual stimuli. All DCM models shared
hierarchical connections between early visual areas (V1-V2), the fusiform
gyrus, lateral IT, a cluster representing the amygdala and temporal pole,
and the OFC. Models were compared using Bayesian procedures. The
two-pathway models which included the ILF explained the data significantly better (log evidence) than all alternative models. In contrast, the
model with only a retino-tectal SCP was not associated with significantly
higher log evidence than two-stage models. The results support the
hypothesis of an involvement of a two-pathway neural architecture relying on the inferior longitudinal fasciculus in the early modulation of ventral visual stream by emotionally competent stimuli.
H79
THE ROLE OF MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN REGULATING
THE EXPERIENTIAL AND AUTONOMIC CORRELATES OF
SOCIAL EVALUATIVE THREAT Kevin Ochsner, Matthew Davidson,
Brent Hughes, Tor Wager; Columbia University — Public speaking is consistently rated as among the most aversive of all human experiences. The
Trier Social Stressor Task (TSST) provides a well-studied laboratory
model of a similar type of social evaluative threat. Here we used a modified, fMRI-compatible variant to determine whether similar or different
regions of medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) might play a key role in
mediating negative affective experience, heart rate (HR), and skin conductance levels (SCL), all of which increase substantially during the task.
We expected overlapping regions of MPFC to correlate with the timecourse of responses for each measure, given the MPFC’s projections to
hypothalamic and brainstem regions mediating autonomic outflow. We
also expected unique correlates of each measure, as physiological and
experiential data are themselves typically weakly correlated. To address
these issues, whole-brain fMRI data, continuous HR and SCL, and periodic affect ratings were collected while participants mentally prepared
speeches they believed would subsequently be delivered to an audience.
Brain timeseries data were regressed on the timecourse of each measure
for individual subjects, and a ‘random-effects’ model was used for group
analysis of regression parameters. Results indicated that all 3 behavioral
correlates of anxiety were inversely related to activity in overlapping
regions of ventral MPFC. This region has been previously implicated in
autonomic control, affective experience and individual differences in
responses to stress. Taken together, past and present finding suggest that
ventral MPFC may play a central role in down-regulating multiple channels of affective responding.
H80
EMOTION MINING: THE PREDICTIVE VALUE OF CONSCIOUS
AND UNCONSCIOUS EMOTION IN DETERMINING POLITICAL
PREFERENCE George Trksak1, Michael Milburn2, Thomas Snyder3;
1
McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School, MA, 2University of Massachusetts/
Boston, MA, 3Emotion Mining Company, Wellesley, MA — Studies examining voting decisions have often used voters’ stands on political issues to
predict political party and candidate preferences. While little is understood regarding the neurobehavioral substrates involved it is also well
known that emotion processes play an important role. Two studies investigated the influence of voters’ stands compared to emotional responses
in predicting voters’ candidate preferences in the context of a political
campaign debate (either the 2000 Presidential Debates or the 2006 Massa-

275

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

chusetts Gubernatorial Debates). Voters’ stands were assessed by survey
with questions related to topics such as taxes, gun violence, and abortion.
Emotional responses were determined with a novel web-based methodology referred to as the EM toolset developed by Emotion Mining Company. The EM toolset characterizes conscious and unconscious emotional
responses to a topic question with analysis of both categorized emotion
words and written emotional responses in an aggregate database. First,
correlation analysis calculated the contribution of voters’ stands compared to emotional responses in predicting voter preference as measured
with standard thermometer ratings. Second, conscious and unconscious
emotional responses were analyzed pre- and post-debate to assess the
influence of the debate in changing emotional responses to candidates.
The results indicate that emotion measurements were significantly more
predictive of participants’ thermometer ratings than voters’ political
stands. Additionally, debates drove changes in conscious emotions
towards candidates, while unconscious emotions remained stable. This
study further demonstrates the strong influence of emotion in political
preference and highlights the unique and informative potential of the EM
toolset in elucidating emotional responses.
H81
THE
NEURAL
BASES
OF
PREPARATORY
EMOTION
REGULATION: HOW DOES PRE-APPRAISAL CUSHION THE
BLOW OF AN IMPENDING NEGATIVE EVENT? Brent
Hughes,
Kevin Ochsner, Matthew Davidson, Tor Wager; Columbia University — Anticipating an unpleasant event may enhance suffering when the event actually transpires. Although behavioral studies have shown that cognitively
preparing to regulate one’s emotional responses can short-circuit aversive anticipation, the brain bases of this ability are not known. Building
on prior work on reappraisal and anticipation (e.g. Ochsner et al, 2002,
2004; Wager et al, 2004), we hypothesized that preparing for, or ‘preappraising,’ upcoming aversive images could 1) diminish behavioral and
neural correlates of aversive expectancy, and 2) might rely on prefrontal
control systems whose anticipatory activation could predict subsequent
drops in amygdala responses to aversive stimuli when they actually
appear. To address these hypotheses whole-brain fMRI data was collected while participants completed both Pre-appraisal or Look (baseline)
trials for aversive images and Look trials for neutral images. Trials consisted of an initial cue indicating trial type, a 4-sec anticipatory interval,
an aversive or neutral image presented for 8-sec, a jittered 3-sec negative
affect rating, and jittered ITI. Cue-only and anticipation-only catch trials
permitted estimation of fMRI responses to each phase of the trial. Contrasts and connectivity analyses were used to identify regions activated
on Pre-appraisal and Look trials during the anticipatory and stimulus
presentation periods and to identify regions whose activity during anticipation predicted drops in amygdala activity during stimulus presentation. Results largely confirmed initial hypotheses providing the first
evidence that PFC-amygdala interactions previously implicated in other
forms of cognitive emotional control (e.g. reappraisal and placebo) may
be similar to those when one cognitively prepares for anticipated aversive events.
H82
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EMOTIONAL EXPECTANCY DURING
SENTENCE COMPREHENSION Daphne Holt1, W. Caroline West1,
Balaji Lakshmanan1, Scott Rauch2, Gina Kuperberg3; 1Massachusetts General
Hospital, 2McLean Hospital, 3Tufts University — Sentence processing is
known to engage inferior prefrontal and temporal cortices and the modulation of these regions is influenced by semantic context. Little, however,
is known about whether these networks are modulated by the emotional
meaning of words within sentences and/or whether paralimbic regions
that are known to mediate emotional appraisal are also engaged. We
used event-related fMRI to identify neural correlates of comprehending
emotional words following an affectively neutral context. Fifteen healthy
individuals read two-sentence scenarios describing social scenarios containing a pleasant, unpleasant or neutral word in the second sentence

276

Emotion

(e.g.: Sandra’s old boyfriend stopped by her apartment. This time he
brought a rose/gun/letter with him.) We found three overall patterns of
response: 1) increased activation to the unpleasant scenarios relative to
the neutral scenarios in the anterior and posterior cingulate gyrus, superior frontal gyrus, insula, and fusiform gyrus, 2) attenuated deactivation
to the pleasant relative to the neutral scenarios in the anterior cingulate
gyrus, and 3) increased activation to the neutral relative to the unpleasant
and pleasant scenarios in the middle and inferior frontal gyri. Moreover,
measures of negative affect were inversely correlated with the modulation of the left posterior cingulate gyrus to unpleasant relative to neutral
scenarios. In conclusion, understanding the emotional meanings of
words following a neutral context engages both networks known to
mediate semantic integration as well as those involved in emotional
appraisal. The posterior cingulate gyrus may serve to integrate emotional
meaning with existing contextual information such as the individual’s
affective state.
H83
THERE’S MORE TO EMOTION THAN MEETS THE EYE:
PROCESSING OF EMOTIONAL PROSODY IN THE AUDITORY
DOMAIN Lauren Cornew1, Tracy Love1,2, Georgina Batten1, Leslie Carver1;
1University of California, San Diego, 2San Diego State University — Much of
the research in the emotion literature focuses on the processing of emotions in the visual modality, and data suggests a processing advantage
for emotionally salient (especially negative) stimuli even at early sensory
stages. This advantage is often interpreted to reflect an evolutionarily
adaptive mechanism for rapid identification of potentially threatening
stimuli which is thought to depend, at least in part, on the integrity of the
amygdala. While emotion’s influence on perception has significant implications for theories of cognitive and neural processing, the auditory correlates remain under-explored. In order to investigate a potential
processing advantage for emotionally valenced stimuli in the auditory
modality, this study employed a gating paradigm. Participants heard
successive 250ms segments of Jabberwocky ‘sentences’ spoken with
angry, happy, or neutral intonation. After each segment, participants
indicated the emotion conveyed and rated their confidence in that decision. Contrary to predictions based on studies of visual emotion perception, participants identified neutral prosody more rapidly and accurately
than either happy or angry prosody. Thus, perceptual modulation by
emotional content appears to differ between visual and auditory modalities, with no processing advantage for emotionally valenced stimuli in
the latter. We are currently collecting data from five and six year old participants using a modified gating paradigm in order to examine the
developmental progression of this phenomenon.
H84
COMPARING
SELECTION
UNDER
CONDITIONS
OF
EMOTIONAL DISTRACTION IN BORDERLINE PERSONALITY
DISORDER PATIENTS AND CONTROLS Charles A. Sanislow, Carol
L. Raye, Karen J. Mitchell, Erich J. Greene, Alessandra Rellini, Shannon M.
Tubridy, Marcia K. Johnson; Yale University — Patients with borderline
personality (n=12), a disorder characterized by dysregulated emotion,
were compared with healthy controls (n=10) during fMRI on a working
memory task requiring them to selectively refresh a just-activated word.
On each trial, participants viewed a screen with 3 words (1 emotional, 2
neutral). A half-second later, either one of the words appeared again
(repeat), or a black dot appeared which, by its location, signaled the participant to think back to (refresh) one of the previous 3 words. Across trials, half of the refreshed/repeated items were neutral and half were
emotional; thus, when refreshing a neutral word, participants had to
ignore the active representation of a salient emotional distracter. Different areas of left prefrontal cortex were recruited by controls and patients
when participants had to ignore the emotional item to refresh the neutral
item: For controls, activity was greater in more ventral areas (left lateral
orbital/inferior frontal), whereas for patients, activity was greater in a
more dorsal area (including left precentral, inferior frontal, and middle

Emotion

frontal gyrus). Further, relative to controls, patients showed less selection-related activation during refreshing in anterior cingulate and right
inferior frontal gyrus independent of emotion. Such a pattern is consistent with the idea that patients and controls differ in the executive processes engaged for selection in the presence of emotion.
H85
ENHANCED CONDITIONING OF NEUTRAL FACES IN YOUNG
ADOLESCENTS RELATIVE TO ADULTS Nim
Tottenham,
Tara
Gilhooly, Todd A. Hare, B. J. Casey; Weill Medical College of Cornell
University — If facial expressions are conditioned stimuli, interpretations
of others’ faces should be influenced by experience (Adolphs et al., 1995;
Davis & Whalen, 2001). New associations should be more easily learned
at younger ages than at older ages, when well-learned associations may
be more difficult to alter. Neutral facial expressions were used as conditioned stimuli (CS) that were either paired or unpaired with aversive
sounds (e.g., nails down a chalkboard; unconditioned stimuli (US)). The
dependent measure was decreased response time to the CS during a
timed task (Critchley et al., 2002). The training procedure was administered to adults (ages 19-25) and young adolescents (ages 12-15) in order to
test the hypothesis that adolescents, relative to adults, should be facilitated in forming the associations between the CS and the US, as demonstrated by needing fewer trials to acquisition. Adults showed evidence of
learning the association (decreased response time to the CS+) but not
until the late trials of the experiment; however, adolescents showed evidence of learning earlier, by the middle trials of the experiment. While
these behavioral data may be explained by heightened amygdala reactivity during adolescence (and hence better emotional learning), these data
are consistent with the hypothesis that 1) facial expressions are conditioned stimuli and 2) that adolescents are faster to learn emotional associations with faces relative to adults because adults have better-established
associations for facial expressions making them more difficult to alter.
H86
A HIGH-DENSITY ERP STUDY OF THE EMOTIONAL STROOP IN
PARTICIPANTS WITH SUB-CLINICAL SEASONAL AFFECTIVE
DISORDER Fern Jaspers-Fayer, Isabel Taake, Lisa Buchy, Mario Liotti;
Simon Fraser University — Seasonal Affective Disorder (SAD) or winter
depression is a form of affective disorder in which patients are predictably symptomatic in the winter, and remit in the summer. Most likely its
neurobiology differs from typical depression, but so far little research has
been carried out to identify cognitive and neurophysiological markers of
SAD. Previously, we found that healthy individuals with subsyndromal
SAD symptoms (as measured by the Seasonal Pattern Affective Questionnaire or SPAQ) tested in the winter had a selective slowing in color naming time for winter-related words in a modified emotional Stroop task. In
the present study, we recorded high-density ERPs to winter-related and
neutral words in healthy undergraduate students with ( n=15) or without
subsyndromal SAD (n=14). Critically, some participants were tested
twice, first in the winter and then again in the summer (SAD: n=9; NonSAD: n=11). No statistical RT differences were found. In the winter session, grandaverage ERPs for winter words were more positive over
anterior frontal regions in the 200-400 ms range compared to the neutral
words, for SAD participants only (p<.05). In the summer session, the
effect disappeared, resulting in a significant interaction of season by emotion (p<.02) in the SAD group. No changes in the 200-400ms positivity
occurred in either season for the NonSAD group. This frontal positivity
modulation should be explored further as a possible neurophysiological
marker of cognitive bias in winter depression.
H87
ERP EVIDENCE OF EARLY COVERT PROCESSING OF PHYSICAL
THREAT WORDS IN SUBJECTS WITH HIGH AND LOW
ANXIETY SENSITIVITY Isabel Taake, Fern Jaspers-Fayer, Lisa Buchy,
Mario Liotti; Simon Fraser University — Anxiety Sensitivity is a measure of
the extent people fear anxiety-related body sensations in future situations. It is a risk factor for the development of clinical anxiety, and can be

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

measured with the Anxiety Sensitivity Index (ASI; McNally, 2002). Individuals with various anxiety disorders display content-specific cognitive
biases, particularly in the domain of covert attention. One paradigm often
used is the visual dot probe task. In clinical and non-clinical anxiety,
responses to a dot presented in the same location of a previous threat
stimulus are quicker than responses to probes in the opposite location
(Sinha, Taake & Liotti, in press). In the present study, we recorded ERPs
while healthy students with high ( n=15) and low ASI (n=9) performed a
dot probe task with lateralized physical threat, positive and neutral
words. No statistical RT differences were found in either group. ERPs to
probes in the location of threat words elicited significantly greater P1
activity over left parietal-occipital scalp than probes in the opposite location (p<.001). This was followed by enhanced positive activity over left
frontal-central scalp (250-400 ms). Lateralized attention results in an
enhanced positivity (P1 effect, 80-160 ms) for stimuli over contralateral
occipital scalp (Mangun & Hillyard, 1991). This is to our knowledge the
first electrophysiological demonstration that covert attentional shifts
towards threat words modulate early activity in visual cortex as indexed
by the P1 attention effect. High ASI resulted in a non-significant increase
of the P1 modulation to threat words.
H88
DOES EMPATHY CHANGE WITH ADVANCING AGE? Janelle Beadle,
Sergio Paradiso, Natalie Denburg, Daniel Tranel; University of Iowa — The ability to empathize with others is the basis for healthy personal relationships and well-being. Some studies have pointed to a decrease in
empathy with advancing age. However, sampling and measurement
issues limit the interpretation of this finding in the general elderly population. In addition, these studies have failed to acknowledge the multidimensional nature of the empathy construct. The aim of the current study
is to obtain a representative sample of older adults and measure empathy
through a self-report questionnaire, the Interpersonal Reactivity Index
(IRI; Davis, 1980). The IRI measures empathy broadly through multiple
subscales that represent its different facets: Perspective Taking (PT), Fantasy (FS), and Empathic Concern (EC). The Perspective Taking and Fantasy scales measure the degree to which one cognitively places oneself in
the role of another person (PT) or a fictional character from a book or
movie (FS). Differently, the Empathic Concern scale measures the degree
to which one experiences emotional concern for the welfare of others. The
current study compared 20 healthy older adults (aged 59-89) to a large
normative sample of undergraduates (Davis, 1980). Older adults scored
significantly lower on the Fantasy subscale, but did not differ on the Perspective Taking and Empathic Concern subscales. Rather than a global
empathy decline, increased age suggests a decrease in a specific domain
of empathy. As additional older adults are obtained, the reliability of
these findings will continue to be examined in order to further elucidate
the type of empathic change occurring in older adults.
H89
NEURAL DYNAMICS OF REJECTION SENSITIVITY Ethan Kross1,
Tobias Egner2, Kevin Ochsner1, Joy Hirsch2, Geraldine Downey1; 1Columbia
University, 2Functional MRI Research Center, Columbia University — Rejection Sensitivity (RS) is the tendency to anxiously expect, readily perceive,
and intensely react to rejection. This study used fMRI to explore whether
individual differences in RS are mediated by differential recruitment of
brain regions involved in emotional appraisal and/or cognitive control.
High and low RS participants were scanned while viewing either representational paintings depicting themes of rejection and acceptance or
nonrepresentational control paintings matched for positive or negative
valence, arousal and interest level. Across all participants, rejection vs.
acceptance images activated regions of the brain involved in processing
affective stimuli (posterior cingulate, insula), and cognitive control (dorsal anterior cingulate cortex; medial frontal cortex). Low and high RS
individuals’ responses to rejection vs. acceptance images were not, however, identical. Low RS individuals displayed significantly more activity
in left inferior and right dorsal frontal regions, and activity in these areas

277

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

correlated negatively with participants’ self-report distress ratings. In
addition, control analyses revealed no effect of viewing negative vs. positive images in any of the areas described above, suggesting that the aforementioned activations were involved in rejection-relevant processing
rather than processing negatively valenced stimuli per se. Taken
together, these findings suggest that responses in regions traditionally
implicated in emotional processing and cognitive control are sensitive to
rejection stimuli irrespective of RS, but that low RS individuals may activate prefrontal structures to regulate distress associated with viewing
such images.
H90
CAN NEGATIVE FACIAL EXPRESSION BE PROCESSED
UNCONSCIOUSLY? BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL EVIDENCES
Renlai Zhou1,2, Junhong Huang1, Senqi Hu3, Zoujun Ye1, Xiaoyi Wang1,
Yufeng Zang1, Qiyong Gong4; 1Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China,
2
Southeast China University, Nanjing, China, 3Humboldt State University,
4Sichuan University, Chengdu, China — The aim of the study was to
explore if negative facial expression could be processed under different
unattended conditions. Sixty-four healthy right-handed university students with normal or correct-normal vision aged from 18 to 25 years old
participated in this study. A behavioral experiment (36 subjects), an ERP
experiment (20 subjects) and an fMRI experiment (18 subjects) with the
same procedure was performed respectively. Forty-two Chinese characters were used as attention targets. A total of 21 emotional human face
photographs which consisted of negative, neutral, and happy faces were
presented as the background of targets. The experiment was a 2 (tasks:
low versus high perceptual load) * 3 (background: negative, neutral, and
happy facial expressions) within subjects repeated design. The participants were asked to judge each Chinese character’s structure (low perceptual load task) or tune (high perceptual load task). Behavioral results
indicated that the interference effects of negative facial expressions
occurred in the low perceptual load task (word structure judgment), but
not in the high perceptual load task (word tone judgment). The results
with ERP recording showed that the amplitude of P2 at CZ elicited by
negative faces in the time-window ranged from 155 to 175 msec was significantly larger than that elicited by happy or neutral faces in the low
perceptual load task (F(df=2.32) = 7.73, P = 0.002). However, there were
no significant differences among the amplitude of P2 at CZ elicited by
negative, neutral, and happy faces in the high perceptual load task
(F(df=2.32) = 0.12, P= 0.89). The results with fMRI scan revealed that
more brain regions were activated in the background of fear facial
expression than that in the background of happy facial expression when
word structure judgment task was performed, and that fewer brain
regions were activated in the background of happy facial expression than
that in the background of fear facial expression when word tune judgment task was performed. Furthermore, although the brain regions were
more activated in the word structure judgment task than that in the word
tune judgment task in the background of both fear and happy facial
expressions, the activated brain regions were significantly different
between these tasks. The above results were discussed in the context of
the relationship between bottom-to-top and top-to-down processes.
H91
THE ROLE OF THE NEURAL CIRCUITRY UNDERLYING
EMPATHY AND MENTAL ATTRIBUTION IN OBSERVATIONAL
FEAR LEARNING Andreas Olsson1, Elizabeth Phelps2; 1Columbia
University, 2New York University — Observing another individual’s fear
expression in reaction to a stimulus provides a powerful means of learning the affective value of that stimulus. Previous research has suggested
that observational fear learning (OFL) involves learning mechanisms
similar to classical fear conditioning, specifically the amygdala. However,
it is possible that the neural circuitry underlying empathy and mental
state attribution may also play an important role in OFL. In this fMRI
study, subjects (n=14) were asked to watch a movie of another individual
(the model) receiving shocks paired with a conditioned stimulus (CS+),

278

Emotion

but not with a control stimulus (CS-) (observation stage), and were told
that they were going to take part in an identical experiment at a later time
(test stage). After watching the movie, subjects entered the test stage and
were presented with the same stimuli as the model in the movie, however, no shocks were administered to the subjects. All subjects showed
learning as measured by the skin conductance response (SCR) during the
test stage. During observation, watching the model being presented with
the CS+ versus the CS- resulted in activation in regions of the rostral anterior ACC and the right insula cortex, previously implicated in empathic
responses, and the anterior rostral MPFC, previously implicated in mental attribution. Moreover, the magnitude of activation in these regions
during the observation stage predicted the magnitude of learning
expressed in the subsequent test stage. These results suggest that regions
underlying empathy and mental attribution may play a role in fear learning through social observation.
H92
EMOTION PROCESSING BY STIMULUS TYPE AND GENDER IN
MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER Scott Langenecker1, Allie Kade1, Sara
Wright1, Patricia Deldin1, Kristy Nielson2, Elizabeth Young1, Huda Akil1,
Lawrence Own2, Jon-Kar Zubieta; 1University of Michigan, 2Marquette
University — Faulty classification of posed facial emotions has been
explored in depression, although no study to date has included comparisons based upon gender, a variable potentially modulating the relationship between depressed status and correct classification of posed facial
emotions. Differences in classifications of posed emotional expressions
between participants with and without Major Depressive Disorder
(MDD) and between females and males were hypothesized, as emotion
classification disparities between males and females may underlie the
greater prevalence in females. Participants included 53 healthy controls
(32 males, 21 females) and 51 patients (17 males, 34 females) diagnosed
with MDD with/without comorbid dysthymia or anxiety. For accuracy,
there was an interaction between gender and diagnosis (p<.04). The
MDD male group and the control female group performed significantly
better than the MDD female group (p<.04), while the female control
group was nominally better than the control male group (p=.14). For
response time, the interaction between gender, diagnosis, and emotion
type was significant (p<.02). The interaction included slower response
time for MDD females for fearful stimuli compared to the control males
(p=.06) and for sad stimuli compared to control males and females
(p<.014). The MDD males were slower than control males for happy stimuli (p=.03). The results suggest that gender modulates the relationship
between depression and emotion processing, with better performance in
MDD males and worse performance in MDD females compared to their
same-gender cohorts and potential MDD subtype by gender interactions
that can be explored in future research.
H93
FEAR LEARNING TO SOCIAL AND NON-SOCIAL STIMULI AND
ITS RELATIONSHIP TO INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN
ANXIETY Susanna Carmona1, Andreas Olsson2, Geraldine Downey2, Kevin
Ochsner2; 1Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona, 2Columbia University — Previous research has showed that individuals high in anxiety and cortisol
release in stressful situations display an attentional bias for threatening
social stimuli, such as angry faces. Work in animals and humans suggest
that cortisol may play an important role in fear conditioning. However,
little is known about how individual differences in anxiety are related to
learning that social stimuli have a threat value. In this experiment, subjects were presented with pairs of angry and neutral faces, and non-social
stimuli (geometric shapes) in a differential fear conditioning paradigm.
One conditioned stimulus from each category served as the CS+ and was
paired with a mild shock, whereas the other served as a control stimulus
(CS-) and was never paired with a shock. The skin conductance response
(SCR) difference between CS+ and CS- was used as a measure of the conditioned response (CR). Our results indicated that the CR was stronger to
angry faces than to neutral faces and non-social shape stimuli. In addi-

Emotion

tion, the magnitude of the CR and the resistance to extinction to angry
faces, but not to neutral faces or non-social stimuli, was positively related
to individual differences in anxiety. These results support the notion that
certain categories of social threat stimuli are more easily associated with
an aversive outcome, and that individuals high in anxiety may be more
vulnerable to developing a fear towards these stimuli.
H94
MEMORY MODULATION BY POST-TRAINING AROUSAL:
RETRIEVAL
ENHANCEMENT
FOR
POSITIVELY
AND
NEGATIVELY AROUSING WORDS INTERACTS WITH EMOTION
REGULATION STRATEGY William Lorber1, Lauren McGurn2, Kristy
A. Nielson2,4; 1Zablocki VA Medical Center, 2Marquette University, 3Medical
College of Wisconsin, Foley Center for Aging — Emotionally arousing stimuli are more memorable than neutral ones and arousal induced after
learning enhances later retrieval, but there is little experimental evidence
regarding how stimulus arousal and valence qualities differentially affect
memory or memory modulation. The present study examined the effect
of arousal induced after learning on memory for words varying in both
arousal and valence quality. Eighty-four adults (64 female) viewed and
rated 60 emotionally provocative words from the Affective Norms for
English Words database for valence (unpleasant—pleasant) and arousal
(low—high), chosen to fit four categories fully crossing the arousal/
valence dimensions. Participants then completed questionnaires for 10minutes, including the Emotion Regulation Questionnaire, which measures one’s use of reappraisal to regulate emotion. A 3-min comedic or
neutral video clip was then presented. Arousal and mood ratings were
also collected. An unannounced word recognition test was given one
week later. Word ratings demonstrated the expected normative pattern
and did not differ by group. Mood and arousal state showed group
equivalence prior to manipulation and increases after comedy. Recognition demonstrated that low-arousal/negative-valence words were less
well retained than words from the other categories; comedy enhanced
word retrieval across categories; and individuals who endorsed reappraisal, an emotion avoidance strategy, still showed significant enhancement of memory by comedy, but to a lesser degree than low reappraisers.
Thus, emotional arousal induced after learning enhanced delayed
retrieval qualities of the stimuli. Furthermore, emotion regulation strategies that can reduce the experience of emotion may also reduce the effects
of emotion on memory consolidation.
H95
COMMON NEURAL SUBSTRATES FOR PERCEIVING FACES,
EXPRESSING PREFERENCES AND MAKING ‘GUT’ DECISIONS:
IMPLICATIONS FOR MODELS OF PERSON PERCEPTION Teal S.
Eich1, Joshua I. Davis2, Kevin N. Ochsner2; 1University of California, Los
Angeles, 2Columbia University — A network of regions centered around
medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) has been implicated in various aspects
of person perception, including mental state attribution, impression formation, and trait attribution. The meaning of these activations is still a
subject of debate, however, for at least two reasons. First, most studies
have failed to differentiate between judgments made deliberatively as
opposed to intuitively. Second, many of these regions have also been
implicated the expression of and judgments about affective preferences.
To disentangle neural bases of these factors, the present study collected
whole brain functional images from 18 healthy individuals while they
made affective (liking) or non-affective (visual complexity) judgments of
social (faces) and non-social (food and art) targets that were made deliberatively or by ‘going with your gut.’ Findings revealed cortical regions
commonly and distinctly associated with each type of these three factors.
Intriguingly, an area of MPFC was commonly activated in three different
contrasts: for judgments of liking vs. visual complexity, people vs. food
or art, and ‘gut’ as opposed to deliberative modes of decision. These findings suggest that some MPFC regions previously thought to play a role
specifically in social cognition may have a more general role in unreflective, affective-based categorizations.

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

H96
WHEN DO PEOPLE DISAGREE WITH AN OPINION
STATEMENT? AN ERP STUDY ON SURVEY QUESTION
ANSWERING Jos Van Berkum1,2, Bregje Holleman3, Jaap Murre1, Mante
Nieuwland1,4; 1University of Amsterdam, 2FC Donders Centre for Cognitive
Neuroimaging, Nijmegen, 3University of Utrecht, 4Tufts University — In cognitive survey research, it is often assumed that respondents in opinion
polls do a linguistic analysis of the entire question or statement before
they bring their attitudes to bear on the issue. According to a leading
model of question answering (Tourangeau, Rips & Rasinski, 2000), for
example, respondents (1) interpret the question, (2) search for a relevant
attitude in memory, (3) retrieve the attitude or construct one on the spot,
and (4) translate the attitude into one of the precoded response options.
Psycholinguistic research on sentence processing, however, has shown
that people immediately bring the wider intepretive context to bear on
comprehension, as the sentence unfolds. ERP studies with the N400, for
instance, have shown that the meaning of a word is related to the story
context or to the identity of the speaker within some 200 milliseconds
after reading or hearing that word. Although the contextual factors examined sofar only involve ‘cold cognition’, we reasoned that sufficiently
salient attitudes (‘hot cognition’) might also affect sentence interpretation
this rapidly. To examine this possibility, we recorded EEG as people from
two very different types of political parties read and answered a survey
on societal matters (such as abortion, immigration, drugs, euthanesia,
religion, premarital sex, adoption, or gay marriage). Relative to attitudeconsistent control words, attitude-inconsistent words immediately elicited a widespread positivity between 400-700 ms in ERPs, as people were
reading the survey statement. Our finding reveals that attitudes are
brought to bear on language comprehension incrementally, with each
word coming in.
H97
THE PAIN OF A MODEL IN THE PERSONALITY OF AN
ONLOOKER: A TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION
(TMS) STUDY Alessio Avenanti1,2, Ilaria Minio Paluello3,4, Salvatore M.
Aglioti3,4; 1University of Bologna, 2Centro Studi e Ricerche in Neuroscienze
Cognitive, Cesena, Italy, 3University of Rome “La Sapienza”, 4IRCCS
Fondazione Santa Lucia, Roma, Italy — The study of inter-individual differences represents a new avenue for Social Cognitive Neuroscience. Behavioral response to emotional and social stimuli varies greatly across
individuals. A movie, for example, can bring a viewer to completely identify with the character and to “feel” his/her emotion while leaving other
viewers unaffected. These individual differences may reflect both the online effect (state) of the observed stimuli and more stable (trait) individual characteristics. Here we show that the somatomotor mirror responses
to the observation of others’ pain are modulated by both state- and traitindividual differences in empathy. We used Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) to record changes in corticospinal motor representations of
hand muscles of individuals observing needles penetrating hands. We
found a reduction of amplitude of motor-evoked potentials that was specific to the muscle that subjects observed being penetrated. This inhibition was linked to the empathic inferences of sensory qualities of the pain
attributed to the model (state-empathy). Moreover, the effect was greater
in those participants who scored high in cognitive empathy (trait-empathy) and lower in those subjects who felt strong aversion for the observed
movies (state-personal distress). Results indicate that mirror somatomotor responses to others’ pain are favored by specific traits of the personality of the onlooker and reduced by self-oriented emotional reactions.

279

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

Linguistic processes: Other
H98
DIMENSIONS OF DISCOURSE: BRAIN ACTIVATION DURING
THE PROCESSING OF TEMPORAL, SPATIAL, AND ACTIONAL
INFORMATION Emily A. Cooper, Uri Hasson, Steven L. Small; University
of Chicago — The temporal dimension pervades human cognitive processing, and the ability to access and construct temporal representations
is important not only for basic perception, but also for tracing the passage
of time over months and years. Human temporal experience is often
thought to rely on the ability to represent space and movement through
space (action), with a particular emphasis on how these relationships are
expressed in language. We examined the neural mechanisms by which
temporal information is processed in language, and compared this to the
processing of two other dimensions in language, space and action, which
have been posited to involve related neural mechanisms. In an fMRI
study, participants passively listened to stories after having been asked to
focus on a single property of the discourse: time, space, or action. Participants heard each story once, attending to one of the three dimensions, but
across participants, attention to each story was directed to all three
dimensions. This enabled us to isolate directly the effect of cueing to time,
space, and action. We defined five anatomical regions of interest and
examined regional activity during story comprehension as a function of
cueing condition. Our analysis demonstrated that cueing to different discourse dimensions affects activity differentially in these regions during
language comprehension. We discuss how monitoring temporal, spatial,
and actional properties affects regional neural activity and the implications of these findings for theories of discourse and embodied cognition.
H99
LANGUAGE FUNCTIONING IN THE BASAL GANGLIA Shiaohui
Chan, Lee Ryan, Thomas G. Bever; University of Arizona — Due to the common belief that language is unique to humans, great emphasis has been
placed on the neocortex in the past decades, especially Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas, while the role of the subcortical areas has been minimized.
This project intended to use event-related functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) to study the involvement of the basal ganglia (BG) in language. Previous research has demonstrated that the BG are implicated in
building up sequences of behavior into meaningful, goal-directed repertoires (Graybiel, 1995). Based on this, we hypothesized that if subjects
were asked to produce a meaningful sentence or conceptual sequence,
the BG should be involved. Twenty-four right-handed, neurologically
healthy English speakers were recruited. They were asked to silently
manipulate word stimuli vertically presented through goggles while
being imaged by a 3T MRI scanner. The subjects’ tasks included 1) putting words into a linguistic (syntactic or conceptual) sequence, 2) moving
words using a non-linguistic rule and 3) repeating words. The results
showed that the BG were significantly activated after subtracting the
repeat condition from the linguistic sequencing condition, suggesting
that these brain structures were recruited when subjects were doing linguistic computation with their knowledge of language. When subtracting
the non-linguistic sequencing condition from the linguistic sequencing
one, part of the BG were still activated, showing that their involvement
may be language-specific, not simply a general/non-linguistic sequencing implication. In sum, our study suggests that the BG, which are usually ignored in language research, may take a central part in language
functioning.
H100
COMPARISON OF CORTICAL NETWORK ACTIVATION
DURING OBSERVATION AND IMITATION OF AUDIOVISUAL
SPEECH Zhi Li, Ana Solodkin, Steven Small; University of Chicago — Significant recent interest has been directed to the neural systems involved
in the observation and execution of movement, and we have had a particular interest in how this relates to language comprehension. In this study,
we used functional MRI (fMRI) and structural equation modeling (SEM)

280

Linguistic processes: Other

to compare neural network activation during observation and imitation
of single syllables. Eleven right-handed healthy adult native English
speakers participated. Two conditions included (1) Observe, in which
they watched a video of an actor pronouncing the syllables ‘pa’, ‘fa;, ‘tha’,
and ‘ta.’; and (2) Imitate, in which they first observed and then overtly
produced (imitated) the phonemes. For the analysis, we identified eight
regions of interest that have been shown to be important in both language production and comprehension, including ventral and dorsal premotor (PMv and PMd), where PMv also includes the pars opercularis of
the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), primary motor, inferior parietal lobule,
posterior superior temporal (gyrus and sulcus) (STp), anterior superior
temporal (STa), pars triangularis of IFG, and cerebellum (CRB). We used
SEM to fit and compare group models of the signal change across the two
conditions. Models were constrained by known anatomical connectivity.
Models for both conditions revealed strong effective connectivity among
STp, IPL, and PMv. The models for observation and execution had interesting differences, particularly related to the balance between sensory
(visual, auditory, and proprioceptive) and motor processing. The results
are discussed in terms of recent theories of observation and execution
matching.
H101
PROCESSING OF VERB-PHRASE ELLIPSIS: EVIDENCE FOR
PRESERVED PROCESSING REFLEXES IN APHASIA Josee Poirier1,2,
Lewis Shapiro1, Tracy Love1,2, David Swinney2; 1San Diego State University,
2
University of California, San Diego — Recent work in neurolinguistics has
revealed impairment in real-time language processing routines following
brain damage. More specifically, anterior lesions to the left hemisphere
have been associated with delayed automatic syntactic reflexes. We
investigated the processing of Verb-Phrase Ellipsis (VPE), which has been
argued to be semantic-based, discourse-based, or of various syntactic
sub-types that have not been investigated in aphasia thus far. Consider:
‘The policeman carried the skier, and the clown did too’. Interpreting
‘what the clown did’ (upon encountering /did too/) requires rapid reference to the verb and its object in the first part of the sentence. We used
Cross-Modal Picture Priming to determine whether the object /skier/
was immediately accessed as soon as its linking with /did too/ is
licensed. To date, seven anterior-lesioned patients have completed testing. Preliminary results indicate immediate priming for the object /
skier/, suggesting rapid referring to the first-clause verb phrase. This pattern is unlike what is observed with other complex constructions such as
object relatives and cleft-objects, which are not processed normally by
individuals with anterior lesions. We interpret our data in terms of the
underlying nature of VPE and the role of anterior cortex. Specifically,
VPE does not rely on the same sort of fast-acting automatic routine that
underlies syntactic processing (and which is disrupted following anterior
brain damage), and instead is likely to rely on more temporally forgiving
routines more aligned with semantic and/or discourse operations. Preliminary data from posterior-lesioned and right-hemisphere patients will
also be discussed in terms of our hypothesis.
H102
PHONOLOGICAL PROCESSING AND WHITE MATTER:
SEPARABLE STRUCTURE-FUNCTION RELATIONSHIPS FOR
THREE COMPONENT PROCESSES Marc Dubin, Sumit Niogi, Jamie
Ferri, Bruce McCandliss; Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology,
Weill Medical College of Cornell University — Phonological processing ability is a critical precursor and predictor of reading development in children. Three phonological processes have been distinguished that may
have differential effects on reading development: 1) analysis/synthesis of
phonemic information, 2) rapid automatized naming, and 3) a phonological component of short term memory (Torgesen and Davis, 1996). These
components are assessed by the Complete Test of Phonological Awareness (CTOPP), and potentially engage distinct brain mechanisms (Turkeltaub, et al, 2003; Katzir, et al, 2005 and Rudner, et al, 2005). We used
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to assess how individual differences in

Linguistic processes: Other

white matter tract microstructure may relate to performance in distinct
components of phonological processing. Fractional anisotropy (FA) was
assessed in several a priori regions of interest (ROIs), each localized in a
subject-by-subject fashion on non-spatially transformed data. A left-lateralized parietal ROI, dominated by superior-inferior fibers, (Left Superior
Corona Radiata) showed a positive correlation with a measure of phonological analysis/synthesis (CTOPP Elison). FA in a bilateral frontal ROI
(Anterior Corona Radiata) was positively correlated with performance on
an oral digit recall task (CTOPP Memory for Digits). Finally, the FA of the
genu of the corpus callosum was correlated with performance on a fluency measure of phonological processing (CTOPP Rapid Letting Naming). Critically, these sets of correlations were unique to these particular
pairings of ROIs and test components, suggesting a separability of the
networks underlying different aspects of phonological processing.
H103
ASSESSING GRAY MATTER CHANGES DURING LANGUAGE
LEARNING: A VOXEL- BASED MORPHOMETRY STUDY Lee
Osterhout, Andrew Poliakov, Judith McLaughlin, Kayo Inoue, Ilona Pitkanen,
Geoffrey Valentine; University of Washington — Recent studies utilizing
Voxel Based Morphometry (VBM) have shown that i) exposure to a second language is associated with changes in gray matter (GM) density and
ii) learning a new skill even over a short period of time can produce
detectable changes in GM density. We hypothesized that students taking
a nine-week intensive Spanish class may exhibit such changes. In our longitudinal VBM design, each learner participated in two MRI sessions of
six scans (3D SPGR, Signa GE 1.5T scanner). One session came early in
the instructional period, and the other came at its completion. The data
were analyzed using SPM5 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/) and the
VBM5 toolkit (http://dbm.neuro.uni-jena.de/vbm/). No significant
changes in GM density were found using an anatomically open hypothesis (i.e. statistical analyses not constrained to any anatomical region),
probably due to the small sample size. However, previous VBM studies
of second language learners (Mechelli et al. 2004) provide specific predictions about possible effect locations that can be tested in an anatomically
constrained hypothesis. The Small Volume Correction with a spherical 10
mm region of search centered at the predicted location detected a significant (P < 0.05) GM density increase. This pilot study is consistent with
previous reports of language learning-related GM density effects, but
shows that such effects can be observed after a very short instructional
period. A larger study is needed to conclusively describe GM density
changes. We will discuss lessons learned as well as methodological considerations for future longitudinal VBM studies of second language
learning.
H104
THE CONSIDERATION OF THE N400 AND THE P600
ASSOCIATED
WITH
THEMATIC
AND
SEMANTIC
VIOLATIONS Hiroko Nakano1, Bruno Rossion2,3, Fabrizio Pizzioli2; 1Saint
Mary's College of California, 2Université Catholique de Louvain, 3Louvain-laNeuve — This study investigated auditory thematic integration processes
in French using syntactically unambiguous sentence. Participants listened to sentences, which contained critical verbs that created thematic or
semantic anomalies. The N400 and the P600 at the verbs were compared
in the following conditions: Control, (e.g., the old man read the newspaper); Semantic, (e.g., The tree read the old man); Thematic, (e.g., The
newspaper read the old man). In the Semantic condition, the subject noun
did not fit either the “agent” or the “theme” role. In the Thematic condition, subject and object nouns were placed so that the sentence created a
thematic violation, (i.e., the subject noun fits to the “theme” role, rather
than the “agent” role). The plausibility of the subject noun as a theme was
also manipulated. We observed that the Semantic condition elicited both
P600 and N400 effects while the Thematic condition elicited P600 effects,
but not N400 effects. Additionally, the P600 effect in the Thematic condition was modulated by the degree of plausibility of the subject noun as
“theme.” The P600 without N400 in syntactically unambiguous sentences
with meaning anomalies is consistent with recent results from sentence
integration studies in other languages (e.g., Hoeks et al., 2004; Kim &

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

Osterhout, 2005; Kolk et al., 2003; Kuperberg et al., 2003). The nature of
P600 and N400 effects in sentence integration processes are discussed in
terms of thematic attraction, semantic association, thematic structural
violation, and animacy (Kuperberg, 2006).
H105
DIFFERENTIAL LEXICAL-SEMANTIC CONTRIBUTION FROM
TWO LANGUAGES IN BILINGUAL VERBAL SHORT-TERM
MEMORY Priscilla L. P. Tu1, Denise H. Wu2, Daisy L. Hung3, Ovid J. L.
Tzeng4; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University,
Taiwan, 2National Central University, Taiwan, 3Institute of Neuroscience,
National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, 4Institute of Linguistics, Academia
Sinica, Taiwan — Previous research has shown that bilinguals have separate lexicons of L1 and L2 in long-term memory (LTM). We hypothesized
that there is a close relationship between verbal shot-term memory
(VSTM) and LTM, therefore there are also correspondent buffers for L1
and L2 in VSTM. Specifically, we employed homophonic Chinese characters and English words (e.g., &#35997;/be/ vs. Bay) to examine the differential lexical-semantic contribution from the LTM of L1 and L2 to
VSTM performance when the phonology of the to-be-remembered items
were identical. Chinese-English bilinguals who have relatively high fluency in L2 were instructed to perform serial probed recall when the stimuli were presented in either L1 or L2. Consistent with our hypothesis,
these bilinguals demonstrated a higher VSTM accuracy in L1 than in L2.
The same advantage of L1 retention was also observed when articulatory
suppression was applied, though the effect was restricted to earlier serial
positions. These results highlight the contribution from lexical-semantic
representation to VSTM. These data are also compatible with the proposal of linguistic specificity between bilingual LTM and VSTM, which
has received support from previous neuropsychological and neuroimaging research. Semantic retention has been associated with left inferior/
middle frontal gyrus (LIFG & LMFG), and speech production in L1 and
L2 also activates adjacent but not identical regions within LIFG. The current finding of differential contribution from the lexical-semantics of L1
and L2 to VSTM is likely subserved by anatomically adjacent but distinct
areas of the language network in the LIFG and LMFG.
H106
P600
EFFECTS
AND
ORTHOGRAPHIC
PROCESSING
DIFFICULTY Albert Kim1, Ilona Pitkanen2; 1University of Colorado at
Boulder, 2University of Washington — Late positive ERP shifts are widely
reported for grammatical anomalies during language processing, and
have been interpreted as reflecting difficulty processing grammatical
structure. Recently, however, similar positive shifts have been reported
for stimuli such as mis-spellings, which do not involve grammatical violations. Several proposals argue that the P600 is elicited by a wide range
of unexpected linguistic events, and that the underlying neural processes
are highly domain general. Such accounts, though not implausible, fail to
explain what distinguishes the P600 from enhanced N400, which is also
elicited by unexpected linguistic events, such as semantic anomalies and
pseudo-words. We tested the hypothesis that structural processing difficulty, whether orthographic or grammatical, unifies the language-related
P600 effects and distinguishes P600 from N400-eliciting situations. We
recorded ERPs as participants read sentence-embedded pseudo-words.
In one study, pseudo-words elicited P600-like positive shifts when they
appeared to be structurally ill-formed (“The baseball player caught the
baul…). When the same pseudo-words did not appear structurally illformed (“The experienced chef sliced the baul…”), they elicited much
smaller P600s and large N400 enhancement. In a second study, we parametrically manipulated the frequency of consonant clusters at the beginnings of the pseudo-words (‘thorp’, ‘phorp’, ‘ghorp’, ‘dforp’). Such
pseudo-words elicited N400 and P600 effects. P600 amplitude was
inversely proportional to cluster frequency, while N400 effects were not
affected by the differences among the pseudo-words. We suggest that in
both studies, structural processing difficulty (in this case orthographic) is
manifested in P600 effects, while difficulty accessing meaning is manifested in N400 effects.

281

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

Linguistic processes: Semantics
H107
ERP MEASURES OF AUTOMATIC PRIMING IN A SEMANTIC
CATEGORIZATION TASK Barry Haimson, David Bertman, Andrea
Shafer, Joy Occhiuto, Sarah Baker, Nishad Jabeen; University of Massachusetts
Dartmouth — The purpose of the present study was to extend previous
research by this laboratory on the effects of relatedness proportion on
ERP correlates of semantic categorization. These findings indicated no
differences in the extent of the N400 effect when participants viewed
stimuli consisting of a high proportion (.75) or a low proportion (.50) of
related primes and targets. Both relatedness proportions may have produced a controlled priming effect. This raises the question whether the
N400 effect will differ when a lower relatedness proportion is actually
used. In the present study we tested subjects on the same semantic categorization task with a list containing a low proportion (.25) of related
pairs of words. During testing participants viewed successively presented pairs of related (semantic and associative) and unrelated words
and were asked to evaluate the relational status of the two words by
depressing an appropriate button on a key pad. Related and unrelated
waves were converted to differences waves. Peak amplitude values were
obtained for the 320 to 450 ms (N400) and the 470 to 900 ms (positive slow
wave) time windows. The results indicated that the N400 effect for the
current low proportion (.25) related condition was greater than the comparable effect for the high proportion (.75) condition. However, no differences were found in slow wave activity for the three conditions. These
results suggest that the N400 effect may be a stronger indicator of automatic priming than controlled priming in a semantic categorization task.
H108
OSCILLATORY CORRELATES OF VERBAL AND VISUAL
SEMANTIC
PROCESSING
DURING
SENTENCE
COMPREHENSION Roel Willems1, Robert Oostenveld1, Asli Özyürek1,2,
Peter Hagoort1,2; 1F. C. Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Radboud
University Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen — Traditionally, electrophysiological studies
of language have explored the evoked activity time locked to an event
measuring Event-Related Potentials. It is however also possible to look at
induced changes in the EEG by studying local neural synchrony as measured by changes in amplitude power in specific frequency bands. This
approach has recently proved to be useful in the neurocognition of language (e.g. Bastiaansen et al., 2002, 2005; Hald et al., 2006). We explored
the induced activity as contained in single trial oscillations of the EEG.
We were interested in exploring oscillatory correlates of semantic integration during sentence comprehension. Specifically we were interested
whether oscillatory activity in different frequency bands would distinguish between semantic processing of visual and non-visual semantic
information. EEG was measured while subjects listened to sentences in
which a critical word could either fit the preceding sentence context or
not. Time locked to the critical word, a picture was presented that could
also either fit the sentence context or not. In this way we were able to
investigate neural changes to semantic processing of a word or of a picture into a sentence context. Increased semantic load is accompanied by
an increase in power in the theta frequency range (4-6 Hz) irrespective
whether the semantic information was conveyed through a word or
through a picture. Picture specific effects were observed in the lower
gamma frequency range (35 Hz). Results will be discussed in the context
of what is known from frequency band in other domains of cognition.
H109
THE INFLUENCE OF TASK ON SEMANTIC PRIMING IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA:
EVIDENCE
FROM
EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS Donna Kreher1, Phillip Holcomb1, Sarah Choi1, Donald
Goff2, Gina Kuperberg1,2; 1Tufts University, 2Massachusetts General
Hospital — Previous work has provided evidence for increased semantic
priming under automatic processing conditions, and reduced semantic

282

Linguistic processes: Semantics

priming under more controlled processing conditions in schizophrenia
patients relative to healthy controls. These two patterns of findings have
led to the dual hypotheses of increased automatic spreading activation
and decreased use of context in schizophrenia. Studies designed to elicit
automatic or controlled semantic processing often differ in multiple
experimental variables including stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) relatedness proportion or behavioral task. The present studies examined
direct and indirect semantic priming in schizophrenia with Event-Related
Potentials (ERPs). The same patients and healthy controls completed two
experiments in which word stimuli were identical, and SOA remained
constant at 350 ms: in the first, participants monitored for words within a
particular semantic category that appeared only in filler items, in the second, participants explicitly rated the relatedness of word pairs. In the
implicit monitoring task, schizophrenia patients, particularly those with
positive thought disorder, showed increased indirect N400 priming
effects relative to healthy controls; no significant differences in direct
N400 priming effects between patients and controls were observed. In the
explicit relatedness ratings task, schizophrenia patients showed reduced
direct N400 priming, and no indirect N400 priming, while healthy controls showed a stepwise reduction in N400 amplitude to unrelated, indirectly related, and directly related words. These results support prior
reports of increased indirect semantic priming in thought-disordered
schizophrenia patients under automatic conditions; in addition, they suggest that explicit decision-making reduces semantic priming in schizophrenia, even when a short SOA and indirectly related word pairs are
utilized.
H110
EFFECT OF DELUSION PRONENESS OF HEALTHY SUBJECTS
ON EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS IN A SEMANTIC TASK J.
Bruno Debruille1, Marie Prévost1, Louis Renoult1, Mathieu Brodeur2, Claire
Lionnet3, Suzanne King1; 1McGill University, 2Université de Montréal,
3
Douglas Hospital — In a previous study, more delusional schizophrenia
patients were found to have smaller N400 potentials than less delusional
patients, suggesting a deficit in semantic processes. In the present study,
we examined whether delusion proneness could predict N400 amplitude
reduction in healthy subjects performing the same task as in the previous
study. The schizotypal personality questionnaire (Raine, 1991) was used
to sort our participants into a subgroup of 24 subjects more prone to delusions (MPD) and a subgroup of 22 subjects less prone to delusions (LPD).
They had to perform the categorization task, which was made of two serially presented words, a category word, ANIMAL?, and a target word that
either belonged to that category (match condition) or did not belong to it
(mismatch condition). To make sure the target word was fully processed
and to avoid habituation, the category word was sometimes replaced by
the word INACTION. In this condition, subjects had no decision to make.
ERPs were less negative in the N400 time window in the MPD than in the
LPD subgroup in the match conditions suggesting a disturbance in
semantic integration processes. In the P600 time window ERPs were
found to be more positive for the MPD than for the LPD subgroup indicating that MPD subjects could have extracted more information from a
stimulus presentation. However the information may be of poorer quality due to MPD’s deficient semantic information integration.
H111
ELECTROCORTCOGRAPHIC EVIDENCE THAT HIGH GAMMA
ACTIVITY DIFFERENTIATES PROCESSING OF WORDS AND
PSEUDOWORDS Ryan Canolty1, Maryam Soltani2,3, Erik Edwards2,3,
Sarang Dalal4, Sri Nagarajan4, Heidi Kirsch4, Nicholas Barbaro4, Robert
Knight1,4; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California,
Berkeley, 2University of California, Berkeley, 3Helen Wills Neuroscience
Institute, 4University of California, San Francisco — Six patients undergoing surgical treatment for intractable epilepsy had a 64-channel 8x8 electrode grid (2.3 mm electrode diameter, 10 mm center to center spacing)
implanted under the dura followed by approximately one week of continuous monitoring of the electrocorticogram (ECoG). This monitoring

Linguistic processes: Semantics

was done in order to localize the seizure focus for later resection and
identify critical language and motor areas to be avoided during resective
surgery. Grid placement was determined entirely by clinical necessity
and was over the left frontotemporal region in all patients. Auditory presentation of hand- and mouth-related action verbs produced changes in
the amplitude of oscillatory activity in several frequency bands across the
electrode grid. Language-related auditory stimuli produced a spatially
and temporally broad drop in beta (12-30 Hz) amplitude combined with
a distributed network of focal, temporally precise increases in high
gamma (80-150 Hz) amplitude in the frontal and temporal lobes. Unintelligible pseudowords which matched the real verbs in duration, intensity,
power spectrum, and temporal modulation both generated high gamma
responses in early auditory areas. However, real words generated
increased high gamma power with longer duration in these same electrodes relative to pseudowords. Real words also generated additional
activity in electrodes over temporal and frontal areas not activated by
pseudowords. These results suggest that high gamma activity, which has
already been shown to track basic sensory and motor processing in
humans, may also prove useful in mapping critical brain areas responsible for lexical processing in the human neocortex.
H112
WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY INTERACTIONS WITH
PLAUSIBILITY TASK DEMANDS Louise Stanczak1, David Caplan2,
Gloria Waters1, Laura Babbitt3, Jung Min Lee2, Gina Kuperberg3, Neal J.
Pearlmutter4; 1Boston University, 2Massachusetts General Hospital, 3Tufts
University, 4Northeastern University — This study investigates BOLD signal across three levels of sentence plausibility (e.g., "Venessa threw the
javelin/feather/situation but did not win the competition."), in high and
low working memory subjects, as a function of task demands. In Experiment 1, subjects read the sentences and answered Yes/No comprehension questions (e.g., "Was the throw good enough to win?") which did not
involve the critical plausibility variation; i.e., plausibility computation
was incidental relative to the comprehension task. Experiment 2 used the
same stimulus sentences with an explicit plausibility judgment task, in
which subjects categorized each sentence into one of three levels of plausibility. In both experiments, plausibility effects were found in both high
and low working memory groups, particularly in the left inferior frontal
region and right parietal region. Across experiments, an interaction
between working memory capacity and task demands was found: Working memory did not interact with plausibility effects in Experiment 1, but
it did in Experiment 2. These results suggest that high and low working
memory subjects do not differ in their ability to compute plausibility, but
they do differ in their use of plausibility information. Furthermore, these
results are compatible with theories of working memory that distinguish
between automatic versus controlled linguistic processing (e.g., Caplan
and Waters, 1999).
H113
ATTENTION AND EMOTION IN VISUAL WORD PROCESSING –
EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Johanna
Kissler1, Cornelia Herbert1, Markus Junghöfer2; 1University of Konstanz,
2University of Münster — Emotional words, just like other perceptual
stimuli, have recently been shown to be preferentially processed during
uninstructed free viewing. In the cortical event-related potential (ERP)
this preferential processing is reflected in an enhanced early occipitotemporal negativity, arising around 200 ms after stimulus onset. Theoretically, this enhanced negativity has been interpreted as an index of natural ‘motivated’ attention to emotional stimuli. Here we investigate to
what extent an instructed non-emotional word processing task interferes
with uninstructed ‘motivated’ attention to emotion. In a rapid serial
visual presentation (RSVP, 680 ms per stimulus) subjects viewed continuous sequences of adjectives and nouns varying in emotional content
(unpleasant, neutral, pleasant) and were instructed to attend to and count
the occurrences of either adjectives or nouns. ERP results showed that the
previously described early negativity in response to emotional words

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

was unaffected by the explicit counting task and still occurred in
response to emotional adjectives and nouns, regardless of whether they
were attended to or not. At later processing stages, however, ERPs clearly
differentiated between attended and unattended words as reflected in a
larger late positive potential (LPP) for the attended word class and
revealed no effects of emotional content or interactions with these.
Results suggest that emotional content is initially transiently processed
but does not affect the words’ further task dependent processing. Future
studies will reveal whether tasks other than the presently used morphosyntactic task disrupt the automatic initial processing of emotional connotation or benefit from emotional content at later stages of processing.
H114
THE FUNCTIONAL ORGANISATION OF VISUAL AND TACTILE
LANGUAGE PROCESSING: FMRI EVIDENCE OF CORTICAL
PLASTICITY IN INDIVIDUALS WITH USHER SYNDROME Cheryl
M. Capek1, Bencie Woll1, Ruth Campbell1, Karine Gazarian1, Mairéad
MacSweeney2, Anthony S. David3, Philip K. McGuire3, Michael J. Brammer3;
1University College London, 2BBSU, Institute of Child Health, University
College London, 3Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London — Previous
neuroimaging studies have provided evidence of functional reorganisation in unimodal sensory deprived individuals. In this study, we used
fMRI to explore the neural correlates of language processing in people
with Usher Syndrome Type I (a genetic disorder in which people are born
profoundly deaf and develop progressive loss of peripheral vision and
night blindness, typically beginning in adolescence) as they processed
materials presented in two modalities: visually and tactilely. Stimuli in
both visual and tactile experiments consisted of words (nouns that were
fingerspelled), non-words (nonsense hand movements) and a low level
baseline. In the visual experiment, stimuli were presented within the limited visual field of the volunteers. In the manual experiment, stimuli were
presented onto the volunteer’s hand. For both visual and tactile modalities, processing words, as compared to non-words, elicited greater activation in a fronto-temporal network in both hemispheres. In addition, we
found differences in the patterns of activation as a function of modality.
We also tested deaf, normally-sighted controls who had no previous
experience receiving manual fingerspelling. Words conveyed tactilely
elicited non-identical patterns of activation in the two groups. In particular, tactilely delivered words elicited greater activation in visual regions
in volunteers with Usher Syndrome than controls. These results suggest
there is a common network for language processing independent of the
modality through which it is perceived as well as regions that are modality-specific. Moreover, these findings provide evidence of cortical plasticity for language processing in adventitiously visually impaired
individuals.
H115
DIVIDE AND CONQUER: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INDICES
OF
SENTENCE
PROCESSING
REFLECT
DISTINCT
CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES
Edward W. Wlotko, Kara D. Federmeier; University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign — Recent behavioral and electrophysiological evidence suggests that the two cerebral hemispheres are sensitive to sentence-level
information in different ways. The current study used event-related
potentials to examine the effect of sentential constraint on the processing
of expected and unexpected sentence completions. Strongly and weakly
constraining sentence frames (defined by cloze probability) were completed with expected or unexpected but plausible words, which were
presented to the left and right visual fields (LVF and RVF). For RVF/LH
presentation, the N400 response was similarly facilitated for strongly and
weakly constrained expected items (relative to unexpected items),
despite their differing cloze probabilities. For LVF/RH presentation, only
strongly constrained expected endings elicited a clearly reduced N400
compared to the other conditions; N400 responses of similar amplitude
were observed to expected and unexpected words in weakly constraining
contexts, again despite notable differences in cloze probability. These

283

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

strikingly different patterns of sensitivity to expectancy and constraint
support the view that the LH and RH have different language comprehension architectures. A follow-up experiment that systematically varied
the cloze probability of sentence completions verified that LH processing
is facilitated over a wider range of expectancy than that of the RH. The
pattern of electrophysiological results suggests that the graded N400
response observed for cloze probability manipulations with central presentation may actually reflect distinct contributions from each cerebral
hemisphere.
H116
PHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES DURING FACE PERCEPTION ARE
AFFECTED BY SEMANTIC CONTENT OF PRECEDING
SENTENCES. Ayelet Landau1, Lisa Aziz-Zadeh1,2, Richard Ivry1; 1UC
Berkeley, 2University of Southern California — We examined the interaction
of language and perception by having participants listen to sentences
prior to the presentation of faces. Using EEG, we asked whether the facesensitive N170 response was modulated by the semantic content of the
sentences. Specifically, each trial contained a sentence (auditory presentation) followed by a picture. The sentences either described a face (e.g.,
“The farmer has a bushy mustache beneath his small nose”) or a place
(e.g., “The house has a couch near the fireplace”). The pictures were
either of faces or places which were unrelated to the sentences. To ensure
that participants attended to the sentences and pictures, 10% of the trials
contained an implausible sentence or picture. Participants were required
to perform plausibility judgments for the sentence and the picture at the
end of each trial. As in prior studies, the amplitude of the N170 to face
stimuli was larger over the right hemisphere. However, we observed a
lateralized context effect in the modulation of the N170. For left hemisphere sites only, this component was larger following the presentation
of face-content sentences compared to place-content sentences. These
results support an embodied theory of semantics where linguistic concepts are closely linked to perceptual representations of these concepts.
H117
TASK-DEPENDENT SEMANTIC INTERFERENCE IN LANGUAGE
PRODUCTION: AN FMRI-STUDY Katharina
Spalek1,
Herbert
Schriefers2, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill1; 1University of Pennsylvania,
2Radboud University Nijmegen — During picture naming, a target name is
retrieved from a multitude of semantic competitors. This co-activation
can be demonstrated by presenting distractor words during the naming
process: If the distractor enhances the activation of an already active
semantic competitor, selection of the picture name is more difficult than
during the presentation of an unrelated distractor (the classic picture
word interference effect). The present fMRI study investigates if the same
selection processes occur when a participant’s task is either to name the
object or to identify a property of the object. Participants responded to
black-and-white pictures with their names or their typical color. The pictures were followed by a word which was either the same as the picture
name, semantically related, or unrelated. Relative to a baseline task, activation in picture naming was centered in the left inferior frontal gyrus
and the left fusiform gyrus. The left fusiform gyrus showed an effect of
condition (same, related, unrelated) for object naming, while the left inferior frontal gyrus showed an effect of condition for color naming. The
condition effects for object and color naming were qualitatively different:
In object naming, the most highly activated condition was ‘related’, presumably reflecting increased selection demands during the selection of
the object name. In color naming, the most highly activated condition
was ‘same’. Possibly, during color naming, a natural tendency to retrieve
the picture’s name is suppressed. This suppression is harder when the
distractor word further enhances the availability of the suppressed picture name.

284

Linguistic processes: Semantics

H118
SOCIAL FEATURE KNOWLEDGE: A TWO-COMPONENT
MODEL Vanessa Troiani, Chivon Anderson, Murray Grossman; University
of Pennsylvania — The neurophysiological correlates underlying social
judgments were assessed using BOLD fMRI. We hypothesize a two-component model of social judgments, involving both social knowledge and
a resource component that supports judgments of this knowledge in
ambiguous social situations. Participants included 14 right-handed
English-speakers (mean age = 24.5 years,mean education = 15.8 years).
We probed subjects’ beliefs about a variety of ambiguous social situations
regarded as “scofflaws”, such as “Going through a red light at 2am”. This
was contrasted with truth-value judgments of non-social queries, such as
“The first President of the United States of America was George Washington”. All statements were evaluated using a 4-point scale of acceptability. An event-related design was used. Images were registered,
normalized in Tailarach space, smoothed, and then analyzed with a random effects model. Relative to non-social statements, social situations
activated left medial frontal (BA 10), left inferior frontal (BA 44), and left
inferior parietal (BA 40) cortex. Non-social statements, relative to social
statements, showed increased activation in right posterolateral temporal
(BA 39), bilateral dorsal posterior cingulate (BA31), and bilateral supplementary motor (BA 6) cortex. Contrasts involving both social and nonsocial statements activated left ventral temporal cortex (BA 20). These
data support our hypothesis that the social feature knowledge represented in ventral temporal and medial frontal regions, together with
executive resources such as working memory supported by inferior frontal cortex, are necessary to judge ambiguous social situations.
H119
INVESTIGATING CONCEPTUAL AND PERCEPTUAL PICTURE
PROCESSING WITH CROSS-FORM PRIMING Eric S. Clapham1,
Aaron T. Karst1, Jana Kainerstorfer2,3, Jody L. Johnson1, John VanMeter3, C.
Mark Wessinger1; 1University of Nevada, Reno, 2University of Vienna,
3Georgetown University Medical Center — The current study uses a crossform priming paradigm to investigate the extraction and encoding of
conceptual information from pictures and words. Using a well-characterized real world picture set we investigated conceptual and perceptual
priming. In a two by two design we investigated picture to picture, word
to word, word to picture, and picture to word priming. This cross-form
design allows the investigation of processing beyond perceptual priming.
The priming stimulus was briefly presented with forward and backward
masking in order to reduce explicit processing. In order to further ensure
that conceptual processing occurred, the task required participants to
identify the primed stimulus as animate or inanimate. Behavioral data
collected in our lab demonstrates the utility of the cross-form design. All
conditions showed facilitation of performance in the form of reaction
time gains. This effect is most robust when the prime and the primed
stimulus are of the same form (picture to picture; word to word) suggesting that, in addition to semantic processing, perceptual processing also
contributes. Nonetheless, facilitation of performance in the crossed conditions (word to picture; picture to word), demonstrates that the priming is
also semantic in nature. These results are in agreement with the notion
that conceptual information is represented in a common amodal store.
That is, regardless of the sensory system responsible for acquiring environmental information, conceptual knowledge utilizes similar cognitive
resources. Functional magnetic resonance imaging data are being used to
help identify brain regions differentially involved in perceptual and conceptual picture processing.
H120
NEURAL BASIS OF METAPHORICAL ABSTRACTION: AN FMRI
STUDY OF EGO-REFERENCE-POINT SPATIAL CONSTRUALS OF
TIME Rafael Nunez, Ruey-Song Huang, Martin Sereno; University of
California San Diego — Research in cognitive linguistics has suggested
that abstract thought is largely achieved via conceptual metaphors that
map entities from a grounded source domain (e.g., space) onto entities of

Linguistic processes: Semantics

a target domain (e.g., time) (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). One such metaphor
maps front-of-ego to future and back-of-ego to past. In one variation, the
ego moves ("we are approaching Thanksgiving"); in another, an object
moves ("Thanksgiving is approaching") (Nunez & Sweetser, 2006). There
is little evidence yet of how specific conceptual metaphors are realized in
the brain. Our goal was to test specific anatomical hypotheses involving
space-time mappings. Recently, Sereno and Huang (2006) found aligned
topographic maps of tactile and near-face visual stimuli in the superior
part of the postcentral sulcus possibly corresponding to the ventral intraparietal area (VIP) of the macaque monkey. Healthy adults, whose putative VIP areas had been previously mapped with fMRI participated in a
subsequent block-design study (8 cycles of 16-second ON vs. 16-second
OFF blocks, auditory or visual cues). ON blocks consisted of five movingego metaphorical expressions, while OFF blocks consisted of five moving-object expressions. Moving-object temporal expressions more
strongly activated the lateral part of the air-puff defined human VIP and
MT+ bilaterally than did moving-ego expressions whereas the posterior
angular gyrus and superior prefrontal cortex preferred moving-object
expressions. The results suggest that temporal concepts may recruit specific brain areas that normally deal with the real moving objects, opening
the way to an investigation of the neural basis of metaphorical abstraction.
H121
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INSIGHTS INTO THE PROCESSING
OF NOMINAL METAPHORS Sophie De Grauwe1,2, Laura J. Davis3,
Phillip J. Holcomb2, Gina R. Kuperberg2; 1Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, 2Tufts
University — We used event-related potentials (ERPs) to examine the
time courses of processing metaphorical and literal sentences in the brain.
ERPs were measured to sentence-final critical words (CWs) as participants read nominal metaphors (“A is a B”) as well as literal and semantically anomalous sentences of the same form. Sentences were presented
word-by-word and participants made acceptability judgments after each
sentence. As expected, a significant N400 effect was evoked by CWs of
the anomalous (relative to the literal) sentences. However, no N400 effect
was evoked by CWs in the metaphorical sentences, suggesting that their
metaphorical meanings had been accessed and were not perceived as
being semantically anomalous. However, in comparison with both the literal and anomalous sentences, CWs in the metaphorical sentences elicited a significantly larger late positivity. We suggest that this late
positivity reflected a delayed cost in neural processing during metaphor
interpretation – possibly a reanalysis resulting from a conflict between
access to both the literal and the metaphorical meanings of the CWs. This
interpretation is most compatible with Giora’s (1997) graded salience
hypothesis for less familiar metaphors. In order to eliminate any confound of wrap-up effects on the late positivity, we are currently following
up this finding by examining ERPs to CWs when they appear at mid-sentence positions.
H122
BRAIN POTENTIALS IN FORMAL SEMANTICS: LICENSED
VERSUS NON-LICENSED NEGATIVE POLARITY ITEMS (NPIS)
Karsten Steinhauer1, John Drury1, Paul Portner2, Matt Walenski2, Michael
Ullman2; 1McGill University, Montreal, 2Georgetown University; Washington
DC — Negative Polarity Items (NPIs) are elements such as "any", "ever",
or "at all", which are unacceptable in sentences lacking an appropriate
licensing property, a prototypical case of which is NEGATION (e.g.,
"John *had/hadn't eaten any pie"). NPI-licensing has been investigated
using event-related potentials (ERPs), though only one NPI (English
"ever" and its German equivalent "jemals") and one licensing manipulation (negation) has previously been tested. Shao & Neville (1998) compared "ever" to non-NPI never in non-licensing contexts (e.g., "Max has
*never/ever been to a party") and reported a LAN/P600 pattern. Saddy
et al. (2004) and Drenhaus et al. (2005) studied "jemals" in (non-)licensing
contexts (+/-negation) and found a different pattern: an N400 followed
by a P600. These previous studies are somewhat problematic in their lack

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

of suitable control conditions: Shao & Neville contrasted different target
words (ever/never) while Saddy et al. and Drenhaus et al. both contrasted the same target word in different contexts. We report results from
an ERP study which avoided these problems by testing: (i) three NPIs
(any/ever/at-all) in (ii) 8 pairs of licensing/non-licensing contexts which
were (iii) also tested with non-NPIs to control for effects of context. Preliminary analyses suggest a novel pattern: a P600 effect that was followed
by a sustained left anterior negativity (LAN). Possible explanations for
the commonalities (P600-effects) and differences (in terms of the attendant relative negativities) across studies will be discussed.
H123
SEMANTIC EFFECTS FOSTERED BY THE MANIPULATION OF
EXPECTANCY: A HIGH-DENSITY ERP STUDY Tony Wu, Joseph
Dien; University of Kansas — The present study involved a sentence-reading paradigm that sought to manipulate expectancy. In particular, there
were two types of sentences, those with congruent endings and those
with incongruent endings. In the low expectancy condition, sentences
had a low cloze probability and a low proportion of congruent sentences.
In the high expectancy condition, sentences had a high cloze probability
and a high proportion of congruent sentences. Event-related potentials
were evaluated from 39 participants using high-density (129 channels)
EEG recordings. Analyses found evidence of N400 and frontal-N300
event-related potentials displaying semantic effects. The N400 effect was
present in the high expectancy condition, while being nearly abolished in
the low expectancy condition. The N300 effect was present in both conditions, but weaker in the low expectancy condition. It is suggested that the
N300 effect found is the same N300 effect as previously reported in picture priming studies. These observations have implications for the relationship between the semantic processing of words and pictures.
H124
THE RECOGNITION POTENTIAL IN A SENTENCE READING
PARADIGM: DOES IT REFLECT AUTOMATIC SEMANTIC
RETRIEVAL? Elizabeth Huber, Joseph Dien; University of Kansas — Linked
to the visual detection of language stimuli, the Recognition Potential (RP)
has been characterized as an index of orthographic, lexical and, most
recently, semantic retrieval. Rapid stream stimulation (RSS) techniques
have traditionally been employed to evoke RP effects. The present
research involved a sentence-reading paradigm in concert with high-density (129 channel) ERP recordings. Experimental conditions were developed by varying two factors: 1) the probability that sentence-trials
contained semantically congruent endings and 2) the cloze ratings of sentence-final words. Spatiotemporal principal components analysis (PCA)
was conducted alongside conventional windowed analyses. In all conditions, a larger RP emerged within 200 ms for semantically congruent sentence-final words. Additional components were discernable within the
300-500 ms window, where meaningfulness and expectancy differentially
impacted the results. A right frontal N400 was observed during both high
probability/high cloze and high probability/low cloze conditions. In the
low cloze conditions, a left-lateralized P400 was observed only when the
probability of congruency was high. Given that condition effects were
observed for these later components, it is suggested that they reflect controlled processes. In contrast, the RP may reflect automatic or contingently automatic semantic activation. These findings are discussed in
light of another recent study from this laboratory with the aim of
addressing factors that may alternatively inhibit the RP during passive
sentence-reading.
H125
AN ERP STUDY OF NOUN PHRASE INTERPRETATION Veena D.
Dwivedi1, Natalie A. Phillips2, Stephanie Einagel3, Shari R. Baum3; 1Brock
University, 2Concordia University, 3McGill University — We used eventrelated brain potentials (ERPs) in order to investigate the interpretation
of ambiguous sentences such as (i) Every kid climbed a tree. In a behavioural study, Kurtzman & MacDonald (1993) showed that plural continuation sentences are preferred (e.g., The trees were in the park) over

285

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

singular continuations (e.g., The tree was in the park). We employed a 2 X
2 design to explore the interpretation of sentences like (i). The first factor
manipulated was the type of context sentence: it was either Ambiguous
(with respect to the number interpretation associated with the direct
object "a tree") as in (i) or Unambiguous as in (ii) Every kid climbed a different tree or (iii) Every kid climbed the same tree. The second factor,
Number, related to the continuation sentence. That is, either the first
noun phrase was plural as in (iv) The trees were in the park or singular as
in (v) The tree was in the park. We examined ERPs at the noun and verb
in continuation sentences such as (iv) and (v) following one of the 3 possible context sentences, (i), (ii) or (iii). ERPs at the Verb in the ambiguous
conditions and the unambiguous singular control condition, exhibited a
negative waveform compared to the unambiguous plural control condition. This result was interpreted as reflecting increased cognitive load
regarding noun phrase interpretation in these constructions (Kluender &
Kutas, 1993; van Berkum et al., 1999). Furthermore, the findings are discussed in terms of off-line norming data collected.
H126
ASSESSING
THE
NEURAL
BASES
OF
CONCEPTUAL
COMBINATION WITH FMRI G. Andrew James1, W. Kyle Simmons2,
Aron K. Barbey1, Xiaoping P. Hu1, Lawrence W. Barsalou1; 1Emory University,
2
National Institute of Mental Health — Recent neuroimaging evidence from
studies of individual concepts has found that conceptual processing
relies on well-established neural networks in the brain’s modality-specific systems for perception, action, and interoception. Neuroimaging
studies, however, have not studied the fundamental process of conceptual combination in which people combine two or more concepts to form
complex conceptual structures. A 3T fMRI experiment was conducted to
identify general mechanisms involved in conceptual combination, and to
assess whether conceptual combination recruits modality-specific brain
networks. Conceptual combination was assessed by contrasting the processing of simple noun phrases (modifier plus head noun) with the individual concepts comprising them. On each trial, a modifier from one of
three modalities (mental state, motion, location) was presented alone, followed by a head noun presented alone. Head nouns were comparable
across the three modifier domains, controlled for semantic category, typicality, frequency, and length. Visual cues following the modifiers
instructed participants to either process each concept independently (i.e.
“leaping” and “horse”) or to process the conceptual combination (i.e.
“leaping horse”). Participants only received a given concept once in a
counterbalanced design. Catch trials (a modifier not followed by a head
noun) enabled deconvolution of neural responses for modifiers vs. head
nouns, which were always a short fixed interval apart in a fast eventrelated design with random ISIs between trials. Analyses identified brain
areas associated with modifiers vs. head nouns, the processing of modifiers and head nouns in conceptual combination vs. in isolation, and
modality-specific effects associated with both modifiers and head nouns.
H127
ASSESSING
MODALITY-SPECIFIC
CATEGORY
REPRESENTATION WITH ARTIFICIAL CATEGORIES AND
FMRI Zhaohui Liu1, W. Kyle Simmons2, G. Andrew James1, Xiaoping P.
Hu1, Lawrence W. Barsalou1; 1Emory University, 2National Institute of Mental
Health — Most evidence for modality-specific category representations
comes from experiments using natural categories. Using high resolution
fMRI in a fast-event related design, we performed an experiment in
which participants learned three novel categories, each associated with a
nonsense syllable name. Each category’s instances shared the same visual
shape of a calligraphy-like character and never repeated. After learning
the categories outside the scanner the day before, participants were
scanned as they performed two tasks. In the category verification task,
participants received a category name, followed by a visual instance, and
indicated whether the instance belonged to the category. In the naming
task, participants received a visual instance, followed by a category
name, and indicated whether the name labeled the instance correctly.

286

Linguistic processes: Semantics

Verification and naming trials were blocked but separated by random
ISIs. Catch trials that contained various subsets of the events on verification and naming trials enabled the deconvolution of BOLD responses for
the first stimulus, second stimulus, and response (which always occurred
in a fixed temporal sequence). Names and instances of the familiar categories were compared to names and instances of unfamiliar (but comparable) visual stimuli, with linguistic and visual processing held constant.
Deconvolution analyses of fMRI data allowed us to establish the brain
areas that represented the familiar categories relative to the unfamiliar
categories, either when activated by a category name, or when activated
by a visual instance. Because activations for input stimuli were removed,
we were able to isolate conceptual representations of the familiar categories.
H128
READ ALL ABOUT IT: THE TIME-COURSE OF INFERRING
OBJECT CONFIGURATION FROM SENTENCE CONTEXT. Diane
Swick1,2, Jary Larsen1, Jennifer Yang1, David Wilkins1; 1VA Northern
California Health Care System, 2UC Davis — How do language comprehension and object recognition processes interact? We used event-related
potential (ERP) recordings to examine whether imagistic information is
accessed during sentence comprehension, and if so, when. The presentation of short sentences was followed by pictures that either matched the
expected configuration of the first noun phrase (Match), did not match
(Mismatch), or were Distractors (Zwaan et al., 2002). Participants decided
whether the pictured object was mentioned in the sentence. The major
ERP analyses were focused on the N400 component, which reflects the
ease of integration into an ongoing semantic context. Mismatch effects in
the N400 would suggest that the object properties implied by sentential
context can produce a violation of semantic expectancies. Mismatch
effects in earlier ERP components would suggest that sentence contexts
can influence perceptual processing. Behavioral data indicated that RTs
were slower for Mismatches than for Matches, replicating earlier findings
(Zwaan et al.). A typical N400 component was elicited by Distractors,
with an onset of approximately 200 ms. A much smaller and later N400
effect was elicited by Mismatches, with an onset of approximately 300400 ms. Thus, the N400 component was sensitive to configurational mismatch, suggesting that object properties inferred from sentential context,
rather than overtly coded, can influence semantic integration processes,
although their representational format (perceptual or amodal) remains
unclear. Preliminary analyses of earlier ERP components did not find differences between Match and Mismatch trials, suggesting that perceptual
processes were not affected. The effects of object prototypicality on these
results will be discussed.
H129
OBSERVED ICONIC AND METAPHORIC SPEECH-ASSOCIATED
GESTURES ARE PROCESSED DIFFERENTLY BY VENTRAL AND
DORSAL PREMOTOR CORTEX Jeremy Skipper, Susan Goldin-Meadow,
Howard Nusbaum, Steven Small; The University of Chicago — Speech-associated gestures are hand and arm actions that are co-expressive with spoken language. Iconic gestures present images of concrete actions whereas
metaphoric gestures present images of actions corresponding to abstract
ideas. Ventral (PMv) and dorsal (PMd) premotor cortex have been shown
to be differently engaged by the directness with which observed actions
can be matched to a motor plan for the production of those actions. We
test the hypothesis that PMv would be more involved in processing
iconic gestures because their meanings more directly indicate actions
whereas PMd would be more involved in processing metaphoric gestures because their meanings are less directly related to actions. During
fMRI, participants listened to stories. Participants also listened to these
stories while watching the actress telling the stories. The actress sometimes made no visible hands movements, made iconic, metaphoric, or
deictic gestures, or made hand movements that were not meaningful
with respect to spoken content like scratching or adjusting clothing, i.e.,
self-adaptor movements. Behavioral results indicate that participant’s

Linguistic processes: Syntax

understood stories better when gestures were observed. A variant of
“reverse correlation” analysis revealed that both the PMv and PMd were
sensitive to gestures but not self-adaptor movements. The PMv was more
sensitive to iconic gestures whereas the PMd was more sensitive to metaphoric gestures. These results suggest that PMv and PMd are differentially involved in extracting the semantic information contained in
gestures based on the correspondence between the observed hand and
arm movements and the meaning of those movements.
H130
SEMANTIC PRIMING BY A SENTENCE CONTEXT IN LEFT
HEMISPHERE DAMAGED APHASIC PATIENTS Eileen
Cardillo1,
Fred Dick2, Nina Dronkers3; 1University of California - San Diego, 2Birkbeck
College, University of London, 3VA Northern California Health Care
System — Although widely explored, the nature of the lexical-semantic
deficit observed in Broca’s aphasia and its relation to the brain region of
the same name has remained elusive. In particular, semantic priming
studies have suggested that patients with Broca’s aphasia may be especially impaired in the automatic activation of word meanings on the basis
of semantic context, implicating left inferior frontal cortex in this process.
However, others contend that the behavior of Broca’s patients in these
tasks is better characterized as a deficit in controlled semantic processes.
We explored these hypotheses using a Voxel-Based Lesion Symptom
Mapping (VLSM) analysis of patient behavior in an auditory sentencepriming task. Twenty left-hemisphere damaged patients with and without diagnoses of Broca’s aphasia made lexical decisions on words that
were preceded by semantically congruent, neutral, or incongruent sentence contexts. It was predicted that if Broca’s area is critical for automatic activation processes, then patients with lesions affecting this region
should show impaired facilitatory priming on congruent trials. However,
if Broca’s area subserves controlled semantic processes, then it was predicted that these patients would show deviant inhibitory priming on
incongruent trials. The VLSM analysis indicated that individuals with
lesions affecting left inferior frontal cortex and left insula experienced significantly greater inhibitory priming on incongruent trials than those
patients whose lesions spared these areas. Thus, results suggest a controlled rather than automatic processing deficit associated with damage
to Broca’s area.

Linguistic processes: Syntax
H131
THE EFFECTS OF AGE OF ACQUISITION AND PROFICIENCY
ON PAST TENSE GENERATION IN SPANISH-ENGLISH
BILINGUALS: AN FMRI STUDY Eric Waldron, Arturo Hernandez;
University of Houston — Previous research indicates that age of acquisition (AOA) and proficiency modulate neural activity during grammatical
processing in late second language (L2) learners. Furthermore, no study
has investigated whether these effects differ depending on the regularity
of a grammatical function in individuals who are immersed in L2 at an
early age. To address these issues, twelve college-aged English/Spanish
bilinguals with varying second language AOA and proficiency levels
were asked to covertly generate the past tense form of regular and irregular English verbs while being scanned with fMRI. AOA and English
vocabulary scores were used as regressors. For individuals with later
AOA, areas of activation were seen in the left middle frontal and precentral gyri and right BA 44 for irregular verbs, while the opposite contrast
with early AOA revealed no significant areas of activation. For regular
verbs, later AOA correlated with areas of activation in bilateral precuneus, right BA 44 and superior parietal lobule, while earlier AOA correlated with activations in the right post-central gyrus and left insula.
Greater proficiency correlated with activation foci in the right medial
temporal gyrus for irregular verbs, while the left superior temporal gyrus
and cuneus were activated preferentially in individuals with lower levels

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

of proficiency. These results are consistent with findings that later age of
acquisition and lower proficiency levels rely on areas of the brain normally involved in attentional processing and executive function while
earlier AOA and greater proficiency correlate with areas of the brain
implicated in phonological and motor planning.
H132
AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF SYNTACTIC PRIMING IN
LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION Kristen Tooley, Matthew Traxler,
Tamara Swaab; University of California at Davis — An ERP experiment
investigated the nature of syntactic priming in language comprehension.
Syntactic priming is defined as the facilitated processing of one grammatical structure due to overlapping information in a previously encountered structure. This phenomenon is well-established in language
production, but not well understood in language comprehension. Previous studies using eye-tracking (Traxler & Pickering, 2005) and ERPs
(Ledoux et al, in press) indicate that priming in comprehension may be
specifically linked to repetition of the verb. The current study sought to
determine whether this effect is due to semantic overlap per se, or genuinely reflects priming of a syntactic structure represented with the verb.
Subjects read prime and target sentence pairs in which the initial verb of
the prime was either repeated (R) or synonymous (S) to that of the target:
e.g., R-prime: The woman abducted by the stalker managed to escape; Sprime: The woman kidnapped by the stalker managed to escape; Target:
The man abducted by the spy refused to tell what he knew. ERPs were
measured to the earliest disambiguating point in the sentence (“by”), and
a significant P600 reduction was found for targets preceded by R-primes
but not S-primes, indicating facilitation of syntactic processing for Rprimes only. There was no significant reduction of the N400 component
(associated with semantic integration) at the verb. These results indicate
that verb repetition is crucial for syntactic priming in comprehension,
and provide strong evidence that the process being facilitated is syntactic,
rather than semantic.
H133
EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIAL (ERP) EVIDENCE FOR
BOTTOM-UP SYNTACTIC DERIVATION COURSE IN BRAZILIAN
PORTUGUESE Aleria C. Lage, Miriam Lemle, Maurício Cagy, Antonio
Fernando Catelli Infantosi; UFRJ - Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro — Semantic violations coinciding with direct object merge have been related to
post-stimulus negative waves peaking around 400ms (N400). Our ERP
experiment investigates subject and object merges by analyzing the electrophysiology during the syntactic/semantic integration efforts. The
hypothesis was that the course of the syntactic derivation is bottom-up,
taking off from standard findings in Generative Grammar. We tested 80
congruous and 80 incongruous S-V-O sentences with heavy verbs in Brazilian Portuguese, like “The boy ate the apple” (“O menino comeu a
maçã”) and *“The mug kissed the man” (*“A caneca beijou o homem”).
Different amplitude ERPs were expected after N400, since subject merge
would be later than verb-object. Electrophysiological activities in the cortex of 29 healthy native speakers were collected during linguistic stimulation (36-channel digital EEG), and signal processing techniques were
applied to estimate the individual ERPs for each anatomic region. We
also treated the results statistically, to know whether the ERP amplitude
and latency differences were relevant. Compared to the electrocortical
activities during congruous sentence computation, the ones related to
incongruous sentence revealed a quite smaller N400, perhaps because
right before the verb-object merge the speaker knew that it would not be
semantically possible; and an ERP around 700ms with an expressive
greater amplitude, that seems to be related to subject merge to VP, since
the subject was the only semantically manipulated constituent. This leads
us to consider the bottom-up derivation course hypothesis as the appropriate one.

287

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

H134
SYNTACTIC MODULATION OF BETA AND THETA RYTHM IN
ONLINE SENTENCE PROCESSING Lilla Magyari1, Marcel C. M.
Bastiaansen1,2, Peter Hagoort2,1; 1Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2F. C. Donders Centre for Cognitive
Neuroimaging, Radboud Universiteit Nijmegen, The Netherlands — The aim
of the present study was to explore the oscillatory brain dynamics related
to syntactic processing during language comprehension. A time-frequency (TF) analysis of power changes was performed on magnetoencephalographic (MEG) data. Subjects had to read Dutch sentences in
three experimental conditions: correct sentences, sentences containing
moderate syntactic violations (word-category violations, where a noun
was replaced by the corresponding verb, e.g. hunter vs. hunt) and series
of words without syntactic structure (the same words as in the correct
sentences, but now in random order). A statistical evaluation of the TF
data, based on random permutation testing (Maris, 2004), revealed power
differences between correct sentences and violated sentences in the theta
(here roughly 3-9 Hz) and lower beta (13-18 Hz) frequency ranges. The
theta power differences were concentrated over right parietal areas,
whereas the beta power differences were present over midfrontal, right
parietal and left parietal areas (the latter only in the contrast correct – random word order). For the beta frequency range, the condition differences
were produced by a linear increase in power over the correct sentences,
which suddenly dropped when a word category violation was encountered, and was completely absent in the random word order sentences.
The systematic modulation of the power changes corresponding to the
level of the syntactic structure distortion suggests that theta and beta
oscillations are involved in normal syntactic processing. Reference:
Maris, E. (2004), Randomization tests for ERP topographies and whole
spatiotemporal data matrices, Psychophysiology, 41, 142-151.
H135
INVESTIGATING THE ROLE OF LEFT INFERIOR FRONTAL
GYRUS IN SYNTACTIC AND REFERENTIAL AMBIGUITY
RESOLUTION David January, John C. Trueswell, Sharon L. ThompsonSchill; University of Pennsylvania — Contrary to traditional hypotheses
which hold that LIFG is the neural substrate of syntax, recent studies
(e.g., Thompson-Schill et al., 1997) show that LIFG is selectively engaged
in the resolution of conflict between competing representations. Novick
et al. (2004) hypothesized that sentence comprehension deficits following
damage to LIFG might be explainable through the Constraint-Based Lexicalist theory of parsing, which holds that successful comprehension
relies on the integration of multiple (partially) independent cues to structure, including frequency, referential needs, and structural biases (Snedeker & Trueswell, 2004; MacDonald, 1994). We report an fMRI study
testing this hypothesis and also the generality of LIFG conflict resolution.
Specifically, subjects listened to sentences which were temporarily either
syntactically ambiguous (“turn over the hippo with the sponge”, containing temporary conflict between an instrument interpretation and a modifier interpretation of “with”) or referentially ambiguous (“turn over the
hippo that has the sponge” in the context of a hippo holding a sponge
and another hippo, containing temporary conflict concerning which
hippo “hippo” refers to). Degree of conflict was varied parametrically
within each ambiguity type. In the referential series, the point at which
the referent was uniquely identified by the sentence was delayed by
varying the context. In the syntactic series, conflict was varied by increasing the number of cues in conflict with the ultimate correct interpretation
of the sentence. If LIFG resolves both syntactic and referential conflict, we
expect co-localized activity in both the referentially and syntactically
ambiguous conditions, increasing with the duration or strength of conflict.

288

Linguistic processes: Syntax

H136
THE INTERACTION OF UNIVERSAL AND LANGUAGE-SPECIFIC
PROPERTIES IN THE NEUROCOGNITION OF LANGUAGE
COMPREHENSION: EVIDENCE FROM THE PROCESSING OF
WORD ORDER PERMUTATIONS IN JAPANESE Susann
Wolff1,
2
1 1
Matthias Schlesewsky , Ina Bornkessel-Schlesewsky ; Max Planck Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 2University of Marburg — One of the
most potent challenges in modelling the neurocognition of language lies
in the need to account for the fact that a single neural language processing system is apparently equipped to support the comprehension of a
highly diverse set of human languages (over 6000). Within this diversity,
one of the key properties that the comprehension system must be able to
accommodate is a flexible ordering of sentence constituents. Previous
electrophysiological findings on the processing of permuted structures in
German have revealed a distinct ERP response, namely an early central
negativity (“scrambling negativity”) for dispreferred but grammatical
word orders. In an auditory ERP study, we examined whether a similar
neural response can also be observed in analogous constructions in Japanese. Our main finding was that unambiguously marked initial objects
do not generally elicit a scrambling negativity in comparison to initial
subjects, but only when followed by a prosodic boundary. We interpret
this result and its deviation from the German pattern as evidence for the
application of a universal “least effort”-based processing strategy, which
interacts with language-specific properties. Thus, initial objects only
engender local processing cost when they are incompatible with a minimal (one argument) structure. While this is always the case in German,
the high tendency towards the omission of subjects in Japanese leads to a
compatibility with a minimal structure by default, i.e. unless contradicted
by prosodic properties. This account derives cross-linguistic similarities
and differences in the electrophysiological processing patterns associated
with word order phenomena.
H137
NEURAL SYSTEMS INVOLVED IN THE COMPREHENSION OF
AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE (ASL) AND NON-LINGUISTIC
GESTURE: AN FMRI STUDY Aaron Newman1, Elissa Newport2, Ted
Supalla2, Daphne Bavelier2; 1Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada,
2
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY — Signed languages, such as American Sign Language (ASL), present unique opportunities to further our
understanding of the factors underlying the neural bases of language. An
important question concerns the relationship between the neurocognitive
systems used in the comprehension of sign language compared to meaningful non-linguistic gestures. In separate event-related fMRI runs, deaf
native signers and hearing non-signers viewed movies of a native signer
producing ASL classifier constructions (including what has been termed
“spatial syntax”) and movies in which non-signers described the same
events, using only gesture without accompanying speech. Deaf native
signers showed highly similar patterns of left-lateralized activation for
ASL and nonlinguistic gesture, comprising the left hemisphere (LH) inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), anterior superior temporal sulcus (STS), and
angular gyrus (AG). Additionally ASL, but not gesture, activated the LH
posterior STS in deaf signers. Hearing non-signers showed bilateral activation of the same LH regions as signers and their RH homologues, and
no differences between activation patterns for ASL and gesture. The LH
posterior STS region activated exclusively by ASL in signers was activated by both ASL and gesture in non-signers. These results suggest neuroplastic changes in deaf native signers, whereby the perception of
meaningful body movements, both linguistic and non-linguistic, become
reliant on a more left-lateralized network of regions compared to the
strongly bilateral activations observed in hearing non-signers. As well, a
region of the left posterior STS appears to become specialized for language processing only in ASL signers.

Linguistic processes: Syntax

H138
THE ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY OF SEMANTIC RELATEDNESS:
GETTING CLOSER THAN CLOZE Aniela I. França, Miriam Lemle,
Maurício Cagy, Antonio Fernando Catelli Infantosi; UFRJ - Universidade
Federal do Rio de Janeiro — How much closer is “school” to “student” than
“beach” to “trunks”? An event-related brain potential (ERP) experiment
with 32 native speakers of Brazilian Portuguese was performed to gauge
semantic relatedness between prime/target words presented sequentially. Differing theoretically from the statistical notion of semantic field,
typical of Cloze, our account of semantic relatedness bears on overlapping aspects of prime/target word definitions. The assumption is that
whenever target is involved in the definition of prime, speakers are
bound to merge the pair into a prepositional phrase: “school with student”. Conversely, if target does not define prime, this syntactic structure
will not pop up. Four sets of paired stimuli with grading relatedness
were randomly presented: (i) 50 pairs for targets contained in the definition of prime (school/student); (ii) 50 pairs that needed two mediating
constructions (beach/trunks: beach with man/man in trunks); (iii) 50
pairs of unrelated words (“wood/telephone”); (iv) 150 word/non-word
pairs (house/blicket). We obtained two ERPs related to each target. The
first, at 200ms, probably stems from phonological processing and showed
no statistical difference among the sets. The second wave, a negativity
peaking at around 400ms, had significantly earlier latencies with targets
in (i) than those in (ii), (iii) and (iv). Set (i) targets also presented the highest amplitude waves. No significant difference was obtained comparing
ERPs from targets in sets (iii) and (iv). These results indicate that semantic relatedness between words might be measured syntactically and that
this tool is more accurate than criteria purported by Cloze Theory.
H139
TAKING AGE INTO ACCOUNT IN BILINGUALISM: ERPS TO
MORPHO-SYNTACTIC PROCESSING. Margaret
Gillon-Dowens1,
Horacio A. Barber2, Oliver Müller3, Manuel Carreiras1; 1University of La
Laguna, Tenerife, 2University College of London, U.K., 3University of La
Laguna, Tenerife — Most ERP studies of morpho-syntactic processing in
both monolingual and bilingual readers have been carried out with populations of young adults. Previous studies with this type of population in
Spanish revealed effects of Left Anterior Negativity (LAN) and late positivity (P600) in response to gender and number violations within sentences visually presented. The aim of this study was to investigate the
electrophysiological correlates of gender and number agreement in the
Spanish language, with participants over the age of 40, who were either
native speakers of Spanish, or late learners with over 15 years of exposure
to Spanish and a high degree of proficiency. Results replicated the P600
effect previously reported with younger populations. Interestingly, the
topographical distribution over the scalp of the LAN effect was similar
for both monolingual and bilingual older groups, but different from that
of the younger readers; older groups showed the syntax-related negativity over left central areas. From this we can conclude that the processing
of morphosyntactic violations in monolinguals and late bilinguals produces similar early ERP effects when age is controlled for. However, the
differences found in topography between the older and younger participants show that age is a factor of importance in these processes.
H140
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN SYNTACTIC PROCESSING AS
REVEALED BY ERPS AND FMRI Eric Pakulak, Stephanie Hyde, Zachary
Jacobs, Helen J. Neville; University of Oregon — Previous studies have indicated that event-related potentials (ERPs) are sensitive to specific aspects
of linguistic proficiency within the population of normal monolingual
English speaking adults (Pakulak & Neville, under review; Weber-Fox et
al., 2003; Yamada et al., 2001). While several studies have examined auditory syntactic processing using PET or fMRI, none of these studies have
examined individual differences in linguistic proficiency in monolinguals
using these methods. In the present study we directly compare data from
ERPs and event-related fMRI to further examine individual differences in

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

brain organization for language in adult monolinguals who vary on
aspects of linguistic proficiency. Adult monolingual speakers of English
were given three subtests of the Test of Adolescent and Adult Language
(TOAL-3) and the composite standardized scores were used to form two
groups. Stimuli consisted of naturally spoken English and “Jabberwocky” sentences, the latter formed by replacing open class words with
pronounceable pseudowords. ERPs were recorded to insertion phrase
structure violations and averaged to the critical word in each sentence,
and the fMRI BOLD response to each critical word was evaluated. ERP
results revealed a more focal left anterior negativity and larger, more
widespread late positivity in higher proficiency vs. lower proficiency
subjects. These modulations in the amplitude and distribution of ERP
components related to language proficiency were then used to constrain
the interpretation of modulations in fMRI activations in lower versus
higher proficiency subjects.
H141
EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS INDICES OF SYNTACTIC
PROCESSING IN MUSIC AND SPEECH Ahren Fitzroy, Lisa Sanders;
University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Event-related potential (ERP)
research shows that linguistic grammatical violations elicit a negativity
150-300 ms after word onset largest over left anterior electrode sites
(LAN). Recent evidence indicates that violations of musical syntax result
in a similar negativity with a more right lateralized distribution (RAN).
The amplitude and distribution of these components is modulated by the
severity of violations and listener proficiency. However, responses to
syntactic violations in music and speech have never been directly compared. The current study was designed to test the hypotheses that 1)
results from previous music studies generalize to other types of harmonic
violations, 2) there are general processing systems involved in automatic
responses to syntactic violations in music and speech, and 3) expertise
effects on syntactic processing are domain specific. ERPs were measured
in response to blatant and more subtle syntactic violations in sentences
and chord progressions in musicians and non-musicians. Severity of violation was manipulated for speech by including insertion errors in normal English sentences and sentences with nonwords in place of openclass items, and for music by substituting out-of-key chords into progressions from a distantly or closely related key. Correctly detected syntactic
violations in music elicited a RAN. Groups who showed early modulations of ERPs in response to subtle syntactic violations tended to do so for
both music and speech. Musical expertise had a larger effect on responses
to music than language violations. Results suggest there are both shared
neural systems supporting syntactic processing of music and speech and
domain-specific effects of experience.
H142
UNDERSTANDING NESTED LOCATIVES: AN EVENT RELATED
POTENTIALS INVESTIGATION Marguerite McQuire1, Kim Verhouf2,
Seana Coulson3; 1Language & Communicative Disorders, UCSD/SDSU,
2Nijmegen Institute for Cognition and Information at the Radboud University
Nijmegen, 3Cognitive Science, UCSD — Cognitive linguists have proposed
that linguistic descriptions of spatial relationships that mirror the way we
search through space are easier to process than those that do not. This
hypothesis predicts that descriptions which begin with a general spatial
location and “zoom in” to a more specific region require fewer cognitive
resources than those that “zoom out”. Two experiments, each with 12
healthy native English speakers, contrasted brain potentials elicited while
reading sentences that began with a short object phrase, and were followed by 4 prepositional phrases indicating the location of the object.
Sentences differed in the sequencing of locative prepositional phrases. At
phrase 2, the effect of “zooming out,” (My cell phone is… under my coat,
ON THE FRONT SEAT) was compared to “zooming in,” (My cell phone
is… on the bus, ON THE FRONT SEAT). Both experiments suggest sentences that “zoom out” elicit a left anterior negativity (LAN) relative to
sentences that “zoom in.” A second point of comparison involved the
consistency of zooming direction. Switching from “zooming out” to

289

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

“zooming in” between the third and fourth phrase (Experiment 1) and
switching from “zooming in” to “zooming out” (Experiment 2) engenders a late positive complex (LPC) at the sentence-final word relative to
sentences whose prepositional phrases consistently “zoom in” or “zoom
out.” Taken together, these data suggest that sentences that present a
search trajectory inconsistent with the way we search for objects in physical space require additional discourse level computations.
H143
BEFORE AND AFTER: AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF LATE
SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNING IN AN INTENSIVE LANGUAGE
COURSE Erin White, Fred Genesee, John Drury, Karsten Steinhauer;
McGill University — Are second language (L2) attainment and the neurological changes associated with L2 learning limited by a critical period
(Johnson & Newport, 1989)? While some ERP studies report that late
(adult) L2 learners cannot elicit the LAN/P600 response typically associated with morpho-syntactic processing in native speakers and child
learners (Weber-Fox & Neville, 1996), others suggest that regardless of
age of acquisition, L2 proficiency levels are responsible for “native-like”
neuro-cognition (Steinhauer et al., 2006). Furthermore, under certain circumstances ERP responses may begin to approximate that of native
speakers after relatively little L2 instruction (Osterhout et al., 2006). We
present pre-post ERP data of 30 Korean speakers both at the beginning
and end of a 9-week intensive intermediate level English course. Participants read correct sentences and those containing a violation of English
grammar not directly transferable from their L1 (verb-subject agreement,
inflection, or phrase structure). L2 learning among these late learners led
to both quantitative and qualitative changes in the ERP signal. By the end
of the course, the P200 amplitude elicited in response to content words
decreased, suggesting that orthographic processing had became less
effortful. Furthermore, the agreement condition elicited a P600 effect that
was not present before the course, suggesting morphological processing
was beginning to resemble that of native-speakers. The results will also
be discussed in terms of cognitive variables thought to influence rate of
L2 learning (phonological short term memory span, motivation to learn,
implicit/explicit learning) and the role they play in predicting changes in
the ERP signal.
H144
A PARAMETRIC FMRI STUDY OF PHRASE STRUCTURE EFFECTS
DURING SENTENCE COMPREHENSION Colin Humphries, Jeffrey
Binder; Medical College of Wisconsin — Event-related fMRI was used to
investigate the neural systems involved in sentence comprehension.
Stimuli were auditory subject-verb-object sentences. Subject and object
phrases consisted of an article, adjective, and noun (e.g., "the heavy
door"). The verb phrase consisted of a modifier verb followed by an infinitive (e.g., "tried to open"). The words in each of the three phrases were
presented in either correct or reversed (e.g., "door heavy the") order, giving a total of eight conditions. Subjects were required to rate each stimulus on how similar it sounded to a normal sentence on a scale from 1 to 4.
A broad network of left hemisphere brain areas showed greater BOLD
signal for stimuli in which the words in the three phrases were in the correct order compared to those in which all of the words were reversed,
including left inferior frontal gyrus (BA 44/45/47), left anterior superior
temporal sulcus (STS), and left posterior STS. Activation in these regions
generally increased in proportion to the number of correctly ordered
phrases in the sentence, though some areas showed a nonlinear, exponential increase indicating additive interactions between the phrases. We
propose that the identified brain areas are involved in integrating phrasal
syntactic elements during sentence comprehension.
H145
MAKING
“IT”
CONCRETE:
AN
EXAMINATION
OF
ANTECEDENT CONCRETENESS EFFECTS IN PRONOMINAL COREFERENCE USING EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Ryan
A.
Downey1, Janet Nicol2, Tracy Love1, David Swinney1; 1SDSU/UCSD Joint

290

Linguistic processes: Syntax

Doctoral Program in Language and Communicative Disorders, 2University of
Arizona — Two experiments using event-related potentials (ERPs) examine: (1) whether the concreteness effect found with ERPs (greater negativity associated with concrete nouns) by Kounios & Holcomb (1994) may be
observed when concrete vs. abstract nouns occur in auditory sentence
contexts; and (2) whether the effect (re-)emerges at the point of a subsequent co-referring element, a pronoun (see examples below). Data from
previous reaction time (RT) studies support “deep”, conceptual reactivation of the licensed antecedent (Nicol & Swinney, 1989; Love & Swinney,
1996) at the pronoun. In Experiment 1, with visual presentation, concrete
nouns elicited greater frontal negativity than abstract nouns in the 300500 ms window (consistent with the “concreteness N400,” (cN400);
Kounios & Holcomb, 1994). Pronouns coreferent with abstract nouns produced greater centroparietal negativity than those coreferent with concrete nouns starting ~300-900 ms following pronoun onset (traditional
N400), suggesting that pronouns with abstract antecedents may be
harder to integrate into ongoing context. Experiment 2 presented sentences auditorily. Interestingly, at the antecedent, no concreteness effect
appeared. However, a cN400 occurred at the pronoun, with concrete it
being more negative than abstract it, starting ~300 ms following pronoun
onset. Taken together, these results provide evidence that deep, conceptual properties of antecedent nouns (concreteness) may be reactivated
immediately at the pronoun during auditory (but not visual) presentation
of sentences. Issues regarding processing under different presentation
modalities (auditory vs. visual) are discussed. EXAMPLES: Phil knows
all about prison(concrete). He loves to talk about it(concrete). Phil knows
all about passion(abstract). He loves to talk about it(abstract).
H146
THE INTERACTION OF PROSODY AND VERB TRANSITIVITY
BIASES DURING THE PROCESSING OF SPOKEN GARDEN PATH
SENTENCES: AN ERP STUDY Inbal Itzhak, Efrat Pauker, Shari Baum,
John Drury, Karsten Steinhauer; McGill University — The important role of
prosody in syntactic parsing has been shown in previous psycholinguistic investigations of auditory sentence processing (e.g., Kjelgaard &
Speer, 1999). ERP data have demonstrated the immediate online use of
prosodic information, including (1) the prosody-induced reversal of ‘garden path effects' and (2) a specific ERP brain response at prosodic phrase
boundaries, the closure positive shift (CPS) (Steinhauer, Alter, &
Friederici, 1999). However, various semantic and contextual constraints
may also influence syntactic parsing decisions. In the case of verbs that
could appear either in an Early Closure construction (an intransitive
interpretation) or in a Late Closure construction (a transitive interpretation), one factor that may have an impact on the parsing decision is the
verb’s transitivity bias. That is, the relative probability of that a given
verb will occur with/without a direct object (Trueswell, Tanenhaus, &
Kello 1993; Garnsey et al. 1997). It is possible that when the parser
encounters a verb that is more frequently used intransitively, it will tend
towards Early Closure, whereas a transitively biased verb may lead the
parser towards a Late Closure analysis. The present study used ERPs to
investigate the interaction of transitivity bias and prosody during the
processing of closure ambiguities. Implications for sentence processing
models will be discussed.
H147
BRAIN RESPONSES TO CONTEXTUALLY UNGRAMMATICAL
VERB INFLECTION IN ADULTS, TYPICALLY DEVELOPING
CHILDREN AND CHILDREN WITH SPECIFIC LANGUAGE
IMPAIRMENT Arild Hestvik, Richard G. Schwartz, Valerie Shafer, Yael
Neumann, Yan Yu, Baila Tropper; CUNY Graduate Center — Children with
Specific Language Impairment (SLI) typically make errors in verbal tense
inflection when producing speech. It is not known whether they also can
perceive when a verb inflection is ungrammatical. To determine this, we
conducted a study obtaining brain responses to auditorily presented
ungrammatical sentences. 23 adults, mean age 31 (SD = 6); 14 typically
developing (TD) children, mean age 9.6 (SD = 1); and 7 SLI children,

Linguistic processes: Syntax

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

mean age 9.9 (SD = 1.3) participated. The stimuli were spoken sentences
like “Yesterday, I walked to school”, “Yesterday, I walk to school”, “Yesterday, I went to school”, “Yesterday, I go to school”. Thus, the present
tense verbs were always ungrammatical. (A separate control experiment
obtained ERPs to the same sentences but without “Yesterday”, so that all
verbs were grammatical.) Adults exhibited a left anterior negativity to the
ungrammatical verb inflections, starting around 200ms after the offset of
the verb, but there was no difference between irregular and regular
verbs. TD children showed an ERP to ungrammaticality that was similar
in latency and topography to the adult group, but limited to irregular
verbs. The SLI children did not show any effects of ungrammaticality.
(However, this could be due to the lower number of subjects; data collection is on-going and a larger child group will be analyzed for the conference.) The preliminary conclusion is that SLI children’s brain responses
do not reflect ungrammaticality of verb inflection, suggesting that their
production errors are matched by a general lack of grammatical control
of tense.
H148
MEMORY OUTCOME AFTER TEMPORAL LOBE SURGERY IN
CHILDHOOD C. Yaro, J. H. Cross, F. Cormack, F. Vargha-Khadem, T.
Baldeweg; UCL Institute of Child Health, UK and Great Ormond Street
Hospital for Children NHS Trust, London, UK — Temporal lobectomy (TL)
is a successful surgical treatment for patients with intractable temporal
lobe epilepsy. Verbal memory loss after resection of the language-dominant temporal lobe is a well documented finding in adult patients. However, little is known about long-term memory outcome in children. We
investigated memory in patients who underwent TL in childhood. In
addition, we evaluated if language lateralisation as determined using
functional MRI (fMRI) influences memory outcome. Mean age at surgery
was 13.5 years and minimum post-surgical follow-up was 5 years. A total
of 31 patients were tested (15 left- and 16 right-sided surgery) of whom 14
had developmental tumours (DT) and 17 hippocampal sclerosis (HS). 5
patients with full-scale IQ <70 were excluded. Cognitive outcome was
measured using standardised tests of intelligence (WAIS-III) and memory (Doors & People Test, Wechsler Memory Scale-adapted). Patients
with left-sided TL showed significantly poorer performance on verbal
memory tasks (story, name and paired associate recall), but no side-specific effects were revealed for visual memory. Furthermore, pathology
type influenced cognitive outcome, with DT patients demonstrating better overall memory and IQ than HS patients, regardless of side of resection. Atypical language fMRI lateralisation (defined as right-sided or
bilateral) was found in 50% of cases (53% left and 47% right). Preliminary
analysis suggests that language lateralisation away from the resected
temporal lobe is beneficial for verbal memory outcome irrespective of
side of surgery. In summary, children show an adult-like pattern of verbal memory deficits after left TL. However, this may be ameliorated by
language reorganisation.

291

Tuesday, May 8, 8:00 - 10:00 AM

292

Linguistic processes: Syntax

Author Index

Index

A
Aalto, M 175
Aarts, E 59
Abeles, N 209
Abercrombie, H 121
Åberg, K 72
Abraham, A 236
Achaibou, A 202
Achler, T 182
Acres, K 138
Adamo, M 197
Adamson, M 220
Addante, RJ 71
Addis, DR 9, 37, 43
Adolphs, R 131
Adrover-Roig, D 60
Aglioti, SM 279
Agran, J 26
Aguirre, GK 182
Ahlfors, S 180
Ahmadi, M 256
Aitken, M 61
Aizenstein, H 273
Akil, H 278
Akiyama, T 130, 209
Alain, C 49, 50, 135, 175
Alexander, AL 120
Alexander, MP 65
Alexopoulos, G 262
Alexopoulos, GS 97
Alger, S 220
Allen, JS 155
Allen, MD 228, 266
Allison, T 193
Ally, BA 38, 68, 218
Almeida, D 248, 249
Almkvist, O 201
Almor, A 175
Alpert, GF 146
Altenmüller, E 118
Amagdei, A 204
Aminoff, E 39, 53
Amlung, MT 98
Amorapanth, P 85
Amso, D 217
Amunts, K 119
Anaki, D 218
Anamizu, S 209
Andelman, F 37
Anderesen, S 31
Andersen, S 130, 131
Anderson, A 58, 117, 272
Anderson, C 230, 284
Anderson, J 269, 271
Anderson, M 39, 264

Anderson, MC 162, 246
Andersson, F 21
Ando, Y 267
Andrawis, M 245
Angel, L 45
Anilkumar, A 76
Ansari, I 126
Ansuini, C 147
Antani, S 230
Anthony, AJ 135
Anticevic, A 145
Antonenko, O 207
Antrobus, JS 246
Arevalo, A 82
Arévalo, A 143
Arieli, A 50
Armony, J 208
Armstrong, J 97
Aron, A 106, 149
Aronoff, J 114
Arroyo, G 26
Artinger, F 25
Arzouan, Y 141
Arzy, S 113
Asari, T 58, 270
Asato, M 159
Asgaard, G 29
Ashby, FG 71
Ashby, G 42
Ashby, J 248
Ashe, J 247
Ashkenazi, S 110
Askren, M 157
Asmus, R 57
Assaf, M 69
Astheimer, L 20, 26
Astur, R 69
Atkinson, A 21, 202
Atmaca, S 147
Attali, E 34, 35
Attar, CH 131
Aumann, C 66
Avenanti, A 279
Avidan, G 181
Avishai, H 110
Avram, J 204
Axmacher, N 105, 215
Aziz-Zadeh, L 284
Azma, S 260
Aznar-Bese, N 248
B
Babbitt, L 283
Bach, P 186, 265
Bachoud-Lévi, A-C 113, 122

Bachrach, A 169
Baciu, M 171
Backer, K 229
Backes, V 119
Badcock, J 103
Badre, D 213, 263
Baer, T 70
Bahrami, B 110
Bailey, JA 149
Bailey, K 69
Baird, A 159
Baker, D 160, 163
Baker, S 282
Baldeweg, T 93, 291
Balleine, B 61
Baltes, R 204
Balzano, J 73
Banai, K 48
Band, G 62, 103
Band, GPH 61, 132
Banich, MT 231
Banissy, MJ 187
Bar, M 10, 39, 53
Barbaro, N 146, 282
Barber, HA 169, 253, 289
Barbey, AK 271, 286
Barbuto, E 42
Barca, L 175
Barcelo, F 8, 60
Barceló, F 60
Barch, D 145, 154, 227
Bareither, I 77
Barense, M 216
Barnard, P 122
Barnes, KA 93
Barr, WB 256
Barre, N 104
Barrett, L 113
Barrett, S 125
Barrick, T 59, 143, 146
Barrie, JN 187
Barsalou, L 218
Barsalou, LW 238, 271, 286
Bartlett, M 117
Bartolomeo, P 129
Bassetti, C 202
Bassolino, M 138
Bastiaansen, J 20
Bastiaansen, MCM 288
Bastian, A 148
Basu, S 235
Bates, E 82, 143
Bath, K 217
Batten, G 276
Batty, M 199
Bauer, A 101

293

Author Index

Bauer, H 112
Bauer, L 100
Bauer, M 26
Baum, S 142, 290
Baum, SR 285
Bavelier, D 81, 288
Bawa, S 36
Bayless, S 191, 275
Bayless, SJ 199
Bayley, P 41
Bayliss, A 129
Bayliss, AP 186
Baym, C 91, 269
Baym, CL 242
Bays, P 78
Beadle, J 277
Bean, J 58
Beauchemin, M 134
Bebko, G 91
Becchio, C 147
Beck, D 127
Bedny, M 79
Beech, E 27
Beer, JS 57
Beets, I 34
Begleiter, H 101
Behrmann, M 181
Bekker, A 237
Belger, A 107
Belin, P 134
Bellebaum, C 112
Bellgowan, PSF 181, 238
Bello, A 79
Bellugi, U 132
Benasich, A 48
Benasich, AA 48
Bender, J 152
Bendixen, A 26
Benetti, S 198, 274
Benjamin, M 101, 148, 255
Bennett, C 159
Bentin, S 253
Ben-Tzvi, S 253
Berens, M 261
Berentsen, S 230
Berg, A 146
Berg, SA 98
Berg-Kirkpatrick, T 263
Berna, C 30
Bernabeu, M 234
Bernard, R 151
Bernardis, P 79
Bernat, E 196
Bernat, EM 208
Berndt, RS 248
Berry, S 218
Berryhill, M 74
Bersick, M 234, 235
Berteletti, I 109
Bertenthal, B 267
Berthoz, A 113
Berthoz, S 112, 118
Bertman, D 282
Besing, J 176

294

Besner, D 63, 126, 132, 185
Bestelmeyer, P 226
Bestmann, S 8
Beth, E 38
Beth, EH 68, 218
Bevans, RL 267
Bever, TG 280
Beversdorf, D 130, 272
Bewernic, BH 66
Bhanji, JP 57
Bhatara, A 114
Bhatara, AK 122
Bhattacharya, J 66
Bialunska, A 150
Bickel, S 233
Biegler, KA 167
Bielicka-Cymerman, J 95
Billington, M 103
Binder, J 125, 255, 290
Binder, JR 177, 230
Binns, MA 30
Biran, I 109
Birn, R 250
Birnbaum, C 229
Bish, J 100, 227
Bishop, S 14
Bissig, D 157
Biswal, B 27
Bitan, T 91
Bittner, RA 75
Black, J 141
Black, K 227
Black, SE 209
Blackburn, J 93
Blair, C 63, 160
Blair, J 116, 120, 122, 265, 269
Blair, K 122
Blair, RJR 119
Blais, C 63, 126, 132
Blanke, O 52, 113, 184
Blankenburg, F 187
Blankner, J 102, 232
Bledowski, C 77
Bles, M 27
Bliss-Moreau, E 113
Blocker, HS 118
Bloise, S 155
Bloise, SM 241
Blumenfeld, R 72
Blumenfeld, RS 71
Bobb, S 83
Bodurka, J 238
Boehm, SG 74
Boers, F 50, 119
Boesiger, P 202
Bögels, S 251
Bolikal, P 223
Boll, S 222
Bolognini, N 51
Bonin, C 98
Booth, J 91
Borg, JS 112
Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, I 288
Borowsky, R 257

Botvinick, M 261
Botzung, A 210
Bouazzaoui, B 45
Boulenger, V 174
Bourgeron, T 264
Boutin, D 28
Bowden, HW 170
Bowles, B 216
Boyce, T 92
Bozic, M 171
Bozoki, A 209
Bradshaw, J 185
Brady, C 102
Brammer, MJ 283
Brandt, SA 107, 131
Brang, D 127, 137, 229
Brannon, E 109, 111
Brannon, EM 6
Brass, M 94, 106, 108, 151, 152
Braun, A 88, 175, 250
Braun, M 41, 75
Braver, T 154
Breitenstein, C 38, 168
Brennan, J 256
Brett, M 78
Bricolo, E 51, 73
Bridson, N 40
Briggs, R 255
Britton, M 194
Britz, J 184
Brodeur, M 225, 237, 282
Brooks, J 206
Brown, A 136
Brown, C 267
Brozinsky, C 239
Bruggeman, R 89
Brumm, K 144
Bruno, J 236
Bruss, J 145, 155
Brysbaert, M 173
Büchel, C 44
Buchsbaum, B 211
Buchy, L 277
Buckner, R 242
Buckner, RL 10, 12, 262
Budd, B 103
Budson, AE 38, 68, 218
Buechel, C 14
Bueti, D 197, 236
Bugg, J 233
Bugg, JM 135
Buhle, J 29
Buiatti, M 253
Bulakowski, PF 184
Bunge, S 91, 98, 269
Bunge, SA 57, 162
Bunting, M 243
Bunzeck, N 223
Burgess, MP 158
Burgess, P 62
Burgos-Ruiz, E 97
Burkhardt, P 86
Burman, D 91
Burr, D 185

Author Index

Burrows, BE 94
Burton, AM 129
Burton, MW 248
Burton, P 65
Busch, NA 131
Busemeyer, JR 268
Bush, W 34
Butman, J 250
Butterworth, B 110, 197
Buxbaum, L 151
Buxton, R 145
Buzan, R 142, 232
Buzas, B 122
C
Cabeza, R 13, 127, 155, 202, 204, 239, 245
Cabeza, RC 201
Cacace, A 269
Cacioppo, J 267
Caddick, KH 70
Cagy, M 287, 289
Cai, Q 173, 248
Caires, MT 94
Calder, A 33
Caldwell-Harris, C 122
Callahan, S 166
Caltagirone, C 49, 143
Calvert, GA 137
Càmara, E 104
Camblin, C 257
Camblin, CC 192
Camchong, J 233
Camen, C 46
Camerer, C 273
Campbell, M 227
Campbell, R 283
Campeanu, S 50
Canessa, N 103
Canli, T 235
Cannon, T 234
Canolty, R 146, 282
Cantlon, J 111
Cao, F 91
Capek, CM 283
Capizzi, K 230
Caplan, D 164, 283
Cappa, S 143
Cappell, K 78
Caramazza, A 225, 253
Cardillo, E 287
Cardo, E 60
Carlesimo, GA 143
Carlson CE 256
Carlson, J 205
Carlyon, R 47
Carlyon, RP 133
Carmona, S 278
Carp, J 58
Carrasco, H 165
Carreiras, M 247, 289
Carrion, R 268
Carter, CS 58, 64
Carver, L 276
Casey, BJ 29, 96, 200, 206, 217, 277

Cassidy, S 222
Castellanos, FX 27, 32, 159, 272
Castiello, U 147
Cavanagh, C 255
Cave, K 34
Chabris, CF 182
Chaddock, L 58
Chaklader, A 220
Chambers, C 33
Chambers, RA 98
Chan, S 280
Chan, W-H 81
Chandrasekaran, B 46
Chang, C-F 129
Chang, W-P 158
Chang, Y-C 201
Chang, Y-L 255
Chapin, H 176
Chapman, H 117, 185
Charlton, R 59, 143, 146
Chaste, P 225
Chatterjee, A 27, 28, 32, 85, 146, 186, 250
Chau, W 50
Chaudhuri, A 56
Chauncey, K 82
Cheang, HS 65
Checa, P 233
Chee, M 126
Cheeran, B 49
Chen, AJ-W 194, 195
Chen, C-C 115
Chen, CC 145
Chen, C-Y 35, 199, 200
Chen, E 250
Chen, H 77, 144
Chen, J 239, 240
Chen, J-H 76, 104
Chen, K-H 201, 230
Chen, Y 73
Chen, Y-H 119
Cheng, D 69
Cheng, F 197
Cheng, K 149
Cheng, S-K 73, 128, 221
Cheng, Y-Y 80
Chertkow, H 87
Cherubini, P 73
Chiaravalloti, N 73
Chiarello, C 156, 169, 247
Chica, A 31
Chikazoe, J 58, 270
Chiou, RYC 110
Chiu, P 267
Chiu, Y-S 83
Cho, S 108, 234
Chochol, C 208
Choi, N 231
Choi, S 282
Choi, YY 108
Chojnowska, C 48
Chokron, S 53, 54
Chong, H 33, 191, 212, 219
Chong, K 93
Chong, T 55, 139

Chorlian, D 100, 101
Chorlian, DB 130
Chou, T-L 91
Chou, Y-Y 199, 200
Choudhury, N 48
Christoffels, I 50
Christoffels, IK 79
Chrysikou, EG 37
Chubb, C 139
Chun, M 264
Chun, MM 230
Chung, H-K 230
Churan, J 174
Chwilla, D 86, 251
Chwilla, DJ 59, 166
Chyan, J-L 128
Ciaramelli, E 120, 185, 218
Cichocki, A 253
Cincotta, CM 182
Clapham, ES 194, 267, 284
Clapp, W 213
Clare, L 37
Clark, C 59
Clarke, S 46, 136
Clements-Stephens, A 173
Clementz, BA 233
Cleret de Langavant, L 113
Cloutier, J 207
Coderre, E 254
Cody, K 45
Coffey-Corina, S 229
Cohen Kadosh, R 6
Cohen, JD 112, 259
Cohen, M 105, 215, 261
Cohen, NJ 213
Cohn, M 210, 218
Cola, M 210
Cola, MG 227
Colby, C 195
Cole, M 233
Collins, M 84
Collins, P 160, 161, 163, 196
Collins, PF 163
Collinson, S 84
Colzato, L 30, 57
Commins, S 68, 221
Compton, R 58
Conant, L 255
Congdon, E 235
Constable, T 88
Conturo, T 154
Conty, L 123
Converse, AK 207
Cook, CL 68
Cook, E 21
Cools, R 61, 62, 64, 105
Cooney, J 263
Cooper, DA 120
Cooper, EA 280
Cooper, R 133
Corazzini, LL 200
Corey, D 210, 256
Corley, M 172
Cormack, F 291

295

Author Index

Cornew, L 276
Cornwell, B 199, 215
Corona, M 220
Cortes, CR 226
Coslett, HB 151, 154, 186
Costa, A 253
Costello, MC 127
Cottrell, G 31, 182
Coubard, O 54
Coulson, S 127, 137, 289
Coulthard, E 99
Couperus, J 34
Courchesne, E 160, 226
Coutya, J 181
Cowey, A 142
Cox, K 133, 273
Craig, A 29, 142, 259
Crane, D 40
Crewther, D 51
Cristofori, I 99
Crone, E 93, 94, 103, 118, 158
Cronin-Golomb, A 186
Cross, JH 291
Cross, K 37, 87
Crosson, B 101, 255
Crowe, S 265
Crowther, JE 167
Crupi, C 216
Csernansky, J 145
Cucurell, D 104
Cuddapa, V 256
Cummine, J 257
Cunillera, T 104
Cunnington, R 55, 139
Curchack, J 159
Curio, G 187
Curley, N 273
Curran, J 46
Curran, T 70
Curtin, J 60
Curtis, C 78
Cusack, R 131
Cutting, L 173
Cycowicz, Y 240
Cycowicz, YM 160, 260
Czernochowski, D 160
D
D’Arripe, O 181
D’Esposito, M 61, 77, 194, 195, 196, 199,
211, 212, 213, 263
Daffner, K 33, 191, 219
Daffner, KR 213
Dal Molin, A 30
Dalal, S 146, 152, 282
Dale, A 145
Dale, AM 256
Daley, T 253
Dalla Barba, G 34, 35
Dalla Bella, S 150, 151
Damasio, A 275
Damasio, H 145, 155
Dammers, J 50, 119
Daniels, S 210

296

Daniels, SK 227
Danker, J 269
Daprati, E 225
Dara, C 117
Daselaar, S 245
Datta, H 126, 137, 162, 176
Daum, I 76, 112, 214, 219
Davachi, L 241
Davalos, D 157
Davalos, DB 135
Davelaar, E 72
David, AS 283
David, N 66, 226
David, O 275
Davidoff, J 55
Davidow, J 217
Davids, N 250, 251
Davidson, D 166
Davidson, M 275, 276
Davidson, P 218
Davidson, PSR 210
Davidson, R 34, 97, 121, 125, 202, 273
Davidson, RJ 120, 121, 207
Davies, MM 92
Davies, P 158
Davis, FC 206, 207
Davis, JI 188, 279
Davis, LJ 285
Davis, M 47
Davis, MH 78, 87, 133, 167
Davis, S 243
Davis, SW 155
Daw, N 223
Dawes, LC 127
Dawson, G 229
De Anna, F 34, 35
De Beaumont, L 28
de Chastelaine, M 160, 240, 260
de Gelder, B 118, 167, 178, 179, 180, 200,
271
De Grauwe, S 285
de Haan, B 30
De Haan, E 100
de Haan, M 199
De Jesus, R 220
de Moor, J 251
de Mornay Davies, P 255
De Rosa, E 197
De Sanctis, P 97, 177
de Vanssay, A 54
de Wit, S 61
de Zubicaray, G 80
Deane, RO 193
Deason, RG 221
DeBoer, T 159, 227
Debruille, JB 225, 237, 282
DeGeorge, P 210
DeGeorge, PC 227
DeGutis, J 195
DeGutis, JM 182
Dehaene, G 253
Dehaene, S 110, 264
Dehghani, N 145
Deidda, C 132

Del Viva, M 185
Deldin, P 278
Deldin, PJ 274
Delgado, M 78, 208, 245, 273
Delgado, MR 222, 273
Della Rosa, A 162
Della Rosa, P 143
DeLuca, J 73, 143, 144, 211
DeMaster, D 98
Démonet, J-F 171
Demos, KE 274
Denburg, N 277
Denckla, M 102, 108, 154, 232, 259
Dennis, NA 155, 239
Dennis, TA 115
Deouell, LY 138
Derrfuss, J 108
Desai, A 255
DeSanctis, F 262
Desmarais, G 186
Desmond, J 69
Desroches, A 257
Desroches, AS 97, 228
Désy, M-C 67
Detre, J 28
Detwiler, J 114
Deuschl, G 108
Deutsch, S 219
Devine, A 128
Devinsky, O 177, 256
Devlin, JT 155
DeYoung, C 108
DeYoung, CG 156, 260
Dhanjal, N 150
Di Martino, A 159
Di Paola, M 143
Di Pellegrino, G 99
di Pellegrino, G 120
Diamond, A 17
Diamond, E 264, 266
Diamond, Y 265
Diana, RA 71
Dias, E 233
Dick, F 55, 143, 287
Dickinson, T 61
Dien, J 88, 285
Dierker, D 145
Dietrich, T 68, 179
Dijkerman, C 102
Dikker, S 20
Dillon, A 29
Ding, Y 129
Disbrow, E 152
Disterhoft, J 69
Ditman, T 86, 256
Dobel, C 168, 252, 256
Dockree, P 68
Dodson, C 36
Doesburg, S 192
Dolan, R 237
Dolan, RJ 114
Dolcos, F 201, 202
Donaldson, D 42, 172, 231, 246
Donaldson, DI 45, 221

Author Index

Donchin, O 148
Donohue, S 103
Donovan, C-L 238
Doramajian, C 152
Doron, K 227
Dow, M 162
Dowker, A 43
Downey, G 277, 278
Downey, RA 290
Downing, PE 115
Draganski, B 237
Drago, V 101, 148
Dragone, D 99
Drevets, W 122
Dronkers, N 82, 143, 287
Drumm, A 45
Drury, J 142, 249, 285, 290
Duarte, A 40
Dubal, S 204, 206
Dubin, M 280
Dubois, B 34, 35, 129
Duchaine, B 140
Duchaine, BC 182
Duff, M 25, 125, 257
Duff, MC 201
Duffau, H 129
Dumas, J 254
Dumontheil, I 62
Dunbar, K 236
Duncan, K 206
Duncan, S 113
Duong, A 87
Dupierrix, E 53
Dupoux, E 96, 113
Duque, J 149
Durgerian, S 243
Durisko, C 75
Durston, S 96
Duzel, E 223, 243
Düzel, E 116, 144
Dwivedi, VD 285
Dyck, M 119
Dyckman, KA 233
Dyson, B 49
Dywan, J 141, 142
E
Ebitz, R 123
Ecker, U 219
Eddy, M 55
Edelman, JA 154
Edwards, E 146, 282
Edwards, L 127, 229
Egan, G 49
Egner, T 277
Ehrenberg, A 244
Eich, TS 279
Eickhoff, S 66
Einagel, S 285
Eisenberg, JB 16
Eisner, F 49
Ekstrom, A 245
Elben, S 225
Eldridge, M 138

Elger, C 105, 215
Ell, S 214, 243
Ellemeberg, D 28
Ellenbogen, J 244
Elling, L 256
Ellingson, M 125
Ellis, AW 175
Ellis, C 56
Ellis, D 69
Ellis, JA 68
Ellner, S 64
Elperin, D 262
Emberson, L 193
Emery, MR 155
Emmorey, K 88, 155
Endrass, T 59, 101, 106
Ennis, J 42
Enriquez-Geppert, S 252
Eppinger, B 62
Epstein, C 244
Eramudugolla, R 126
Erickson, KI 142
Ernst, M 272
Esch, M 84
Eschen, A 68
Escoffier, N 115
Eslinger, P 160, 163, 230, 240
Essex, M 97
Ettinger, U 76
Eulitz, C 82
Evans, KM 220
Eviatar, Z 85, 250
Ezzyat, Y 212, 216
F
Fabiani, M 26
Fabus, R 95
Fadda, L 143
Fahle, M 26
Fairhurst, M 30, 206
Falcon, SD 113
Falkenstein, M 62
Fan, J 91, 105, 205
Fanning, J 161
Fanning, JL 162
Farah, MJ 15
Farb, N 58
Fareri, D 208
Farnè, A 138
Farrell, L 269
Farroni, T 198, 274
Fauchereau, F 264
Faust, M 141
Faust, R 269
Fay, S 45
Fecteau, S 234
Federmeier, K 82
Federmeier, KD 220, 283
Fegen, D 195
Feinstein, JS 201
Feldman, R 114
Fell, J 215
Fellbrich, A 111
Fellows, L 59, 146

Fellows, LK 70
Ferdinand, NK 104
Feredoes, E 210
Ferguson, HJ 85
Fernandes, M 203, 216
Fernandez del Olmo, M 49
Fernández, G 74
Fernandino, L 262
Ferrera, V 259
Ferri, J 280
Festa, EK 52, 228, 240
Festman, J 61
Fichtenholtz, H 114
Fiebach, C 77
Fiebelkorn, I 176, 177
Fiez, J 75, 273
Fiez, JA 240
Filik, R 172
Filippi, C 254
Fillmore, P 161
Fillmore, PT 133
Filoteo, JV 22, 38, 214, 220
Fincham, J 271
Fineman, S 58
Finger, E 119, 122, 269
Fink, GR 66
Fink, M 174
Finke, C 41, 75, 150
Fiocco, A 44
Firk, C 79
Fischer, J 192
Fischer, K 195
Fischmeister, FS 112
Fishbein, W 246
Fiske, S 272
Fiske, ST 112
Fissell, K 273
FitzPatrick, I 84
Fitzroy, A 289
Fletcher, PC 214
Floden, D 272
Floel, A 38
Flora, T 100
Florczak, SM 241
Fogelson, N 66
Folegatti, A 27
Folstein, J 62
Fombonne, E 122
Fong-Ichimura, AK 228
Fonteneau, E 55
Ford, A 148
Ford, L 266
Ford, MA 167
Forgeard, M 164
Fornari, E 136
Forrester, L 149, 153
Forstmann, B 64
Forstmann, BU 108
Fortin, M 187
Fossati, P 206
Fossella, J 91, 105
Fossella, JA 96
Foss-Feig, J 21, 93, 97, 102, 103, 162
Fotedar, S 102, 108, 232, 259

297

Author Index

Foucart, A 166
Foucher, A 204
Foundas, A 210
Foundas, AL 227
Fourney, M 262
Fox, AS 207
Foxe, J 53, 136, 138, 176, 193, 197, 209, 262
Foxe, JJ 97, 104, 137, 177
França, AI 289
Frank, M 106, 261
Franke, C 260
Fraser, C 38, 40
Fraser, S 152
Freedman, M 209
Freeman, JE 68
Frenck-Mestre, C 165, 166
Fried, I 37, 50, 64, 245
Friederici, AD 89, 167, 173
Friedericie, AD 115
Friedman, D 160, 234, 235, 240, 260
Friedman, JT 48
Friedman, RB 226, 265
Friedrich, CK 136
Frishkoff, G 250
Friston, KJ 145
Frith, C 62, 236, 237
Fritz, T 200
Froeliger, B 29
Froud, K 70, 141, 147, 165, 171
Fründ, I 131
Fuchs, S 31, 32
Fugelsang, F 236
Fujikawa-Brooks, S 95
Fujioka, T 135
Fukuda, H 270
Fukushima, H 200
Fulham, R 20, 103
Fung, D 87
Fußer, F 75
G
Gaab, N 125
Gabay, S 31, 33
Gabriel, L 227
Gabrieli, J 169
Gabrieli, JDE 94, 125
Gabrieli, S 169
Gage, N 95, 161
Gage, NM 133
Gagliardi, A 145
Gaiefsky, M 255
Gaillard, W 162
Galaburda, A 132
Galgano, J 147
Gallup Jr., GG 65
Galpin, A 150
Gamson, D 160, 163
Gander, A 243
Gandour, J 46
Ganis, G 180
Gannon, P 88
Ganushchak, L 174
Ganzel, B 206
Garagnani, M 87

298

Garavan, H 104
Garcia, P 171
Garn, C 266
Garoff-Eaton, R 39
Garrard, P 254
Garrido, L 140
Garrido-Nag, K 162
Garry, MI 148
Garver, K 158
Garver, KE 160
Gaur, P 173
Gavin, W 158
Gawrys, B 232
Gazarian, K 283
Gazzaley, A 195, 213
Gazzaniga, M 227
Gazzola, V 51
Gee, JC 92
Gehring, W 105
Geier, C 158, 160
Geiser, E 135
Geissner, E 101
Gelfand, J 272
Geminiani, G 200
Genesee, F 290
Genetti, M 179
Genova, H 73
Genovese, C 195
Genovesio, A 52, 69
Gentile, F 27
Gentilucci, M 79
George, N 123, 198, 199, 274
Geraci, M 116
Gerbasi, ME 182
Gergely, G 152
Germine, L 140
Germine, LT 199
Getz, S 217
Geurin, S 238
Geyer, A 172
Ghaffari, M 159
Ghajar, J 235
Ghetti, S 98, 162
Gidley Larson, JC 158
Gidley-Larson, J 102
Giesbers, R 168
Gilbert, DG 29
Gilbert, S 62
Gilbert, SJ 214
Gilhooly, T 277
Gillespie, K 265
Gillespie, S 145
Gillingham, S 65
Gillon-Dowens, M 247, 289
Ginn, J 184
Giosa, L 147
Giovanello, K 36
Giovannetti, T 37
Gisquet-Verrier, P 119
Gitelman, DR 242
Gitten, JC 52
Glickstein, M 227
Glimcher, PW 11, 106
Gloria, R 60

Glover, G 206
Glover, GH 94
Gluck 222
Gluck, M 245
Gluck, MA 222, 223
Gmeindl, L 78
Göbel, S 21
Goebl, W 153
Goff, D 282
Goh, J 126
Gojmerac, C 272
Golay, X 240
Gold, CA 38
Gold, D 42, 238
Goldfarb, L 109
Goldin-Meadow, S 88, 286
Goldman, D 122
Goldman, J 236
Goldschmied, J 182
Goldstein, A 141
Goldstein, DB 239
Goldstein, M 196, 205
Golub, SA 264
Gomes, H 25, 83, 125, 257
Gomez-Ramirez, M 53, 137, 138, 197
Gong, Q 278
Gooch, C 29
Goodrich-Hunsaker, N 208
Gopinath, K 255
Gordon, B 208, 253
Gordon, P 95, 251, 255, 257
Gore, C 195
Gorzelanczyk, EJ 151
Goswami, U 17
Gotimer, KF 272
Goto, S 267
Gotts, SJ 181
Gout, O 54
Gow, D 254
Gozzi, M 73
Grabowecky, M 194, 204
Grabowski, T 145, 247, 275
Gracco, V 169
Grady, C 216
Graf, M 54
Grafman, J 92
Grafton, S 237
Graham, K 40, 216
Graham, KS 41
Graham, R 114, 118
Graham, S 106
Grainger, J 82, 170
Grandjean, D 203
Gratton, G 26
Graves, W 247
Gray, J 108, 155, 206
Gray, JR 156, 260
Green, A 236
Green, D 274
Green, E 142
Green, SR 179
Greenberg, M 63
Greene, A 217
Greené, B 107

Author Index

Greene, DJ 195
Greene, EJ 241, 276
Greenop, K 123
Greten-Harrison, B 69
Greve, A 221
Grezes, J 112, 118
Grèzes, J 5, 178, 271
Griffin, IC 32
Grillon, C 123, 199, 215
Grimes, JA 213
Grinband, J 259, 273
Groh-Bordin, C 25, 214
Groiss, S 225
Gross, V 186
Gross, WL 243
Grossman, M 37, 87, 230, 284
Grove, K 40
Grube, M 134
Gruber, T 131
Gruno, M 35, 201
Guardini, P 179
Guggisberg, A 152
Gugler, MF 173
Guidotti, L 243
Guise, K 105
Gullapalli, RP 248
Gunter, TC 86, 89
Guo, T 83, 172
Gupta, P 247
Gussenhoven, C 175
Gutchess, A 244
Guthrie, M 245
Guthrie, MJ 222
Guyader, N 54
H
Habeck, C 212
Habel, U 119
Haberman, J 56
Habib, R 71
Hadjikhani, N 99, 180
Haenschel, C 75
Hagendorf, H 131
Haggard, P 188
Hagler, D 145
Hagler, DJ 256
Hagoort, P 175, 282, 288
Hahne, A 173
Haider, H 164
Haimson, B 282
Haist, F 144
Halderman, L 156, 169, 247
Halderman, LK 247
Hale, S 139
Halgren, E 145, 256
Halit, H 55
Hall, J 27
Hall, JL 205
Halperin, J 25
Halverson, J 121
Ham, B-J 231
Hämäläinen, M 180
Hamann, S 207, 244
Hambrick, Z 209

Hamidi, M 74
Hamilton, A 237
Hampton, A 47, 165
Han, D 229
Handy, T 27
Hannesdottir, K 146
Hannula, D 75
Hanson, C 145, 228
Hanson, S 145, 228
Hara, N 46
Harat, M 151
Hare, T 200, 217
Hare, TA 277
Harenski, CL 207
Harke, KC 50
Harral, E 116
Harris, C 186
Harris, L 272
Harris, LT 112
Harrison, B 162
Harrison, LM 145
Hart, S 107
Hartlein, J 227
Hartshorne, J 98
Hartstra, E 94, 118
Hartsuiker, RJ 164
Hasegawa, T 200
Hasher, L 197
Hashimoto, R 229
Hashimoto, R-I 101
Haskins, A 241
Hassabis, D 44
Hasse, S 134
Hasson, U 256, 280
Haufe, S 187
Hauk, O 87, 167
Haupt, S 215
Hauswald, A 245
Hawellek, B 114
Hayama, H 67
Hayden, B 232
Hayes, SM 239
Hazan, H 250
He, Y 49
Head, D 262
Heatherton, T 103, 121
Heatherton, TF 207, 274
Hebb, AO 268
Hebrank, A 244
Hecht, EE 208
Heeger, D 256
Heekeren, H 108
Heilman, K 101, 148
Heilman, RM 204
Heindel, WC 52, 228, 240
Heining, M 202
Heinrich, A 133
Heinze, H-J 116, 144
Heinzer, S 179
Helbig, H 54
Heller, A 137
Hellwig, F 166
Hellwig-Brida, S 107
Hendler, T 123

Hendriks, E 151
Henik, A 31, 33, 109, 110
Henkell, H 264, 265, 266
Henry, M 111
Henshall, K 49
Henson, R 40
Henson, RNA 41, 214
Herbert, C 283
Herdman, A 72, 181, 187
Hernandez, A 267, 287
Hernandez, AE 248
Herrera, J 103
Herrmann, CS 131
Herron, J 38, 40, 41
Hershey, T 227
Hervais-Adelman, A 47
Hester, R 104
Hestvik, A 290
Hey, K 76
Hice, K 217
Hickok, G 43, 53, 167
Hickok, GS 133
Higgins, JA 212
Hill, J 249
Hill, KJ 92
Hillier, A 130
Hillyard, S 136, 192
Hinkley, L 152
Hirata, C 149
Hirota, Y 220
Hirsch, J 259, 273, 277
Hisagi, M 126
Hoeks, JCJ 89
Hoenig, K 107
Hoetting, K 136
Hoffma, J 195
Hoffman, J 263
Hoffmann, K-T 41
Hoffmann, M 140
Hofmann, J 237
Holcomb, P 33, 55, 82, 86, 172, 191, 219,
267, 282
Holcomb, PJ 170, 213, 285
Holle, H 86
Holleman, B 279
Holroyd, C 57
Holroyd, T 215
Holt, D 276
Holyoak, K 234
Holzschneider, K 101
Hommel, B 30, 57, 62, 132
Hooker, C 203
Hooker, CI 199
Hooper, C 161, 163
Hopfinger, J 114
Hopfinger, JB 191, 192
Hopkins, R 41, 208
Horemans, I 174
Horie, R 149
Horne, M 166
Horton, C 160, 240, 260
Horvath, M 187
Hoscheidt, S 242
Hosein, A 181

299

Author Index

Hoshino, N 86
Howard, DV 93
Howard, JH 93
Hoyt, E 114
Hsiao, J 182
Hsieh, I-H 47
Hsieh, J-C 185
Hsieh, S 57
Hsu, CF 99
Hsu, C-H 80, 81
Hsu, M 273
Hsu, T-Y 128
Hsu, W-Y 128
Hu, N 168
Hu, S 278
Hu, XP 286
Hu, Z 80, 81
Huang, B-Y 82
Huang, C 267
Huang, J 151, 278
Huang, M 145
Huang, M-X 256
Huang, R-S 284
Hubbard, E 110
Hubbard, EM 109
Huber, D 72
Huber, E 285
Huddleston, E 39
Hudry, J 66
Huettel, S 127
Huettel, SA 239
Huff, W 226
Hughes, B 275, 276
Hughes, M 20, 103
Huizinga, M 61
Hulbert, J 39
Hulse, E 178
Humphreys, K 181
Humphries, C 125, 290
Hung, D 35
Hung, DL 25, 73, 77, 80, 81, 83, 84, 110, 128,
129, 147, 199, 200, 221, 249, 281
Hunt, R 70, 217
Hurlemann, R 114
Husain, M 46, 78, 99, 132
Hutchins, S 222
Hutton, S 80
Hwang, K 92
Hyde, C 159
Hyde, DC 111
I
Ifergan, G 110
Ikeda, K 200
Imfeld, A 126
Indefrey, P 84, 166
Ing, D 220
Ingram, JN 188
Innes-Brown, H 49, 51
Inoue, K 281
Iordanescu, L 194
Irlbacher, K 131
Irvine, D 126
Isenberg, AL 95, 133, 161

300

Ishai, A 12, 53
Isingrini, M 45
Itier, R 275
Itzhak, I 142, 290
Ivry, R 61, 149, 214, 235, 284
Iyengar, U 164
J
Jabbi, M 20
Jabeen, N 282
Jacko, JA 184
Jackowski, AP 101
Jackowski, M 101
Jackson, M 75
Jacobs, J 64, 244, 245
Jacques, C 181, 252
Jaeger, A 220
Jahn, A 121
Jaime, PA 208
Jamadar, S 20
James, GA 286
Janata, P 137
Jancke, L 134, 135
Janes, WE 262
Jansma, B 27
Jansma, BM 164
January, D 288
Jaspers-Fayer, F 277
Javitt, D 209, 233
Jax, S 151
Jax, SA 154
Jeannerod, M 174
Jeffs, K 266
Jelsone, L 29, 259
Jemel, B 181
Jenkins, AC 236
Jenkins, R 56
Jensen, O 78
Jepma, M 21
Jessup, RK 268
Jha, A 76
Jimenez, AM 274
Jiminez, A 92
Jimura, K 58, 270
Jing, J-T 147
Joanisse, M 257
Joanisse, MF 97, 168, 228
Joerger, T 35
Johns, C 255
Johnson Jr., R 234, 235, 264, 265, 266
Johnson, J 188
Johnson, JD 67
Johnson, JL 284
Johnson, L 199, 215
Johnson, M 69, 212
Johnson, MH 55
Johnson, MK 212, 241, 276
Johnsrude, I 47
Johnsrude, IS 133
Johnston, S 75
Johnstone, T 34, 120, 121, 206
Jokisch, D 78
Jolicoeur, PP 231
Jones, M 269

Jonides, J 231
Joober, R 225
Jörgens, S 225
Jorgenson, L 217
Joshua, N 54
Josse, G 254
Jost, K 234
Jou, RJ 101
Jou, RL 273
Jouvent, R 204, 206, 262
Joyce, E 222
Juan, C-H 35, 128, 129
Judkins, T 149, 153
Julagay, J 169, 247
Jung, K-J 181
Jung-Beeman, M 269
Junghöfer, M 168, 252, 256, 283
Just, M 85
Just, MA 171, 252
Justus, T 255
K
Kable, JW 11
Kacinik, N 251
Kade, A 278
Kahana, M 44, 64, 211, 218, 244, 245
Kahana, MJ 222
Kahn, I 242
Kainerstorfer, J 194, 284
Kaiser, J 67, 77
Kakoullis, M 264
Kalin, NH 121, 207
Kalisch, R 237
Kallioinen, P 72, 213
Kamarajan, C 100, 101, 130
Kamel, N 120
Kan, I 36
Kang, H 114
Kang, J 183
Kanowski, M 140
Kanske, P 32
Kaplan, L 262
Kappelle, J 100
Karayanidis, F 20
Karmiloff-Smith, A 99
Karnath, HO 30
Karst, AT 194, 267, 284
Karzel, K 95
Kashima, H 130, 209
Kataki, M 130
Katayama, J 77
Kathmann, N 35, 59, 101, 106, 131, 152, 201,
260
Kato, M 130, 209
Katya, R 96
Katz, R 97, 262
Kaufmann, C 106, 152
Kawasaki, H 131
Kawasaki, M 270
Kaye, J 229
Kearns, K 81
Keenan, J 268
Kehagia, A 64
Kehrer, S 107, 131

Author Index

Keidel, JL 177
Keisker, B 99
Keisler, A 247
Keizer, A 30
Keller, I 25
Kellermann, T 119
Kelley, J 213
Kelley, W 103, 121
Kelley, WM 207, 274
Kelly, AMC 27, 32
Kelly, C 273
Kelly, S 84, 138, 193, 197
Kelsey, KM 135
Kelso, S 176
Kemner, C 167, 183
Kenealy, L 21, 93, 102, 103
Kennard, C 46
Kennedy, D 226
Kennedy, KM 142
Kensinger, E 39, 115, 117, 198, 204
Kenworthy, L 162
Kerkhoff, G 25
Kerkhofs, R 251
Kern, S 121
Kerr, D 274
Kessels, RPC 74
Ketcham, K 73
Ketz, NA 221
Keysers, C 20, 51
Khanna, P 222
Khatami, R 202
Khateb, A 179
Kherif, F 78, 87, 254
Khizanishvili, A 173
Khoe, W 192
Kiebel, SJ 145
Kiefer, M 54, 107
Kiehl, KA 48, 112, 207
Kielar, A 168
Kim, A 218, 281
Kim, H 206
Kim, J-K 53
Kim, K 108
Kim, M-S 36
Kim, N 130
Kim, P 114
Kim, S-Y 191
Kim, YY 36
King, J 105
King, S 282
King-Casas, BR 274
Kinkinghneum, S 34
Kinsbourne, M 196
Kinzel, EN 184
Kipervasser, S 37
Kiran, S 79
Kirk, A 35
Kirkham, N 157
Kirkland, J 97
Kirsch, H 146, 282
Kirschbaum, C 121
Kirwan, B 208
Kishida, K 267
Kishiyama, M 66, 92

Kisley, MA 135
Kissler, J 245, 283
Kitajo, K 193
Klauke, B 168
Klaver, P 179, 180
Klein, C 74
Klein, JT 193
Klein, S 162
Klepousniotou, E 169
Kliegel, M 64, 68
Kling, T 175
Klingberg, T 17
Klingmuller, D 114
Kloth, N 56
Kluender, KR 177
Kluger, B 101, 148
Klump, K 209
Knaus, TA 99
Knebel, J-F 66
Knecht, S 38
Knight, R 66, 92, 282
Knight, RT 8, 48, 146, 199, 274
Knipe, H 163
Knoblauch, K 206
Knoblich, G 147
Knorr, S 35
Knowlton, B 234
Kobayashi, C 163
Kober, H 29
Koch, B 112, 214
Koch, G 49
Koch, SP 131
Koechlin, E 7, 178
Koehnke, J 176
Koelsch, S 66, 86, 261
Koepsell, K 66
Koester, D 115, 168
Kogen, D 218
Köhler, S 72, 216
Koldewyn, K 111, 229
Kolk, HH 166
Kollias, S 99
Kolsch, H 114
Kolster, R 196, 235
Komarova, Y 29, 142
Kondos, L 100
Konishi, S 58, 270
Konkel, A 213
Konno, M 270
Kopp, B 57
Kopp, U 41
Koralek, A 195
Korb, FM 106
Korenberg, J 132
Körner, U 131
Korolev, I 244
Kosaki, Y 61
Kosslyn, SM 180
Köster, O 76
Kothmann, D 27, 82
Kotynek-Friedl, M 164
Kotz, SA 32, 115, 165, 167
Kousta, S-T 169
Kovach, C 131, 275

Kovelman, I 261
Koyama, S 134, 253
Kraemer, D 236
Kraft, A 131
Krain, AL 272
Krainik, A 206
Kralik, J 232
Kramer, A 127
Kramer, AF 142
Kramer, R 228
Krämer, UM 104
Kray, J 62, 104
Krebs, RM 144
Krebs-Noble, D 248
Kreher, D 282
Krendl, A 103
Krienen, F 263
Krienen, K 263
Krigolson, O 57
Krishnan, A 46
Kristin, H 262
Kroll, J 83, 86
Kroll, N 239
Kross, E 277
Krueger, F 92
Kruger, K 38
Kucian, K 96
Kuefner, D 159
Kuhl, B 239
Kuhl, P 94, 229
Kujala, T 170
Kumada, T 51
Kumar, A 212
Kumaran, D 42, 44
Kumari, V 76
Kumru, H 234
Kung, C-C 56
Kung, S-J 25
Kuo, B-C 76, 104, 183
Kuo, T 45
Kuo, W-J 83, 147, 185
Kuperberg GR 285
Kuperberg, G 86, 256, 267, 276, 282, 283
Kuperberg, GR 268
Kuperman, S 100
Kuriki, S 134
Kurland, J 226
Kuroki, C 46
Kushla, K 141
Kutas, M 217, 253
Kuzniecky, RI 256
Kwok, K 230
Kwok, S 87
Kwon, JS 36
L
LaBar, K 114, 118
LaBar, KS 120, 201, 239
Labrish, C 238
Lacey, EH 226
Lachaux, J-P 275
Ladavas, E 99, 120, 185
Làdavas, E 138
Lage, AC 287

301

Author Index

Lahav, A 138
Lahiri, A 82
Lai, Y 129
Lai, Y-R 201, 230
Laine, TL 176
Lakshmanan, B 276
Lallart, E 262
Lallart, X 262
Lalor, E 193
Lamalle, L 171, 206
Lamers, M 175
Lamm, C 275
Lamme, V 63
Lamme, VAF 183
Landau, A 284
Landau, JD 46
Landis, T 184
Lang, A 196
Langenecker, S 278
Langer, C 181
Large, E 176
Larsen, J 228, 255, 286
Larson, C 114
Larson, JG 148
Laskowska, I 151
Lassonde, M 28, 134, 187, 195
Lau, H 220, 237
Lau, K 186
Laureys, S 16
Lavidor, M 173
Lawrence, A 33
Lawrence, E 96
Lawson, GM 68
Le, L 111, 229
Lebede, M 232
Lebel, K 79
Leber, AB 230
LeBihan, D 264
Leboyer, M 225
Leckman, J 114
Leclerc, C 117
Le-Coutre, J 66
LeDoux, J 273
Ledoux, K 253
Lee, B-T 231
Lee, C-L 82
Lee, C-Y 80, 81, 84
Lee, D 231
Lee, JM 164, 283
Lee, K 101, 270
Lee, KH 108, 121
Lee, P 97, 102, 103, 162
Lee, S 205
Lee, S-C 221
Lehmann, T-N 41
Lehnhardt, F 226
Leknes, S 206
Lemle, M 287, 289
Lenartz, D 105
Lengenfelder, J 144, 211
Lenggenhager, B 52
Lennert, T 67
Lenroot, R 92
Leo, F 185

302

Leonard, C 156, 169
Leonard, CM 247
Leontiev, O 145
Lepage, J-F 146
Lepore, F 187
Lesch, K-P 235
Leshikar, E 244
Letourneau, SM 94
Leuthold, H 85, 172, 180
Levine, B 209, 218
Levitin, D 114
Levitin, DJ 122
Levy, BJ 246
Levy, I 106
Levy, R 119, 129
Lewandowska, M 174
Lewis, A 45
Lewis, J 66, 115
Lewis, M 275
Lewis, R 267
Lewis-Peacock, J 211
Leynes, PA 45, 46
Li, C-SR 58
Li, J 267
Li, K 152
Li, X 183
Li, YH 139
Li, Z 280
Liang, K-C 104
Libertus, M 109, 111
Libon, DJ 37
Lichtensteiger, J 179, 180
Lie, E 151
Liebenthal, E 125, 177, 255
Liebert, M 182
Liegeois, F 93
Liepelt, R 151
Light, SN 121
Lim, K 163
Lim, KO 163
Lin, C-Y 73
Lin, Y-C 129
Lincoln, A 132
Linden, D 37, 75
Linden, DEJ 74, 75
Lindgren, KA 99
Lindgren, M 166
Lion, A 139
Lionel, G 45
Lionnet, C 225, 237, 282
Liotti, M 187, 277
Lipovsky, B 163
Littlewort, G 117
Litwinowicz, A 151
Liu, C 259
Liu, H 80, 81
Liu, H-L 76
Liu, J-R 128
Liu, R 160
Liu, T 144
Liu, Y 105
Liu, Z 286
Lloyd, D 67
Lo Gerfo, E 49

Loehr, J 153
Loenneker, T 96, 179, 180
Loftin, S 227
Loftus, A 185
Lohrenz, T 267
Loig, T 234
Lombardi, S 42, 238
Long, DL 64
Long, VV 240
Longo dos Santos, C 271
Longo, M 267
Longtin, C-M 167
Lonnqvist-Akenine, U 201
Lopez-Paniagua, D 182, 261
Lor, M 274
Lorber, W 279
Lott, S 226
Loui, P 48
Love, T 144, 166, 276, 280, 290
Loveland, M 133
Low, K 26
Lozier, L 103
Lu, C-C 82
Lu, J 168
Lucan, J 136
Lucas, N 132
Lucia, LC 139
Luciana, M 160, 161, 163
Luciana, MM 163
Luhmann, C 264
Lui, M 243
Luna, B 94, 157, 158, 159, 160
Lunardelli, A 103
Luo, Q 120
Luo, Y 259
Lupiáñez, J 31
Lupien, S 44
Lustig, C 157, 262
Lutz, A 125
Lutzenberger, W 67
Luus, B 187
Lyon, AC 37
Lyoo, I-K 231
M
Macaluso, E 47
Macdonald, MJE 182
MacGregor, G 146
MacGregor, L 172
Machado, L 128
MacKenzie, G 42
Macko, R 149, 153
Macko, RF 153
MacSweeney, M 283
Madden, DJ 127, 155, 239
Maddox, T 243
Maddox, WT 22, 38, 214, 220, 242
Maeder, P 136
Magnee, M 167
Maguire, E 42, 44
Magyari, L 288
Mahon, BZ 225
Mahoney, JR 137
Mai, X 259

Author Index

Maidhof, C 261
Maier, W 114
Main, KL 184
Malach, R 50, 256
Malave, V 85
Malcolm, B 240
Malhotra, P 132
Malison, R 69
Malla, A 225
Mallot, H 44
Mandel, H 159
Manevitz, L 250
Mangels, J 35
Manis, F 236
Maniscalco, B 35
Mann, D 91
Manning, J 44
Manning, L 210
Manz, N 100, 101, 130
Marantz, A 81, 169
Maravita, A 51
Marchiondo, L 155, 206
Marchione, K 63
Marco-Pallarés, J 104
Marendaz, C 54
Marinkovic, K 260
Mariol, M 252
Marion, B 179, 193
Markus, H 59, 143, 146
Mark-Zigdon, N 110
Marreiros, AC 145
Marsh, A 119, 122
Marshall, W 141
Marslen-Wilson, WD 167, 171
Marsolek, CJ 221
Martin, A 181, 205, 218, 238
Martin, B 141, 257
Martin, E 68, 179, 180
Martin, F 128
Martin, L 27, 65, 208
Martin, M 64, 68
Martin, R 45
Martin, RC 167
Martinerie, J 275
Martinez, A 136
Martinez, C 133
Martin-Fiori, E 96
Martus, P 75
Martuzzi, R 136, 180
Maruyama, T 51
Marzi, CA 30, 51
Mason, M 39
Mason, MF 9
Mason, R 85, 171, 252
Mata, R 96
Materek, A 173
Matheson, A 199
Mathewson, K 57, 141, 142
Mathiak, K 50, 95, 119
Mathiak, KA 95
Matlen, B 269
Matlen, BJ 162
Matlis, S 238
Matthews, N 133

Mattingley, J 33, 126, 139, 185
Mattingley, JB 55, 104, 193
Matusch, A 114
Mauldin, K 218
Maurer, U 25, 178
Maxwell, C 69
Maxwell, J 202
Mayberg, H 58
Mayer, JS 75
Mayer, R 238
Mayes, AR 241
Mayes, L 114
Mayr, U 234
Mazzulla, EC 206
McAndrews, MP 37, 42
McArdle, J 250
McCandliss, B 25, 196, 235, 280
McCandliss, BD 17, 178
McCarley, R 101
McCarry, T 29
McCarthy, G 120, 179, 193
McClain, M 210, 227
McClure, SM 112
McDermott, K 9
McDevitt, T 84
McDonald, CR 256
McDonald, K 175
McDowell, JE 233
McEvoy, K 213
McFarland, D 269
McFarland, DH 251
McGeoch, P 161
McGeoch, PD 188
McGettigan, C 49, 171
McGill, M 79
McGinnis, S 33, 191, 219
McGinnis, SM 212
McGregor, K 101, 148, 255
McGuire, P 96
McGuire, PK 283
McGurn, L 279
McHugo, M 121
McInerney, K 219
McIntosh, A 72
McIntosh, R 102
McIntyre, J 113
McKay, C 49
McKeever, JD 218
McKeon, D 58
McLaughlin, J 281
McLaughlin, PM 30
McLean, AA 206
McMahon, K 80
McQuire, M 127, 289
Meadowcroft, M 240
Mecklinger, A 62, 104
Medina, J 154
Medler, DA 230
Medvedev, A 194
Meek, S 29, 35, 142, 232, 259
Meeren, H 178, 180
Mehler, J 253
Mehta, A 176
Mehta, S 145, 247

Melara, R 130
Mencl, E 144
Mendez, R 118
Mengotti, P 103
Menichelli, A 225
Menon, E 274
Mercier, M 184, 198
Mercure, E 55
Merriam, E 195
Messinger, A 232
Mestres-Missé, A 104
Mesulam, M 170
Mesulam, M-M 241
Mesulam, MM 242
Meuli, R 136
Meyer, J 222
Meyer, M 134, 135
Michaud, J 164
Michel, C 136, 184
Michel, T 76
Michie, P 20, 103, 133
Mickley, K 198
Midgley, KJ 170
Milburn, M 275
Milham, MP 27, 32
Miller, BL 209
Miller, BT 213
Miller, L 50
Miller, M 238
Milleville, SC 181
Millner, A 29, 217
Mills, D 132
Milner, D 102
Mimura, M 209
Minagawa-Kawai, Y 96
Minear, M 139
Minnebusch, D 219
Minshew, N 160
Minton, B 188
Miranda, R 39
Mirsattari, S 216
Mishra, J 136
Misra, M 83
Mitchell, D 119, 120, 131, 269
Mitchell, J 192
Mitchell, JP 236
Mitchell, K 212
Mitchell, KJ 241, 276
Mitchell, PK 154
Mitchell, T 85
Mitchell, TV 94
Mitterer, H 251
Miu, AC 204
Miyakawa, A 61, 203
Miyamoto, T 134
Miyashita, Y 58, 270
Mizelle, C 149
Mizelle, JC 153
Mizuno, T 101, 148
Mock, B 62
Modirrousta, M 70
Molholm, S 136, 137, 176, 177
Molina, AG 234
Möller, J 104

303

Author Index

Mollison, M 244, 245
Molnar-Szakacs, I 113
Moloney, KP 184
Mondillo, K 120
Monetta, L 117
Montague, R 11, 267
Montesi, J 53, 137, 197
Monti, M 265
Moo, L 253
Moo, LR 70
Moody, T 234
Moore, A 116
Moore, AB 255
Moore, CD 259
Moore, JL 222
Moore, KS 212
Moore, P 87, 230
Mooren, F 38
Morales, O 118
Moran, L 52
Moran, Z 125
Morel, S 198
Moretti, L 99
Morey, RA 120
Morgan, A 93
Morgan, HM 74
Morgan-Short, K 164
Morimoto, H 58
Morris, A 33
Morris, JP 179
Morris, R 59, 143
Morrison, I 67, 265
Morton, J 122
Morton, N 218
Moschner, C 57
Moscovitch, M 37, 42, 72, 210, 218
Moses, S 72
Moskowitz, A 139
Mostofsky, S 98, 102, 108, 148, 154, 232,
235, 259
Mostofsky, SH 158
Moua, KCK 64
Moustafa, A 106, 261
Movellan, J 117
Moya, L 181
Mozer, M 194
Muccioli, M 120
Mueller, BA 163
Mueller, M 31
Muetzel, R 161, 163
Muetzel, RL 163
Muggleton, N 142, 187
Mukamel, R 50
Mulckhuyse, M 33
Mulder, MJ 96
Mulder, T 51
Mullen, T 146
Müller, M 32
Müller, MM 130, 131
Müller, O 289
Müller, R-A 92
Mulvenna, C 187
Münte, T 61
Munte, TF 111

304

Münte, TF 104, 118
Muragaki, Y 51
Murman, D 209
Murphy, C 262
Murphy, G 220
Murphy, J 221
Murphy, K 218
Murray, M 46, 136
Murray, MM 52, 66
Murray, R 96
Murre, J 279
Muscatell, K 115
Myers, C 245
Myers, CE 222, 223
N
N’Diaye, K 123
Naccache, L 16
Nachev, P 99
Naci, L 21
Nadel, L 73, 242
Nadkani, N 144, 211
Nagarajan, S 152, 282
Nagata, Y 191
Nager, W 104, 111
Nair, V 29, 142, 259
Nair, VA 175
Nakamura, K 46
Nakano, H 252, 281
Nakayama, K 140, 182
Namibisan, R 212
Nanninga, C 57
Naparstek, S 109
Narayanan, A 130
Narmour, E 28
Natale, E 30
Nazir, T 248
Nazir, TA 173, 174
Neargarder, S 186
Nearing, KI 256
Nee, D 231
Need, A 239
Negri, GAL 103, 225
Neill, E 84
Nelson, CA 159
Nelson, S 246
Nessler, D 234, 235, 260
Neufeld, M 37
Neumann, J 108
Neumann, MF 54, 129
Neumann, Y 83, 290
Neville, H 109, 161, 162
New, A 205
Newen, A 66
Newhouse, P 254
Newman, A 288
Newman, E 192
Newman, RL 97, 168, 228, 257
Newport, E 288
Newport, EL 81
Ng, K-K 243
Ng, P 116
Ng, TWC 46
Nguyen, V 227

Nicholls, M 185
Nicholson, R 20
Nico, D 225
Nicol, J 166, 290
Niedeggen, N 225
Nieder, A 6
Niehaus, L 116
Nielson, K 278
Nielson, KA 243, 279
Nierhaus, T 173
Nieuwland, M 84, 279
Nigbur, R 198
Nijboer, T 102
Niki, C 51
Nikoli, D 75
Nimmo-Smith, I 78
Niogi, S 196, 280
Nir, Y 50, 256
Niry, D 61
Nishimura, R 127
Nitkunan, A 146
Nitschke, J 274
Nobre, AC 31, 32
Noda, A 220
Nomura, E 242
Nordahl, T 191
Norman, K 192, 218
Norra, C 50
Norris, C 267
Northam, G 93
Norton, A 164
Nosarti, C 96
Nunez, R 284
Nusbaum, H 286
Nwaigwe, M 76
Nyhus, E 70
Nys, G 102
Nystrom, LE 112
O
O’Brien, A 73
O’Connor, D 36
O’Connor, MM 116
O’Connor, S 100
O’Doherty, J 11
O’Hare, A 88
O’Regan, A 54
Oakes, TR 207
Obadia, M 54
Obermeier, C 86
Obler, LK 137
Obleser, J 82, 172
Obrig, H 173
Occhiuto, J 282
Ochsner, K 188, 275, 276, 277, 278
Ochsner, KN 29, 279
Ofen, N 125
Ogawa, S 46
Ohlmann, T 53
Ojemann, JG 268
Okada, K 183
Okana, K 256
Oken, B 266
Okuda, J 270

Author Index

Olagungu-Jones, Y 159
Olagunju-Jones, Y 158
Oldenburg, J 94, 118
Oler, JA 206
Olson, E 161
Olson, I 74, 212, 216
Olsson, A 278
Oniwinde, O 76
Oostenveld, R 282
Opitz, B 214, 237
Oppenheimer, J 48
Ordaz, S 157
Orellana, G 60
Ortigue, S 237
Ortiz, C 91
Ortiz, J 48
Osherson, D 265
Ostaszewski, P 95
Ostendorf, F 41, 75, 150
Osterhout, L 281
Ostlund, S 61
Ott, BR 228
Otten, L 169
Otten, LJ 215
Overy, K 164
Owen, AM 115
Owens, T 228
Own, L 278
Özyürek, A 282
P
Pa, J 53
Pacini, A 122
Paczynski, M 268
Paczynski, P 256
Padden, D 229
Page, J 28, 222
Page, K 28, 222
Pakulak, E 161
Paller, K 215
Paller, KA 204, 241, 242
Palmer, C 153, 211, 222
Palmer, ED 92
Paluello, IM 279
Panagiotides, H 268
Pandey, A 101
Pannebakker, MM 132
Pannu-Hayes, J 120
Pantelis, PC 222
Papademetris, X 101, 155, 156
Papagno, C 73
Paradiso, S 277
Park, D 126, 244
Park, H 71
Park, L 42
Park, N 42, 238
Parker, F 176
Parkinson, CH 115
Parkinson, JA 115
Parks, C 72
Parrent, A 216
Parrish, TB 241, 242
Parsons, L 265
Pascual-Leone, A 234

Passow, S 173
Pastrello, K 274
Patel, D 76
Patel, P 257
Patel, R 223
Paterson, SJ 101
Patrick, C 196
Pauker, E 142, 290
Paulignan, Y 173, 174, 248
Paulmann, S 115
Paulsen, D 109, 161, 162
Paulus, M 22
Paus, T 87
Pavlova, M 4, 179
Pavuluri, M 116
Payne, J 204, 242, 244
Paz-Alonso, PM 162
Pearlmutter, B 193
Pearlmutter, NJ 283
Peck, K 255
Peelen, M 21, 186
Peelle, J 87
Peers, P 33
Pegna, A 179
Pekar, J 102, 108, 232, 235, 259
Peleg, O 85, 250
Pell, M 117
Pell, MD 65, 117
Pelletier, I 134
Pelphrey, K 4, 111
Peña, M 60, 253
Pena, V 159
Peng, D 80, 81, 172
Penhune, V 152, 271
Penhune, VB 149
Penney, T 243
Perani, D 143
Perantie, D 227
Perea, M 247
Perez, C 54
Perfetti, C 250
Perianez, JA 60
Periáñez, JA 60
Pernet, C 171
Perry, L 92
Perschler, P 71
Perthen, J 144
Peschardt, K 116
Pessiglione, M 237
Pessoa, L 14
Peters, J 214
Petersen, S 246
Peterson, M 181
Petersson, KM 74, 84, 175
Pettenati, P 79
Petty, CM 120
Peyrin, C 54, 171
Pfordresher, P 150
Phelps, E 273, 278
Phelps, EA 273
Phillips, M 29, 35, 142, 202, 232, 259
Phillips, N 81, 141
Phillips, NA 285
Piazza, M 7, 110

Pichat, C 171
Pichler, DC 249
Picton, T 135
Piech, RM 115
Piekema, C 74
Pietschmann, M 59
Pigott, S 216
Pike, GB 169
Pilgrim, L 265
Pine, D 116, 119, 272
Pineda, J 116, 229
Pinel, P 110, 264
Pinter, J 229
Piro, J 91
Pitkanen, I 281
Pizzioli, F 252, 281
Platt, M 232, 266
Platt, ML 193
Plessow, F 108
Ploner, CJ 41, 75, 150
Ploner, M 225
Ploran, E 246
Plotzker, A 216
Poeppel, D 248, 249
Poggi, E 103
Poirier, J 280
Poissant, H 122
Polczynska-Fiszer, M 148
Poldrack, R 234
Poliakoff, E 150
Poliakov, A 281
Polse, L 257
Polyn, S 218
Ponz, A 198, 202
Poppenk, J 72
Porjesz, B 100, 101, 130
Portner, P 285
Poryazova, R 202
Poser, B 175
Posner, M 91, 105
Post, RB 184
Postle, B 210, 211
Postle, BR 74
Postman, WA 175, 250
Potts, G 27, 65
Pourtois, G 132, 180, 184, 202, 203
Powell, S 232
Power, J 69
Prat, C 171
Preston, AR 68
Preus, A 101, 229
Prévost, M 225, 237, 282
Price, C 87, 254
Price, CJ 155
Prime, D 231
Primo, SA 184
Prince, S 245
Prince, SE 239
Prinz, W 261
Provenzale, JM 127
Pruessner, J 216
Pruitt, L 109
Puhlmann, H 150
Pulvermuller, F 87, 170, 251

305

Author Index

Pulvermüller, F 167
Purdy, JD 165
Pursley, R 250
Puvaneswaran, B 215
Pylkkanen, L 256
Pylkkänen, L 20, 169
Q
Qu, Z 129
Quamme, J 241
Quan, J 135
Quandt, L 58
Quayle, AH 215
Quintin, E-M 122
R
Rabagliati, H 20
Rabbitt, C 159
Rabinowicz, E 209
Race, E 94
Rademaker, F 170
Raettig, T 167
Rafal, R 33
Rahm, B 77
Rahman, RA 140
Rainville, C 187
Raizada, R 94
Raj, V 45, 46
Rajah, MN 40
Rajeevan, N 101, 155, 156
Rakitin, B 29
Rakitin, BC 212
Rakoczy, H 236
Ramachandran, V 161
Ramachandran, VS 187, 188, 228
Ramachandran,VS 137
Ramanathan, P 221
Randall, B 171
Ranganath, C 45, 71, 72, 75, 137, 215, 239,
241
Rangaswami, M 130
Rangaswamy, M 100, 101
Rangel, A 12
Rao, A 32
Rao, SM 243
Rass, O 46
Ratliff, J 58
Rauch, S 113, 276
Rauss, K 184
Ravizza, S 191
Ravizza, SM 64
Rawlings, N 125
Raye, C 212
Raye, CL 241, 276
Raz, A 29
Raz, N 142
Realmuto, J 160, 163
Reber, PJ 241, 242
Redcay, E 160
Rees, G 236
Regel, S 89
Reggia, J 243
Reider-Groswasser, I 37

306

Reilly, R 193
Reinke, K 205
Reis, D 155, 206
Reis, DL 260
Reiss, A 132
Rellini, A 276
Remken, R 89
Remy, P 113
Renault, B 275
Renoult, L 225, 237, 282
Rentz, D 191
Reske, M 119
Reuter, B 152, 260
Reuter-Lorenz, P 78
Reuter-Lorenz, PA 205
Rey, G 204
Rey1, G 206
Reynolds, E 229
Reynolds, J 192
Rhodes, SM 45
Richard, M 261
Richards, D 266
Richards, J 91
Richardson, M 154
Richeson, J 103
Richter, N 134
Ridderinkhof, KR 61, 64, 108, 132
Ridderinkhof, R 62, 63
Rieger, M 261
Rietveld, T 175
Rifkin, L 96
Rigato, S 274
Riggs, L 72
Righart, R 179
Riis, J 33, 191, 219
Riis, JL 212
Riley, T 222
Risko, E 63
Risko, EF 132, 185
Ritchey, M 201
Ritter, V 25
Ritter, W 25, 137
Rivard, M-E 88
Rivera, S 111, 229
Rizzo, A 69
Rizzolatti, G 51
Roarty, M 238
Robbins, T 64
Roberts, AC 115
Roberts, L 50
Robertson, EK 97
Robertson, L 191
Robidoux, S 63
Robinson, M 240
Robinson, O 62
Roche, R 68, 221
Roche, RAP 222
Rodrigue, KM 142
Rodriguez-Fornells, A 61, 104
Roeder, B 136
Roehm, D 86, 164
Roelofs, A 59
Rogalski, E 170
Rogalsky, C 43, 167

Rogers, G 273
Rogers, J 78
Rohrbaugh, J 100
Rohrer, L 160, 163
Rolinska, P 151
Roll, M 166, 253
Rombouts, S 30, 93, 94, 118, 158
Rombouts, SA 103
Romei, L 176
Romei, V 52
Romero, S 269
Roopesh, N 100, 101
Ropp, L 223
Rork, A 229
Rosazza, C 248
Rose, D 203
Rosen, S 49
Rosen, Z 261
Rosenbaum, RS 65
Rosenthal, CR 46
Rösler, F 234
Ross, B 135, 175, 177
Ross, RS 70, 71
Rossell, S 36, 49, 54
Rossi, S 173
Rossion, B 181, 252, 281
Roth, J 88
Rothi, LG 255
Rothwell, J 49
Rothwell, P 60
Rotzer, S 96
Roy, AC 174
Roy, E 186
Roy, S 144
Rübsamen, R 134
Rudrauf, D 145, 275
Rueda, MR 233
Rugg, M 13, 37, 71, 188, 220
Rugg, MD 43, 67, 183
Rukovets, V 122
Rull, D 132
Rumiati, R 225
Rumiati, RI 103
Rusconi, E 197
Russell, C 132
Rustichini, A 106
Ruz, M 31
Ryan, J 72
Ryan, L 73, 242, 280
Ryu, J 231
Ryu, J-J 56
S
Saberi, K 47
Sabin, AT 177
Sabourin, L 161, 162
Sabri, M 125
Sacco, J 209
Sahakian, B 62
Said, CP 259
Sailer, U 112
Saint-Amour, D 146, 187
Saito, F 130, 209
Sakagami, M 270

Author Index

Sakai, S 151
Salerno, S 49
Salloum, G 144
Salmon, D 220
Salo, R 191
Saltzman, E 138
Samanta, J 106
Sanchez, C 29, 142, 259
Sander, D 203
Sanders, L 20, 26, 34, 289
Sanford, A 172
Sanford, AJ 85
Sanislow, CA 276
Santos, NS 66, 226
Sanz, C 164, 170
Sarinopoulos, I 274
Sarkar, R 235
Sartori, L 147
Sarty, G 257
Sathian, K 136
Sato, T 270
Saunders, R 100
Savage, C 88
Savazzi, S 51
Savion-Lemieux, T 149, 152
Scaife, RW 71
Scalf, P 127
Scanlon, P 68
Schacht, A 198
Schacter, D 39, 244
Schacter, DL 9, 43
Schadow, J 131
Schaefer, HS 120
Schafer, RJ 88
Scharre, D 130
Schaus, A 274
Scheibe, C 108
Schelstraete, M-A 252
Schendan, HE 139, 180, 217
Schendel, ZA 211
Scherer, K 203
Schiavone, F 143
Schillaci, M 142
Schiller, NO 79, 168, 174
Schirmer, A 115
Schlaepfer, T 105, 215
Schlaug, G 138, 164, 178
Schlesewsky, M 288
Schlummer, J 119
Schmalbrock, P 130
Schmid, A 55
Schmidt, A 228
Schmidt, L 237
Schmidt, W 155
Schmidtborn, L 140
Schmidt-Kassow, M 165
Schmitt, R 152
Schmitz, TW 197
Schneider, BA 175
Schneider, F 119
Schneider, W 121, 233
Schnider, N 178
Schnitzler, A 225
Schnyer, D 243

Schöls, L 104
Scholte, HS 183
Schooler, J 27
Schott, BH 116, 144
Schriefers, H 251, 284
Schröger, E 26, 134
Schubert, C 134
Schubert, R 187
Schubert, T 107, 108
Schubotz, RI 28, 236
Schuch, S 186
Schuckit, M 100
Schüle-Freyer, R 104
Schultheiss, OC 205
Schultz, R 114
Schultz, RT 101
Schumacher, EH 63, 184
Schütze, H 116, 144
Schwarb, H 63
Schwartz, B 219
Schwartz, RG 290
Schwartz, S 132, 180, 184, 202, 203
Schwartz, T 176
Schwarz, M 112, 214
Schwarzbauer, C 41
Schweinberger, SR 54, 56, 129
Schwitzkowski, K 106
Sciama, S 43
Scisco, J 46
Scott, D 203
Scott, S 49, 73
Scott, SK 172
Seassau, M 119
Sebanz, N 147, 268
Seeck, M 184, 203
Segal, Z 58
Segalowitz, S 83, 141, 142
Segawa, J 254
Segebarth, C 171
Seger, C 261
Seger, CA 182
Sehatpour, P 53, 138, 176, 177, 233
Seidenbecher, CI 116
Seidenberg, M 243
Seidenberg, MS 177
Sejnowski, T 136
Sekuler, R 44, 211
Sen, NM 219
Senghas, A 188
Seniow, J 174
Senkowski, D 137
Seo, D 208
Sereno, M 177, 284
Sergejew, A 49
Sergerie, K 208
Serino, A 138
Serra, L 143
Servera-Barceló, M 60
Servos, P 5
Seufert, P 140
Severens, E 164
Shackman, A 34, 202
Shadmehr, R 148
Shafer, A 282

Shafer, V 83, 126, 162, 290
Shafer, VL 137
Shafritz, K 63
Shah, M 37
Shah, NJ 66
Shahin, A 50
Shaikh, K 197
Shalinsky, M 261
Shamosh, N 108, 155
Shamosh, NA 260
Shane, M 207
Shane, MS 48
Shapiro, K 253
Shapiro, KL 74
Shapiro, L 280
Sharma, R 259
Sharma, S 267
Sharp, R 231
Shaywitz, B 63
Shaywitz, S 63
Shea, T 49
Shelef, I 110
Shelton, A 245
Shelton, SE 207
Shenhav, A 196
Shepherd, SV 193
Sherman, S 106
Shiao, H-Y 129
Shih, LYL 185
Shinkareva, S 85
Shipman, S 69
Shohamy, D 157, 217, 240, 245
Shook, D 93, 103
Shook, S 102
Shpaner, M 138, 209
Shrager, Y 67
Shtyrov, Y 170, 251
Shu, H 168
Sibuma, B 141
Siedlecki, K 266
Siegel, S 69
Siegle, G 121
Sikström, S 72, 213
Silber, BY 174
Silfverhuth, M 268
Silipo, G 209
Silvanto, J 142
Silver, AM 99
Silver, M 196
Silverman, M 196, 205
Silvers, J 205
Sim, T-C 133
Simmonds, D 102, 108, 235, 259
Simmons, A 22
Simmons, WK 218, 238, 271, 286
Simon, EJ 264, 265, 266
Simon, J 77
Simon, T 100, 227
Simon, TJ 92, 227
Simons, J 62
Simons, JS 214
Simpson, M 175
Sin, N 195, 262
Singer, N 123

307

Author Index

Sinha, R 58
Sinnott-Armstrong, W 112
Sisante, J-F 235
Sitnikova, T 267, 268
Skakum, A 186
Skinner, E 216
Skipper, J 286
Skogsberg, KA 194
Slachevsky, A 60
Slagter, H 34, 125, 202
Slocombe, EA 139
Slodczyk, J 119
Slotnick, SD 70, 71, 127, 213
Small, S 280, 286
Small, SL 280
Smallfield, J 222
Smallwood, J 27
Smarandescu, L 142, 259
Smart, A 72
Smith, A 144, 211
Smith, APR 43
Smith, R 272
Smith, S 32
Snell, J 106
Snodgrass, M 30
Snyder, H 107
Snyder, JS 175
Snyder, T 275
Söderlund, H 209
Sohn, M-H 231
Sokol-Hessner, P 273
Sokolov, A 179
Soliman, F 217
Solodkin, A 280
Solomon, J 175
Soltani, M 146, 282
Soltysik, D 255
Somerville, L 121
Sommer, T 91
Sommer, W 108, 140, 198
Song, D 220
Song, T 145
Song, Y 183
Souza, M 91
Spalek, K 284
Spelke, ES 111
Spence, MA 95, 161
Spengler, S 152
Sperling, AJ 226
Spiegel, D 76
Spierer, L 46
Spiering, B 42
Spiering, BJ 71
Spira, K 77
Spiridon, M 180
Sponheim, SR 208
Spreckelmeyer, KN 118
Sprouse, J 249
Spruill, III, J 165
Squire, L 41
Squire, LR 67
Sreenivasan, K 76
St. Jacques, PL 202
Staib, LH 101

308

Stamatakis, E 21
Stamatakis, EA 138
Stanczak, L 283
Stanley, EM 82
Stanton, SJ 205
Stanwyck, JJ 208
Staresina, B 241
Stark, C 208, 237
Stark, M 146
Stark, S 208
Staroselsky, M 122
Stefan, K 200
Stefanini, S 79
Stein, M 21
Steinbeis, N 86
Steinberg, F 176
Steinhauer, K 88, 142, 164, 170, 249, 285,
290
Stelzel, C 107
Stephan, KE 145
Stern, Y 29, 212, 266
Steven, M 227
Stevens, A 30
Stickgold, R 244
Stimus, A 100, 101
Stocco, A 271
Stollstorff, M 21
Stolz, JA 132
Stout, JD 256
Stowe, LA 89
Stoyanova, R 123
Strangman, GE 52
Strenziok, M 92
Striano, T 115
Sturm, V 105, 215, 225
Stuss, D 272
Stuss, DT 30, 65
Subramaniam, K 269
Suchan, B 76
Südmeyer, M 225
Suh, M 235
Suk, D 229
Sullwold, K 160
Summerfield, C 178
Summers, JJ 148
Sun, C-K 199, 200
Sundborg, S 162
Supalla, T 288
Suppiah, S 146
Suskauer, S 102, 108, 259
Susskind, J 117
Sutrisno, M 117
Sutton, B 244
Suzuki, H 270
Suzuki, S 194, 204
Sverzut, A 225
Swaab, T 251, 253, 255, 257, 287
Swain, J 114
Sweeney, J 116
Sweeney, JA 160
Sweeny, TD 204
Swick, D 255, 263, 286
Swinney, D 166, 280, 290
Szczepanik, E 95

Szelag, E 174
Szostak, C 30
Szpunar, K 9
Szymaszek, A 174
T
Taake, I 277
Tabeling, S 57
Taconnat, L 45
Tadi, T 52
Tagamets, MA 226
Tager-Flusberg, H 99
Tai, C-R 99
Takahashi, T 200
Takarae, Y 100, 227
Takayama, Y 46
Takeichi, H 253
Taler, V 81
Tallon-Baudry, C 140
Talsma, D 33
Tamarit, L 203
Tambini, A 56
Tamietto, M 200
Tan, JC 126
Tan, W 129
Tanaka, J 187
Tanaka, K 149
Tang, E 267
Tang, M 229
Tang, Y 100, 101
Tani, J 149
Tardif, T 259
Tarr, M 56
Tarter, AB 155
Tavabi, K 256
Taylor, J 220
Taylor, JR 240
Taylor, KI 138
Taylor, KJ 41
Taylor, M 191, 275
Taylor, MJ 199
Tays, W 141, 142
Teeuwisse, W 30
Telkemeyer, S 173
Temple, E 163, 206
Teng, S 103, 176
Tepest, R 226
Terwilliger, R 159
Tessari, A 103
Tessel, C 126
Teuscher, U 127
Thakral, PP 127
Theeuwes, J 33
Theoret, H 146
Théoret, H 67
Theriault, M 28
Thesen, T 137, 145, 177, 256
Thibeault, C 222
Thiebaut de Schotten, M 129
Thiran, J-P 136
Thivierge, J-P 141
Thomas, C 181
Thomas, K 70, 217
Thomas, KM 95

Author Index

Thomas, L 118
Thomas, N 128
Thomas, R 218
Thomas, VA 155
Thompson, TW 194
Thompson-Schill, S 79, 107, 182
Thompson-Schill, SL 284, 288
Thomson, RHS 148
Thönneßen, H 50
Thorne, S 160, 163
Thurow, ME 120
Thut, G 52
Tian, X 72
Tien, Y-M 249
Tierney, A 177
Tijus, C 123
Timmermann, L 225
Tipper, S 129, 150, 186, 265
Tipper, SP 30, 186
Tirovolas, A 114
Titone, D 88
Tivarus, M 130
Todd, J 133
Todorov, A 259
Toepel, U 66
Tom, J 229
Tomaszczyk, J 203
Tomblin, B 47, 165
Tononi, G 74, 210
Tooley, K 287
Tormos, JM 234
Torralbo, A 127, 182
Torriero, S 49
Tottenham, N 277
Tournier, D 93
Towler, S 156
Towne, M 261
Toyomura, A 134
Tracey, I 30, 206
Trainor, L 50, 135
Tranel, D 145, 201, 277
Traxler, M 287
Tremblay, K 50
Trenner, M 26
Tricomi, E 240
Trinkler, I 113, 122
Trksak, G 275
Troiani, V 87, 284
Tropper, B 290
Troyer, A 218
Trueswell, JC 288
Tsai, C-C 147
Tsai, J-L 80, 81
Tse, C-Y 26, 243
Tseng, A 95
Tsuchida, A 59
Tsujimoto, S 52, 69
Tsukiura, T 204
Tu, PLP 281
Tubridy, SM 276
Tucker, M 220, 246
Tuescher, O 196, 205
Tulving, E 71
Turbidy, SM 241

Turella, L 147
Turk-Browne, N 264
Turk-Browne, NB 230
Turken, A 263
Tyler, LK 21, 138, 171
Tzeng, OJ-L 99, 128, 129, 147
Tzeng, OJL 25, 73, 77, 80, 81, 83, 84, 110,
185, 199, 200, 221, 249, 281
U
Uba, M 95
Uddin, LQ 27, 32
Ueda, K 270
Ueno, K 149
Ulanday, J 27
Ulbrich, P 174
Ullman, M 39, 98, 102, 249, 285
Ullman, MT 164, 170
Ullrich, L 219
Ullsperger, M 108
Ulsperger, M 105
Uncapher, MR 43
Ungerleider, L 123
Urbanski, M 129
Urooj, U 175
Urry, HL 120, 121
V
Vaden, KI 133
Vaidya, C 21, 97, 102, 103, 162
Vaidya, CJ 93
Valdois, S 171
Valentine, G 281
Valenzuela, D 78
van Balkom, H 251
Van Berkum, J 279
van Berkum, J 84
van de Meerendonk, N 166
van de Riet, W 271
van de Ven, V 50
van den Bos, W 112
Van den Stock, J 271
van den Wildenberg, W 63, 64
van der Kleij, R 57
van der Lely, H 96
van der Meer, E 92
van der Molen, MW 61
van der Worp, H 51
Van Duynslaeger, M 65
van Engeland, H 96, 167, 183
Van Essen, D 145
van Gaal, S 63
van Heijnsbergen, C 178
Van Horn, J 238
van Koningsbruggen, M 33
van Leeuwen, P 57
van Leeuwen, T 175
Van Leijenhorst, L 158
van Leijenhorst, L 93
Van Meel, K 158
Van Overwalle, F 65
van Paasschen, J 37
Van Petten, C 45, 62

Van Reekum, C 34
van Reekum, C 120
van Reekum, CM 121
van Rossum, MCW 221
van Steenbergen, H 62
van Turennout, M 59, 250, 251
van Veen, V 58
Van Vleet, T 195
van Vugt, M 211
van Vugt, MK 222
van wouwe, NC 61
van Zandvoort, M 100
Vandenbroucke, MWG 183
Vanderpool, C 29
VanMeter, J 194, 226, 284
Vann, S 44
Vannest, J 81
VanWagenen, S 249
Vargas, G 32
Vargha-Khadem, F 291
Vasilyeva, N 122
Velanova, K 94
Venables, N 160, 196
Vendemia, J 29, 35, 142, 259
Vendemia, JMC 175
Venkatraman, V 232
Verfaellie, M 36, 243
Vergara, M 247
Verhoef, KMW 59
Verhoeven, L 250, 251
Verhouf, K 289
Verosky, S 203
Verosky, SC 199
Verstraeten, E 65
Verstynen, T 149
Vesely, L 87
Vessaz, MN 96
Vetter, P 110
Vidal, N 162, 176
Vigliocco, G 169
Vijayakumar, D 29, 142
Vijayakumar, V 259
Villringer, A 26, 187
Vines, B 178
Vinogradov, S 203
Visser, TAW 193
Vissers, CT 166
Vives, K 193
Vizueta, N 95
Voelbel, G 143, 144, 211
Vogeley, K 66, 226
Vogel-Farley, V 159
Volkmann, J 108
Volle, E 129
Vollmer, B 93
von Aster, M 96
von Cramon, DY 28, 105, 106, 115, 134, 151,
152, 236
von Eye, A 209
Voss, H 206
Voss, J 215
Voss, JL 242
Voss, M 142, 188
Voss, P 187

309

Author Index

Voudouris, N 84
Vuilleumier, P 21, 132, 180, 184, 198, 202,
203
Vytal, K 207, 244
Vythilingam, M 120
W
Wabnitz, A 255
Wagensveld, B 250
Wager, T 15, 203, 262, 275, 276
Waggoner, R 149
Wagner, A 240
Wagner, AD 68, 217, 239
Wagner, DD 274
Waldron, E 287
Walenski, M 98, 102, 285
Walker, M 244
Walsh, V 5, 142, 187, 197, 236
Wambach, DM 37
Wambacq, I 176
Wamsley, E 220
Wamsley, EJ 246
Wang, A 196
Wang, D 80
Wang, H 130
Wang, H-Z 99
Wang, J 160, 163, 240
Wang, M-Y 183
Wang, W 126
Wang, X 168, 278
Ward, J 187
Ward, L 192, 193
Waring, J 204
Waring, JD 38, 68, 218
Wariyar, R 61
Warner, L 29
Warren, J 73, 150
Wartak, S 185
Wartenburger, I 173
Watanabe, M 270
Waters, G 164, 283
Waters, SW 239
Watson, K 266
Waugh, CE 205
Weaver, C 264
Weaver, K 30
Weber-Fox, C 47, 165
Wee, H 36
Weekes, B 80
Weems, S 243
Weerappuli, P 209
Weiner, M 220
Weinstein, A 214
Weintraub, S 170, 241
Weiskrantz, L 200
Weissberg, E 206
Weisser, V 136
Weissman, D 29
Weiten, A 104
Welborn, L 155
Welcome, S 156, 169, 247
Welsh, R 244
Wencil, E 27, 28
Wendelken, C 227

310

Weng, H 273
Weniger, D 99
Wenzel, R 26
Werheid, K 35, 201
Werner, E 63
Werning, M 236
Werth, E 202
Wessel, DL 48
Wessel, K 57
Wessinger, CM 194, 267, 284
West, R 64
West, WC 276
Westenberg, M 93, 158
Westerberg, CE 221, 241
Westerlund, A 159
Whalen, D 144
Whalen, PJ 206, 207
Wheatley, T 205
Wheaton, L 149, 153
Wheaton, LA 153
Wheeler Jr., HH 195
Wheeler, M 246
Wheeler, ME 240
White, C 130
White, E 290
White, K 101, 148, 255, 261
White, LE 127, 155
Whitmer, A 231
Whitney, D 56, 176, 184, 192
Wible, C 101, 229
Wicha, NYY 82, 170
Wicker, B 51, 112, 118
Widick, P 85, 250
Wiebe, S 88
Wiener, JM 44
Wiener, M 186
Wierenga, C 209, 255
Wiese, H 54, 129
Wild, HJ 266
Wilder, M 194
Wilding, E 38, 40, 41
Wilkins, D 286
Willemer, C 38
Willems, R 282
Williams, LE 188, 228
Williams, MA 55, 193
Williams, SCR 76
Williamson, I 62
Willingham, D 247
Willoughby, A 263
Willoughby, M 63
Wilson, C 218
Wilson, H 211
Wilson, RM 177
Winblad, B 201
Winder, R 243
Winkler, A 139
Winkler, RE 266
Winner, E 164
Wirth, MM 205
Wise, R 73, 150
Wise, RJS 172
Wise, S 69, 232
Wittmann, B 243

Wittmann, BC 116
Wittmann, M 174
Wixted, J 41
Wlotko, EW 283
Woehr, J 196
Wojtecki, L 225
Wolaczyk, T 95
Wolbers, T 44
Woldorff, M 29, 109
Wolf, C 75
Wolf, O 219
Wolfensteller, U 28, 108
Wolff, P 271
Wolff, S 288
Wolfson, V 25
Wolk, D 33, 191, 219
Wolk, DA 212
Woll, B 283
Wolosin, S 154
Wolpert, DM 188
Wolynski, B 140
Wong, J 45
Wong, M 62
Woo, J 159
Wood, LD 209
Wood, S 27
Woodard, JL 243
Woodruff, CC 43
Woods, R 37
Woollams, A 254
Worthy, DA 38
Wright, BA 48, 177
Wright, C 113
Wright, CE 139
Wright, M 49
Wright, S 91, 269, 278
Wroblewski, M 126
Wu, C 265
Wu, DH 25, 77, 84, 110, 281
Wu, EH 48
Wu, T 285
Wu, Z 92, 227
Wyart, V 140
Wyatt, J 93
Wyatt, N 128
Wylie, G 73, 138, 143, 144, 211, 262
Wylie, GR 97
Wynne, C 221
X
Xu, J 88, 149, 250
Xu, Y 168
Y
Yadon, C 157
Yadon, CA 135
Yam, A 132
Yamada, Y 162
Yamashita, K-I 58
Yamazaki, K 77
Yan, P 58
Yang, D 267
Yang, J 255, 286

Author Index

Yang, Q 160, 163, 240
Yang, Y 80, 81
Yarkoni, T 154
Yashar, N 262
Yassa, M 237
Yasui, E 94, 157
Ye, Z 278
Yeh, T-C 185
Yeh, T-H 230
Yeh, Y-Y 76, 104
Yen, N-S 201, 230
Yeong, SHM 270
Yerys, B 162
Yoncheva, Y 25
Yonelinas, A 72, 98, 216, 239, 241
Yonelinas, AP 71
Yoo, SY 36
Yoshizaki, K 127
Young, E 278
Yovel, G 56
Yu, AJ 8

Yu, BH-Y 84
Yu, Y 162, 290
Yuval-Greenberg, S 138
Z
Zaehle, T 134
Zaidel, E 139, 195, 262
Zajdel, D 266
Zalla, T 225
Zang, Y 278
Zanolie, K 93, 158
Zanto, T 176
Zatorre, RJ 53
Zeithamova, D 22
Zempleni, MZ 89
Zevin, J 25
Zevin, JD 178
Zhang, H 92
Zhang, L 31
Zhang, Q 80

Zhang, Y 183
Zheng, X 83
Zhou, H 168
Zhou, R 278
Zhu, D 114
Ziegler, W 25
Ziermans, TB 96
Zimmer, HD 214, 219
Zimmer, U 47
Zimmerman, E 160, 163
Zipse, L 81
Zlatar, Z 148
Zöllig, J 64
Zorzi, M 109
Zubieta, J-K 203, 278
Zumberge, A 236
Zvyagintsev, M 50
Zweig, E 169
Zwitserlood, P 168, 252, 256
Zysset, S 115

311

Placeholder for
WW Norton Ad
(CNS_WWNORTON_page312.pdf)

