Cognitive Neuroscience Society
23rd Annual Meeting, April 2-5, 2016
New York Hilton Midtown, New York City, New York

2016 Annual Meeting Program
Contents
2016 Committees & Staff  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2
Schedule Overview .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3
Keynote  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5
George A. Miller Prize . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6
The Fred Kavli Distinguished Career
Contributions Award .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7
Young Investigator Award . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8
Special Events  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 9
CNS 2016 Debate  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10
Data Blitz  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11
General Information .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13
Save the Date .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .15
GSA/PFA Awards  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .16
Exhibits  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .16
Invited-Symposium Sessions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .17
Symposium Sessions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .23
Poster Schedule  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 37
Poster Session A  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .38
Poster Session B  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .75
Poster Session C  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 112
Poster Session D  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 149
Poster Session E  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 187
Poster Session F .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 224
Poster Topic Index  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 262
Author Index  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 264
Advertisements .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 275
Hotel Floor Plans  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 278

A Supplement of the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Cognitive Neuroscience Society
c/o Center for the Mind and Brain
267 Cousteau Place, Davis, CA 95616
ISSN 1096-8857 © CNS
www.cogneurosociety.org

2016 Committees & Staff
Governing Board

Symposium Committee

Roberto Cabeza, Ph.D., Duke University
Marta Kutas, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego
Helen Neville, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D.,University of California,
	 Santa Barbara (ex officio)
George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California,
	 Davis (ex officio)
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
(ex officio)

Elizabeth Kensinger, Ph.D., Boston College (Chair)
Michael Cole, Ph.D., Rutgers University
Kelly Giovanello, Ph.D., University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill
Ole Jensen, Ph.D., Radboud University of Birmingham
Uta Noppeneny Ph.D., University of Birmingham
Corianne Rogalsky, Ph.D., Arizona State University
Daphna Shohamy, Ph.D., Columbia University

Program Committee
Brad Postle, Ph.D., University of Wisconsin-Madison
(Chair)
Michael Anderson, Ph.D., University of Cambridge
Roberto Cabeza, Ph.D., Duke University
Manuel Carreiras, Ph.D., Basque Center on Cognition,
Brain and Language, Spain
Michael Chee, M.B.B.S., Duke University -NUS Graduate
Medical School, Singapore
Kia Nobre, Ph.D., University of Oxford
Sharon Thompson-Schill, Ph.D., University of Pennsylvania

Poster Committee
Tobias	Egner,	Ph.D.,	Duke	University	(Chair)
Marian Berryhill, Ph.D. University of Nevada, Reno Signe
Bray, Ph.D., University of Calgary
Evangelia Chrysikou, Ph.D., University of Kansas
Brian Haas, Ph.D., University of Georgia
Matthew Jerram, Ph.D., Suffolk University
Jeffrey Johnson, Ph.D., University of Missouri
Jonas Obleser, Ph.D., University of Lübeck, Germany
Rebecca Spencer, Ph.D., University of MassachusettsAmherst
Matthias Wieser, Universoty of Wuerzburg, Germany

2

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Young Investigator Award Committee
Kevin LaBar, Ph.D., Duke University (Chair)
Marvin Chun, Ph.D., Yale University
Michael Frank, Ph.D., Brown University
Cindy Lustig, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Cathy Price, Ph.D., University College, London

Founding Committee (1994)
Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D., University of California,
	 Santa Barbara
George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California, Davis
Steve Pinker, Ph.D., Harvard University
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Art Shimamura, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley

Administrative Staff
Kate Tretheway, Executive Director
Sangay Wangmo, Administrative Assistant

TM Events, Inc. Meeting Staff
Tara Miller, Event Director
Kerry Bosch, Meeting Planner
Dustin Miller, Event Associate
Becky Gazzaniga, Event Associate
Shawna Lampkin, Event Associate
Joan Carole, Exhibits Manager
Jeff Wilson, Website & Program Manager
Shauney Wilson, Submissions Manager

Schedule Overview
Saturday, April 2, 2016
11:00 am – 1:30 pm 	

Exhibitor Check-In, 3rd Floor Promenade

11:00 am – 6:30 pm 	

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check In, 3rd Floor Promenade

1:00 – 2:00 pm 	

Keynote Address Race and the brain: Insights from the neural systems of emotion and
decisions, Elizabeth Phelps, Open to the public, Grand Ballroom

2:00 – 2:30 pm 	

Coffee Service, Grand Ballroom Foyer

2:30 – 3:45 pm 	

Data Blitz Session 1, Tobias Egner, Chair, Beekman

	

Data Blitz Session 2, Brad Postle, Chair, Sutton South

3:00 – 7:00 pm 	

Exhibits on Display, Americas Hall I & II

4:00 – 5:00 pm 	

22nd Annual George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience Lecture, Computational
neuroimaging: Quantifying brain tissue and modeling activity in the living human
brain, Brian Wandell, Grand Ballroom East

5:00 – 7:00 pm 	

Poster Session A, Americas Hall I & II

6:00 – 7:00 pm 	

Welcome Reception, Americas Hall I & II

Sunday, April 3, 2016
7:30 am – 6:30 pm 	

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check In, 3rd Floor Promenade

8:00 am – 7:00 pm 	

Exhibits on Display, Americas Hall I & II
(Exhibit Halls Closed 11:00 am – 1:30 pm)

8:00 – 8:30 am 	

Continental Breakfast, Americas Hall I & II

8:00 – 10:00 am 	

Poster Session B, Americas Hall I & II

10:00 am – 12:00 pm 	

Invited Symposium 1 Computational Psychiatry Michael Frank, Chair, Grand Ballroom
East

	

Invited Symposium 2 Memory reactivation contributes to memory consolidation,
integration and decision-making Lila Davachi, Chair, Sutton Complex

12:00 – 1:30 pm 	

Lunch Break (Exhibit Halls Closed)

12:15 – 1:15 pm 	

Professional networking using social media Nicholas J.A. Wan, Beekman

1:30 – 3:30 pm 	

Symposium 1 20 years of resting-state: contributions to understanding cognition
Bharat Biswal, Chair, Michael Cole, Co-Chair, Grand Ballroom East

	

Symposium 2 The role of amplitude, phase, and rhythmicity of neural oscillations
in top-down control of cognition Jason Samaha, Chair, Ali Mazaheri, Co-Chair, Sutton
Center

	

Symposium 3 Metacognitive neuroscience: How the human brain reflects on cognition, perception and action Stephen Fleming, Chair, Grand Ballroom West

3:30 – 4:00 pm 	

Coffee Service, Grand Ballroom Foyer

4:00 – 5:00 pm 	

The Fred Kavli distinguished Career Contributions in Cognitive Neuroscience Lecture
Commonality of the fine-grained structure of neural representations across brains,
James Haxby, Grand Ballroom East

5:00 – 7:00 pm 	

Poster Session C, Americas Hall I & II

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

3

Schedule Overview	

2016 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 4, 2016
8:00 am – 6:30 pm 	
8:00 – 8:30 am 	
8:00 am – 5:00 pm 	
8:00 – 10:00 am 	
10:00 am – 12:00 pm 	
	
	
12:00 – 1:30 pm 	
12:15 – 1:15 pm 	
	
	
1:30 – 3:30 pm 	
3:00 – 4:00 pm 	
3:30 – 4:00 pm 	
4:00 – 5:00 pm 	
	
5:00 – 6:30 pm 	
7:00 – 9:00 pm 	

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check In, 3rd Floor Promenade
Continental Breakfast, Americas Hall I & II
Exhibits on Display
Poster Session D, Americas Hall I & II
Symposium 4 From prediction error to control: Neurobiological and computational accounts of
Prefrontal Cortex Eliana Vassena, Chair, Grand Ballroom East
Symposium 5 Memory retrieval as a guide along the winding road of memory formation Donna
Bridge, Chair, Sutton Center
Symposium 6 Multisensory integration: neural mechanisms, computational operations and
behaviour Uta Noppeney, Chair, Grand Ballroom West
Lunch Break
Exhibit Expo, Americas Hall I & II
NIH Funding: Training and Research Grant Opportunities, Kathy Mann Koepke, Sutton Center
Publishing Workshop for Early Career Researchers, Panel: Cindy Lustig, Micah Murray, Michael
Rugg, Rebecca Schwarzlose, Toby Charkin, Adam Fraser, Grand Ballroom West
Federal Funding Opportunities at the National Science Foundation, Alumit Ishai, Grand Ballroom East
Poster Session E, Americas Hall I & II
CNS Trainee Professional Development Panel, Concourse G
Coffee Service, Americas Hall I & II
YIA 1 The Cognitive Neuroscience of Adolescent Behavior Adriana Galvan, Grand Ballroom West
YIA 2 Enhancing episodic memory networks using noninvasive brain stimulation Joel Voss,
Grand Ballroom West
Debate, Connectomics: ‘Missing link’ for understanding neural computation, or ‘minutiae of
implementation’?, Anthony Movshon & Moritz Helmstaedter, Debaters, David Poeppel, Moderator, Sutton Center
CNS Student Trainee Social Night, McGee’s Pub NYC

Tuesday, April 5, 2016
8:00 am – 3:00 pm 	
8:00 – 8:30 am 	
8:00 – 10:00 am 	
	
10:00 am – 12:00 pm 	
	
	
12:00 – 1:30 pm 	
1:30 – 3:30 pm 	
	

4

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check In, 3rd Floor Promenade
Continental Breakfast, Americas Hall I & II
Exhibits on Display, Americas Hall I & II
Poster Session F, Americas Hall I & II
Symposium 7 Human Intracranial Electrophysiology: A New Era Josef Parvizi, Chair,
Grand Ballroom West
Symposium 8 Taking stock of cognitive training: theory, neural mechanisms and application
Duncan Astle, Chair, Beekman
Symposium 9 Affective-motivational salience and attentional sets Rebecca Todd , Chair, Grace
Truong, Co-Chair, Sutton Center
Lunch Break
Invited Symposium 3 The Neuroscience of Socioeconomic Status: Setting the Agenda Martha
Farah, Chair, Grand Ballroom West
Invited Symposium 4 Dynamic Neural Coding for Flexible Cognition Mark Stokes, Chair,
Sutton Center

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Keynote
Elizabeth A. Phelps, Ph.D.
Julius Silver Professor of Psychology and Neural Science, New York University,
Nathan Kline Institute

Keynote Address, Open to the Public
Saturday, April 2, 2016, 1:00 - 2:00pm, Grand Ballroom

Race and the Brain: Insights from the neural
systems of emotion and decisions
Investigations of the neural systems mediating the processing of social
groups defined by race, specifically Black and White race groups in American participants, reveals significant overlap with brain mechanisms involved
in emotion. This talk will provide an overview of research on the neuroscience of race and emotion, focusing on implicit race attitudes. Implicit race
attitudes are expressed without conscious effort and control, and contrast
with explicit, conscious attitudes. In spite of sharp decline in the expression
of explicit, negative attitudes towards outgroup race members over the last
half century, negative implicit attitudes persist, even in the face of strong
egalitarian goals and beliefs. Early research demonstrated that implicit, but not explicit, negative attitudes towards outgroup race members correlate with blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal in the amygdala – a region implicated in threat representations, as well as emotion’s influence on cognition. Building on this initial finding, we demonstrate
how learning and decisions may be modulated by implicit race attitudes and involve neural systems mediating emotion,
learning and choice. Finally, we draw on recent research on emotion regulation to suggest potential means to diminish the
unintentional expression of negative, implicit race attitudes.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

5

George A. Miller Prize
Congratulations to Dr. Brian Wandell
for being awarded this honor!
Dr. Brian Wandell will accept this prestigious award
and deliver his lecture on Saturday, April 2, 2016, 4:00 –
5:00 pm, in the Grand Ballroom East at the New York Hilton
Midtown Hotel.

Computational neuroimaging:
Quantifying brain tissue and modeling
activity in the living human brain

About the George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive
Neuroscience
The George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience was established in 1995 by the Cognitive Neuroscience Society to honor the
innovative scholarship of George A. Miller, whose many theoretical advances has so greatly influenced the discipline of cognitive
neuroscience. The first ten years of the prize were funded by generous support from the James S. McDonnell Foundation.
The Prize is awarded to the nominee whose career is characterized
by distinguished and sustained scholarship and research at the
cutting-edge of their discipline and that has in the past, or has the
potential in the future, to revolutionize cognitive neuroscience.

Dr. Brian Wandell

Extraordinary innovation and high impact on international scientific thinking should be a hallmark of the recipient’s work.

Isaac and Madeline Stein Family Professor, Director of
Stanford’s Center for Cognitive and Neurobiological Imaging
(CNI), Psychology Department.

Each year a call for nominations for the George A. Miller Prize is
made to the membership of the society. The recipient of the prize
attends the annual meeting of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society
and delivers the George A. Miller lecture.

In the last twenty-five
years there has been
extraordinary progress in our ability to
measure and model
the tissue properties
and activity in the
living human brain
using magnetic resonance imaging. Reliable measurements
can be made at the
millimeter scale in
individual subjects,
significantly enhancing the value of these
techniques for both
scientific and clinical
applications. I will describe examples that combine functional
MRI measurements with simple visual models to characterize
the position, size and stimulus selectivity within the many
different regions of visual cortex. I will also describe how to
use diffusion MRI and quantitative MRI to model the connections between brain regions and measure the active, biological wires that carry information across the very large expanse
of the human brain. MRI measurements that quantify the
molecular properties of brain tissue, and reproducible computational models of brain responses promise a new era in
which data and models from around the world can be meaningfully compared and combined. Using the tools of reproducible research for computing and informatics for data sharing, we can develop quantitative profiles of brain responses
and tissue properties that help us understand the brain in
both health and disease. These measurements and models
can provide a strong foundation for a human neuroscience
that benefits society.
6

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Previous Winners of the George A. Miller
Lectureship
2015 	
2014	
2013 	
2012 	
2011 	
2010 	
2009 	
2008 	
2007 	
2006 	
2005 	
2004 	
2003 	
2002 	
2001 	
2000 	
1999 	
1998 	
1997 	
1996 	
1995 	

Patricia Kuhl, Ph.D., University of Washington
Jon Kaas, Ph.D., Vanderbilt University
Fred H. Gage, Ph.D., The Salk Institute
Eve Marder, Ph.D., Brandeis University
Mortimer Mishkin, Ph.D., NIMH
Steven Pinker, Ph.D., Harvard University
Marcus Raichle, Ph.D., Washington University School of Medicine
Anne Treisman, Ph.D., Princeton University
Joaquin M. Fuster, Ph.D.,
University of California Los Angeles
Steven A. Hillyard, Ph.D.,
University of California San Diego
Leslie Ungerleider, Ph.D., National
Institute of Mental Health
Michael Posner, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Michael Gazzaniga, Ph.D., Dartmouth College
Daniel Kahneman, Ph.D., Princeton University
William Newsome, Ph.D., Stanford University
Patricia Churchland, Ph.D.,
University of California, San Diego
Giacommo Rizzolatti, Ph.D.,
University of Parma, Italy
Susan Carey, Ph.D., New York University
Roger Shepard, Ph.D., Stanford University
David Premack, Ph.D., CNRS, France
David H. Hubel, Ph.D., Harvard Medical School

The Fred Kavli Distinguished
Career Contributions Award
Congratulations to Dr. James Haxby for About the Distinguished Career
Contributions Award
being awarded this honor!
Dr. Haxby, will accept this prestigious award and deliver his
lecture on Sunday, April 3, 2016, 4:00 –5:00 pm, in the Grand
Ballroom East at the New York Hilton Midtown Hotel.

Commonality of the fine-grained
structure of neural representations
across brains

The Distinguished Career Contributions (DCC) award
honors senior cognitive neuroscientists for their distinguished career, leadership and mentoring in the field of
cognitive neuroscience. The recipient of this prize gives a
lecture at our annual meeting.

Previous Winners of the Distinguished
Career Contributions Award

Dr. James Haxby

2015 	

Marta Kutas, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego

Evans Family Distinguished Professor and Director of the
Center for Cognitive Neuroscience at Dartmouth, Professor in
the Center for Mind/Brain Sciences at the University of Trento

2014	

Marsel Mesulam, M.D., Northwestern University

2013	 Robert T. Knight, M.D., University of California,
	Berkeley

Multivariate pattern
analysis
affords
investigation of finegrained patterns of
neural activity that
carry
fine-grained
distinctions in the
information
they
represent. These patterns of brain activity
in different brains
can be recast as vectors in a common
high-dimensional
representational
space with basis
functions that have
tuning profiles and
patterns of connectivity that are common across brains. We
derive transformation matrices that rotate individual anatomical spaces into the common model space with searchlight-based, whole cortex hyperalignment. This model provides a common structure that captures fine-grained
distinctions among cortical patterns of response that are not
modeled well by current brain atlases. The model also captures coarse-scale features of cortical topography, such as
retinotopy and category-selectivity, and provides a computational account for both coarse-scale and fine-scale
topographies with multiplexed topographic basis functions.

2012	

Morris Moscovitch, Ph.D., University of Toronto

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

7

Young Investigator Award
Congratulations to the 2016 Young
Investigator Award Winners
Adriana Galvan, Associate Professor of Psychology,
Jeffrey Wenzel Term Chair in Behavioral Neuroscience, Department of Psychology, UCLA

in decision making. These hypotheses are tested with cognitive, neuroimaging, endocrine, and eyeblink studies.
Contrary to historical narratives about the destructive consequences of the unstable adolescent brain, this research is
revealing particular ways in which its plasticity bears exciting possibilities for learning, exploration, and ingenuity.

Joel Voss, Assistant Professor, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Departments of Medical Social Sciences, Neurology,
and Psychiatry

Enhancing Episodic Memory Networks
Using Noninvasive Brain Stimulation

YIA special lectures take place on Monday, April 4, 2016,
4:00 – 5:00 pm, in the Grand Ballroom West at the New York
Hilton Midtown Hotel.

Joel Voss, Assistant Professor

The purpose of the awards is to recognize outstanding contributions by scientists early in their careers. Two awardees,
one male and one female, are named by the Awards Committee, and are honored at the CNS annual meeting. Each
award includes $500 US to be used by the winners toward
travel costs to the meeting, or for any other purpose.

The Cognitive Neuroscience of
Adolescent Behavior
Monday, April 4, 4:00 –4:30 pm, Grand Ballroom West

Adriana Galvan
Associate Professor of Psychology
Jeffrey Wenzel Term Chair in Behavioral Neuroscience, UCLA
The human brain undergoes significant maturation during adolescence.
Most changes occur in mesolimbic
circuitry and frontal cortex. Intriguingly, mesolimbic brain regions
exhibit non-linear patterns of neural
engagement, showing the greatest
activation in adolescents as compared to younger and older individuals. This pattern of development is
in contrast to linear patterns of
development observed in cortical
regions. How does this unique neurodevelopmental phenotype affect commonly observed
behavior in adolescents? In which environmental circumstances do these neurobehavioral interactions yield adaptive
versus maladaptive behavior? Research in my laboratory is
designed to address these questions. In this talk, I will present a line of research testing the hypothesis that the ongoing
maturation of mesolimbic circuitry during adolescence confers greater sensitivity to environmental input and flexibility

8

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Monday, April 4, 4:30 –5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom West
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine
Episodic memory has been associated with interactions among a distributed set of brain regions forming a hippocampal-cortical network.
This network is disrupted in a variety of neurological and neuropsychiatric conditions that have
memory impairment as a chief
symptom. I will describe my laboratory’s efforts to target and manipulate portions of this network using
noninvasive electromagnetic stimulation. We have shown that multiple-day, network-targeted, repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation (rTMS) can produce lasting enhancements of
network functional MRI connectivity and episodic memory
performance. These changes are robust 24 hours after the
final rTMS session and persist in weakened form for up to 2
weeks. Furthermore, rTMS-induced changes are highly specific to targeted portions of the hippocampal-cortical network defined a priori on anatomical grounds. Improvements
in episodic memory performance also occur with enhanced
neural correlates of recollective retrieval, suggesting relative
specificity of stimulation effects on the targeted posterior
portions of the hippocampal-cortical network that are more
heavily implicated in recollective than familiarity-based
memory retrieval. Targeted noninvasive stimulation of hippocampal-cortical networks is a promising approach for
studying involvement of hippocampal-cortical networks in
memory that could have significant impact on impairments
of memory in a variety of disorders.

Special Events
Professional Networking Using Social
Media

Publishing Workshop for Early Career
Researchers

Sunday, April 3, 12:15 - 1:15 pm, Beekman

Monday, April 4, 12:15 - 1:15 pm, Grand Ballroom West

Social media is a powerful tool for neuroscientists. Speakers
will discuss ways to use social media (blogging, Twitter,
LinkedIn, etc.) to widen and strengthen your professional
network as well as open up new opportunities you may not
have been exposed to otherwise (press opportunities, different funding sources, etc). Speakers will also share personal
experiences from social media and give tips on what has
helped (or not helped) build their own professional network
and expand their careers. Discussion time will allow for participants to engage with speakers and others on experiences
learned through using social media as a networking tool.

This workshop will present a rare opportunity to gain
insights into journal publishing from the Editors and Publishers of Elsevier journals (such as Neuropsychologia) on
how to write and review a paper, new publishing initiatives
and publishing ethics.

Organizer: Nicholas J.A. Wan (Utah State University)
Speakers: Bradley Voytek, Ph.D. (University of California
– San Diego); Richard Prather, Ph.D. (University of Maryland); Sophie Scott, Ph.D. (University College London)

Federal Funding Opportunities at the
National Science Foundation
Monday, April 4, 12:15 - 1:15 pm, Grand Ballroom East
Dr. Alumit Ishai, Director of the Cognitive Neuroscience
Program, will present an overview of current federal funding opportunities for Cognitive Neuroscientists at NSF, the
grant application, review and funding processes, and provide hints for successful grant writing along the way. Come
learn how to advance your research with federal support!

Panel: Panel: Cindy Lustig (Editor-in-Chief of Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences and Senior Editor of NeuroImage), Micah Murray (Editor-in-Chief of Brain Topography,
Section Editor of Neuropsychologia, and Handling Editor
of NeuroImage), Michael Rugg (Editor-in-Chief of Neuropsychologia), Rebecca Schwarzlose (Editor of Trends in
Cognitive Science), Toby Charkin (Executive Publisher at
Elsevier), Adam Fraser (Publisher at Elsevier)

CNS Trainee Professional Development
Panel
Monday, April 4, 3:00 - 4:00 pm, Concourse G
Join the CNS Trainee Association for the first Trainee Professional Development Panel! Hear some of the foremost
experts in the field of cognitive neuroscience detail their
career trajectories, discuss factors that influenced their
development, and reveal what they wish they had known
as Trainees. The second half of the session will be open for
Q&A. Appropriate for trainees of all levels!

Speaker: Alumit Ishai, Director, NSF Cognitive Neuroscience Program

NIH Funding: Training and Research
Grant Opportunities
Monday, April 4, 12:15 - 1:15 pm, Sutton Center
NIH Program Directors representing several Institutes will
highlight current training, career development, and research
funding opportunities; will touch on funding opportunities,
grant application types, review, and funding processes, and
provide hints for success. Come learn and ask questions
about how NIH support can help you!
Speaker: Kathy Mann Koepke, NICHD/NIH

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

9

CNS 2016 Debate
Connectomics: ‘Missing link’ for
understanding neural computation, or
‘minutiae of implementation’?
Monday, April 4, 5:00 - 6:30 pm, Sutton Center
A debate between Anthony Movshon, NYU and Moritz
Helmstaedter, Max-Planck-Institute.
Moderator: David Poeppel, Max-Planck-Institute & NYU
Limited seating, reservation required.

Anthony Movshon, NYU
Biologists are taught the basic principle that form follows
function. The idea of connectomics goes further, to propose
that form determines function. From this it would follow
that knowing the form of neural circuits in detail would by
itself allow us to deduce their function. The reality is different. The form of neural circuits undoubtedly constrains their
function, but a knowledge of form alone is neither necessary
nor sufficient to understand brain function. Neuroanatomy
has always been one of the central tools of neuroscience.
But except in very special cases like the retina, where the
behavior of a circuit is well understood, anatomy alone
tells us little of function. Rather, functional models that try
to capture the purpose of neural computation rather than
dwelling on the minutiae of its implementation offer a better
path to understanding the brain.

10

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Moritz Helmstaedter, Max-Planck-Institute
Since brains drive rich time-varying behaviors, the focus of
scientific investigation has always been the dynamics of neurons, synapses, neuronal ensembles. Decades later we have
a myriad of theoretical proposals how brains could compute, especially in the cerebral cortex of mammals. But few
of these models are unequivocally refutable by functional
experiments. Could the lack of knowledge about neuronal
circuit structure, connectomes, be the missing link? Connectomic experiments are more efficient than functional ones in
finding rare but relevant computations of a neuronal ensemble. Connectomes are required to explain computations in
the mammalian retina and fly optical system. The degree to
which connectomes shape computations in the mammalian
cerebral cortex will remain a matter of scientific debate until
finally, cerebral cortex connectomes will be measured.

Data Blitz
Data Blitz Sessions
A Data Blitz is a series of 5-minute talks, each covering just a
bite-sized bit of research. It will offer a fast-paced overview
of some of the most exciting research presented at this year’s
poster sessions.

Data Blitz Session 1
Saturday, April 2, 2:30 - 3:45 pm, Beekman
Chair: Tobias Egner, Duke University
Speakers: Sophie Scott, Alessandro Tavano, Simon Davis, JeanRemi King, Radhika Gosavi, Robert Emerson, Ola Ozernov-Palchik, Francesca Carota, Caitlin Hilliard, Jessica Creery, Jean-Baptiste Eichenlaub, Rachel Newsome
Talk 1: LISTENING TO ‘WOB WOB’ AND ‘WAH WAH’ - THE EFFECTS
OF EXPERTISE IN BEAT BOXING AND GUITAR PLAYING ON PERCEPTION NETWORKS. Sophie Scott1, Saloni Krishan1, Cesar
Lima1, Tom Manly1, Samuel Evans1, Harry Yeff2; 1Institute
of Cognitive Neuroscience, UCL, London, 2Get Involved
LTD

Talk 2: TEMPORAL PROBABILITIES IN THE BETA-BAND Ales-

sandro Tavano , Erich Schröger , Sonja Kotz ; Max
Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, Frankfurt am
Main (Germany)., 2Institute of Psychology, University of
Leipzig (Germany)., 3Maastricht University, Maastricht
(The Netherlands), 4Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive Brain Sciences, Leipzig (Germany)
1,2

2

3,4

1

Talk 3: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF EVERYDAY THINGS: HOW PERCEPTUAL AND CONCEPTUAL FEATURES INFLUENCE MEMORY FOR
OBJECTS. Simon Davis1, Benjamin Geib1, Rosalie Cichinelli1, Marty Woldorff1, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke University

Talk 4: DECODING THE SELECTIVE AND DYNAMIC MAINTENANCE OF UNSEEN SENSORY FEATURES IN THE HUMAN BRAIN
Jean-Remi King1, Niccolo Pescetelli2, Stanislas Dehaene3;
1
New York University, 2Oxford, 3College de France, Paris

Talk 5: DECODING GRAPHEME-COLOR SYNESTHESIA USING
MULTIVARIATE PATTERN ANALYSIS Radhika Gosavi1, Emma
Meyering1, Nathan Rose1, Bradley Postle1, Edward Hubbard1; 1University of Wisconsin- Madison

Talk 6: LONGITUDINAL STUDY OF THE EMERGING LATERALIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE NETWORK DURING INFANCY Robert

Emerson1, Wei Gao2, Weili Lin1; 1University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, CA

Talk 7: DISTINCT NEURAL ALTERATIONS OF HETEROGENEOUS
DYSLEXIA RISK PROFILES Ola Ozernov-Palchik1,2, Meaghan

Mauer1, Elizabeth S Norton3, Georgios Sideridis1,5, Sara
Beach4,5, Maryanne Wolf2, John D. E. Gabrieli5, Nadine
Gaab1,5; 1Boston Children’s Hospital, 2Tufts University,
3
Northwestern University, 4Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 5Harvard University

Talk 8: WORD CO-OCCURRENCE STATISTICS AND CONCEPTUAL
TAXONOMIES PREDICT DISSOCIABLE FMRI INFORMATION PATTERNS IN THE BRAIN SEMANTIC SYSTEMS. Francesca Carota1,
Hamed Nili2, Friedemann Pulvermüller3, Nikolaus
Kriegeskorte1; 1MRC - Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit,
Cambridge, UK, 2Experimental Psychology Department,
University of Oxford, UK, 3Freie Universität, Berlin, Germany

Talk 9: HIPPOCAMPAL DECLARATIVE MEMORY SUPPORTS LANGUAGE AND GESTURE PRODUCTION Caitlin Hilliard1, Susan
Wagner Cook1, Melissa Duff1; 1University of Iowa

Talk 10: HUMAN HIPPOCAMPAL THETA DURING FEEDBACK ON
A SPATIAL LEARNING TASK Jessica Creery1, David Brang1,2,
Vernon Towle2, James Tao2, Sasha Wu2, Ken Paller1;
1
Northwestern University, 2University of Chicago

Talk 11: REACTIVATION OF MEMORY-RELATED GAMMA ACTIVITY
IN HUMAN SLEEP Jean-Baptiste Eichenlaub1, Nicole Rivi-

lis1, Siddharth Biswal1, Brandon Westover1, Eric Halgren2,
Sydney S. Cash1; 1Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 2Kavli Institute for Brain and Mind,
UCSD

Talk 12: WHEN A MARSHMALLOW IS MORE LIKE A PILLOW
THAN A GRAHAM CRACKER: PARSING PERCEPTUAL AND CONCEPTUAL PROCESSES OF THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE Rachel
Newsome1,2, Danielle Douglas1, Louisa Man1, Morgan
Barense1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research
Institute

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

11

Data Blitz	

Data Blitz Session 2
Saturday, April 2, 2:30 - 3:45 pm, Sutton South
Chair: Brad Postle, University of Wisconsin - Madison
Speakers: Kendra Seaman, Vyoma D Shah, Lisa Alexandria Velenosi, Wayne Mackey, Anne Martin, MaryAnn P Noonan, Tommy
Wilson, Alessandra Finisguerra, Katherine Rice, Suzanne Dikker,
Moranne Eidelman-Rothman, Charlotte Grosse Wiesmann
Talk 1: ADULT AGE DIFFERENCES IN THE INFLUENCE OF FINANCIAL SKEWNESS ON CHOICE AND NEURAL ACTIVITY Kendra
Seaman1, Josiah Leong2, Charlene Wu2, Brian Knutson2,
Gregory Samanez-Larkin1; 1Yale University, 2Stanford
University

Talk 2: INCREASED DOPAMINE SYNTHESIS CAPACITY IS ASSOCIATED WITH A LOWER RATE OF LEARNING IN OLDER ADULTS

2016 Annual Meeting

Talk 7: CROSS-FREQUENCY COUPLING BETWEEN ALPHA OSCILLATIONS AND SELECTIVE ENTRAINMENT: A CORRELATE OF
SELECTIVE ATTENTION Tommy Wilson1, Sophie Molholm1,
John J Foxe1,2; 1The Sheryl and Daniel R. Tishman Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory (CNL) and Children’s
Evaluation and Rehabilitation Center (CERC), Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 2Ernest J. Del
Monte Institute for Neuromedicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York

Talk 8: DECEPTIVE INTENTION AND KINEMATIC ALTERATION
OF AN OBSERVED ACTION AFFECT THE MOTOR SYSTEM VIA
DISSOCIABLE PROCESSES Alessandra Finisguerra1, Lucia
Amoruso1, Stegios Makris2, Cosimo Urgesi1,3; 1University
of Udine, Italy, 2Edge Hill University, United Kingdom,
3
Bangor University, United Kingdom

Vyoma D Shah1, Anne S Berry1, Suzanne L Baker1, Taylor
J Mellinger2, Kaitlin N Swinnerton2, Jacob W Vogel2, William J Jagust1; 1Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
2
University of California Berkeley

Talk 9: LET’S CHAT: DEVELOPMENTAL NEURAL BASES OF
SOCIAL MOTIVATION DURING REAL-TIME PEER INTERACTION

Talk 3: NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF SPATIAL LAYOUT ACROSS
MENTAL TRANSFORMATION – A TACTILE FMRI STUDY Lisa Alex-

Talk 10: BRAIN-TO-BRAIN SYNCHRONY PREDICTS STUDENT
ENGAGEMENT AND SOCIAL DYNAMICS IN THE CLASSROOM:
A CROWD-SOURCING NEUROSCIENCE STUDY. Suzanne

andria Velenosi1,2, Timo Torsten Schmidt1,2, Felix Blankenburg1,2; 1Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Center
for Cognitive Neuroscience Berlin, Berlin, Germany

Katherine Rice1, Eleonora Sadikova1, Elizabeth Redcay1;
1
University of Maryland

Talk 4: DISRUPTION OF DELAY-PERIOD ACTIVITY IN HUMAN
FRONTAL EYE FIELDS CAUSES SYSTEMATIC IMPAIRMENTS
IN SPATIAL COGNITION Wayne Mackey1, Clayton Curtis1;

Dikker1,2, Lu Wan3, Ido Davidesco1, Lisa Kaggen4, Jess
Rowland1, James McClintock5, Matthias Oostrik, Jay Van
Bavel1, Mingzhou Ding3, David Poeppel1,6; 1New York
University, 2Utrecht University, 3University of Florida,
4
Stanford University, 5Trevor Day School, 6Max Planck
Institute for Empirical Aesthetics

Talk 5: MEMORY AND ATTENTION FIELDS IN THE HUMAN VISUAL
SYSTEM Anne Martin1, Liang Wang1,2, Yuri Saalmann1,3,

Talk 11: PRIOR EXPOSURE TO EXTREME PAIN ALTERS THE
PERCEPTUAL PROCESSING OF OTHERS’ PAIN; THE EFFECT OF
OXYTOCIN Moranne Eidelman-Rothman1, Abraham Gold-

1

New York University

Avgusta Shestyuk4, Nathan Crone5, Josef Parvisi6, Robert
Knight4, Sabine Kastner1; 1Princeton University, 2Chinese
Academy of Sciences, 3University of Wisconsin, Madison,
4
University of California, Berkeley, 5The Johns Hopkins
Hospital, 6Stanford University

Talk 6: DIFFERENTIAL MODULATION OF VISUAL RESPONSES
BY DISTRACTOR OR TARGET PREDICTIONS? MaryAnn P
Noonan1, Yannik Bauer2, Alex H Von Lautz3, Chris Summerfield1, Mark S Stokes1; 1Department of Experimental
Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK, 2International Max Planck Research School, University of Tübingen, Germany, 3Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Berlin, Germany

12

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

stein1, Omri Weisman1, Inna Schneiderman1, Orna Zagoory-Sharon1, Jean Decety2, Ruth Feldman1; 1Bar-Ilan University, 2The University of Chicago

Talk 12: WHITE MATTER MATURATION IN TEMPOROPARIETAL
JUNCTION AND ITS CONNECTION TO PREFRONTAL CORTEX
SUPPORTS THE EMERGENCE OF THEORY OF MIND Charlotte
Grosse Wiesmann1, Jan Schreiber1, Tania Singer1, Nikolaus Steinbeis1,2, Angela D. Friederici1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 2Universiteit Leiden

General Information
Abstracts

Certificate of Attendance

Poster abstracts can be found in the printed program and
in the PDF version which is downloadable from www.
cogneurosociety.org.

ATM

To receive a Certificate of Attendance please visit the Registration Counter on the 3rd Floor Promenade of the New
York Hilton Midtown Hotel at the end of meeting. If you
require any changes, we will be happy to email/mail a copy
after the meeting. See also Receipts.

An ATM is located in the lobby level of the hotel for your
convenience.

Chair People

Audiovisual Equipment for Talks
LCD projectors (e.g., for PowerPoint presentations) will be
provided in all rooms where spoken sessions are scheduled;
however, computers will NOT be provided. Presenters must
bring their own computers and set them up BEFORE the
start of the session in which they are presenting. Speakers
are requested to bring their own dongle. Facilities will be
provided to allow several computers to be connected to the
LCD projector in a room. Presenters are strongly encouraged
to arrive in their scheduled symposium room a minimum of
30 minutes before their talks so that they know how to set
up their equipment.

Baggage Check
The Bell Desk - Assistance with luggage, packages and other
carry-on's, is located with the Concierge, next to the front
desk in the lobby. Baggage Storage ($3.50 p/bag)

Business Center
The Business Center is located on the 2nd floor of the New
York Hilton Midtown Hotel.

Catering
Catering will be available during the conference and is
included in the registration fee. Please refer to the table
below for the catering times.
Saturday, April 2
Welcome Reception, 6:00 - 7:00 pm, Americas Hall I & II
Coffee Service, 2:00 – 2:30 pm, Grand Ballroom Foyer
Sunday, April 3

Please ensure that you are available in your presentation
room at least thirty minutes before the start of the session.
Persons chairing sessions are asked to keep the talks on time.

Contact Us
To contact us onsite, visit the Registration Counter on the
3rd Floor Promenade of the New York Hilton Midtown
Hotel or send an email to meeting@cnsmeeting.org. We will
respond to your email at our soonest opportunity.

Code of Conduct
The Cognitive Neuroscience Society is committed to providing a safe and professional environment during our
annual meeting. All CNS members are expected to conduct
themselves in a business-like and professional manner. It
is unlawful to harass a person or employee because of that
person’s sex or race. Harassment is defined by any situation
that creates a hostile or offensive work environment. Any
person found to be harassing another during the meeting
will be escorted off the premises and barred from attending
future meetings.

Disclaimer
The Program Committee reserves the right to change the
meeting program at any time without notice. Please note
this program is correct at time of print.

Drink Tickets
Each Attendee will receive one drink ticket; it can be
redeemed for an alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverage at the
Welcome Reception on Saturday. Lost drink tickets will not
be replaced.

Continental Breakfast, 8:00 – 8:30 am, Americas Hall I & II
Coffee Service, 3:30 – 4:00 pm, Grand Ballroom Foyer
Monday, April 4
Continental Breakfast, 8:00 – 8:30 am, Americas Hall I & II
Coffee Service, 3:30 – 4:00 pm, Americas Hall I & II
Tuesday, April 5
Continental Breakfast, 8:00 – 8:30 am, Americas Hall I & II

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

13

General Information	

2016 Annual Meeting

Exhibits

Internet Access

The conference exhibits are located in Americas Hall I & II of
the New York Hilton Midtown Hotel. Located in this room
are the posters, exhibit booths, and catering. The Exhibit
Hall is open to all attendees at the following times:

CNS attendees will receive complimentary wireless internet
in their guest room, when reserved within the CNS block
and before March 16, 2016.

Saturday, April 2 	
Sunday, April 3 	
	
Monday, April 4	
Tuesday, April 5	

3:00 – 7:00 pm
8:00 am – 11:00 am
1:30 - 7:00 pm
8:00 am – 5:00 pm
8:00 – 10:00 am

Exhibit Halls are closed Sunday, 11:00 am - 1:30 pm. Join us
for the Exhibits Expo on Monday from 12:00 - 1:30 pm.

Facebook
Find us on Facebook search for “Cognitive Neuroscience
Society” and like us!

Hotel

Free internet terminals are located on the 3rd Floor Promenade. Internet terminals are available during the meeting registration hours on Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday
when not needed for onsite registration. See Onsite Meeting
Registration.

LinkedIn
Join our group on LinkedIn search “Cognitive Neuroscience
Society (CNS)”.

Lost & Found
The meeting Lost and Found is located at the Registration
Counter on the 3rd Floor Promenade of the New York
Hilton Midtown Hotel.

The New York Hilton Midtown Hotel is our exclusive Hotel
for the CNS 2016 Annual Meeting and where all CNS 2016
meeting events will be held. New York Hilton Midtown
Hotel located at 1335 Avenue of the Americas, New York,
New York, 10019, USA.

Member Services

Hotel Restaurants

Saturday, April 2 	
Sunday, April 3 	
Monday, April 4	
Tuesday, April 5	

Bridges – Discover the ultimate in sophistication in the fantastic setting of Bridges Bar. Celebrate the romance of Manhattan's Seven Bridges while sipping your favorite cocktail
at the spacious bar. Enjoy some of the best martinis in town
or choose from our ever-changing selection of fine regional
wines in a welcoming atmosphere. Open from 5:30 p.m. to
2:00 a.m. Monday to Saturday.
Herb n’ Kitchen - Hilton's new concept restaurant, Herb N'
Kitchen, features seasonal salads, artisanal sandwiches and
brick oven pizzas. A barista zone offers specialty coffees to
enjoy either in the restaurant or on the go. Breakfast buffet
served daily from 6:30 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. (last seating 11:00
a.m.). Coffee and light fare items available to take away
from 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
Lobby Lounge – Overlooking the lobby, the Lobby Lounge
is your spot to rendez-vous. Enjoy exceptional wines, cocktails, light fare, as well as terrific people watching. Open
from 12 noon to midnight Monday through Saturday and
12 noon Sundays.
Minus5 Ice Bar - Minus5° is an ice bar where you can touch,
feel, and explore handcrafted ice sculptures and architecture made from Canadian ice. Everything inside minus5° is
made of ice, even the glasses that you enjoy our famous vodka-based cocktails in. No matter what the event, you and
your companions will be treated to the coolest experience in
town! This is a unique venue for fun and memorable group
events or corporate functions.

14

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

The member services desk is located at the Registration
Counter on the 3rd Floor Promenade of the New York Hilton
Midtown Hotel. The member services desk will be open at
the following times:
11:00 am – 5:00 pm
7:30 am – 4:30 pm
8:00 am – 6:30 pm
8:00 am – 12:00 pm

Message Center
Messages for meeting registrants can be left and retrieved at
the Registration Counter on the 3rd Floor Promenade of the
New York Hilton Midtown Hotel. A bulletin board will be
available for announcements and job postings.

Mobile Phones
Attendees are asked to silence their mobile phones when in
sessions.

Name Badges
The New York Hilton Midtown Hotel and Convention
Center is open to public access. For security purposes,
attendees, speakers and exhibitors are asked to wear their
name badges to all sessions and social functions.
Entrance into sessions is restricted to registered attendees
only. Entrance to the Exhibition will be limited to badge
holders only. If you misplace your name badge, please go to
the Registration Counter on the 3rd Floor Promenade of the
New York Hilton Midtown Hotel for a replacement.

2016 Annual Meeting	

General Information

Parking

Registration

The New York Hilton Midtown Hotel offers Valet parking. Parking rates are currently $55.00/24 hour per car or
$67.00/24 hour per SUV for hotel guests. (Please note this
information was correct at time of print.)

The	 Registration	 Counter	 is	 located	 on	 the	 3rd Floor
Promenade of the New York Hilton Midtown Hotel. The
Registration Counter will be open at the following times:

Phone Charging Station
There will be a small phone charging station located at the
Registration Counter on the 3rd Floor Promenade of the
New York Hilton Midtown Hotel.

Photo Disclaimer
Registration and attendance at, or participation in, the Cognitive Neuroscience Society meetings and other activities
constitute an agreement by the registrant/attendee to CNS’s
use and distribution (both now and in the future) of the registrant's or attendee's image in photographs of such events
and activities.

Poster Sessions
Poster sessions are scheduled on Saturday, April 2, Sunday,
April 3, Monday, April 4, and Tuesday, April 5. The presenting author must be present during the assigned session
and other authors may be present to answer questions. The
poster sessions are in Americas Hall I & II of the New York
Hilton Midtown Hotel. Badges are required at all times. Do
not leave personal items in the poster room.

Printed Program
One copy of the printed program is available to each
attendee. If you would like a second copy please check in
at the Registration Counter on the 3rd Floor Promenade of
the New York Hilton Midtown Hotel on the last day of the
event. Every effort has been made to produce an accurate
program. If you are presenting at the conference, please
confirm your presentation times as listed in this program.
Attendees also have the option to view the program by
downloading it from our website.

Receipts
You received two receipts via email, one at the time of purchase and a second with your registration confirmation.
Please email the registration desk if you require an additional copy. See also Certificate of Attendance.

Reception

Saturday, April 2
Sunday, April 3 	
Monday, April 4	
Tuesday, April 5	

11:00 am - 6:30 pm
7:30 am – 6:30 pm
8:00 am – 6:30 pm
8:00 am – 3:00 pm

Smoking
Smoking is not permitted in or outside any of the meeting
rooms or the exhibition hall.

Speakers
All speakers must register and wear name badge to present.
Please ensure that you are available in your presentation
room at least thirty minutes before the start of the session.
See also Audiovisual equipment for Talks.

Transportation
Taxis at JFK Airport charge a flat fare of $52 for trips between
the airport and Manhattan. Taxis impose a $4.50 surcharge
during peak hours (4-8 p.m. weekdays, excluding holidays),
for a fare of $56.50.
*Fares subject to change without notice.

Twitter
Follow CNS Annual Meeting (@CNSmtg). Our Hashtag this
year is #CNS2016

Website
http://www.cogneurosociety.org/annual-meeting/

SAVE THE DATE

CNS 2017
Annual Meeting
Will be held in San Francisco on
March 25-28, 2017

The Welcome Reception will be held in Americas Hall I & II,
from 6:00-7:00 pm on Saturday, April 2.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

15

Exhibits
Exhibitors

Exhibit Hours

Visit our exhibitors in Americas Hall I (third floor) and
Americas Hall II.(fourth floor).

The conference exhibits are located in Americas Hall I & II of
the New York Hilton Midtown Hotel. Located in this room
are the posters, exhibit booths, and catering. The Exhibit
Hall is open to all attendees at the following times:

ANT North America
BIOPAC Systems, Inc.
Brain Products GmbH
Brain Vision LLC
Cedrus Corporation
Compumedics Neuroscan
Cortech Solutions, Inc.
EGI
Electrical Geodesics, Inc.
MAG & More
Rogue Research, Inc
Rogue Resolutions Ltd.
Routledge
Society for Neuroscience
Soterix Medical, Inc.
SR Research, Ltd.
The MIT Press

Saturday, April 2 	
Sunday, April 3 	
	
Monday, April 4	
Tuesday, April 5	

3:00 – 7:00 pm
8:00 am – 11:00 am
1:30 - 7:00 pm
8:00 am – 5:00 pm
8:00 – 10:00 am

Exhibit Halls are closed closed Sunday, 11:00 am - 1:30 pm.

Join Us at the Exhibit Expo
Join us Monday for a special Exhibit Expo from
12:00 – 1:30 pm. Explore all that CNS's exhibitors
have to offer during this exclusive event dedicated to providing attendees new ideas, innovative technologies, and useful products.

GSA/PFA Awards
Congratulations to the 2016 winners of the Graduate Student
Awards and the Post-Doctoral Fellow Awards. Each winner
receives a monetary stipend to cover conference travel expenses.

Graduate Student
Award Winners

Post-Doctoral Fellow
Award Winners

Jessica Robin

JB Eichenlaub

Robert Emerson

Kendra Seaman

Austen Smith

Moranne Eidelman-Rothman

Katherine Alfred

Francesca Carota

Tommy Wilson

Anne Martin

Michael Wolff

Jonathan Fawcett

Tyler Santander

Jean-Remi King

Radhika Gosavi

16

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Invited-Symposium Sessions
#

Title

Date

Time

Location

1

Computational Psychiatry

Sunday, April 3

10:00 am - Noon

Grand Ballroom East

2

Memory reactivation contributes to memory consolidation, integration
and decision-making

Sunday, April 3

10:00 am - Noon

Sutton Complex

3

The Neuroscience of Socioeconomic Status: Setting the Agenda

Tuesday, April 5

1:30 - 3:30 pm

Grand Ballroom West

4

Dynamic Neural Coding for Flexible Cognition

Tuesday, April 5

1:30 - 3:30 pm

Sutton Center

Invited Symposium Session 1
COMPUTATIONAL PSYCHIATRY

Sunday, April 3, 10:00 am - Noon, Grand Ballroom East
Chair: Michael Frank, Brown University
Speakers: Michael Breakspear, Anne Collins, Read Montague,
Rosalyn Moran

A central challenge in attempting to characterize complex
behavioral phenotypes with mechanistic descriptions is that
our understanding of neural systems is far from facilitating
a complete account of human behaviors. This explanatory
gap has impeded progress in refining diagnostics and in
development of effective treatments for mental illnesses. By
focusing on a wealth of converging theoretical and cognitive
neuroscience evidence, the burgeoning field of Computational Psychiatry offers a quantitative and computational
interpretation of previously qualitative diagnostic features,
investigating how alterations to component neural systems
can underlie specific behavioral phenotypes and/or to predict treatment outcomes. Multiple levels of computation
and theory are used to understand mechanisms and dynamics at the level of cells, neurotransmitters and circuits, and
to characterize higher level principles involved in learning,
decision making, executive functions and social behavior.
These models are also used to quantitatively fit behavioral
and neural data in tandem with machine learning methods
to discover structure among high dimensional data-sets
(imaging, genetics etc) relevant for classification of mental
illness.

TALK 1: BRAIN NETWORK DYSFUNCTION IN
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS

Michael Breakspear1; 1Queensland Institute of Medical Research,
Brisbane Australia

A large body of recent research has now established the
central role of brain network activity in action, perception
and cognition. Emerging research now positions a number
of psychiatric disorders as disturbances in these same networks. For example, schizophrenia appears to disrupt the
structural and functional integrity of the core backbone of
large-scale cortical networks. Conversely, affective disorders
more selectively target the networks underlying interocep-

tive awareness and cognitive control. I will present a brief
didactic prelude of brain network research, a survey of key
findings in psychiatric disorders, and a summary of new
opportunities for diagnosis and treatment that a brain network approach offers to the study of psychiatric disorders.

TALK 2: EXTRACTING THE PRINCIPAL COMPONENTS OF
HUMAN LEARNING

Anne Collins1,2, Michael Frank1; 1Brown University, Brown Institute
for Brain Science, 2University of California at Berkeley

Human learning should be compared to a symphony, rather
than to a violin solo or even duet: many different neuro-cognitive players contribute to the various aspects of learning
for which they are best fitted, and may thus be more or less
relied on in different environments, or even dynamically, as
learning proceeds. To understand the mechanisms behind
impaired learning in patient populations, it is essential to be
able to reliably attribute different aspects of their behavior to
the relevant player, as well as to understand how dysfunction in one player may impact the others. In this talk, I will
show how careful experimental design and computational
modeling allow us to pull apart the contributions some
of these players, such as the dopamine-dependent habit
learning system, and prefrontal-cortex dependent working
memory, as well as to investigate their interactions. Results
from patients with schizophrenia highlight the importance
of carefully separating out these contributions to appropriately interpret learning impairments.

TALK 3: COMPUTATIONAL MEANING OF DOPAMINE AND
SEROTONIN INTERACTIONS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE
Read Montague1,2; 1Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute,
2
Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, University College
London

The neurotransmitters dopamine and serotonin interact to
influence a dramatically wide range of cognitive functions
including mood, sleep, reward processing, learning, and
decision-making. Such claims are supported by the profound
deficits that arise when these systems malfunction such as
in Parkinson’s Disease, Addiction, Major Depression, and
Schizophrenia. The lack of rapid, conjoint measurements of
these two transmitters has obstructed the development of
coherent computational accounts of their joint function. We
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

17

Invited-Symposium Sessions	

probed sub-second transients of dopamine and serotonin
in human striatum using an investment game and a new
approach to measuring concentrations of both neurotransmitters. We find that phasic sub-second changes in serotonin
and dopamine link sensory outcomes to near-term actions:
whether a subject stays with their current position on the
next round (stay strategy) or changes their position significantly (switch strategy). Unexpectedly, the transmitters
display the same encoding of near-term actions where both
show phasic increases to the stay strategy and decreases to
the switch strategy. However, these action-encodings differ
according to the polarity of prior sensory experience. Dopamine transients encode next actions only following positive
outcomes (positive reward prediction errors), while serotonin fluctuations encode next actions only following negative outcomes (negative reward prediction errors). Thus,
rapid increases in these transmitters act in concert to inhibit
over-reactions to environmental stimuli and open the door
for other levels of cognitive control to influence behavior.

TALK 4: IDENTIFYING THE PROMOTERS OF PSYCHIATRIC
SYMPTOMS IN ANTI-NMDA RECEPTOR ENCEPHALITIS
USING DYNAMIC CAUSAL MODELS
Rosalyn Moran1; 1Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute

Autoimmune channelopathies, including Anti-N-methyld-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antibody encephalitis, are a
recently discovered class of neurological disorder where
patients can present with a spectrum of severe psychiatric
symptoms from abnormal movement patterns to fullblown psychosis. Serum and CSF titres provide diagnostic
indicators for NMDAr antibodies but do not explain the
heterogeneity of symptom presentation. Here we present a
method to functionally assess the neural basis for associated
psychiatric illness using a retrospective analysis of electroencephalographic data acquired from two patient cohorts
one comprising NMDAr encephalitis and a second with
non-autoimmune associated, infectious encephalopathy.
Our approach employs a characterization of forward and
backward connectivity profiles among sources in the brain
as well as a characterization of region specific effects using
a dynamic causal model (DCM) of ion-channel signalling.
Specifically, we map the cross-spectral characteristic of resting-state EEG to a plausible underlying model of interacting
neuronal assemblies. These models have previously been
used to characterize the abnormal integration of sensory
information with top-down signals in animal models of
psychosis and in patients with schizophrenia, where algorithmic properties of pathology have been cast in predictive
coding terms. We find that specific patterns of NMDAr
breakdown are associated with the diverse symptomology
of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis. We also demonstrate,
more broadly, that a methodology developed for cognitive
neuroscience can pinpoint key channel pathologies using
non-invasive electrophysiological recordings and explain
complex features of neuropsychiatric illnesses.

18

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

Invited Symposium Session 2
MEMORY REACTIVATION CONTRIBUTES TO
MEMORY CONSOLIDATION, INTEGRATION AND
DECISION-MAKING

Sunday, April 3, 10:00 am - Noon, Sutton Complex
Chair: Lila Davachi, New York University
Speakers: Daphna Shohamy, Lluís Fuentemilla, Lila Davachi, Ken
Paller

Recent advances in behavioral and cognitive neuroscientific
methods have led to a better understanding of the role of
memory reactivation in cognition. Specifically, it is now
becoming clear that memory reactivation likely provides a
mechanism underlying the persistence and integration of
the past into the present allowing memories to guide future
behaviors in various ways. The symposium will highlight
recent work demonstrating that memory reactivation
contributes to memory persistence and integration at various stages of processing: during encoding, at boundaries
between encoding events, during more extended post-encoding periods and, finally, during sleep. Daphna Shohamy
will present her work highlighting the role of reactivation
during encoding. Specifically, she will discuss her groundbreaking work demonstrating the role of reactivation in integrative encoding. Lluis Fuentmilla will present his recent
work demonstrating that reactivation of prior events may
be specifically triggered at event boundaries. Lila Davachi
will then discuss recent studies showing that reactivation of
local hippocampal patterns as well as hippocampal-cortical
connectivity occurs during post-encoding periods and this
predicts later memory for the preceding representations and
can also influence how current information is processed.
Finally, Ken Paller will present his elegant work during
sleep that suggests a causal link between reactivation during
sleep, specifically, and later memory.

TALK 1: REACTIVATING MEMORIES TO GUIDE
DECISIONS
Daphna Shohamy1; 1Columbia University

Adaptive decisions are guided by past experience. Yet, decisions must often be made between alternatives that have not
been directly experienced before, requiring the integration
of memories across multiple past events. I will review findings supporting a role for reactivation in at least two distinct
mechanisms: one involves the integration of memories into
a network of related experiences, before a decision is ever
faced. A complementary mechanism involves reactivation
of memories to support inference and prospection at the
time a decision is being made. I will discuss evidence supporting each of these mechanisms, their neurobiological
underpinnings, and the implications for understanding the
role of memory in decision-making.

2016 Annual Meeting	

TALK 2: CONTEXT SHIFTS TRIGGER THE RAPID MEMORY
REACTIVATION OF THE JUST ENCODED SEQUENCE OF
EVENTS
Lluís Fuentemilla ; University of Barcelona-IDIBELL
2 1

Experiences unfold over time, but people tend to discretize
the continuum into sequences of memory segments. This
ability to parcel out the experienced continuum into small
event memory episodes is thought to be promoted by the
online detection of context shifts or episodic boundaries,
thus cueing the rapid transformation of the just encoded
events into long-term memory traces. However, in order
to preserve a subjective sense of continuity, these memory
traces must be linked such that the order of events can be
later reconstructed. Here, I will show evidence from scalp
electrophysiological recordings (EEG) in humans that context shifts triggered a rapid memory reactivation of the just
encoded sequential episode, thereby providing a neural signature of the online formation of a cohesive memory representation of a sequence of events. Instances of memory reactivation were detected very rapidly (at ~400 ms) and were
specific to context shifts that were preceded by a sequence
of events with episodic content. Importantly, memory reactivation was not observed during the sequential encoding of
memory events within an episode, indicating memory reactivation was induced specifically when context shifts were
detected. Finally, the degree of memory reactivation predicted participant’s ability to later recollect a linked memory
trace representation of across sequence of events, suggesting
that a very rapid memory reinstatement at episodic boundaries of the just encoded sequence of events may help preserve a subjective sense of continuity of our past experience.

TALK 3: REACTIVATION OF PRIOR MENTAL STATES
STRENGTHENS STATE-RELATED MEMORY REPRESENTATIONS AND INFLUENCES HOW NEW INFORMATION IS
ENCODED
Lila Davachi3; 1New York University

What is the long-term fate of encoded associative memories?
How do these memories stabilize over time? I will present
our recent work suggesting that initial memory traces subsequently become reactivated during post-encoding time
periods. This reactivation is present both in local hippocampal activation patterns as well as in hippocampal-cortical
connectivity patterns. Importantly, the extent of reactivation
is related to later memory retrieval success, suggesting that
reactivation contributes to memory consolidation. More
recently, we have shown that patterns of brain activity can
persist not only into immediate rest periods but also into
more extended periods of online task performance. We
show that this persistence can change the way new material is encoded and remembered, suggesting that cognitive
states, more generally, can reactivate and alter how new
representations are processed and encoded.

Invited-Symposium Sessions

TALK 4: SLEEP AND MEMORY REACTIVATION: HOW
YOUR SLEEP INFLUENCES WHO YOU ARE
Ken Paller4; 1Northwestern University

Neuropsychology has provided a foundation for understanding human memory. Standard views of the core defect
of amnesia postulate a failure in reactivating recent memories for facts and events (declarative memories). In this case,
reactivation involves neocortical-hippocampal interaction
as the hippocampus helps to link cortical information components together. Moreover, consolidation cannot progress
normally without this reactivation. Memory stabilization
and integration depend on repeated reactivation across
protracted periods of time. Combining this conceptualization of the neural basis of declarative memory with the
commonplace assumption that memories are reactivated
during sleep, we postulated that one benefit of sleep arises
through reactivation and consolidation (Paller, 1997; Paller
& Voss, 2004). Accordingly, a fruitful avenue for the study
of consolidation and its failure in disorders of memory is
to examine memory reactivation during sleep. Correlations
between measures of sleep physiology and retention have
implicated slow-wave sleep in consolidation. To experimentally manipulate reactivation, sensory stimulation during
sleep has been used to systematically modulate memory
processing without causing awakening. For example, we
have shown that sounds associated with spatial learning,
when presented during slow-wave sleep, can reactivate
specific memories formed prior to sleep. Using this method
of Targeted Memory Reactivation (TMR), benefits have also
been observed for skills and habits, and so are not restricted
to declarative memory. A reasonable conclusion is that what
we know and remember is partly a function of what happens while we are asleep. Different types of offline memory
processing likely transpire during waking and during sleep,
ultimately exerting a profound influence on learning. New
opportunities for clinical and educational applications can
now be explored by using TMR techniques to modify the
consolidation of relevant memories during sleep. At the
same time, basic research efforts aimed at elucidating the
neural mechanisms of memory modification during sleep
can help us understand how many types of learning depend
on sleep-based memory reactivation.

Invited Symposium Session 3
THE NEUROSCIENCE OF SOCIOECONOMIC
STATUS: SETTING THE AGENDA

Tuesday, April 5, 1:30 - 3:30 pm, Grand Ballroom West
Chair: Martha J. Farah, University of Pennsylvania
Speakers: Martha J. Farah, Kimberly G. Noble, Allyson P. Mackey,
Bruce S. McEwen

Childhood socioeconomic status (SES) has lifelong effects on
cognitive ability, mental health and physical health. In the
past decade cognitive neuroscientists have begun to study
SES and its neural correlates. The somewhat ambitious
aim of this symposium is to push beyond the fascinating
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

19

Invited-Symposium Sessions	

but preliminary research phase of finding SES correlates
in brain structure and function, and think about next steps
for research in this area. After reviewing what is currently
known we will ask: Where are the most critical gaps in our
basic science knowledge? How can neuroscience be harnessed to address real-world SES disparities - in cognitive
and language development, in school achievement and in
health? The final panel discussion will take up the issue of
where the field could and should go next, as well as the relevance of SES for cognitive neuroscientists studying development, aging, individual differences, and educational
applications.

TALK 1: HOW, AND WHY, DOES BRAIN DEVELOPMENT
DIFFER BETWEEN RICH AND POOR CHILDREN?
Martha J. Farah1; 1University of Pennsylvania

A small but rapidly growing literature documents correlations between the SES of children’s families and the structural and functional characteristics of children’s brains.
As an introduction to this symposium, I will review these
findings, highlighting the encouraging consistencies among
published findings as well as the still poorly understood
inconsistencies. I will then turn to the question of mechanism: what causes the brain to develop differently in different socioeconomic environments? SES represents a complex bundle of potentially causal factors including stress,
parenting behavior, toxin exposure, nutrition and prenatal
influences, as well as inherited characteristics, and multiple
SES-linked factors undoubtedly influence brain development. Research concerning these factors will be reviewed.
Finally, I will note some of the scientific complexities and
social challenges that arise in the neuroscience of socioeconomic status.

TALK 2: PUTTING NEUROSCIENCE TO WORK TO COMBAT
THE EFFECTS OF POVERTY ON EARLY CHILDHOOD
DEVELOPMENT
Kimberly G. Noble2; 1Columbia University

We are now at an exciting juncture when the basic neuroscience of child poverty can inform the design and evaluation
of intervention strategies aimed at improving children’s
cognitive and emotional development. But what is the right
level at which to intervene? And how does neuroscience
help answer this question? Three broad interventional
approaches will be discussed. First, data will be reviewed
on high-quality school-based interventions. Although often
moderately effective, interventions that wait until school age
are unlikely to reverse SES disparities in child development
on their own, given the remarkable neural and psychological disparities that are seen as early as the second year of
life. Second, data will be presented on interventions aimed
at the “mediators” of SES disparities in early development,
designed, for example, to improve responsive parenting
or linguistic stimulation in the home. These, too, can be
moderately effective, though often suffer from attrition and
can be difficult to scale up. Finally, interventions targeting
socioeconomic disparities at the most distal level – that is,
20

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

by reducing poverty itself – will be considered. Data from
a pilot study of the first randomized clinical trial of poverty
reduction will be presented, demonstrating the feasibility
of this approach. While income alone may not be the only
or even the most important factor determining children’s
trajectories, it may be the most manipulable from a policy
perspective. The role of neuroscience in suggesting interventions and providing biomarkers for assessing their efficacy will be discussed.

TALK 3: CLOSING THE INCOME ACHIEVEMENT GAP:
INSIGHTS FROM COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE
Allyson P. Mackey3; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology

The income gap in academic achievement is a pervasive
problem, with broad lifelong consequences. However, very
little is understood about how SES shapes brain development, and in turn, how brain structure and function support
learning in school. I will present our recent work on relationships between academic achievement and brain structure in
socioeconomically diverse samples. These data provide biological correlates of the income achievement gap, and potential biomarkers for academic interventions. Future studies
with longitudinal academic and brain data will be necessary
to better understand how brain changes support academic
changes (and vice versa). While the basic science continues
to develop, we are also engaging with school leaders to select
research questions of pressing translational importance, and
to develop and evaluate interventions based on the current
state of the science, even if it is in its infancy.

TALK 4: CENTRAL ROLE OF THE BRAIN IN STRESS AND
ADAPTATION: HOW INEQUALITY GETS “UNDER THE
SKIN”
Bruce S. McEwen4; 1The Rockefeller University

The brain is the central organ of stress because it interprets
what is stressful and determines behavioral and physiological responses. Besides major life events, the aggravations
of daily life drive physiological systems, causing “wear
and tear” or “allostatic load” and “overload.” This reflects
the impact of life experiences interacting with genes (“epigenetics”) and the epigenetic effects of individual life-style
habits such as sleep; diet, exercise and substance abuse; and
adverse childhood experiences that set life-long patterns of
behavior and physiological reactivity. There are also effects
of toxic agents in the environment and social ordering associated with gradients of disease, with an increasing frequency
of mortality and morbidity as one descends the scale of
socioeconomic status. Hormones associated with stress and
allostatic load are adaptive in the short-run but in the long
run overuse and dysregulation cause allostatic overload and
remodeling of brain architecture. This is particularly evident
in the hippocampus, where dendrites shrink, spine synapses
are lost and neurogenesis is suppressed. The amygdala and
prefrontal cortex, involved in anxiety, fear, mood, cognition
and self-regulation, also show structural plasticity. Moreover, adverse early life experience, often associated with
low SES, interacting with alleles of certain genes, produces

2016 Annual Meeting	

lasting effects on brain and body via epigenetic mechanisms.
Evidence from human brain imaging and animal models
will be presented and discussed together with strategies for
prevention and amelioration. By revealing mechanisms of
health disparities, neuroscience is pointing the way to new
biomarkers and new therapeutic targets to protect the health
of low SES individuals.

Invited Symposium Session 4
DYNAMIC NEURAL CODING FOR FLEXIBLE
COGNITION

Tuesday, April 5, 1:30 - 3:30 pm, Sutton Center
Chair: Mark Stokes, Univ of Oxford
Speakers: Robert Knight, Mark Stokes, Sabine Kastner, Omri
Barak

Brain activity is highly dynamic. Although time-variability is often treated as measurement noise, new analytic
approaches are starting to provide new insights into how
complex neural dynamics contribute to adaptive behaviour.
The key challenge at this juncture is to integrate theoretical
concepts and empirical insights across various traditions
(e.g., human to animal models) and biological scales (synapse to whole-brain networks) for a systems-level understanding of dynamic coding for flexible cognition. Cognitive
flexibility presents a particular challenge in neuroscience.
The same neural systems must be able to process information in different ways, depending on the myriad contextual
contingencies that determine the appropriate input/output
mapping in a particular situation. Although it is sometimes
tempting to consider the brain like a circuit board, with a
set repertoire of input/output behaviours determined by
structural pathways; overlaid upon the structural substrate
of neuronal connections are the functional dynamics that
also influence of information processing. Orchestrated
changes in the functional state of a network could be especially important for high level cognitive functions, including
task-dependent perception, working memory and flexible
decision-making. In this symposium, we will consider
potential mechanisms underpinning dynamic coding for
flexible cognition. Speakers from complementary perspectives will present their latest research, from computational
modelling and population-level analyses in non-human primates to larger-scale network dynamics in the human brain.

TALK 1: FRONTAL CORTEX DEPENDENT NETWORKS
SUPPORTING FLEXIBLE BEHAVIOUR
Robert Knight1; 1UC Berkeley

Humans rapidly and flexibly respond to ever-changing
environmental demands. Abundant animal electrophysiological and human neuroimaging research points to a
central role of prefrontal regions in regulating goal-directed
behaviour. Notably, prefrontal dysfunction is central to
numerous neurological, psychiatric and developmental
disorders. Damage restricted to human lateral prefrontal
regions results in profound deficits in cognitive capacity

Invited-Symposium Sessions

whereas orbital prefrontal damage leads to devastating
problems in social discourse. How are these diverse control
functions enabled? Intracranial recording of human cortical
(electrocorticography; ECoG) and depth (stereoencephalography; SEEG) neural activity provides a unique window into
the mechanisms of goal-directed behaviour with unprecedented spatial (sub-centimetre) and temporal (sub-second)
resolution. Here we review the key role of high frequency
oscillations (high gamma, HG; 7-200 Hz) as an index of local
cortical excitability and provides a bridge between human
and animal research. This local activity is embedded in distributed neural circuits measured with connectivity metrics
including phase locking and graph theoretical approaches.
The degree of local HG activity is tuned by the phase of lower
frequency oscillations and provides a measure of information flow in rapidly reconfiguring dynamic neural networks.
Combing these intracranial approaches provides insights
into how neural networks emerge to support both cognitive
and social abilities. Evidence will be provided that similar
electrophysiological mechanisms support both lateral and
orbital frontal capacity in humans. Critically, prefrontal sustained activity measured by intracranial recordings predicts
response timing with near perfect accuracy highlighting the
central role of prefrontal cortex in linking human perception
and action in the sub-second temporal domain.

TALK 2: DYNAMIC CODES AND STABLE REPRESENTATIONS FOR WORKING MEMORY AND FLEXIBLE DECISION-MAKING
Mark Stokes1; 1Oxford University

Brain activity is highly dynamic, yet often it is important
to maintain a stable cognitive state. We will consider how
complex neural dynamics could be helpful for maintaining
stable representations in working memory. First, we examine the basic neurophysiological mechanisms that underpin
dynamic coding in primate prefrontal cortex. A combination
of single unit statistics, population-level state-space analyses and data-driven simulations highlights the importance
of a non-stationary neural subpopulation involved throughout working memory, as well as rapid qualitative changes in
neural selectivity during encoding and maintenance. Next,
we apply representational similarity analysis to show that
these dynamics nevertheless yield stable cognitive representations. Finally, we propose a theoretical model for working
memory. From a dynamic coding perspective, task-relevant
activity in frontal cortex drives a cascade of neural states
that modulate the response profile of the network. History-dependent changes in the underlying neural state result
in context-dependent processing of subsequent stimuli, such
as a memory probe, thus resulting in a systematic memory-dependent response. We further consider how a similar
mechanism could underpin flexible decision-making.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

21

Invited-Symposium Sessions	

TALK 3: NEURAL NETWORK DYNAMICS FOR
ATTENTIONAL SELECTION IN THE PRIMATE BRAIN
Sabine Kastner1; 1Princeton University

Natural scenes are cluttered and contain many objects that
cannot all be processed simultaneously due to capacity
limitations of the visual system. Selective attention refers
to a set of mechanisms that route behaviourally relevant
information through large-scale cortical networks. I will
discuss studies performed in two primate brain models,
the human and the macaque monkey, using a variety of
different techniques including fMRI, ECoG and single-cell
physiology. First, I will discuss how large-scale networks
mediating perception and cognition can be identified using
functional brain imaging. Second, I will discuss physiology
studies revealing temporal dynamics in a distributed largescale network that mediates the selection of behaviourally
relevant information. And third, I will present results from
primate posterior parietal cortex revealing common neural
mechanisms for attentional selection that are closely related
to behavioural outcome. Together, these comparative electrophysiology studies begin to identify commonalities and
differences in attention mechanisms across primate species.

22

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

TALK 4: MODELLING NEURAL DYNAMICS UNDERLYING
FLEXIBLE RESPONSE CRITERION

Omri Barak1, Federico Carnevale2, Victor de Lafuente3, Ranulfo
Romo3, Nestor Parga2; 1Technion–Israel Institute of Technology,
2
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, 3Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico

Under uncertainty, the brain uses previous knowledge to
transform sensory inputs into the percepts on which decisions are based. When the uncertainty lies in the timing of
sensory evidence, however, the mechanism underlying the
use of previously acquired temporal information remains
unknown. We study this issue in monkeys performing
a detection task with variable stimulation times. We use
the neural correlates of false alarms to infer the subject’s
response criterion and ﬁnd that it modulates over the course
of a trial. Analysis of premotor cortex activity shows that this
modulation is represented by the dynamics of population
responses. A trained recurrent network model reproduces
the experimental ﬁndings, and demonstrates a novel neural
mechanism to beneﬁt from temporal expectations in perceptual detection. Previous knowledge about the probability
of stimulation over time can be intrinsically encoded in the
neural population dynamics, allowing a ﬂexible control of
the response criterion over time. Omri Barak, Co authors:
, , Instituto de Neurobiologia, , Queretaro 76230, Mexico ,
Instituto de Fisiologia Celular-Neurociencias, Universidad
Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 04510 Mexico DF, Mexico ,
Departmento de Fisica Teorica, Universidad Autonoma de
Madrid, Cantoblanco 28049, Madrid, Spain

Symposium Sessions
#

Title

Date

Time

Location

1

20 years of resting-state: contributions to understanding cognition

Sunday, April 3

1:30 - 3:30 pm

Grand Ballroom East

2

The role of amplitude, phase, and rhythmicity of neural oscillations
in top-down control of cognition

Sunday, April 3

1:30 - 3:30 pm

Sutton Center

3

Metacognitive neuroscience: How the human brain reflects on cognition, perception and action

Sunday, April 3

1:30 - 3:30 pm

Grand Ballroom West

4

From prediction error to control: Neurobiological and computational
accounts of Prefrontal Cortex

Monday, April 4

10:00 am - Noon

Grand Ballroom East

5

Memory retrieval as a guide along the winding road of memory
formation

Monday, April 4

10:00 am - Noon

Sutton Center

6

Multisensory integration: neural mechanisms, computational operations and behaviour

Monday, April 4

10:00 am - Noon

Grand Ballroom West

7

Human Intracranial Electrophysiology: A New Era

Tuesday, April 5

10:00 am - Noon

Grand Ballroom West

8

Taking stock of cognitive training: theory, neural mechanisms and
application

Tuesday, April 5

10:00 am - Noon

Beekman

9

Affective-motivational salience and attentional sets

Tuesday, April 5

10:00 am - Noon

Sutton Center

Symposium Session 1
20 YEARS OF RESTING-STATE: CONTRIBUTIONS
TO UNDERSTANDING COGNITION

Sunday, April 3, 1:30 - 3:30 pm, Grand Ballroom East
Chair: Bharat Biswal, New Jersey Institute of Technology
Co-Chair: Michael Cole, Rutgers University
Speakers: Bharat Biswal, Michael Cole, Sepideh Sadaghiani, Bart
Rypma, Alan Anticevic

Resting state functional connectivity (RSFC) approaches,
first developed 20 years ago, encountered significant resistance for almost a decade and have remain a source of
controversy to this day. Despite these controversies, recent
years have witnessed an exponential increase in studies of
functional connectivity. While initial papers focused primarily on the development and refinement of RSFC methodologies, more recent work has focused on applications
of resting state approaches to cognitive neuroscience and
clinical questions. In this proposal several applications of
resting state to cognitive neuroscience are presented. The
first talk reviews studies reporting strong relationships
between RSFC and task fMRI. We propose that a systematic
exploration of the symbiotic relationship between Rest-Task
fMRI will offer methods to combine these two modalities to
address important questions in clinical and basic neuroscience research corresponding to the brain basis of cognition.

In the second talk, we will discuss the authors’ recent finding that resting state network architecture is present across
a wide variety of tasks, suggesting the general functional
relevance of resting state networks. These results shed new
light on the relationship between spontaneous and task-relevant brain processes underlying cognition. In the third talk,
the authors will report an investigation into the behavioral
relevance of dynamic shifts in RSFC, finding that such spontaneous shifts can predict subsequent changes in behavioral
performance. The final talk considers clinical applications
of RSFC, specifically reviewing work linking cognitive
task-based and resting-state approaches via computational
modeling and pharmacology with a specific focus on understanding these processes in psychiatric illness.

TALK 1: RESTING STATE AND COGNITION: A BRIEF
OVERVIEW

Bharat Biswal1, Xin Di1; 1New Jersey Institute of Technology

Resting-state fMRI (R-fMRI) has been used as an alternative to the conventional task-based fMRI (T-fMRI) since it
requires minimal cognitive or behavioral demand by the
subject and can be used in different populations. R-fMRI
measures have been thought to reflect the spontaneous or
‘baseline’ neuronal activity while T-fMRI activations may
reflect the dynamic neuronal activities in response to an
extrinsic demand. Even though cognitive processes are usually studied using T-fMRI by manipulating different cognitive states, an emerging line of studies have been trying
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

23

Symposium Sessions	

to map cognitive states with brain regions and connectivity
using R-fMRI. Such studies usually correlate individual differences of cognitive performance to regional and connectivity measures in resting-state. We will give an overview
of such studies, and discuss the relationships between these
studies and T-fMRI results. More importantly, we propose
that a systematic exploration of the symbiotic relationship
between R-T fMRI will offer methods to combine the two
fMRI modalities to address important questions in clinical
and neuroscience research corresponding to individuality
and variability.

TALK 2: THE COGNITIVE RELEVANCE OF RESTING-STATE
FMRI: SPONTANEOUSLY ORGANIZED NETWORKS AND
BRAIN STATES ACROSS REST AND TASK

Michael Cole1, Doug Schultz1, Richard Chen1, Kaustabh Kulkarni1,
Takuya Ito1; 1Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience,
Rutgers University, Newark, NJ

Resting state functional connectivity MRI is increasingly
used to characterize functional networks in the human
brain. We recently found that the resting state network
architecture is present across a wide variety of tasks, suggesting the general functional relevance of resting state
networks. This illustrates the importance of better understanding the processes underlying the organization of resting state neural activity, as well as how such spontaneous
processes affect task-related brain activity. We have taken
several approaches to accomplishing these goals. First, we
have identified individual difference correlations between
the brain’s network architecture and cognitive abilities.
Second, we have expanded into the realm of multivariate
activity patterns, mapping functional connectivity patterns
to activity patterns as well as identifying brain state dynamics through time in terms of activity patterns during rest
and task. Together these approaches shed new light on the
relationship between spontaneous and task-relevant brain
processes underlying cognition.

TALK 3: DYNAMIC FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY AND
BEHAVIORAL VARIABILITY

Sepideh Sadaghiani1, Jean-Baptiste Poline2, Andreas Kleinschmidt3, Mark D’Esposito2; 1Stanford University, 2University of
California Berkeley, 3University of Geneva

A large proportion of brain activity is not directly evoked by
specific external events. Nevertheless, the role of this ubiquitous ongoing activity in cognition is largely unknown.
Ongoing activity is correlated across distant brain regions
within large-scale networks and thought to reflect neural
communication or functional connectivity. Strength and
spatial organization of functional connectivity as measured
with fMRI change dynamically over seconds to minutes.
We investigated the behavioral relevance of these dynamic
shifts by applying MVPA to functional connectivity patterns during long pre-stimulus periods (>30s) unaffected by
stimulus-evoked neural responses. The functional connectivity state before presentation of a faint stimulus predicted
whether the participant was going to perceive or miss the
24

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

stimulus on a given trial. Using graph theory, we compared
topology of functional connectivity prior to the two perceptual outcomes. Connectivity states preceding missed stimuli
showed weakened modular structure, in which connectivity
was more random and less conforming to the intrinsic organization of large-scale networks. These findings show that
ongoing brain connectivity dynamics can explain variability
in behavior. This result supports a view in which ongoing
neural activity and connectivity play an active role in cognition. In this view ongoing functional connectivity represents
the internal model of the brain to predict regularities in the
external world. With sensory information always being limited and often sparse, this internal predictive model enables
the brain to construct perception and generate action.

TALK 4: CORTICAL NETWORK EFFICIENCY UNDERLIES
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN PROCESSING SPEED
Bart Rypma1; 1University of Texas at Dallas

Recent advances in neuroimaging have permitted testing
of hypotheses regarding the neural bases of individual
differences, but this literature has been characterized by
inconsistent results. We hypothesized that one source of
between study variability could be between-sample differences in resting and task-based network activity. To test this
hypothesis we had participants perform rest and a cognitive task during fMRI scanning. We examined connectivity
in frontal and parietal regions during a resting task and a
digit--symbol visual search task. Our results showed (1)
significant differences in numbers of frontoparietal connections between rest and task, (2) faster participants showed
more rest-related activity than slower participants, but less
visual-search activity, and (3) connectivity increases in prefrontal, temporal, and parietal nodes were associated with
increases in reaction time. These results suggest that relatively low-demand cognitive performance depends on spontaneous fluctuating network activity, whereas high-demand
performance depends on a more limited, unidirectional
network. The nature of brain-behavior relationships may
vary depending on the extent of cognitive demand. Individual differences in cognitive efficiency may vary with the
extent of frontoparietal connectivity. High-demand network
activity may reflect the extent to which individuals require
top-down executive guidance of behavior for successful task
performance. Low-demand network activity may reflect
task- and performance monitoring that minimizes executive
requirements for guidance of behavior.

TALK 5: LINKING COGNITIVE TASK-BASED AND RESTING-STATE APPROACHES VIA COMPUTATIONAL
MODELING TO UNDERSTAND PSYCHIATRIC ILLNESS

Alan Anticevic1, G Yang1, J Murray1; 1Yale University, Department of
Psychiatry, New Haven, CT

Understanding neural mechanisms that produce task-based
and resting-state computations presents a fundamental
problem for systems neuroscience. Furthermore, there
has been a massive proliferation of both task-evoked and
resting-state neuroimaging in psychiatry, often treating

2016 Annual Meeting	

these two modalities as separate. Concurrently, psychiatric disorders are not conceptualized as reflecting distinct
abnormalities during task versus rest. Put simply, the same
mechanistic disruptions should explain both task-based and
resting-state abnormalities. This presentation highlights
the utility of using biophysically grounded computational
modeling to simulate both task-based and resting-state
regimes while generating mechanistic predictions across
states following parsimonious synaptic-level manipulations. The presentation also highlights novel resting-state
and task-based effects in schizophrenia – a severe psychiatric condition that profoundly affects cognitive processing
and resting-state connectivity patterns. In turn, the presentation highlights complementary results following NMDA
receptor antagonism via acute ketamine administration – a
pharmacological manipulation known to affect both cognitive processing and resting-state functional connectivity via
a mechanism that can be captured computationally, namely
alterations in excitation/inhibition balance. Specifically,
results using a delayed working memory task are discussed
across both pharmacological and clinical experiments. Collectively, a framework is presented for how to ‘unify’ observations across task and resting-state using a computational
framework that can give rise to both resting- and task-based
observations.

Symposium Session 2
THE ROLE OF AMPLITUDE, PHASE, AND
RHYTHMICITY OF NEURAL OSCILLATIONS IN
TOP-DOWN CONTROL OF COGNITION

Sunday, April 3, 1:30 - 3:30 pm, Sutton Center
Chair: Jason Samaha, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Co-Chair: Ali Mazaheri, University of Birmingham
Speakers: Mathilde Bonnefond, Alexander Sack, Ali Mazaheri,
Jason Samaha, Bradley Voytek

Symposium Sessions

across the brain. Samaha will present work suggesting that
alpha-band oscillations reflect discreet epochs of visual processing that can be guided by temporal predictions. Finally,
Voytek will close with a computational account of oscillatory communication and present invasive and non-invasive
electrophysiological recordings in humans demonstrating
goal-directed modulated of neural communication in frontal
cortex and implications for neuropathology. This survey of
the field will cover many recent advances in understanding
neural communication, top-down control, and human cognition and will highlight areas of active debate and avenues
for further research.

TALK 1: LEFT PREFRONTAL CORTEX CONTROLS ALPHA
PHASE ADJUSTMENT IN ANTICIPATION OF PREDICTABLE
STIMULI

Mathilde Bonnefond1, Rodolfo Solis-Vivanco2, Ole Jensen1;
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud
University, Nijmegen, 2Instituto Nacional de Neurologia y Neurocirugia, Tlalpan, Mexico
1

While it is now consensual that alpha power (8-12Hz) can
adjust in anticipation of incoming information, it remains
unclear whether alpha phase can adjust as well. I will present the results of two magnetoencephalography experiments
showing that alpha power and alpha phase, in visual areas,
are being adjusted in anticipation of both irrelevant and
relevant visual information. These adjustments prevented/
optimized the processing of irrelevant/relevant stimuli as
assessed by performance and stimulus-induced activity. In
addition, we found in both experiments that alpha oscillations in the left prefrontal cortex controlled the adjustment
of alpha phase in visual areas. The anticipatory power and
phase adjustments add to the computational versatility of
the alpha rhythm, since it allows for adjusting the processing capabilities of the visual system on a fine temporal scale.

TALK 2: THE ROLE OF OSCILLATORY PHASE FOR
Central to cognition is the regulation of information flow ENCODING CONSISTENT TEMPORAL STATISTICS
across different regions of the brain. The temporal coordination of neural oscillations has been proposed to play a
key role in communication between brain regions and in
anticipatory and predictive processes. This symposium will
present new empirical and theoretic evidence suggesting
that 1) various key spectral dynamics (i.e., phase, amplitude,
degree of rhythmicity) of oscillations are important for regulating information flow across the cortex and, 2) top-down
control over neural oscillations via temporal expectation
and attention can bias processing in a goal-directed manner.
Bonnefond will begin with evidence that the phase of visuocortical alpha-band oscillations may act as a gating mechanism in the service of anticipatory processing, with a role
for left prefrontal cortex as the ‘source’ of such top-down
control. Sack will discuss examples of oscillatory phase
biases on perception in the context of temporally predictable
cross-modal stimuli. Mazaheri will provide evidence that
modulating the rhythmicity of lower frequency oscillations
could be a mechanism to reduce maladaptive connectivity

Alexander Sack1,2, Sanne ten Oever1,2; 1Maastricht University,
Netherlands, 2Maastricht Brain Imaging Center

Perception of temporally predictive events is enhanced by
aligning high excitable phases of ongoing oscillations to the
upcoming event. This mechanism has been shown useful
to proactively improve perception in an environment that
dynamically changes its temporal statistics. However, some
temporal statistics are very consistent. For example in audiovisual speech there is a consistent relationship between the
onset of lip movements and the onset of speech sounds
such that different syllables have distinct visual-to-auditory
onset delays. We show that these consistent delays bias participants’ perception. Moreover, ongoing oscillatory phase
biases the perception of these syllables in the absence of
visual input. This data show that consistent temporal information gets wired on oscillatory properties and provide a
unique way to categorize information.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

25

Symposium Sessions	

TALK 3: THE “RHYTHMICITY” OF OSCILLATIONS
IN NEURONAL COMMUNICATION AND TEMPORAL
EXPECTATION

Ali Mazaheri1; 1University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK

Cognition and behaviour are believed to emerge from
widespread, often transient, neuronal interactions in the
brain. Some of these interactions are captured in the oscillatory activity present in EEG and MEG measurements.
The phase-angle of these oscillations has been suggested
to reflect the transient inhibitory and excitatory state of the
underlying networks producing them. Furthermore, neuronal communication between networks has been suggested
to be subserved by the phase-coupling of oscillations in
sending and receiving regions. Using this framework, the
first part of my talk will focus on new evidence that the disruption in the rhythmicity of an oscillation through external
neuro-modulation such as deep-brain stimulation could
lead to a reduction in pathological network ‘over-connectivity’ and translate to therapeutic improvements in disorders
such as Parkinson’s and treatment of refractory obsessive
compulsive disorder. The second part of my talk will focus
on whether the phase of ongoing oscillations could be modulated by endogenous factors such as temporal expectation.
Here, in contradiction to some of the other findings that will
be presented by my colleagues in this symposium I will be
providing evidence against the hypothesis that the phase of
alpha activity could be modulated by top-down expectation.
I will attempt to address some of the possible theoretical and
methodological issues underlying this discrepancy.

TALK 4: THE ROLE OF ALPHA-BAND OSCILLATIONS IN
TEMPORAL PREDICTION AND PERCEPTION.

Jason Samaha1, Bradley Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison

The phase of ongoing posterior alpha-band oscillations has
been shown to predict the perception of near-threshold visual
stimuli and subsequent cortical information flow. These
observations have motivated the hypothesis that alpha-band
rhythms reflect discreet “windows” of visual processing. In
two studies, we investigated, 1) whether alpha-band phase
can be guided by top-down control according to temporal
predictions and 2), whether the frequency of alpha rhythms
is related to the temporal resolution of visual perception.
We found that when subjects were provided with cues
predictive of the moment of visual target onset, discrimination accuracy improved and targets were more frequently
reported as consciously seen. This effect was accompanied
by a significant shift in the phase of alpha-band oscillations,
prior to target onset, toward each individual’s optimal
phase for stimulus discrimination. If alpha-band oscillations do reflect phasic windows of visual processing, then
the frequency of the oscillation should predict the temporal
resolution of visual perception. In our second experiment,
we measured two-flash fusion thresholds and identified the
peak alpha frequency of our observers. We found a high correlation between the measures, such that individuals with

26

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

higher alpha frequencies showed lower fusion thresholds,
indicating a finer-grained temporal resolution of visual perception. Additionally, trial-to-trial variation in prestimulus
alpha frequency predicted two-flash discrimination accuracy. Taken together, our results suggest that neural activity
in the alpha-band may reflect discreet visual computations,
the timing of which can be guided by temporal predictions
so as to optimally process predicted visual information.

TALK 5: NOISY OSCILLATORY NETWORKS IN COGNITION
Bradley Voytek1, Erik Peterson1; 1University of California, San
Diego, USA

Humans have an interesting capacity for maintaining
multiple behavioral goals at different timescales--from the
control of immediate actions to holding more abstract longterm goals in mind. This process requires the coordination
of many partially overlapping functional brain networks.
Neural oscillations are often modeled as a major driver in
the formation of such networks, acting under the assumption that information flow is enhanced when low frequency
oscillations synchronize neural firing. Surprisingly, the
biological feasibility of this assumption is largely untested.
Here I introduce a novel computational model for oscillatory neural communication. I show that it is the kind of
excitatory-inhibitory coupling that matters most, not the
degree of coupling as has been previously suggested. When
the coupling between a low frequency oscillation and neural
spiking is driven by a model of balanced excitatory-inhibitory inputs, information flow is enhanced. In contrast, when
coupling is unbalanced, driven either by excessive excitation
or inhibition, information flow is obstructed. Additionally,
using a combination of invasive and non-invasive human
electrophysiology, I provide evidence that interregional
oscillatory coupling coordinates brief windows of spiking
activity between frontal subregions. This interregional communication occurs in a noisy neuronal environment, and I
show how age-related changes in neuronal noise diminish
neural communication and mediate age-related working
memory impairments. Numerous neuropathologies, including Parkinson’s disease, schizophrenia, and autism, are associated with oscillatory disruptions and excitation-inhibition
imbalances. Understanding the distinction between balanced and unbalanced oscillatory coupling offers a unifying
mechanistic framework for understanding effective neural
communication and its disruption in neuropathology.

2016 Annual Meeting	

Symposium Session 3
METACOGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE: HOW THE
HUMAN BRAIN REFLECTS ON COGNITION,
PERCEPTION AND ACTION

Sunday, April 3, 1:30 - 3:30 pm, Grand Ballroom West
Chair: Stephen Fleming, University College London
Speakers: Biyu He, Hakwan Lau, Steve Fleming, Louise Goupil,
Lisa Son

Metacognition refers to the ability to self-evaluate and control
one’s performance on a task in the absence of external feedback. Recently metacognition has become a focus of study in
the cognitive neurosciences, spurred by the development of
simple psychophysics paradigms and computational models
to study the building blocks of self-evaluation including
confidence, error detection and judgments of learning. This
symposium will showcase emerging metacognitive neuroscience research on how various forms of self-evaluation are
instantiated in the human brain. Biyu He will demonstrate
the use of visual psychophysics to decorrelate objective performance, subjective awareness and metacognitive confidence, and show how these behavioural measures map onto
distinct spatiotemporal signatures of brain activity. Hakwan
Lau will harness the power of multivoxel neurofeedback to
selectively manipulate confidence levels, thereby isolating
the neural substrates of metacognitive computation. Steve
Fleming will explore the role of action outputs in the construction of metacognitive confidence through experiments
applying transcranial magnetic stimulation to the motor
system during perceptual judgments. Louise Goupil will
show that metacognitive mechanisms are intact early in
development, harnessing non-verbal measures and electroencephalography to show correlates of confidence and error
detection in 12-18 month old infants. Together these talks
will illuminate our emerging understanding of the neural
basis of metacognition, and demonstrate experimental techniques for its study in a variety of domains.

TALK 1: SPATIOTEMPORAL DISSOCIATION OF BRAIN
ACTIVITY UNDERLYING SUBJECTIVE AWARENESS,
OBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE AND CONFIDENCE
Biyu He1; 1National Institutes of Health

Despite intense recent research, the neural correlates of
conscious visual perception remain elusive. The most established paradigm for studying brain mechanisms underlying
conscious perception is to keep the physical sensory inputs
constant and identify brain activities that correlate with the
changing content of conscious awareness. However, a contrast based on conscious content alone would not only reveal
brain activities directly contributing to conscious perception,
but also include brain activities that precede or follow it.
To address this issue, we adopted a paradigm whereby we
collected, trial-by-trial, measures of objective performance,
subjective awareness and the confidence level of subjective
awareness. Using magnetoencephalography (MEG) record-

Symposium Sessions

ings in healthy human volunteers, we dissociated brain
activities underlying these different cognitive phenomena.
Our results provide strong evidence that widely distributed
slow cortical potentials (SCPs) correlate with subjective
awareness, even after the effects of objective performance
and confidence were both removed. The SCP correlate of
conscious perception manifests strongly in its waveform,
phase and power. By contrast, objective performance and
confidence were both contributed by relatively transient
brain activity. Source activity correlated with confidence
first appeared in the dorsal parietal cortex at around 200 ms.
It then moved anteriorly and had widespread frontoparietal
distribution at ~500 ms. The activity was restricted to posterior brain regions at ~750 ms and dissipated thereafter. It
reappeared around central and frontal cortices at 2 ~ 2.5 sec,
possibly in anticipation of the upcoming responses to questions. These results shed new light on the brain mechanisms
of conscious, unconscious and metacognitive processing.

TALK 2: MULTIVOXEL NEUROFEEDBACK SELECTIVELY
MODULATES CONFIDENCE WITHOUT CHANGING
PERCEPTUAL PERFORMANCE
Hakwan Lau1; 1UCLA

A central controversy in current studies of metacognition
concerns whether confidence directly reflects the reliability
of a perceptual (or cognitive) process, as suggested by normative models. The affirmative view enjoys popularity in
both the computational and animal literatures, but it has also
been suggested that confidence may depend on a late-stage
estimation process dissociable from actual reliability. Yet, at
least in humans, experimental tools have lacked the precision to resolve these issues convincingly. Here we overcome
this challenge by employing the recently-developed method
of decoded neurofeedback (DecNef), in order to systematically manipulate multivoxel correlates of confidence in a
fronto-parietal network. Our results provide clear evidence
that confidence can be dissociated from perceptual performance; we selectively manipulated the former without
changing the latter. Further psychophysical analysis rules
out accounts based on simple shifts in criterion or reporting
strategy for confidence. These findings challenge the current
dominant views of confidence and metacognition. Using the
same technique of decoded neurofeedback, in another study
we show that it can be used to partially erase fear memory,
demonstrating its potential for a variety of novel applications.

TALK 3: UNPACKING THE INPUTS TO METACOGNITIVE
COMPUTATION: THE ROLE OF ACTIONS IN PERCEPTUAL
CONFIDENCE
Steve Fleming1; 1University College London

Theoretical models often assume that decision confidence
is related to the quality or strength of the inputs to the
system, such as the strength of a visual stimulus. Counter
to this intuitive view here we show that motor outputs also
contribute to judgments of perceptual confidence. In two
experiments we used transcranial magnetic stimulation
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

27

Symposium Sessions	

(TMS) to manipulate response-specific representations in
the premotor cortex, selectively disrupting post-decision
confidence in visual discrimination judgments. Specifically,
stimulation of the motor representation associated with the
unchosen response reduced confidence in correct responses,
thereby reducing metacognitive capacity without changing
visual discrimination performance. Effects of TMS on confidence were observed when stimulation was applied both
before and after the response occurred, which suggests that
confidence depends on late-stage metacognitive processes.
In the second part of my talk I will discuss these findings
from the perspective of a novel computational framework in
which self-evaluation during decision-making operates as a
second-order inference about a coupled but distinct decision
system, equivalent to inferring the performance of another
actor. This framework explains why action outputs play a
causal role in the construction of confidence.

TALK 4: INFANTS MONITOR THEIR CONFIDENCE AND
ERRORS DURING DECISION-MAKING
Louise Goupil1, Sid Kouider1; 1CNRS/EHESS/ENS-DEC, Paris

Humans adapt their behaviour not only by observing the
consequences of their actions, but also by internally monitoring their performances. Because these metacognitive
abilities are typically assessed through explicit self-reports,
they are usually denied to young children, who can hardly
verbalise their own cognitive states. Yet, recent research
revealed that basic metacognitive mechanisms, such as decision confidence and error monitoring, reduce to simple computational mechanisms, and can be observed in non-verbal
organisms such as rats and monkeys. Whether these basic
metacognitive abilities are also present in early stages of
human development, or emerge later with the capacity to
report cognitive states remains unknown. Here, by relying
on non-verbal indices, we show that 12 and 18 month-old
infants internally monitor the accuracy of their own decisions. At the behavioural level, infants showed increased
persistence in their initial choice after making a correct as
compared to an incorrect response, evidencing an appropriate evaluation of decision confidence. At the neural level, we
found that a well-established electrophysiological signature
of error monitoring in adults, the error-related negativity,
is similarly elicited when infants make an incorrect choice.
Hence, although explicit forms of metacognition mature
later during childhood, infants already estimate decision
confidence, monitor their errors, and use these implicit metacognitive evaluations to regulate subsequent behaviour.

TALK 5: DISCUSSION

Lisa Son1; 1Barnard College

Lisa Son will act as a discussant for the symposium, drawing
together strands of each presentation and setting them into
the wider context of research on human and comparative
metacognition. We will allow time for Q&A with all presenters.

28

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

Symposium Session 4
FROM PREDICTION ERROR TO CONTROL:
NEUROBIOLOGICAL AND COMPUTATIONAL
ACCOUNTS OF PREFRONTAL CORTEX

Monday, April 4, 10:00 am - Noon, Grand Ballroom East
Chair: Eliana Vassena, Ghent University
Speakers: Benjamin Hayden, Joshua Brown, William Alexander,
Eliana Vassena, Anne Collins

Prefrontal cortex (PFC) has long been recognized as the
locus of higher-level cognitive processes guiding human
behavior, yet the neurophysiological mechanisms underlying such complex computations remain elusive. Two
sub-regions of PFC, dorsolateral PFC (DLPFC) and Anterior
Cingulate Cortex (ACC, also referred to as medial PFC)
have emerged as critical components of the neural network
involved in cognitive control and decision-making. ACC
has been implicated in error monitoring, conflict processing,
and effortful control, while DLPFC is involved in task-set
representation and working memory. Beyond the functional characterization of these regions separately, the goal
of this symposium is to provide the latest insights on how
these regions interact to support cognitive control from the
perspective of prediction and prediction error. Benjamin
Hayden will discuss data from studies in monkeys showing
how ACC prediction and control signals arise from a combination of single-neuron encoded variables. Joshua Brown
will present findings from a computational model detailing
how prediction and prediction error signals generated in
ACC govern value-based strategic behaviors. William Alexander will present evidence from computational modeling
showing that the interaction of DLPFC and ACC can be
understood in terms of progressively more abstract hierarchies of predictions and prediction errors. Eliana Vassena
will demonstrate ACC and DLPFC involvement in both
prediction and control, and show how a prediction account
can explain neural and behavioral effects in effort-based
decision-making and task-preparation. Finally, Anne Collins will discuss computational modeling and EEG results
emphasizing the importance of prediction error in structure
learning and generalization in complex environments.

TALK 1: DEMAND FOR CONTROL REDUCES CODING
SPARSENESS IN DORSAL ANTERIOR CINGULATE
CORTEX
Benjamin Hayden1; 1University of Rochester

Factors that elicit control—such as conflict and surprise—
enhance BOLD responses in dorsal anterior cingulate
cortex (dACC) but do not consistently drive single neurons.
Possible explanations for this discrepancy include species
differences, anatomical differences, and task and training
differences. We hypothesize instead that the discrepancy
reflects that way that neural signals are aggregated in creating the BOLD. Specifically, we hypothesize that increases
in BOLD activity can reflect broader recruitment of neurons

2016 Annual Meeting	

that represent context and strategy variables. In a new gambling task, we found that decisional conflict and surprising
outcomes (both presumed to drive control) weakly and
inconsistently affected single neurons, but reliably reduced
population sparseness—a measure of neuronal recruitment.
Moreover, selectivity for these two factors was highly positively correlated with selectivity for context and strategy on
a cell-by-cell basis. These findings endorse the hypothesis
that aggregate control signals do not require control-sensitive neurons, and suggest that these signals may be a consequence, not a direct cause, of control. A simple computational model, where cells are more broadly tuned to task
variables in control-demanding trials than in easy trials,
explains our findings.

TALK 2: HOW DOES THE ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX
CONTROL VALUE-BASED DECISION-MAKING?
Joshua Brown1; 1Indiana University

Recent work on the role of the anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) in cognition has focused on choice difficulty, action
value, risk avoidance, conflict resolution, and the value of
exerting control among other factors. A main underlying
question is what are the output signals of the ACC, and
relatedly, what is their effect on downstream cognitive processes? Here we propose a model of how ACC influences
cognitive processing in other brain regions that choose
actions. The model builds on the earlier PRO model and
suggests that ACC learns to represent specifically the states
in which the potential costs or risks of an action are high,
on both short and long time scales. It then uses those cost
signals as a basis to bias decisions to minimize losses while
maximizing gains. The model simulates both proactive and
reactive control signals and accounts for a variety of empirical findings regarding value-based decision-making.

TALK 3: REPRESENTATIONS OF PREDICTION ERROR IN
COGNITIVE CONTROL
William Alexander1; 1Ghent University

Prediction error is a critical and pervasive signal observed
throughout the brain, from regions involved in low-level
sensory processing to those implicated in high-level cognitive behaviors. In most frameworks, prediction error serves
as a training signal mediating the strength of associations
between two events; associations are augmented by positive
prediction errors and attenuated by negative prediction
errors. In recent work we have proposed that, in addition
to training associations between events, prediction errors
themselves may constitute a type of event that can be associated with task-relevant stimuli. The Hierarchical Error Representation (HER) model suggests that hierarchically organized regions of anterior cingulate (ACC) and dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) interact to learn progressively
more abstract representations of prediction error. The HER
model is able to autonomously learn sophisticated cognitive
tasks that require working memory and representations of
task structure in a manner similar to humans. The model
additionally captures an array of effects observed in ACC

Symposium Sessions

and DLPFC from fMRI, EEG, MVPA, single-unit neurophysiology, and lesion studies.

TALK 4: COGNITIVE CONTROL AND PREDICTION
IN EFFORT-BASED DECISION-MAKING AND
PERFORMANCE: BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL
CORRELATES.
Eliana Vassena1; 1Ghent University

Human behavior is driven by the pursuit of rewards, which
in daily life come at a cost, in terms of required cognitive
control (or effort). Exerting control implicates Anterior
Cingulate Cortex (ACC) and Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex
(DLPFC). Importantly this network is involved in expectation of effortful control as well, showing increased activity
as a function of predicted task difficulty. Such activity partially overlaps with expectation of reward, and it has been
observed both during decision-making and during task
preparation. In our recent work, we show that this range
of effects can be accommodated within the framework of
prediction and prediction error. We demonstrate how the
Predicted Response Outcome model (PRO model), based
on prediction error, reliably explains control-related activity
in ACC. An extension to this model -the Hierarchical Error
Representation model (HER model)- expands the same
principle to DLPFC. Combining experimental and modeling
evidence, we propose a novel theoretical account of ACCDLPFC interactions based on the HER model. We describe
how control-related activity in both regions may derive from
prediction error computations across prediction and control
contexts. Interestingly, the model predicts that order of
information processing will influence behavior. In 2 behavioral studies, we demonstrate that imposing an order of processing of information about required control and potential
reward affects decision-making and task-performance. In
our data, reward was prioritized in decision-making, while
control requirements more strongly influenced preparation.
Taken together, our findings support a contribution of ACCDLPFC network in effortful control and prediction, within
the framework of the HER model.

TALK 5: EEG MARKERS OF STRUCTURE LEARNING,
CLUSTERING AND TRANSFER

Anne Collins1,2; 1Brown University, 2University of California Berkeley

When we learn from feedback, reward prediction errors
allow us to estimate the value of stimulus-action associations. However, in a structured world where different
rules may be valid in distinct contexts, or where instead
distinct contexts may require the same rule, reward prediction errors may inform us as to when to create new rules,
when to transfer known rules to new contexts, and when
to generalize newly learned associations to other equivalent contexts. Here, I present computational modeling and
experimental results that show that healthy human adults
perform this kind of structure learning and generalization in
reinforcement learning. Trial-by-trial model-based analysis
of EEG signals showed that subjects incorporated the generCognitive Neuroscience Society

29

Symposium Sessions	

alized reward expectations from their inferred hierarchical
structure; the extent of structure-dependent prediction error
representation in the neural signal predicted behavioral
transfer. These results further our understanding of how
humans learn and generalize flexibly by building abstract,
behaviorally relevant representations of the complex,
high-dimensional sensory environment.

Symposium Session 5
MEMORY RETRIEVAL AS A GUIDE ALONG THE
WINDING ROAD OF MEMORY FORMATION

Monday, April 4, 10:00 am - Noon, Sutton Center
Chair: Donna Bridge, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine
Speakers: Dagmar Zeithamova, Almut Hupbach, Jordan Poppenk,
Donna Bridge, Joel Voss

There are longstanding distinctions between putative cognitive and neural processes that support memory encoding
versus memory retrieval; encoding happens when new
information forms a memory, whereas retrieval happens
when stored information is accessed. However, growing
evidence suggests that neurocognitive processes supporting
encoding and retrieval are highly intertwined and interact
at multiple stages of memory formation, re-formation, and
decay. These findings challenge the notion that retrieval is
the simple expression of information hard-coded as memory
representations, suggesting instead that it is a dynamic force
throughout the life of a memory, continuously influencing
learning of new and related information as well as memory-based decisions. The specific mechanisms whereby
retrieval influences memory are under active debate. For
instance, in various “testing effect” experiments, retrieval
strengthens existing memories, whereas in various “reconsolidation” experiments, retrieval is characterized as a temporary window for memory modification or disruption. Yet
other studies show that retrieval shapes new learning by
allowing for incorporation of new information into the context of what is already known (retrieval-mediated learning).
The talks in this symposium will highlight many facets of
retrieval’s influence on memory, with the aim of blurring
the lines between encoding and retrieval processes in order
to forge a better understanding of the processes that build
and re-form memories irrespective of the artificial encoding/retrieval divide.

TALK 1: RETRIEVAL-MEDIATED LEARNING AND
THE FORMATION OF KNOWLEDGE THAT SPANS
EXPERIENCES
Dagmar Zeithamova1; 1University of Oregon

Memory does not only serve as a record of the past. Rather,
memory is prospectively oriented, allowing us to use past
experience to inform novel decisions and anticipate the
future. To be prospectively useful, current events are not
encoded in isolation but rather processed on the background
of prior knowledge in order to relate information across
30

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

events. I will discuss a series of studies on retrieval-mediated learning, demonstrating reinstatement of prior experiences during encoding of related events. Via hippocampal
interactions with medial prefrontal cortex, the retrieved and
current experiences can be then combined into integrated
memory representations that transcend direct experience.
These findings highlight the constructive nature of memory
resulting from encoding/retrieval interactions.

TALK 2: WHAT TRIGGERS MEMORY UPDATING?
EXPLORING THE IMPACT OF DIFFERENT REACTIVATION
PROCEDURES
Almut Hupbach1; 1Lehigh University

Each time a memory is reactivated, it can re-enter a plastic
state in which it can be modified - it can be changed in content, strengthened, weakened, or even erased. In this talk, I
will explore the effects of different reactivation procedures
for episodic memory updating. Specifically, I will ask which
conditions foster the incorporation of new information into
reactivated memory. Using a behavioral interference paradigm, we presented new information immediately after
reactivation of an episodic memory, and after a time delay
assessed the extent to which new information intruded
into the reactivated memory. In a first series of studies, we
directly compared different types of reminders, such as
reminding questions and re-exposure to the spatial learning context. In support of the fundamental role of spatial
context for episodic memory organization, we found that
re-exposing participants to the original spatial context was
both necessary and sufficient for memory updating. However, this effect was moderated by context familiarity. In
highly familiar environments, the spatial context itself was
no longer important, and other reminders became effective.
In a second series of studies, we manipulated the strength
of reactivation. Our findings suggest that strength of reactivation and memory updating are related in an inverted
U-shape function: no reference to the original memory
(no reactivation) as well as explicit testing of the original
memory (strong reactivation) prevented memory updating, whereas indirect reminders as well as relearning the
old information before learning new information triggered
updating. Implications for theory and educational practice
will be discussed.

TALK 3: IMPACTS OF STIMULUS FAMILIARITY ON NEW
EPISODIC ENCODING
Jordan Poppenk1; 1Queen’s University

A variety of experimental paradigms, reported by various
labs, have revealed a facilitatory role of prior stimulus
experience in the encoding of new events involving those
stimuli, whether that stimulus experience was derived from
recent repetition or prior knowledge. Recent research has
turned to mechanisms: why is this advantage realized? In
this talk, I will describe fMRI classifier evidence gathered in
the context of a source memory task to address several possibilities: 1) do participants allocate less attentional resources
to familiar stimuli, and more to their context? 2) Does con-

2016 Annual Meeting	

textual information better “stick” when there is an existing,
relevant memory trace? An assessment of participants’
task-related processing appears to favour the latter possibility. In addition, I will discuss the relevance of neural priming, a phenomenon that accompanies processing of familiar
information. In particular, repetition of items is known to
induce attenuation of cortical responses in perceptual areas,
although its relevance to mnemonic benefits to familiarity
is unclear. As no reports have examined neural priming
beyond a period of several days, it is unknown whether
neural priming could accompany retrieval-based memory
enhancement where semantic memory is concerned. I will
describe new fMRI evidence describing the upper limit of
neural priming’s persistence.

TALK 4: ACTIVE RETRIEVAL MODULATES THE
STRUCTURE OF EPISODIC MEMORIES

Donna Bridge1; 1Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine

The hippocampus binds arbitrarily associated pieces of
information to support episodic memory. Surprisingly little
is known regarding the factors that influence what pieces
of information will be bound or whether there is meaningful structural organization of their interrelationships in
memory. We propose that active retrieval modulates the
relative “dominance” of memory features, by enabling specific memories to become temporarily salient and available
for binding with other information encountered during an
event. This dominance concept is grounded on the notion
that multiple memory traces are always in competition for
control of behavior, but it is the dominant trace that ultimately takes control and is most susceptible to modification.
Using eye-movement tracking and neuroimaging methods,
we have shown that active retrieval modulates what information is currently dominant and therefore available for
binding by the hippocampus with either memory content
or relevant information in the environment. Specifically,
retrieval provides structure to existing and new memories
by influencing (1) what information will be susceptible to
binding (2) when binding will occur and (3) the strength
of binding among memory features. I will present results
from a collection of studies that shed light on these robust
and specific influences of retrieval on memory formation
and modification. These findings demonstrate that episodic
memories are not amorphous collections of information, but
rather are honed and structured by active retrieval in order
to facilitate adaptive use of memory and to promote rapid
learning.

TALK 5: Q & A AND PANEL DISCUSSION

Joel Voss1, Donna Bridge1, Dagmar Zeithamova2, Almut Hupbach3,
Jordan Poppenk4; 1Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, 2University of Oregon, 3Lehigh University, 4Queen’s
University

Joel Voss will moderate the discussion of retrieval’s influence on memory. The panel will field questions from the
audience.

Symposium Sessions

Symposium Session 6
MULTISENSORY INTEGRATION: NEURAL
MECHANISMS, COMPUTATIONAL OPERATIONS
AND BEHAVIOUR

Monday, April 4, 10:00 am - Noon, Grand Ballroom West
Chair: Uta Noppeney, Computational Neuroscience and Cognitive
Robotics Centre, University of Birmingham, UK
Speakers: Greg DeAngelis, Uta Noppeney, Michael S. Beauchamp, John J. Foxe, Mark Wallace

For effective interactions with our multisensory environment the brain is challenged to integrate signals from multiple senses. Over the past decade accumulating evidence has
suggested that multisensory integration is not deferred until
later processing stages in association cortices, but emerges
already at the primary cortical level. This interdisciplinary
symposium will provide a state of the art overview of how
the brain integrates sensory information into a coherent
percept of the world. We will bring together speakers that
employ various methodologies ranging from electrophysiology in non-human primates to human electrocorticography, fMRI, EEG, psychophysics and computational modelling. In particular we aim to bridge the gap between neural
mechanisms and responses, computational operations and
behavior. We will explore how fundamental computational
principles shape multisensory integration across diverse
domains such as motion, spatial or speech processing. Further, we will ask how multisensory integration develops
during lifespan in individuals with autism spectrum disorders and normal ageing. The symposium should be of substantial interest to the cognitive neuroscience community
by providing new insights into the interactions between the
sensory systems and bridging between sensory functions
and cognition in typical and atypical populations.

TALK 1: MULTISENSORY MECHANISMS FOR DISSOCIATING SELF-MOTION AND OBJECT MOTION

Greg DeAngelis1; 1Center for Visual Science, University of Rochester, USA

Image motion on the retina generally reflects some combination of self-motion and objects that move in the world. Thus,
a fundamental task for the brain is to dissociate visual motion
into components related to self-motion and object motion. I
will demonstrate that vestibular signals play important roles
in perceptual estimation of self-motion and object motion. In
addition, I will show that decoding the responses of a population of multisensory (visual-vestibular) neurons allows
the brain to accurately estimate self-motion (heading) in
the presence of object motion, or vice-versa. Moreover, the
population decoding scheme that achieves this goal can be
derived from a general computational strategy for marginalizing over one variable and estimating another variable.
Thus, the brain appears to use multisensory signals to carry
out near-optimal probabilistic computations that dissociate
variables that may be confounded in the peripheral sensory
input.
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

31

Symposium Sessions	

TALK 2: SEE WHAT YOU HEAR: CONSTRUCTING A REPRESENTATION OF THE WORLD ACROSS THE SENSES
Uta Noppeney1, Tim Rohe2; 1Computational Neuroscience and
Cognitive Robotics Centre, University of Birmingham, UK, 2University ofTuebingen

Our brains are continuously confronted with the problem
of how to understand the sensory signals with which they
are bombarded. For example, I can hear a bird and I can see
a bird, but is it one bird singing on the branch, or is it two
birds: one sitting on the branch and the other singing in the
bush? How should the brain combine signals into a veridical percept of the environment without knowing whether
they pertain to same or different events? Combining Bayesian Modelling with fMRI and EEG multivariate decoding
we investigated how the brain solves this so-called Causal
Inference problem. We demonstrate that the human brain
integrates sensory signals into spatial representations in line
with Bayesian Causal Inference by simultaneously encoding multiple spatial estimates along the cortical hierarchy.
Critically, only at the top of the hierarchy, in anterior intraparietal sulcus, the uncertainty about the world’s causal
structure is taken into account and sensory signals are
integrated weighted by their bottom-up sensory reliability
and top-down task-relevance into spatial priority maps as
predicted by Bayesian Causal Inference. Characterizing the
computational operations of multisensory interactions in
human neocortex reveals the hierarchical nature of multisensory perception.

TALK 3: MODELS AND MECHANISMS OF MULTISENSORY
SPEECH PERCEPTION
Michael S. Beauchamp1; 1Baylor College of Medicine, USA

Speech is the most important mode of human communication and speech perception is multisensory, making use
of both auditory information from the talker’s voice and
visual information from the talker’s face. Surprisingly, some
individuals make little use of visual speech information,
while others are strongly influenced by it. I will discuss our
attempts to construct Bayesian models, specifically models
of causal inference, to understand why this might be.
Guided by these models, we have used electrocorticography
(ECoG), fMRI and TMS to understand the neural substrates
of multisensory speech perception. These studies have
revealed that the human superior temporal sulcus (STS) is
a key node in the brain network for speech perception and
individual differences in speech perception. Surprising new
data show that eye movements when viewing talking faces
predict perception.

TALK 4: MULTISENSORY INTEGRATION DEFICITS IN
AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER (ASD)

John J. Foxe1,2, Lars A. Ross2, Sophie Molholm2; 1The Ernest J. Del
Monte Institute for Neuromedicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, 2The Sheryl and Daniel R. Tishman Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, Albert Einstein College of Medicine

Observing a speaker’s articulations substantially improves
speech intelligibility under noisy listening conditions, a
32

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

crucial component of effective communication. We assessed
these abilities in children with an ASD, since multisensory
deficits are increasingly recognized as a component of the
autism phenotype. Severe speech integration deficits were
uncovered in school-aged children with autism (5-12 yearolds), but appeared to resolve in children entering adolescence (>13 years of age). This suggests that these abilities
are amenable to intervention during early childhood, with
potentially important outcomes for social communication abilities in these ASD children. These multisensory
speech deficits have clear implications for educators and
clinicians working in autism. In parallel work using more
basic audio-visual inputs, high-density electrophysiological
recordings also reveal highly immature early sensory integration in neocortical circuits and a lack of behavioral facilitation in ASD participants. It is particularly compelling that
deficits in basic electrophysiological measures of audio-visual integration were associated with clinical severity scores
in these children. We will discuss the mounting evidence
pointing to sensory integration deficits as a major feature of
the ASDs.

TALK 5: LINKS BETWEEN SENSORY AND MULTISENSORY
FUNCTION AND COGNITION
Mark Wallace1; 1Vanderbilt University, US

Despite an intuitive understanding that sensory and multisensory systems form the building blocks for higher-order
perceptual and cognitive representations, surprisingly little
work has examined the relationship across these domains.
We sought to examine this relationship by comparing performance on a battery of sensory and multisensory tasks
with a series of measures of cognitive performance. This
work was carried out in a developmental context, looking
for links across domains in human subjects ranging in age
from 8 to 80. Striking changes were noted in sensory, multisensory and cognitive function in older adults (age 65+),
with changes in multisensory function not being readily
predicted based on changes in unisensory performance.
Correlational analyses and hierarchical clustering across
all ages revealed a complex pattern of associations across
the various sensory and cognitive indices. One example of
one of the strongest relationships was between measures of
audiovisual temporal acuity and measures of language and
communication. In addition to these behavioral, psychophysical and cognitive measures, ongoing neuroimaging
work is examining the relationships between (multi)sensory
networks and cognitive networks in an effort to better reveal
the interrelationships between them.

2016 Annual Meeting	

Symposium Session 7
HUMAN INTRACRANIAL ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY:
A NEW ERA
Tuesday, April 5, 10:00 am - Noon, Grand Ballroom West
Chair: Josef Parvizi, Stanford University
Speakers: Josef Parvizi, György Buzsáki, Xiao-Jing Wang, Dejan
Markovic, Sabine Kastner

The purpose of this symposium is to shed light on the basics
of neuronal population dynamics and oscillations as well
as the new research developments that are taking place
in the field of human intracranial electrophysiology. Will
invasive recordings and cortical stimulations in human subjects change our view of the functional organization of the
human brain?

TALK 1: INTRODUCTION

Josef Parvizi1; 1Stanford University

Functional architecture of the brain is at the core of discussions in the field of system neuroscience. Recent advances
in invasive recording and direct cortical stimulation methods have given rise to unique set of information about the
functional and causal role of distinct populations of neurons
within specific regions of the mammalian brains. These new
observations have yielded unprecedented data about the
selective functional properties of localized populations of
neurons during experimental paradigms as well as daily-life
natural settings. This presentation will provide an introductory overview of invasive recording and neuromodulation
methods in human subjects and will highlight the unique
contribution of such studies throughout the history of neuroscience.

TALK 2: RHYTHMS IN THE MAMMALIAN BRAINS
György Buzsáki1; 1New York University

Brain rhythms are highly preserved throughout the evolution of mammalian brains and have constrained the evolutionary and ontogenetic scaling of brain structures. This
presentation will provide an overview of brain rhythms and
how they form a system, tied together by cross-frequency
phase coupling. This mechanism allows for bidirectional
communication across brain structure in a state-dependent
manner. The receiver structure initiates the exchange by a
slow frequency rhythm and the messages are conveyed back
from the sender to receiver in higher frequency packages,
typically gamma and ripples oscillations. Oscillations allow
for the segmentation of spike trains-carried information into
neurons ‘letters’ (assemblies) and ‘words’, which can be
concatenated into neuronal ‘sentences’.

TALK 3: COMPUTATIONAL MODELING OF OSCILLATIONS
Xiao-Jing Wang1; 1New York University

This lecture will cover basic principles of brain oscillations during cognition. First, I will summarize the current
status of experimental observations of neural population
oscillations and their circuit mechanisms, with a focus on

Symposium Sessions

gamma and theta rhythms. These oscillatory phenomena
have been associated with not only local processing but also
inter-areal communication in the brain. I will present recent
studies of frequency-dependent feedforward versus feedback signaling between cortical areas, in particular our new
results from a large-scale circuit model of the primate cortex
endowed with a laminar structure. I will also discuss controversies on the synchrony analysis as a dominant perspective
on inter-areal communication or global brain connectivity.
These findings and ideas have important implications for
abnormal neural synchronization associated with mental
disorders like schizophrenia and autism.

TALK 4: NEUROMODULATION: A FUTURISTIC
PERSPECTIVE
Dejan Markovic1; 1UCLA

Much progress has been made in generating brain-machine
interface and restoring limb movement. However, it has
proven to be more difficult to restore cognitive functions.
This presentation will discuss what may be possible in the
future for enhancing cognitive functions using implantable
neuromodulation devices. Starting from devices for translational animal studies and initial work in body-powered systems, this talk will discuss a minimally invasive battery-less
neuromodulation system for human memory restoration.
This talk will cover how we are about to break the the grand
challenges in neural engineering by introducing reliable
low-power miniaturized wireless telemetry systems at rates
and channel counts that are needed for major scientific
discoveries and therapeutic outcomes in neurospcyhiatric
conditions.

TALK 5: DISCUSSION

Sabine Kastner1; 1Princeton University

The main theme of the discussion will be to address the
question of intracranial electrophysiology versus scalp EEG
or neuroimaging as well as animal versus human studies.
Ethical issues as well as methodological limitations and
superiorities of invasive monitoring will be discussed with
the presenters in a round table format.

Symposium Session 8
TAKING STOCK OF COGNITIVE TRAINING:
THEORY, NEURAL MECHANISMS AND
APPLICATION

Tuesday, April 5, 10:00 am - Noon, Beekman
Chair: Duncan Astle, MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit,
Cambridge
Speakers: Susan Gathercole, Thomas Redick, John Jonides, Duncan Astle, Adam Gazzaley

Cognitive training – sometimes referred to as ‘brain training’ – is one of the most controversial topics in cognitive science and neuroscience. Strong claims have been made that
training can remediate cognitive deficits associated with a
variety of conditions, including: neurodevelopmental disorCognitive Neuroscience Society

33

Symposium Sessions	

ders, acquired brain damage, neurodegeneration and typical ageing. Commercial training programmes, targeting core
functions like attention and working memory, promise generalised gains on everyday tasks and school achievement.
However there has been growing disquiet among scientists
in the area that these claims exceed the current evidence
base. The time is right to take stock of the scientific basis
of cognitive training, from cognitive theory and underlying
neural mechanisms, through to an evaluation of potential applications. That is the purpose of this symposium.
Thomas Redick will provide an empirical evaluation of the
claims made by proponents of intensive cognitive training.
Susan Gathercole will address the current lack of theory in
the area, by proposing a framework for transfer following
working memory training. Duncan Astle will draw upon
magnetoencephalography data to provide a detailed neurophysiological account of cognitive plasticity following training. John Jonides will explore the potential transfer benefits
of combining adaptive training with brain stimulation. And
finally, Adam Gazzaley will outline recent developments
with innovative technologies, and their potential to enhance
the application of training interventions.

TALK 1: A FRAMEWORK FOR TRANSFER FOLLOWING
WORKING MEMORY TRAINING

Susan Gathercole1,2; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit,
Cambridge, 2University of Cambridge

The past decade has seen the emergence of the new field
of research on cognitive training, with the development
of many programs targeting abilities including memory,
reasoning, and processing speed. A critical step in understanding the cognitive changes induced by training is to
track the transfer of training gains to untrained activities. In
this presentation I will put forward a new evidence-based
framework for transfer following working memory (WM)
training, one of the most substantial fields of cognitive training. It is proposed that the transfer to other WM tasks has
two principal sources: i) the establishment of new cognitive
routines for highly unfamiliar and unpracticed WM activities, and ii) the development of metacognitive strategies
satisfying response requirements for the specific mnemonic
content. Predictions from this framework are tested against
data from a large sample of children who completed either
adaptive WM training or a low-dose WM control program.
Transfer is greatest when the two conditions of the framework involving learning to do something new are satisfied,
and the magnitude of transfer is predicted by general cognitive ability prior to training. A smaller source of transfer
may reflect fine-tuning of pre-existing processes within
verbal short-term memory (STM) and is independent of IQ.

TALK 2: WHAT’S WORKING IN WORKING MEMORY
TRAINING?
Thomas Redick1; 1Purdue University

A growing number of research articles and commercial websites claim evidence that brief, computerized interventions
can be used to improve one’s cognitive abilities. In particu34

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

lar, working memory training research has bourgeoned in
recent years, in virtually every area of psychology. Despite
claims that various forms of working memory training can
improve memory, attention, and even intelligence, numerous questions remain about the efficacy of such programs.
My talk will begin by briefly summarizing the working
memory training literature. Then, I will present the results
from a series of studies investigating transfer to both ‘near’
and ‘far’ cognitive processes. The conclusion from these
studies is that working memory training produces limited benefits in terms of specific gains on short-term and
working memory tasks that are very similar to the training
programs, but no advantage for outcomes that are quite different from the training tasks. I will end with a discussion
of issues related to research design, data interpretation, and
unresolved questions in working memory training research
and application.

TALK 3: ENHANCING WORKING MEMORY TRAINING
USING TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION
John Jonides1, Ben Katz1, Chelsea Zabel1, Jacky Au2, Susanne
Jaeggi2, Martin Buschkuehl3; 1University of Michigan, 2University
of California, Irvine, 3MIND Research Institute, Irvine

Working memory (WM) is a fundamental cognitive ability
that is limited in capacity and constrains complex thought.
It is highly predictive of academic and professional success,
and thus, in this increasingly complex information age,
interventions to increase WM ability are highly valued. A
promising intervention that has gained traction over the
last decade is transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS),
which is a non-invasive form of brain stimulation that can
modulate cortical excitability and temporarily increase
brain plasticity. As such, it can boost learning or enhance
performance on cognitive tasks. We assessed the value of
tDCS as a tool to facilitate working memory training and
discovered that stimulation over prefrontal cortex enhanced
performance over seven days of training and also had selective effects on transfer to non-trained tasks.

TALK 4: ALTERING DEVELOPING NEUROPHYSIOLOGY
WITH COGNITIVE TRAINING

Duncan Astle1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge

Working memory is a basic requirement for many everyday
tasks. Poor working memory skills are highly predictive
of educational underachievement and developmental disorder. Despite the high level of interest in the application
of cognitive training, especially in childhood, very little
is known about the neurophysiological mechanisms by
which training gains are achieved. I will present data from
a double-blind randomised controlled training study, in
which we use the dynamic electrical activity recorded using
MEG to explore underlying neurophysiological changes
following training. We used new methods to explore the
spontaneous coordination of electrophysiological signals
at rest. Improvements in working memory after training
were significantly associated with changes in functional

2016 Annual Meeting	

connectivity between areas in fronto-parietal cortex and
inferior-temporal cortex. During task performance we also
observed enhanced coupling between the upper alpha
rhythm (at 16 Hz), recorded in superior frontal and parietal
cortex, and high gamma activity (at ~ 90 Hz) in inferior temporal cortex. This altered neural network activity associated
with cognitive skill enhancement is consistent with a framework in which slower cortical rhythms enable the dynamic
regulation of higher frequency oscillatory activity related
to task-related cognitive processes. This is the first demonstration that this hierarchically organised neuronal coupling
can be measured in childhood, is associated with enhanced
competence in a cognitive skill, and can be augmented by
targeted intervention.

TALK 5: TECHNOLOGY MEETS NEUROSCIENCE CHANGING THE FUTURE OF HEALTH AND EDUCATION
Adam Gazzaley1; 1University of California, San Francisco

A fundamental challenge of modern society is the development of effective approaches to enhance brain function
and cognition in both the healthy and impaired. For the
healthy, this should be a core mission of our educational
system and for the cognitively impaired this is the primary
goal of our medical system. Unfortunately, neither of these
systems have effectively met this challenge. I will describe
a novel approach out of our lab that uses custom-designed
video games to achieve meaningful and sustainable cognitive enhancement via personalized closed-loop systems
(Nature 2013; Neuron 2014). I will also share with you the
next stage of our research program, which integrates our
video games with the latest technological innovations in
software (e.g., brain computer interface algorithms, GPU
computing, cloud-based analytics) and hardware (e.g., virtual reality, mobile EEG, physiological recording devices
(watches), transcranial brain stimulation) to further enhance
our brain’s information processing systems and ultimately
improve quality of life.

Symposium Session 9
AFFECTIVE-MOTIVATIONAL SALIENCE AND
ATTENTIONAL SETS

Tuesday, April 5, 10:00 am - Noon, Sutton Center
Chair: Rebecca Todd, University of British Columbia
Co-Chair: Grace Truong, University of British Columbia
Speakers: Andreas Keil, Valentina Rossi, Grace Truong, Leonardo
Chelazzi, Rebecca M. Todd

How does affective-motivational relevance tune attention
to the world, and how does such affective prioritization fit
into current models of selective attention? Recently, the traditional division of selective attention into ‘top-down’ and
‘bottom-up’ processes has been challenged on a number of
fronts. One challenge has come from research on attentional
prioritization of affectively-motivationally salient stimuli.
On the one hand, such salience elicits relatively reflexive
responses to features of the stimuli, similar to ‘bottom-up’

Symposium Sessions

processes elicited by low-level visual salience. At the same
time, prioritized attention to affective-motivational salience
can be modulated by an organism’s changing goals in a
manner traditionally characterized as ‘top-down.’ Moreover, such prioritization is subserved by a distinct network
of brain regions that selectively tune the visual cortex to
affective-motivational salience, much as frontoparietal
attentional networks do. Along with other evidence, these
findings point to a view in which attention is tuned to multiple sources of salience in relation to a broad range of goals,
which can be short or long term, and implicit or explicit.
Here we present research probing mechanisms by which
affective-motivational salience, based on learned associations with reward, punishment, and self-relevance, creates
attentional sets for relevant aspects of the world and influences deployment of explicit attentional sets for task-relevant stimuli. Taken together, this body of research suggests
that, to understand attentional processes, we need to take
into account ways in which they may be habitually shaped
by implicit motivational/affective goals.

TALK 1: THREAT VERSUS SAFETY IN HUMAN VISUAL
CORTEX: HOW AFFECTIVE EXPERIENCE IMPACTS
PERCEPTION
Andreas Keil1; 1University of Florida, USA

A plethora of studies suggest that the biological relevance of
visual stimuli is associated with facilitated sensory processing. Beyond the phenomenological demonstration of this
effect however little is known about the neurophysiological
mechanisms that mediate selective facilitation of biologically relevant cues. In this presentation, we discuss conceptual and methodological issues regarding the characterization and induction of threat and safety in the laboratory.
We then turn to experimental explorations of behavioral
and neurophysiological dynamics as observers learn that
a novel, initially unengaging, stimulus is behaviorally relevant. Combining the steady-state visual evoked potential
and other electrophysiological signals with hemodynamic
neuroimaging techniques, we find that activity in lower-tier
visual cortex changes as a function of motivational relevance
acquired through Pavlovian fear conditioning. The temporal rate of these changes, their extent, and the brain regions
involved reflect the specific behavioral and environmental
contingencies to which observers adapt. Findings will be
discussed in a theoretical framework that views emotions as
action dispositions.

TALK 2: INCENTIVE MOTIVATION ALTERS EARLY
SENSORY PROCESSING IN VISUAL CORTEX: EVIDENCE
FROM ERPS

Valentina Rossi1, Naomi Vanlessen1, Marieke Bayer2, Annika
Graß2, Annekathrin Schacht2, Gilles Pourtois1; 1Ghent University,
Belgium, 2University of Göttingen, Germany

Previous research has highlighted that motivationally relevant stimuli (e.g., stimuli paired with positive or negative
outcomes) receive preferential processing, either through a
gain in visual saliency or through strategic reallocation of
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

35

Symposium Sessions	

attention. Capitalizing on the high temporal resolution of
event-related brain potentials (ERPs), we performed a series
of studies to investigate the time-course of reward/punishment expectancy, starting from the earliest stages of visual
processing (75 ms, C1 component of the Visual Evoked
Potentials). First, in a combined ERP/eye-tracking spatial
cueing task we tested whether incentive expectancy would
modulate early visual responses to semantically neutral
visual stimuli, independently or interactively with voluntary spatial attention. Second, removing the predicting cue
informing on the incentive value of the trial, we sought to
test if the mere repeated association with positive or negative reinforcers would be sufficient to modulate early visual
cortex responses to originally neutral stimuli, and whether
these modulations would be value-based or saliency-based
(thus dependent on the signed value vs. absolute value of
the reinforcer). Our results show that motivational relevance
(reward, but also punishment expectancy) can increase the
earliest visual cortex response at the C1 level, showing
saliency-based priority gain. Moreover, we show that this
modulation also generalizes to new stimuli sharing perceptual features with the reinforced ones, presented in a new
context. These neurophysiological results suggest that the
human low-tier visual cortex rapidly encodes motivationally significant signals based on a coarse feature-extraction
mechanism, independently from top-down attention allocation.

TALK 3: SELF-RELEVANCE AS A SOURCE OF
ATTENTIONAL BIAS

Grace Truong1, Todd C. Handy1, Rebecca M. Todd1; 1University of
British Columbia, Canada

Recent research has produced growing evidence of affect-biased attention, which we have characterized in terms of
habitual attentional sets for categories of stimuli based on
affective salience. Affective salience is shaped by associations with positive or negative consequences in relation
to both short- and long-term goals. Here we propose that
self-relevance is a superordinate framework for affect-biased attention, as things that are prioritized as a result of
emotional/motivational history are inherently self-related.
We thus predict that self-relevant will be similarly prioritized. In three studies we examined whether people can
rapidly generate a pre-stimulus attentional set for objects
that are self-relevant because we own them using a temporal order judgment paradigm. Participants viewed pairs
of objects (one self-owned, one other-owned) and judged
which appeared first. Critically, self-relevance was ascribed
online and to everyday objects, thus mimicking real world
conditions in which the personal importance of any given
object varies as a function of context. Results indicated that
self-owned objects were significantly more likely to be perceived first when presented at the same time as an object
owned by someone else, revealing a prior entry effect for
self-owned objects. This evidence suggests that automatic
attention biases are not solely the domain of “hardwired”

36

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

universally salient stimuli. Rather, they are more flexible
and context-dependent than we previously knew, and can
accommodate whatever is meaningful to each of us as individuals. The implications of these findings will be discussed
along with related neuroimaging and behavioral experiments investigating the post-stimulus (i.e. downstream)
effects of self-relevance.

TALK 4: ALTERING VISUAL SELECTIVE ATTENTION WITH
REWARD

Leonardo Chelazzi1, Oscar Ferrante1, Elisa Santandrea1, Chiara
Della Libera1; 1University of Verona, Italy

In the past we have pioneered research assessing whether
reward modifies attentional priorities. In early studies, we
demonstrated that the association of reward with specific
stimulus features, such as color and shape, alters the attentional priority of those features, both in the short- and longterm. Subsequent work demonstrated that such effects could
result from either of two mechanisms: one reflecting sheer
stimulus-reward associations, in a Pavlovian fashion, and
a second one reflecting the reinforcement of specific attentional operations applied to the given stimulus, in a Skinnerian fashion. More recently, we have explored whether
similar effects can be obtained in the spatial domain. Using
a reward-based training regimen, we demonstrated that
spatial priority maps can be altered in a highly selective
manner by virtue of variable reward probabilities associated
with different locations. All the evidence above is generally
compatible with the notion that reward affects attention
in a bottom-up fashion, altering the priority of stimuli and
locations. More recently we have begun to explore whether
reward can also impact the top-down guidance of attention,
changing the strength of the signals that control selection at a
more abstract level of representation. The evidence demonstrates that reward can indeed exert a strong influence on
the endogenous control of attention, such that a reward-associated attentional set is more readily re-instated, when
necessary, but is also less readily abandoned when a switch
in attentional set is required. Overall, the reported findings
demonstrate a pervasive and multi-faceted influence of
reward on attentional guidance.

TALK 5: SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

Rebecca M. Todd1; 1University of British Columbia, Canada

In this session we will summarize the presentations in relation to emerging models of attentional prioritization and
allow time for Q & A.

Poster Schedule
Poster sessions are scheduled for Saturday-Tuesday in Americas Hall I & II of the New York Hilton Midtown hotel. Posters
1-88 are presented in Americas Hall I and posters 89-176 are in Americas Hall II.
All attendees must present their CNS 2016 name badge to enter the exhibit hall. Do not leave personal items in the poster
room.
The presenting author must be present during the assigned session. You may post your materials on the board assigned to
you at any time after the “Set-up Begins” time (listed below), but before the beginning of the assigned poster session. You
must remove your poster promptly no later than the time listed above in “Take-down Complete.” Any posters left up after
the “Take-down Complete” time may be discarded.
Note that presenters are asked to set up poster in advance of their session and to leave their poster up for a period following
their session (see your specific session for hours). This is to allow attendees to view posters outside the formal session times.
Only registered poster presenters, wearing a CNS 2016 meeting badge, for the current session and exhibitors will be allowed
in the exhibit hall during set up and take-down hours. All other attendees will be turned away at the door. No attendee or
exhibitor will be allowed to enter the exhibit hall after the Closed for the Day- No Entry hours.
Poster
Session

Date

Setup
Begins

Session
Begins

Session
Ends

Take-Down
Completed

A

Saturday, April 2

3:00 pm*

5:00 pm

7:00 pm

7:15 pm

B

Sunday, April 3

7:30 am*

8:00 am

10:00 am

11:45 am

C

Sunday, April 3

1:30 pm*

5:00 pm

7:00 pm

7:15 pm

D

Monday, April 4

7:30 am*

8:00 am

10:00 am

12:00 pm

E

Monday, April 4

12:30 pm*

1:30 pm

3:30 pm

4:45 pm

F

Tuesday April 5

7:30 am*

8:00 am

10:00 am

10:15 am

* Please note that only scheduled registered poster presenters may enter the exhibit hall during the set-up time. All other
attendees may only enter when the exhibit hall opens.
Note: Please remove your poster promptly at take down complete time, so that the next presenter may set up their poster.

People's Choice Poster Award
Vote for your favorite poster during each Poster Session. One winner will be selected per session to receive a $100 Award!
Voting will take place at the Exhibit Hall entrance. Winners will be posted each morning at the Member Services Desk.
Sponsored by

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

37

Poster Session A
ATTENTION: Auditory
A1
INFANT MISMATCH RESPONSES TO SPEECH: THE INTERPLAY
BETWEEN LANGUAGE AND ATTENTION Yan Yu1, Margaret Kamowski-Shakibai2, Monica Wagner1, Valerie Shafer3; 1St. John’s University, 2Marymount Manhattan College, 3The Graduate Center, City University of New York —

The consistent presence of mismatch responses (MMR) to speech contrast
in infants suggests that speech processing develops rapidly during infancy.
However, the current literature in this area has been discordant primarily
due to the polarity and latency variations of MMR across studies on infant
speech perception. Furthermore, little is known about how bilingual versus
monolingual experience influences early neurodevelopment of speech perception. We hypothesize that early bilingual experience influences infant’s
attention to speech, and negative MMR is an indication of more attention
to speech change. In this study, we tested 6-month-old infants from monolingual English-speaking households and bilingual Spanish-English speaking households, respectively, using English-only vowel contrast. A passive
listening oddball paradigm was used. We compared MMR from the first
half of the data session with that from the second half of the session within
each infant. The results show that between 150 and 300 ms, the change patterns from the first half to the second half of the event-related recordings
differ drastically between the two language groups. The responses become
more negative for the bilinguals (both the standard and deviant) whereas
no difference, or even greater positivity for the monolinguals. These results
provide new evidence for the interplay of language and attention in infant
speech development, and it supports our earlier findings (Shafer et al.
2012) regarding increased attention allocation to speech in bilingual infants
during passive listening context.

A2
THE INFLUENCE OF STIMULUS-REWARD ASSOCIATIONS ON
AUDITORY PROCESSING Elise Demeter1, Brittany Glassberg1, Marissa L.
Gamble1,2, Marty G. Woldorff1; 1Duke University, 2Boston University — Recent

work demonstrates stimulus-reward associations can enhance the attentional priority of visual stimuli; it is less known, however, how reward
influences the processing of auditory stimuli. Here, we leveraged high-temporal-resolution electrical brain recording (EEG) to investigate the influence of stimulus-reward associations in an auditory oddball task. The task
consisted of standard tones (1000 Hz) and rare, deviant target tones (30%
of stimuli; 900 and 1100 Hz, equally probable). Tones were randomly presented (100 ms duration, 800-1000 ms interstimulus interval). Participants
were instructed to buttonpress whenever targets were presented and that
they could earn monetary rewards based on their speed and accuracy. In
the first half of the session, high-pitched targets were assigned to a high-reward condition and low-pitched targets to low-reward (high-reward pay
rate 10 times low). Reward assignments were reversed in the second half
of the session, with reward-assignment order counterbalanced across subjects. Behaviorally, high-reward tones had faster reaction times than low-reward ones. Event-related potentials (ERPs) time-locked to the tone onsets
revealed that reward enhanced the amplitude of the early N1 sensory component (latency 70 to 130 ms) and the deviance-related mismatch negativity (130-200 ms). Reward also enhanced the amplitude of and decreased
the latency of a central-parietal P3 component (240-800 ms). These data
demonstrate stimulus-reward associations can enhance the early sensory
processing and discrimination of auditory stimuli, as reflected by the N1
and mismatch negativity components, respectively, and that this enhanced
processing then ramifies onto later processing stages, as evidenced by the
P3.

A3
PHASE-TRACKING OF SPEECH OCCURS WITHOUT BROADBAND
ENVELOPE MODULATION Dillon Hambrook1,2, Matthew Tata1,2; 1University

of Lethbridge, 2Canadian Centre for Behavioural Neuroscience — Speech com-

prehension itself is a minor miracle of the human brain made more remarkable by the fact that it is surprisingly robust to interference from competing
sounds. Neural oscillatory activity that is coherent between brain systems
has been hypothesized to be a biological mechanism that enables speech
comprehension. Low frequency (2-8 Hz) electroencephalogram (EEG)
activity tracks quasi-periodic changes in the acoustic energy of speech. This
tracking is enhanced for attended and intelligible speech. One theory suggests that selective entrainment of neural activity to the acoustic dynamics
of a speech stream enable the brain to parse speech into semantically meaningful units by aligning periods of increased neural sensitivity to periods
of high-information within the speech stream. We test the hypothesis that
the broadband acoustic envelope of speech is crucial for the entrainment of
neural activity to speech. By cross-correlating the EEG response with signals derived from the dynamics of speech with an intact or a masked acoustic envelope we identify phase-locked activity related to speech processing.
We show that masking the broadband acoustic envelope is not sufficient to
prevent tracking of the acoustic dynamics of a speech signal, despite a significant degradation in the intelligibility of the speech. Our results suggest
that phase-tracking of the acoustic dynamics of speech operates on amplitude modulations in the frequency bands specific to a speaker’s voice rather
than broadband energy transients.

A4
THE IMPACT OF MUSICIANSHIP ON INDUCED OSCILLATORY
ACTIVITY DURING A SPEECH-IN-NOISE TASK Benjamin Rich Zendel1,2,

Olivier Dussault2, Merwin Olthof2,3, Sylvie Belleville2, Isabelle Peretz2; 1Memorial
University of Newfoundland, 2Université de Montréal, 3University of Amsterdam
— Numerous studies have demonstrated that musicians, compared to

non-musicians, have an enhanced ability to understand speech in the presence of background noise. Electroencephalographic evidence suggests that
this benefit is related to enhanced encoding of speech formants, which leads
to more efficient semantic processing of incoming speech information in
noisy environments. These studies have focused on evoked brain activity,
quantified by averaging brain responses that are time-locked to the onset of
a speech signal presented in noise. This approach may miss neural activity
that is not time locked to the onset of a speech signal, because the addition of background noise jitters the onset of the neural response to a speech
stimulus. Measuring speech-induced change in neural oscillatory activity
would reduce the impact of this onset jitter, and may be useful in understanding the musician benefit for understanding speech-in-noise. Accordingly, groups of musicians and non-musicians were presented with a series
of words in different levels of multi-talker babble noise. Induced power
changes in the theta, alpha and beta bands were quantified as a function
of group and noise level. In both groups there was a noise-related increase
in alpha power. Moreover, this noise-related increase in alpha power was
enhanced in musicians. It is likely that the noise-related increase in alpha
power reflects the inhibition of background noise. Thus, the increased
noise-related alpha in musicians likely reflects enhanced inhibitory functioning of the auditory system.

A5
DOES ATTENTION TO OBJECTS IN AUDITORY WORKING MEMORY
ENHANCE PERCEPTUAL PRECISION? Sung-Joo Lim1,2, Malte Wöstmann1,2, Frederik Geweke1, Jonas Obleser1,2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 2University of Lübeck — Selective attention

directed towards objects in working memory (i.e., retrospective attention)
is known to facilitate recall of an attended object, but how this benefit arises
is unknown, especially in the auditory modality. We recently found that
retrospective attention to one of two syllables in auditory working memory
facilitates performance via enhancing perceptual precision of the attended

38

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting	
syllable. Here, we set out to test whether attention-related perceptual
precision enhancement generalizes to different degrees of spare memory
capacity. We examined the effect of object-based retrospective attention
with a varying number of to-be-encoded items (i.e., memory load). During
memory retention in a syllable pitch-discrimination task, we presented
retroactive cues. On each trial, listeners (n=12; 20–30 years) sequentially
encoded two, four, or six syllables. A valid or a neutral visual retro-cue was
then provided to direct listeners’ attention to one, to-be-probed syllable.
Directing attention to a specific syllable object in memory led to faster pitch
change judgments (η2p = 0.17) regardless of memory load. Importantly,
psychophysical modeling results revealed that retrospective attention
improved perceptual precision of the attended syllable object (expressed
by steeper slopes of a psychometric curve; η2p = 0.085). Notably, this precision benefit was most pronounced for low memory load (Cohen’s d =
0.55), and this change in precision benefit was predicted by inter-individual differences in memory capacity benefit across memory load (37% variance explained). Our results suggest that retrospective attention enhances
perceptual precision of attended objects in auditory memory, but such
enhancement depends on the amount of spare memory capacity.

A6
THE BEHAVIOURAL AND NEURAL FATE OF IGNORED SPEECH
Malte Wöstmann1,2, Lorenz Fiedler1,2, Sung-Joo Lim1,2, Jonas Obleser1,2; 1Department of Psychology, University of Lübeck, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — Attention is epito-

mized in the improvement of behavioural responses and enhancement of
neural responses to task-relevant stimuli. But in how far does interference
resulting from task-irrelevant, ignored stimuli depend on stimulus features
(e.g., signal intelligibility) and on characteristics of the human observer
(e.g., cognitive aging)? In two experiments using an irrelevant-speech paradigm, participants heard to-be-ignored speech while remaining focussed
on previously-encoded digits in memory. In a first behavioural experiment,
younger (23–33 years) and older participants (61–78 years) listened to nine
single digits (“1” to “9”) in random order and were instructed to ignore
three subsequent spoken sentences that varied in acoustic detail (i.e., intelligibility) and in each sentence’s final word (i.e., semantic) predictability. The
serial recall accuracy of digits was lower in older compared with younger
listeners, supporting the expected age-related decline in attention performance. Across age, performance was only affected by the manipulation of
acoustic detail, indicating that not higher semantic predictability (Bayes
Factor < 0.2 favouring the null) but only higher intelligibility (Bayes Factor
> 10e7 favouring an effect of intelligibility) of ignored speech predicts
behavioural interference. In a follow-up electroencephalography (EEG)
study employing cross-correlation with the stimulus envelope, auditory
1–8 Hz phase-locked responses showed that listeners’ neural encoding of
the ignored speech stimulus depends on its acoustic detail, while simultaneous alpha (8–12 Hz) power modulation suggested deployment of inhibitory attentional control. Our findings suggest that non-attentive neural
responses to ignored yet intelligible speech compromise the processing of
attended, task-relevant stimuli.

A7
TIMESCALES OF COGNITIVE CONTROL DURING AN AUDITORY
SIMON TASK Lisa Chinn1, Carolyn Pauker1, Edward Golob1; 1Tulane University — Cognitive control is a context-dependent skill that enables one to

ignore distractions and accomplish goals. It operates at timescales of seconds-to-minutes, however, the degree that control at shorter timescales
drives effects at longer timescales is currently unclear. We hypothesized
that cognitive control would be dynamic across individual trials (seconds),
but not fully account for effects at longer timescales (minutes). A Simon
task quantified the impact of distracting spatial information on behavior
and EEG. Subjects (n=47) listened to amplitude-modulated noise (25,75 Hz)
presented laterally, and pressed left/right buttons according to modulation
rate. Subjects responded faster with matching (compatible) vs. conflicting
(incompatible) trial types (stimulus/response laterality), termed the “Simon
effect”. The base rate of compatible trials varied across blocks (25, 50, 75%),
which also affected the proportion of pairs of trial-types (“sequences”). Different base rates manipulate control demand because rare distractors are
more likely to capture attention. Independent component analysis identified base rate effects in frontal and central cortical components using ERP

Poster Session A
and time-frequency power measures. The Simon effect increased with base
rate for reaction time and accuracy (p’s<.001), frontal theta-alpha (p<.001),
central ERPs (p<.001) and ERSP power (theta p<.001; alpha p<.05). For twotrial sequences the Simon effect was larger after compatible trials (behavior
p’s<.001, frontal 400-500 ms ERPs p<.01; frontal theta-alpha ERSPs p<.001;
central theta p<.001, alpha p<.05 ERSPs). Predictive quantitative models
using sequence effects data suggest base rate effects are not fully accounted
for by sequence effects. Results indicate behavioral and neural measures
tuned to contextual changes on different timescales.

A8
THETA BAND PHASE-TRACKING IN CROSS-MODAL SPEECH

Shweta Soni1, Matthew S. Tata1; 1University of Lethbridge — In multisensory

environment, our brain gathers information from multiple sensory sources
and integrates into relevant form to guide our attention. In such environments, congruent and incongruent audio-visual stimuli have been known
to have great impact on processing speech signals. While the facial articulation cues have been widely studied as visual cues for auditory processing, the role of reading text as visual information is still unclear. It is well
known that speech perception is indexed by the degree at which low frequency neural oscillations track speech acoustics. We predicted that reading congruent text would modulate speech-locked EEG by aligning visual
and auditory attention to the same dynamic stimulus. We recorded brain’s
electrophysiological activity as subjects performed a perception task where
they received congruent and incongruent audio-visual information. Using
cross-correlation method of quantifying phase-locked activity, we found
that congruent visual inputs improved the auditory cortex’s responses,
especially in the Theta band (4-8 Hz) to the envelope of speech as compared to incongruent visual inputs. Our data corroborates the complementary role of visual inputs for auditory perception in cross modal senario.
It also provides further insights to investigate the situations where brain
is perceptually disconnected to stimuli (auditory), like mind-wandering.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
A9
EEG EVIDENCE OF COMMAND FOLLOWING IN PATIENTS WITH
SEVERE BRAIN INJURY William H. Curley1,2, Peter B. Forgacs2,3,4, Tanya

N. Nauvel2, Mary M. Conte2, Nicholas D. Schiff2,3,4; 1Bates College, ME, 2Brain
and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, NY, 3Department of
Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill Cornell Medical College, NY, 4The Rockefeller
University, NY — Patients with disorders of consciousness (DOCs) following

severe brain injury often have severe motor deficits, limiting their capacity
for behavioral output and often leading to misdiagnosis (Schnakers et al.,
2009). Electroencephalographic (EEG) assessment of mental imagery is a
strategy to assess the level of conscious awareness (Goldfine et al., 2011)
that bypasses the motor system. The EEG elicited to motor commands is
interpreted as the neural signature of awareness and motor planning in the
absence of overt, purposeful movements (Forgacs et al., 2014). In an ongoing study of DOCs, multichannel video-EEG was recorded in 40 severely
brain-injured patient subjects (PSs), and 15 healthy controls (HCs) while
they were asked to perform four different motor imagery tasks (tennis,
swimming, open/close hand, and visuospatial navigation). The EEG was
segmented into 3-s epochs and only artifact-free epochs were analyzed.
Power spectral estimates in the alpha and beta frequency ranges were then
compared during task and rest conditions. For each channel, a Two Group
Test was used to determine whether there was a significant (p ≤ 0.05) difference in power between conditions (Goldfine et al., 2011). We found changes
in spectral power in the alpha and/or beta frequency bands in all HCs and
13 of 25 PSs. For both groups, EEG positive response profiles occurred consistently within channels in centro-parietal regions immediately superior to
the motor cortex, suggestive of motor planning. Our findings have important implications for the use of EEG motor imagery in the assessment of
cognitive reserves in severe brain injury.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

39

Poster Session A	

ATTENTION: Auditory
A10
THE ROLE OF BETA OSCILLATION IN SENSORY PREDICTION
AND ATTENTION Andrew Chang1, Dan Bosnyak1, Laurel J. Trainor1; 1McMas-

ter University — Neural activities of cortical perceptual systems reflect the

interactions between sensory prediction and attention. Studies showed
that power fluctuations of beta (15 – 25 Hz) oscillatory activity in auditory
cortex entrain to the rhythmic tone sequences, such that power decreases
following the onset of a tone, and increases again predictive of the onset of
the next tone. The current study aimed to investigate whether beta oscillations also predict “what” in addition to “when”, and how beta oscillations affect subsequent attentional responses. We recorded EEG while participants passively listened to isochronous auditory oddball sequences, in
which occasional tones are in a deviant pitch. We analyzed the oscillations
from primary auditory cortices. In Experiment 1, the results showed that
the unpredictable deviances induced stronger power than standards in the
low-beta band (15 – 20 Hz), and the effect was larger when the deviances
had a lower occurrence rate (10 vs. 20 %), suggesting that beta oscillations
reflect prediction violations of “what”. In Experiment 2, the two oddball
sequences were at the same occurrence rate (20%), but the deviances were
either predictable or not in the sequence. The results showed enhanced beta
power entrainment prior to the deviances only in the predictable oddball
sequence, and it was negatively associated with amplitude of P3a, a late
event-related potential reflecting less exogenous attentional orienting to
deviances. Together, we suggest that beta oscillations reflect sensory prediction of both “what” and “when”, and such predictive activities decrease
subsequent exogenous attentional responses to deviant pitch.

A11
NO AGE-DIFFERENCES IN RECOVERING FROM THE SENSORY
CONSEQUENCES OF AUDITORY DISTRACTION Marta Volosin1,2,
Zsofia Anna Gaal1, Janos Horvath1; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience and Psychology, RCNS-HAS, Budapest, Hungary, 2Eotvos Lorand University, Budapest,
Hungary — Numerous studies suggest that elderly are more susceptible to

distraction than young adults, but the temporal characteristics of distraction and recovery from a distracted state are still not well researched. The
present study utilized the N1 event-related potential (ERP) to investigate
how long the distracted state persists in young (19-26 years) and in old
(62-74 years) adults. N1 reflects the sensory registration of auditory events,
but it also influenced by the focus of attention: sound events in the focus of
attention elicit enhanced N1s in comparison to auditory events outside of
it. Previous studies showed that when a distracter precedes a target event
by 150 ms, the target-related N1 is significantly reduced in comparison to
the N1 elicited by a target following the distracter by 650 ms. In the present study, a continuous stimulation paradigm was administered, in which
participants listened to a continuous tone occasionally changing its pitch
in brief glides (distracters). The tone also contained short gaps (targets).
The temporal separation between glides and gaps was 150, 250, 650 ms or
longer and the participants’ task was to respond to gaps while ignoring
glides. We found that target-related N1s were significantly reduced for 150
and 250 ms glide-gap separations compared to 650 ms or longer glide-gap
separations. Although elderly exhibited significantly lower gap-related N1
amplitudes than young adults, the relative (proportional) magnitude of N1
modulation did not differ between the two age groups. This suggests that
aging does not affect the time needed to recover from auditory distraction.

ATTENTION: Nonspatial
A12
MEASURING COGNITIVE FATIGUE IN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
USING AN ATTENTION TASK Sarah Wood1, Starla Weaver3, Glenn Wylie1,2,

Brian Yao1,2, Yu He1, Tony Jiang1,2, Guang Yue1,2, Nancy Chiaravalloti1,2, Helen
Genova1,2, John DeLuca1,2, Ekaterina Dobryakova1,2; 1Kessler Foundation, 2Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, 3Oklahoma City University — Fatigue affects
90% of individuals with Multiple Sclerosis (MS). To develop effective treatments, we must understand the neural mechanisms underlying fatigue.

40

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
To elucidate the neural mechanisms associated with fatigue, subjects with
relapsing-remitting MS and high fatigue completed two Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) scans. During the first scan, subjects completed a non-fatiguing task (nFT) consisting of a single letter memory cue
and single position cue. Rapid presentation of random letters followed, and
subjects had to respond whenever the cued letter was in the cued position.
During the second scan, subjects did a fatiguing task (FT), in which the
memory cue contained two letters and the position cue contained two positions to remember. Participants had to respond whenever either letter was
in either position. Between blocks, subjects reported their fatigue level on a
1-10 scale. The behavioral data shows that task accuracy was significantly
lower (p<0.01) and response time was significantly slower (p<0.01) for the
FT. A significant increase in self-reported fatigue (p<0.01) was noted during
the FT as compared with the nFT. Analysis of fMRI data showed greater
activation in sensory areas of the brain during the FT. The nFT resulted in
widespread activation of regions in the default mode network (DMN). The
behavioral and self-report results suggest that the difficult attention task is
more fatiguing than the nFT. DMN activation during the nFT suggests that
this task is less cognitively taxing than the FT, during which less activation
was observed.

A13
TEMPORAL EXPECTANCIES DRIVEN BY SELF- AND EXTERNALLY
GENERATED RHYTHMS Alexander Jones1, Yi-Fang Hsu2, Lionel Granjon3,4,
Florian Waszak3,4; 1Middlesex University London, 2National Taiwan Normal University, 3Université Paris Descartes, 4CNRS — The dynamic attending theory

proposes that rhythms create periodic fluctuations of attention which modulate the gain of sensory input. However, temporal expectancies can also
be driven by the mere passage of time (foreperiod effect). It is currently
unknown how these two types of temporal expectancy relate to each other,
i.e., whether they work in parallel and have distinguishable neural signatures. The current research addresses this issue. Participants either tapped
a 1Hz rhythm (active task) or were passively presented with the same
rhythm using tactile stimulators (passive task). Based on this rhythm an
auditory target was then presented early, in synchrony or late. Behavioural
results were in line with the dynamic attending theory as RTs were faster
for in- compared to out-of-synchrony targets. Electrophysiological results
showed self-generated and externally induced rhythms to entrain neural
oscillations in the delta frequency band. Auditory ERPs showed evidence
of two distinct temporal expectancy processes. Both tasks demonstrated a
patterned which followed a linear foreperiod effect. In the active task, however, we also observed an ERP effect consistent with the dynamic attending theory. This study showed that temporal expectancies generated by a
rhythm and expectation generated by the mere passage of time are dissociable mechanisms.

A14
STATES OF MIND: CHARACTERIZING THE NEURAL BASES OF
FOCUS AND MIND-WANDERING THROUGH DYNAMIC FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY Benjamin Mooneyham1, Michael Mrazek1, Alissa
Mrazek2, Kaita Mrazek1, Dawa Phillips1, Jonathan Schooler1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara, 2Northwestern University — Neuroscientific approaches

toward understanding the impact of mindfulness training on brain function have demonstrated differences in activity and functional connectivity
within and between intrinsic brain systems, particularly the “central executive,” “salience,” and “default” networks, based on mindfulness training
and experience. Assessments of functional connectivity during meditation tasks have previously only examined “static” functional connectivity
values across entire tasks, and therefore have not disentangled the functional connectivity relationships between key brain networks as the mind
fluctuates between states of focused attention and mind-wandering. Using
a dynamic functional connectivity approach within a sustained attention
task, we identified states of functional connectivity between key regions of
the central executive, salience, and default networks that were positively
and negatively associated with dispositional mindfulness levels, indicating states of focus and mind-wandering. We then assessed the impact of a
multifaceted mindfulness intervention program on the frequency of these
states’ occurrence, and demonstrated a relationship between improve-

2016 Annual Meeting	
ments in mindfulness and state occurrence. We consider the implications
of the functional connectivity state characteristics within a discussion of
network dynamics underlying focused attention and mind-wandering.

A15
FEATURE-SPECIFIC AND CATEGORY-SPECIFIC ATTENTIONAL
CONTROL SETTINGS ARE DIFFERENTIALLY AFFECTED BY ATTENTIONAL RESOURCE ENGAGEMENT IN CONTINGENT ATTENTIONAL CAPTURE Wu Xia1, Fu Shimin1; 1Tsinghua University, Beijing,
100084, China — Contingent attentional capture proposed that attentional

control settings (ACS) can guide involuntary attentional capture to distractors sharing target relevant property. Although feature-specific ACS and
category-specific ACS were reported in single-dimensional search task, it is
still unclear whether these two ACSs operate simultaneously in conjunction
search task and how they relate to each other. Three experiments were conducted to investigate and compare feature-specific and category-specific
ACS under different search strategies. The matching level between peripheral distractors and central target on feature and category dimensions was
manipulated in a rapid serial visual presentation task. The influence of
attentional resource engagement was also manipulated by the temporal
lags between target and distractor. N2pc component, as well as the deficit
of target accuracy, was measured to be indicative of attentional capture.
Results consistently showed both category-specific and feature-specific
ACS. Moreover, relative to category-specific ACS, the feature-specific ACS
seems having more weights. Importantly, feature-specific ACS operated
regardless of attentional resource engagement, whereas category-specific
ACS was prevented by insufficient attentional engagement. It is concluded
that feature-specific ACS and category-specific ACS are differentially monitored by attentional resource engagement and have different weights in
conjunction search.

A16
PRIORITIZATION IN WORKING MEMORY BY TEMPORAL AND
FEATURE-BASED EXPECTATIONS Freek van Ede1, Marcel Niklaus2,3, Nick

Myers1,2, Anna C. Nobre1,2; 1Oxford Centre for Human Brain Activity, Department
of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, UK, 2Department of Experimental Psychology,
University of Oxford, UK, 3Department of Psychology, University of Zurich, Switzerland — Adaptive behavior relies on various sources of top-down biases

that enable the prioritization of information that is most relevant to ongoing task demands. In recent years, it has become clear that such top-down
biases continue to operate in working memory, as evidenced by enhanced
performance for items that are retro-cued during the retention interval. We
investigated whether two other potent sources of top-down biases – temporal and feature-based expectations – can also prioritize information in
working memory. In experiment 1, retro-cues informed participants about
the feature-dimension (color or orientation) on which they were most likely
to be probed. We demonstrate that, compared with neutral cues, working memory is improved for the cued feature-dimension at the expense
of the uncued dimension. Thus, even within integrated items in working
memory, features can be dynamically up- and down-regulated based on
current task demands. In experiment 2, differently colored items were most
likely to be probed at different working memory delays (1250 or 2500 ms).
We demonstrate that such temporal expectations also influence working
memory performance. Most strikingly, even for those items that show
reduced performance when invalidly probed early, we observed enhanced
performance when validly probed late, revealing dynamic “recovery” of
their representational fidelity. Thus, multiple sources of top-down biases
continue to operate during working memory and reveal novel insights into
the dynamic nature of retained representations.

A17
GOAL-DIRECTED ATTENTION SUPPRESSES MULTIVOXEL PATTERN REPRESENTATION AND REDUCES INTER-REGIONAL
COUPLING DURING DISTRACTOR INHIBITION Kai Hwang1, Akshay
Jagadeesh1, Ruoying Yang1, Mark D’Esposito1; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, UC Berkeley — Goal-directed attention prioritizes the processing of
task-relevant stimuli. Recent evidence suggests that attention increases the
coupling between goal-relevant regions, and enhances the representation

Poster Session A
of goal-relevant information coded in spatially distributed patterns of brain
activity. Although it is often important to inhibit task-irrelevant stimuli,
how attention modulates the neural representation and inter-regional
coupling during distractor processing is less understood. To address this
question, 29 healthy adult participants were recruited for an fMRI study.
Sequences of superimposed images of faces and buildings were presented
centrally to the participants, and participants were required to detect occasional back-to-back repetitions of a target category (face or building), while
ignoring repetitions in the opposite distractor category. A passive viewing
baseline was included to quantify attention enhancement versus distractor
suppression effects in the fusiform face area (FFA) and parahippocampal
place area (PPA). Replicating previous findings, we found that attention
reduced evoked responses for distractors in FFA and PPA. Further, using a
psychophysiological interaction model, we found that independent of stimulus-driven activity, coupling between early visual areas and higher visual
areas encoding the distractor information was decreased when compared
to the baseline. Independent of univariate analyses, we further developed
a multivoxel pattern-matching method to quantify information representation under different attention conditions. We found that attention suppressed multivoxel patterns of activity for distractors relative to baseline.
Our results suggest that multiple neural mechanisms for inhibiting visual
distractors likely exist, including reducing response gain, decreasing coupling along the visual processing hierarchy, and suppresses the representation of distracting information.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
A18
A COLLECTION OF UNFAMILIAR EMOTIONAL MOVIE CLIPS Annick

Tanguay1, Kylee Ramdeen1, Lydia Muyingo1, Christine Beaudoin1, Patrick S.
R. Davidson1; 1University of Ottawa — Sets of static emotional images have

proven invaluable for research in psychology and neuroscience. Here we
present a collection of emotional movie clips, which can be used in ways
similar to the static image collections. We provide 300 realistic, brief movie
clips from fictional and non-fictional sources. Each emotional clip has a
non-emotional one available from the same source, to facilitate matching.
We include ratings of valence and arousal (using the same scales as the
International Affective Picture System) and estimates of visual complexity.
Clips are low in familiarity (to avoid unduly influencing participants’ emotional responses, attention, and memory). This set should prove useful for
a wide range of work on emotion and behavior.

A19
MIDFRONTAL THETA EEG REFLECTS COMPETITION BETWEEN
PAVLOVIAN AND INSTRUMENTAL SYSTEMS DURING SOCIAL
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING James Thompson1, Margaret Westwa-

ter-Wozniak2, Zena Kirby1; 1George Mason University, 2University of Cambridge
— Emotional expressions are social signals that send information to other
people in order to influence their behavior. As a receiver, facial expressions can be a) a guide to appropriate actions; and b) reward or punishment eliciting approach or withdrawal, respectively. In the present study,
we examined how Pavlovian responses to facial expressions interact with
instrumental learning, and the role of midfrontal theta EEG in this interaction. Action and outcome valence were orthogonalized in our task as
participants (N=13) learned to use abstract cue shapes to guide whether
they should respond to an upcoming target (“Go” trials) or withhold a
response to the target (“NoGo” trials) to receive a social reward (photo of
smiling face) or avoid a social punishment (photo of angry face). EEG was
recorded from 124 electrodes as participants performed the task. While
participants successfully demonstrated instrumental learning, we found
evidence of Pavlovian bias: significant social reward-related invigoration
(p<0.01) and social punishment-related suppression (p<0.05) of responses.
Time-frequency analysis of EEG responses to the cue shapes revealed a significant increase (p<0.001) in power in the 4-8Hz range at midfrontal sites
around 500ms after cue onset in conditions that conflicted with Pavlovian
biases (Go-to-avoid punishment; NoGo-to-win reward) relative to those
consistent with these biases (Go-to-win reward; NoGo-to-avoid punish-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

41

Poster Session A	
ment). These findings are consistent with midfrontal theta EEG responses
reflecting the competition between Pavlovian learning in response to the
rewarding or punishing nature of the facial expressions, and an instrumental system capable of using the facial expressions to guide behavior.

A20
CONVERGING EVIDENCE FOR THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF
AVERSIVE ANTICIPATION Josh Carlson1, Tsafrir Greenberg2, Lilianne
Mujica-Parodi3; 1Northern Michigan University, 2University of Pittsburgh, 3Stony
Brook University — Anticipation of aversive events is an adaptive prepara-

tory response to negative future outcomes. The anterior insula has consistently been linked to anxious anticipation, while other structures such
as the amygdala and anterior cingulate cortex have also been implicated
albeit less consistently. Many neuroimaging studies of aversive anticipation have used modest sample sizes, region of interest analyses, and a
variety of methodological approaches of inducing anxious anticipation.
The aim of the current investigation was to generate a more robust and
complete understanding of the neural correlates of anxious anticipation by
measuring anticipatory activity across multiple datasets. Two approaches
were used to test this aim. First, we performed a voxel-wise analysis across
three fMRI datasets to test for common, and distinct, activity in anticipation of aversive sounds, static visual images, and dynamic visual images.
Second, Neurosynth was used to perform a meta-analysis based on activation coordinates from 40 fMRI studies of aversive anticipation. Results
from the voxel-wise analysis of combined datasets revealed a widespread
preparatory response in the anterior insula, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
dorsal anterior cingulate, medial supplementary motor area, premotor
area, visual cortex, auditory cortex, somatosensory cortex, amygdala, and
a striatal region consistent with the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. The
results from Neurosynth revealed similar, but more restricted, activity in
the anterior insula, perigenual anterior cingulate, dorsal anterior cingulate,
medial supplementary motor area, amygdala, and striatum/bed nucleus
of the stria terminalis. Thus, the results provide converging evidence for a
widespread neural system associated with anticipatory anxiety.

A21
IMPLICIT TENDENCIES TO APPROACH AND AVOID ALCOHOL
PREDICT FUTURE DRINKING Laura Martin Braunstein1, Alexis Kuer-

bis2, Peter Gollwitzer3, Gabriele Oettingen3, Kevin Ochsner1, Jon Morgenstern4;
1
Columbia University, 2Hunter College, CUNY, 3New York University, 4North Shore
Long Island Jewish Health System — Addiction is characterized by compulsive

drug-seeking and substance use, yet many individuals break free of these
patterns and change their behavior. Traditional predictors of behavior
change/persistence rely on self-reports of factors like readiness to change.
However, these explicit measures only characterize top-down influences
on behavior. The incentive sensitization model of addition suggests that
more implicit, automatic processes, like the tendency to approach substance cues, play a major role in behavior. We tested whether implicit
approach and avoidance tendencies for alcohol would predict drinking
behavior in a sample of heavy drinkers undergoing treatment to moderate
their drinking. We examined implicit approach and avoidance tendencies
for alcohol using a modified version of the relevant stimulus response compatibility (SRC) task. In the SRC task, approach and avoidance tendencies
were assessed incidentally using reaction times to categorize alcohol/
control images by making certain movements, which include approach
and avoidance responses. We measured alcohol approach and avoidance
tendencies at baseline and post-treatment (12 weeks later) and found that
the speed to approach and avoid pictures of alcohol at baseline predicted
drinking at post. Specifically, faster alcohol approach at baseline was associated with greater overall drinking at post, and faster alcohol avoidance
at baseline predicted fewer drinking days per week at post. Interestingly,
readiness to change at baseline did not predict drinking at post. Further,
implicit approach tendencies were largely distinct from explicit measures,
and approach and avoidance tendencies explained unique variance in post
drinking behavior.

2016 Annual Meeting

A22
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WHITE MATTER MICROSTRUCTURE AND ATTENTIONAL IMPULSIVITY IN ADOLESCENTS WITH
AFFECTIVE MENTAL HEALTH DISORDERS Andrea T. Shafer1, James
Benoit2, Andy Greenshaw2, Sunita Vohra2, Florin Dolcos3, Anthony Singhal2;
1
Wayne State University, 2University of Alberta, 3University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign — Extant literature on microstructural white matter (WM)

changes in adolescents with psychopathology is sparse. While the majority of studies show decreases in fractional anisotropy (FA) compared to
non-clinical adolescents, a few studies identified increases in FA in certain
WM tracts for specific subsets of clinical adolescents (ADHD, alcohol-use
disorders and conduct disorder). Only a handful of studies have examined differences in structure-function relationships between clinical and
non-clinical adolescents. Most of these show decrements in attentional
performance linked to decreases in FA, but some show decrements linked
to increases in FA. Therefore, alterations in FA associated with adolescent
psychopathology in general and those related to functional differences in
attentional processing remain unclear. To address these issues, the current
study used diffusion tensor imaging in combination with a continuous
performance test in 40 adolescents (20 clinical with affective mental health
disorders, 20 non-clinical). The main purpose was to examine group differences in FA, and differences in the relationship between FA and attentional
impulsivity in the two samples. A customized preprocessing pipeline using
FMRIB tools was implemented, and voxel-based analyses were performed.
Analyses identified two main findings. First, FA decreases were observed
for clinical relative to non-clinical adolescents in 13 WM structures (i.e.,
lobar WM, commissural, projection and association fibers). Second, differences in structure-function relationships were found between groups.
Whereas clinical adolescents showed a positive relationship between FA
and impulsivity in commissural, projection and association fibers, non-clinical adolescents had a negative relationship between FA and impulsivity
that was largely localized to association fibers.

A23
VISUOCORTICAL CORRELATES OF ATTENTION DURING PREDICTABLE AND UNPREDICTABLE THREAT - A FREQUENCY-TAGGING SSVEP APPROACH Matthias J Wieser1, Philipp Reicherts1, Georgiana
Juravle2, Andreas von Leupoldt3; 1University of Würzburg, Germany, 2UKE Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany, 3University of Leuven, Belgium — Fear and anxiety

are functionally different defense states mediated by distinct brain structures. Whereas fear is elicited by imminent threat and leads to a phasic fear
reaction, anxiety is characterized by a sustained state of heightened vigilance due to temporally uncertain danger. In the present study we investigated whether fear and anxiety are associated with different states of attentional vigilance as measured by visuocortical facilitation. To this end, we
employed a NPU-paradigm together with ssVEPs and frequency-tagging
methodology. We investigated ssVEPs across three context conditions (30
sec): no aversive events (N), predictable aversive events (P), and unpredictable aversive events (U) signaled by a grid of four peripheral objects.
Short-duration cues (Gabor patches) were presented for 3 seconds several
times in each condition. Aversive events were signaled by the cues in the
P condition but were presented randomly in the U condition. Importantly,
cues and context events were flickered at different frequencies (15 Hz vs. 20
Hz) in order to disentangle electrocortical responses to contexts and cues.
As expected, the onset of the context elicited larger electrocortical responses
for the U compared to the P context in the first 1000 ms. Conversely, P
cues elicited larger electrocortical responses compared to the N and U cues.
Interestingly, during the presence of the P cue, visuocortical processing of
the concurrent context was also enhanced. The results support the notion
of enhanced hypervigilance to unpredictable threat, while predictable cues
show electrocortical enhancement of the cues themselves but additionally a
boost of context processing.

A24
DIFFERENTIAL IMPACT OF VMPFC DAMAGE ON RISK TAKING IN
‘HOT’ AND ‘COLD’ DECISIONS Julia Spaniol1, Francesco Di Muro2, Elisa

Ciaramelli2; 1Ryerson University, 2University of Bologna — The ventromedial

prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) has been implicated in valuation and decision

42

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting	
making, but its precise role in risky choice is not fully understood. In particular, it is unclear how vmPFC contributes to affect-charged (‘hot’) versus
deliberative (‘cold’) decision making. In the current study, we compared 3
groups matched on demographic characteristics: patients with focal lesions
in vmPFC, patient controls with damage outside of the frontal cortex, and
healthy controls. Over two sessions, participants completed hot and cold
versions of a risky choice task, the Columbia Card Task (CCT; Figner et al.,
2009). In the CCT, risk is manipulated parametrically, along with gain magnitude and loss magnitude, allowing an assessment of how these factors
influence risk taking. In the ‘hot’ version of the task, affect is triggered by
asking participants to make incremental decisions with immediate feedback. In this version, vmPFC patients showed normal risk sensitivity, but
a strong overall increase in risk appetite relative to the other groups. In the
cold CCT, decisions are made in a single step and without feedback. Here,
vmPFC patients showed no overall difference in risk appetite relative to the
other groups, although the vmPFC group’s sensitivity to variation in risk
was reduced. Finally, sensitivity to gain and loss magnitudes did not differ
significantly between the groups, in either the hot or the cold CCT. These
results indicate that the vmPFC may play a critical role in overriding risky
choice in affect-rich, ‘hot’ decisions, specifically.

A25
THE TIME-COURSE OF MORAL PERCEPTION: AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF THE MORAL POP-OUT EFFECT Peter Mende-Siedlecki1,
Ana P. Gantman1, Brian Steele2, Jay J. Van Bavel1, Kyle E. Mathewson2; 1New
York University, 2University of Alberta — Models of moral psychology have

only recently considered the relationship between morality and perception. We propose that due to chronic moral motives, moral (vs. non-moral)
content is privileged in perceptual awareness. Supporting this, Gantman
and Van Bavel (2014) observed that under perceptually ambiguous conditions (backwards-masked stimulus presentation), moral words (e.g., “kill”,
“should”) were perceived more accurately than non-moral words (e.g.,
“die”, “could”), an effect termed the “moral pop-out effect” (MPE). However, the time-course underlying this effect remains unclear. To examine
how quickly moral concerns influence cognitive processing, participants
(N=43) underwent electroencephalography recording during a lexical
decision task presenting moral and non-moral words matched for valence,
arousal, and frequency. A difference in the earliest event-related potential
(ERP) components (P1, N1, N2) would suggest a direct influence of moral
relevance on visual processing, while a difference in later ERP components
(P3) would suggest a difference in attentional processes between moral
and non-moral words. Participants correctly identified moral words more
frequently than non-moral words, replicating the MPE. Moreover, ERP
responses to moral and non-moral words began to differ around 300ms,
suggesting that the MPE is supported by differences in perceptual attention, biasing the threshold for detecting moral content. Critically, behavioral and neural indices of MPE were correlated across subjects, such that
greater detection of moral (vs. non-moral) words was associated with larger
P3 amplitudes in response to moral words. These results suggest that the
primacy of moral content may stem from increased attention to morally-relevant information, diminishing the threshold for awareness.

A26
CORTICAL AND SUBCORTICAL RESPONSES TO NEGATIVE
IMAGES PROSPECTIVELY PREDICT DECISIONS TO REGULATE
EMOTION Bruce Dore1, Jochen Weber1, Yaakov Stern1, Kevin Ochsner1; 1Columbia University — Deciding to regulate emotion is a fundamental means by

which individuals can respond to environmental challenges, but little is
known about the neural processes that support such decisions. We used
fMRI to test whether brain responses to negative images can be used to
prospectively predict emotion regulation choice behavior. We found 1) that
activity within a priori regions of interest including the amygdala, ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) and
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC) predicted person-level number of
choices to regulate, and 2) within-person expression of a meta-analytically
derived whole-brain pattern associated with regulating emotion predicted
choosing to regulate responses to particular stimuli, beyond the predictive
value of stimulus intensity or self-reports of emotion. These data demonstrate that brain responses associated with emotional reactivity and regulation can be used to predict who will choose to control emotion and for

Poster Session A
which stimuli they will choose to do so, a first step towards a prospectively predictive and neuroscience-informed model of variable behavioral
responses to distressing events.

A27
ATTENTIONAL DEPLOYMENT TO FEAR-RELATED CUES Felix Bacigalupo1, Steven Luck1; 1University of California - Davis — Introduction: Under-

standing the basic brain and cognitive mechanisms involved in fear processing is critical to understand the pathophysiology of anxiety related
disorders and for developing new treatments. Objective: To study how
attention is deployed to stimuli that are associated with fear with rigorous control over sensory properties of the stimuli. Methods: The experiment consisted of two phases: Phase 1) fear conditioning, in which a specific color was associated with a loud noise (conditioned stimulus or CS+),
whereas other two colors were neutral (CS-); to assess fear conditioning, we
measured the skin conductance response (SCR). Phase 2) attentional task,
in which the participants were instructed to attend to a lateralized colored
circle (target) and report whether it had a gap on top or bottom. Sometimes, one of the colors in this array matched the CS+ color. Visuo-spatial attention was measured via the N2pc component, whereas emotional
processing was evaluated via the late positive potential (LPP) of the event
related potential (ERP) waveform. Results: There were greater N2pc and
LPP amplitudes (indicating greater allocation of attention and emotional
processing) for CS+ targets compared to CS- targets in the attention task.
Conclusions: These preliminary results suggest that the deployment of
visuo-spatial attention is enhanced by fear-related cues. It is possible that
patients suffering from anxiety and trauma-related disorders have a dysregulation of visuo-spatial attention that enhances the allocation of attention to fear-related sensory inputs, thus leading to a paradoxical state of
over-processing aversive stimuli.

A28
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES DETERMINE EFFECTS OF ACUTE
STRESS ON COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY Elizabeth V. Goldfarb1, Monja I.
Frobose2, Roshan Cools2,3, Elizabeth A. Phelps1,4; 1New York University, New York,
NY, 2Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4Nathan Kline Institute, Orangeburg, NY
— The ability to ignore irrelevant distraction (i.e., cognitive stability) but

flexibly update when the information becomes relevant (i.e., cognitive flexibility) are critical, and functionally opposing, computations. As flexibility in an adapted delayed match-to-sample (DMS) task has been shown to
involve the dorsal striatum, and stress enhances dorsal striatal function, we
hypothesized that stress would facilitate flexibility. Using a within subjects
design (N = 38), we assessed the effects of acute stress on performance in
this DMS task. As expected, our stress manipulation (cold pressor task) led
to a significant increase in cortisol. Individual differences in factors such
as cortisol response, gender, and chronic stress levels explained the effects
of acute stress on cognitive flexibility. Overall, participants were more
accurate on trials that required flexibility compared to trials that required
simple working memory maintenance. Under acute stress, the magnitude
of this difference was correlated with increases in cortisol, such that higher
levels of cortisol correlated with greater flexibility. This relationship was
stronger in female than male participants. Effects of stress also varied based
on pre-experimental chronic stress levels (Perceived Stress Scale). Participants with low levels of chronic stress showed improved flexibility and
stability under stress, while participants with high levels of chronic stress
showed impaired flexibility and stability under stress. These findings provide insight into the variable influence of acute stress on cognitive control
and emphasized the relevant role of individual differences in responses to
stress.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

43

Poster Session A	

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding
A29
BORDERLINE PERSONALITY DISORDER PATIENTS SHOW LONGITUDINAL AMYGDALA AND ANTERIOR INSULA SENSITIZATION
TO EMOTIONAL STIMULI FOLLOWING INITIAL HABITUATION

Bryan T. Denny1, Jin Fan1,2, Antonia S. New1,3, Marianne Goodman1,3, Mercedes
Perez-Rodriguez1, Samuel Fels1, Hayley Galitzer1, Antonia McMaster1, Heather
Alexander1, Larry J. Siever1,3, Harold W. Koenigsberg1,3; 1Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, 2Queens College, City University of New York, 3James J. Peters VA
Medical Center — Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is the prototypical

disorder of emotion regulation, yet there remains limited understanding
of its neurocognitive correlates. Impairment in habituation or anomalous
sensitization of the salience network during repeated exposure to emotional events could contribute to emotion dysregulation in BPD. The present study examined the effect of repeated exposure to emotional images,
both within-session and across two sessions separated by about three days,
upon nodes of the salience network in BPD patients, avoidant personality
disorder patients (AvPD), and healthy controls (HC). 26 BPD, 25 AvPD, and
24 HC participants viewed 5 presentations of the same set of 10 negative
and 10 neutral images in each of two sessions spaced approximately three
days apart as fMRI data were acquired. Activation in anatomically-defined
salience network regions-of-interest (amygdala; anterior insula; and dorsal
anterior cingulate cortex, dACC) was compared across groups for each presentation on each of the two study days. Right amygdala activity showed
a main effect of within-session habituation across groups (F(4,1368)=12.45,
p<0.001). However, only BPD patients showed increased right amygdala
activation to the images re-encountered on Day 2 (Group X Session interaction, F(2,1368)=23.38, p<0.001). A similar pattern was observed in right
anterior insula, but not in left amygdala, left anterior insula, or dACC.
BPD patients are distinguished from AvPDs and HCs by right amygdala
and right anterior insula sensitization upon delayed re-exposure to negative images for which responses had previously shown habituation. These
results suggest dissociable processes of acute habituation and delayed sensitization in BPD patients.

A30
THE EMOTIONAL HOMUNCULUS: EVIDENCE FOR SOMATOTOPIC
EMPATHY Bettina Forster1, Alejandra Sel2, Manos Tsakiris3, Beatriz Calvo-Merino1; 1City University London, UK, 2University of Oxford, UK, 3Royal Holloway University of London, UK — Recent research has shown independent contribu-

tion of somatosensory cortex (SCx) to facial emotion processing (Pitcher
et al., 2008; Sel et al., 2014). In addition, research showed that emotions are
felt in different body parts and represented by different patterns of brain
responses (Nummenmaa et al., 2014; Saarimaki et al., 2015). We tested
whether the empathetic response triggered by observing others emotional
face expressions leads to distinct activations of SCx. Participants performed
a visual facial emotion discrimination task. On half of the trials SCx activity
was probed by task irrelevant touch to different body parts. By subtracting
neural activity elicited on visual-only facial emotion expression trials from
tactually probed trials we isolated pure SCx emotion responses. Furthermore, by comparing responses to different tactile probe locations (finger
versus toe) and different facial emotion expression trials (sad versus anger)
we show dissociation in the somatotopic response to different facial emotion expressions. Moreover, participants were asked to indicate where in
the body the person expressing the facial emotion felt the emotion. This
empathetic inference predicted our participants’ cortical activation within
SCx when judging facial emotion expressions, at least for anger. Taken
together, our result is the first evidence for distinct somatotopic activation
patterns of perceiving others’ felt emotions. Nummenmaa et al. 2014. PNAS
111: 646-51. Pitcher et al. 2008. J Neurosci 28: 8929-33. Saarimaki et al. 2015.
Cereb Cortex: 1-11. Sel et al. 2014. J Neurosci 34: 3263–7

2016 Annual Meeting

A31
A DOMAIN-GENERAL REPRESENTATION OF VISUAL AESTHETIC
APPRECIATION IN THE DEFAULT-MODE NETWORK REVEALED
BY MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN ANALYSIS Edward Vessel1, Jonathan Stahl2,
Gabrielle Starr1; 1New York University, 2Ohio State University — Individuals can

be aesthetically moved by a diverse array of visual objects, from abstract
paintings to mountain vistas. Previous work suggests that the default mode
network (DMN), implicated in a variety of internally focused cognitive processes, is differentially engaged by strongly aesthetically moving artwork
(vs. non-moving artwork; Vessel, Starr & Rubin 2012). Is the representation
of aesthetic appreciation in the DMN specific for artifacts of human culture
such as artwork, or does it contain a domain-general representation of aesthetic appreciation? Thirteen observers made aesthetic judgments (“how
much does this image move you?”) about images of artworks, natural
landscapes, or architecture on a continuous scale (in separate runs) while
being scanned using fMRI. Classifiers were trained to distinguish most vs.
least moving trials using multi-voxel patterns of trialwise BOLD responses.
When provided data from the anterior medial prefrontal cortex (aMPFC)
portion of DMN (derived from subject-specific “rest” scans), classifiers
trained on one category and tested on another performed better than chance
for all train/test combinations (57-60%, p<0.01), providing strong evidence
that this portion of the DMN contains domain-general information about
aesthetic appreciation. We also tested classifiers derived from a series of
anatomical ROI’s tiling medial and orbital PFC. We found across-domain
sensitivity between artwork and architecture and between landscapes and
architecture. However, there were several ROIs with sensitivity to only
single domains, and across-domain sensitivity between art and landscapes
did not reach significance in any ROI tested. This suggests that there also
exist domain-specific representations of aesthetic appreciation in PFC.

A32
SEARCHING FOR THE PAVLOVIAN TRACE: MULTIVARIATE PATTERN ANALYSIS REVEALS EXPRESSION OF PURELY EXPERIENCE-BASED FEAR MEMORIES IN THE HUMAN RIGHT AMYGDALA Senne Braem1, Jan De Houwer1, Jelle Demanet1, Kenneth Yuen2, Raffael
Kalisch2, Marcel Brass1; 1Ghent University, 2Johannes Gutenberg University Medical Center — Human Pavlovian fear conditioning has long been hypothe-

sized to rely, at least in part, on non-verbal processing of the contingency
between the conditioned stimulus (CS) and the aversive unconditioned
stimulus (US) that drives the acquisition of conditioned responding (CR). A
proposed neural substrate for these purely experience-based learning and
memory processes is the amygdala. Demonstrating non-verbal processing
by conducting Pavlovian conditioning in the absence of CS awareness has
proven methodologically challenging, and these studies have not established a consensus on the existence of non-verbal elements in conditioning,
nor on their neural substrates. We here used an alternative strategy. Instead
of trying to eliminate conscious CS processing, we created two experimental conditions (CS+1, CS+2) that were equated for CS awareness and all
verbally available information on CS-US contingencies. One condition
(testing the expression of the CS+1 associated fear memory) was characterized by an additional element of prior experience of the CS-US contingency
that was not present in the other condition (testing the CS+2 associated
fear memory expression). We observed slightly stronger CRs to the CS+1,
reflecting the expression of a purely experience-based, uninstructed fear
memory trace, which we here term the Pavlovian trace. We further found
that of all fear relevant regions, only the right amygdala showed a CS+1
specific neural activation pattern. Moreover, its strength correlated with the
amplitude of the CS+1 > CS+2 fear memory expression difference. This is
strong evidence for the existence of a Pavlovian memory trace in the human
right amygdala.

A33
DYNAMIC ACTIVITY IN DEFAULT-MODE AND ATTENTION NETWORKS EVOKED BY SUSPENSEFUL NARRATIVES Matthew Bezdek1,
Shella Keilholz1, Eric Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology — Suspense-

ful film sequences serve as naturalistic stimuli for investigating momentby-moment changes in emotional and attentional processes. In previous
research, we reported that moments of high suspense evoke a pattern of

44

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting	
brain activation suggesting a narrowing of attention, with increased processing of the central visual field and decreased processing of the periphery
(Bezdek et al., 2015). We also reported that suspense produced increased
activity in nodes of the ventral attention network and decreased activity
in the default-mode network (DMN), consistent with the attention hypothesis. In the current study, we investigated the time course of activity in
these brain networks at periods of high and low suspense. We collected
fMRI scans on 12 people using a multi-band sequence to achieve near full
brain coverage with a fast repetition time of 700 ms. From the resting state
run, we used independent component analysis to identify components
whose spatial pattern corresponded to the DMN and an attentional network that included regions of the dorsal and ventral attention networks.
We then extracted the average signal during the viewing of the suspenseful film excerpts and observe the pattern of activity surrounding suspense
peaks and valleys. Consistent with previous research we found that peaks
in suspense are associated with increases in attention network activity and
decreases in DMN activity. This network separation reaches its peak about
three seconds before the moment of highest suspense. These results suggest
that brain responses to suspense may build over time in advance of conscious reports of suspense.

A34
EMOTIONAL PROCESSING IN PTSD: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Robert D. Torrence1, Jeremy A. Andrzejewski1, Lucy J. Troup1; 1Colorado State University — Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has been char-

acterized by difficulty in emotional processing. Identifying the underlining
neurological processes related to emotional facial processing in PTSD may
provide important information about the development and maintenance of
PTSD symptoms. The aim of this study was to examine event-related potentials (ERPs) during an emotional processing task in individuals with PTSD
characteristics and individuals without PTSD. The task measured implicit
and explicit emotional expression recognition and empathy in positive
(happy), neutral, and negative (angry and fearful) facial expressions. The
mean amplitude of the P300 component was compared between the PTSD
and non-PTSD groups. Behavioral measures indicated no significant differences in emotion processing between controls and those scoring highly
on the PCL-5 measure for PTSD. The ERP results indicated that the mean
amplitude for the P300 component was reduced in the PTSD group when
compared to non-PTSD. These results suggested individuals with PTSD
have a deficit in early discrimination between emotional facial expressions
on a neurological level. Previous research has indicated that individuals
with anxiety and depression have a similar reduction in the P300 component as this study found in individuals with PTSD.

A35
SUPERIOR TEMPORAL GYRUS STIMULATION MODULATES
FACIAL EXPRESSION PERCEPTION IN A MISFORTUNATE SITUATION Mirella Manfredi1, Ana Paula Gonçalves Donate1, Sofia Macarini Gonçalves

Vieira1, Mariana De Araújo Andreoli1, Paulo sergio Boggio1; 1Social and Cognitive
Neuroscience Laboratory, Center of Biological and Health Science, Mackenzie
Presbyterian University, Sao Paulo, Brazil — In a previous ERP study, we sug-

gested that the comic element of a misfortune is the facial expression of the
victims. Three situations were considered: people showing a painful/angry
expression (Affective), a comic bewilderment expression (Comic) and
people with no face visible (No Face). We found an early response specific
to the comic stimuli. Since evidences showed that the left superior temporal
gyrus (STG) is involved in facial expression perception, we hypothesized
that tDCS application on this area would modulate the ability to recognize the facial expression and therefore, the comic element of a misfortune.
Twenty university students underwent three bilateral tDCS stimulation
sessions (anodal, cathodal, sham) over the left STG. The task consisted in
categorizing the stimuli as comic or not. We presented the experimental
material used in the previous study. The data revealed an improvement
of the reaction times to comic and affective stimuli in the anodal stimulation. Moreover, while we observed longer responses to comic compared to
affective stimuli in the sham condition, these differences disappeared in the
anodal stimulation. Interestingly, no differences were found between the
responses to the No face stimuli across the three tDCS conditions. Overall, this study indicated that the STG activity modulated the responses to
comic and affective stimuli only when the facial expression was showed.

Poster Session A
Moreover, the data confirmed that the anodal stimulation over the left STG
improved the ability to detect the facial expressions of the victims in a misfortune, facilitating the categorization of the situation as comic or not.

A36
INSULAR MORPHOMETRY ASYMMETRY- AND AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN AUTISM Taylor Smith1, Khalil Thompson1, Armond Collins1,

Tracey A. Knaus2, Helen Tager-Flusberg3, Jeremy D. Cohen1; 1Xavier University
of Louisiana, 2Brain and Behavior Program at Children’s Hospital, Louisiana
State University Health Sciences Center, 3Boston University School of Medicine
— Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex neurobiological devel-

opmental disorder, characterized by impaired social communication and
social reciprocity, repetitive stereotypic behaviors, and high comorbidity
of anxiety disorders. Prevailing theories of ASD suggest malfunction of
individual brain regions, including amygdala, superior temporal sulcus
(STS), or fusiform gyrus. Insular cortex has bidirectional connections with
all of these regions, and has altered structure and function in populations
with anxiety disorders, including other genetic developmental disorders.
Moreover, age-related brain differences of amygdala were found in ASD
at younger ages, but then disappear in adolescence. Using an established
insular morphometry method, including a functionally-based anterior-posterior segmentation method, we investigated insular volumetric differences across age (preteen, teen) in ASD (N=26, F=4) and controls (N=17,
F=3). It was expected that anterior and posterior insular volumes would
be reduced in ASD. While no simple group differences were found for any
insular region-of-interest, there was a significant group by hemisphere
by age interaction for total insular volume. This indicated left-right total
insular asymmetry that differed both between ASD and controls as well
as preteen and teenaged groups. There was also a significant group by
age interaction for posterior insula but not anterior. When looking at functional subregions, it was the posterior insula, not the anterior as predicted
by existing anxiety models, that showed group-related volume differences
across age. The current data combined with amygdalo-insular connectivity
suggests that altered total insular asymmetry and early reductions in posterior insular volume contributes to the development of heightened anxiety
in ASD.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
A37
HOLISTIC PROCESSING BUT NOT ATTENTION ALLOCATION
CONTRIBUTES TO THE OWN-RACE ADVANTAGE IN FACE RECOGNITION Grit Herzmann1, Tim Curran2; 1The College of Wooster, 2University

of Colorado Boulder — People are better at memorizing own-race than oth-

er-race faces. Previous research found lower brain activation for own-race
faces during learning which suggested more efficient memory encoding as
one of the factors contributing to the processing advantage. We tested this
assumption in two experiments with Caucasian subjects and event-related
potential (ERP) recording during memory encoding and retrieval. We operationalized more efficient memory encoding as possibly related to focused
vs. divided attention (Experiment 1) or intact vs. disrupted holistic processing (Experiment 2). In Experiment 1, Caucasian and Chinese faces were
studied under divided and focused attention. In Experiment 2, Caucasian
and African-American faces were studied upright or upside-down, which
disrupts holistic processing. Own-race faces were accurately recollected
more often than other-race faces in both experiments. This advantage was
not affected by attention manipulations but interacted with disruptions
of holistic processing. ERPs replicated previous results and showed more
efficient memory encoding for own-race faces in the focused attention and
upright presentation conditions. In these conditions, less brain activation
was required to successfully encode and subsequently recollect own-race
faces. Whereas divided attention did not affect memory encoding differently for own-race and other-race faces, turning faces upside-down caused
significant differences. In the inverted condition, subsequently recollected
own-race faces elicited more positive amplitudes as compared to other-race
faces. Thus, faces that are not easily processed holistically required more
neural activation during memory encoding. Both experiments show that
more efficient memory encoding is predominantly based on facilitation in
holistic processing but not on the allocation of attention.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

45

Poster Session A	

A38
TRUST DECISIONS ARE MEDIATED BY ALPHA SUPPRESSION
OVER PARIETAL ELECTRODE SITES Chris Blais1, Derek M. Ellis1, Kim-

berly M. Wingert1, Adam B. Cohen1, Gene A. Brewer1; 1Arizona State University
— The ability to render a trust decision is fundamental for civilization, yet

surprisingly little is known about the neurophysiology of these decisions.
We told subjects they were playing a coin toss game with a trustworthy
and an untrustworthy person and measured their neural activity with EEG.
Both profiles were computer generated and correctly reported the outcome
of a coin toss on 66% of trials. Behaviorally, subjects probability matched
and chose to trust the reported coin flips from each profile equally (66.2%
vs. 65.9%, respectively, n.s.). Electrophysiologically, there were reliable differences in the pattern of oscillatory activity in the alpha band (8-13Hz)
over parietal electrode sites 1-3 s prior to their trust decision. Specifically,
for trustworthy profiles there was greater alpha suppression for trust decisions vs. distrust decisions. Conversely, for untrustworthy profiles there
was greater alpha suppression for distrust decisions vs. trust decisions.
This finding is consistent with the interpretation that subjects are maintaining a “trust” mental set for trustworthy individuals and a “distrust”
mental set for untrustworthy individuals. This differential activity (trust
minus distrust) also predicts the number of trust decisions made (r = -.65,
p < .004 for trustworthy; r = .38, p = .071 for untrustworthy). Our results
are consistent with the idea subjects form an intention to trust (or distrust)
an individual very early in the processing stream, and that this intention
manifests as alpha suppression over parietal cortex.

A39
HOW VALID IS FALSE-BELIEF COGNITION TO SOCIAL ABILITY?
EXAMINING INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN MENTALIZING IN
ADULTS Jacqueline Thompson1, Robin Dunbar1; 1University of Oxford — Men-

talizing (often called Theory of Mind or mindreading) is the ability to interpret and understand the mental states of others. Most mentalizing research
has been done in children, but the little that has investigated individual
differences in adults has either focused on very simplified false-belief
tasks thought to rely on inhibitory mechanisms, or has used more ecologically valid, narrative story tasks whose cognitive underpinnings are less
understood. In fMRI studies these tasks have shown differential activation, suggesting that they may only minimally draw upon the same cognitive mechanisms: the simplified tasks have shown selective activation
in areas important for executive cognition (anterior cingulated cortex),
whereas story tasks have generally found wider activation throughout
the ‘standard’ mentalizing network (including temporoparietal junction
and medial prefrontal cortex). However, these two types of mentalizing
task have rarely (if ever) been investigated in tandem. We tested 80 young
adults on multiple measures relating to social cognition, including a simple
false-belief task, a narrative story mentalizing task, executive (impulsivity
and response inhibition), working memory, and self-report measures of
empathy and extraversion (EQ and IPIP50). As hypothesized, the two types
of mentalizing tasks showed only a modest correlation (r=.20), reflecting
their minimal overlap. Surprisingly, however, cognitive costs of false-belief
performance correlated negatively with empathy (r=-.27) and extraversion
(r=-.24), counter to the widely-held expectation that social expertise aids
mentalizing ability. These results suggest that cognitive profiles associated
with sociability may actually be linked to worse (low-level) mentalizing
ability, inviting further research to disentangle this intriguing finding.

A40
THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE HIPPOCAMPUS TO SOCIAL COGNITION DYSFUNCTION Rita Tavares1, Temidayo Orederu1, Avi Mendelsohn1,2,

Daniela Schiller1; 1Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 2University of Haifa
— Efforts to uncover what is the “social brain” have propelled the growth
of social neuroscience. Social cognition abilities, however, refuse to neatly
map onto anatomically defined brain regions. We investigated how the
human brain tracks ongoing changes in social relationships using functional neuroimaging. Participants played the lead role in a “choose-yourown-adventure” game, in which they interacted with cartoon characters.
We found that a geometric model of social relationships, in a “social space”
framed by power and affiliation, predicted hippocampal activity. Moreover, participants who reported better social skills showed stronger cova-

46

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
riance between hippocampal activity and “movement” through “social
space.” These results suggest that the hippocampus is critical for social cognition, and imply that beyond framing physical locations, the hippocampus
computes a more abstract, multidimensional cognitive map. Importantly,
these neural representations of social space may be relevant for psychological wellbeing. Here we report new evidence on how this model can
be predictive of social behavior and cognition. We found that a number
of geometric variables, extracted from participants’ behavior in the game,
correlated robustly with trait scores: participants with higher social anxiety
tended to give less power to the game’s characters; and participants who
reported less social avoidance and higher self-efficacy showed increased
exploration of the social space. Additionally, we found that lower hippocampal volumes predicted lower fidelity tracking of social distance in the
posterior cingulate cortex. We propose that geometric modeling of social
relationships, and its correlation to hippocampal function, may provide a
new diagnostic tool for social cognition dysfunction.

A41
EFFECTS OF STIMULUS ONSET ASYNCHRONY (SOA) ON
ODOR-INDUCED MODULATIONS OF HEDONIC EVALUATIONS OF
FACES: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL (ERP) STUDY Stephanie
Cook1, Nicholas Fallon1, Anna Thomas2, Timo Giesbrecht2, Matt Field1, Andrej
Stancak1; 1University of Liverpool, 2Unilever Research and Development — Previ-

ous studies show that odors modulate hedonic evaluations of faces. It is not
known whether such odor-priming effects vary as a function of temporal
lag between odor and visual stimulus. The present study aimed to analyse neural mechanisms underlying effects of odors on evaluations of faces
using two SOAs. Participants (N=28) rated faces under pleasant- (jasmine),
unpleasant- (methylmercaptan), and no-odor conditions. In half of trials,
faces appeared during a 3 s odor pulse. In the other half of trials, faces
appeared one-second after odor offset. Participants rated pleasantness of
faces and odor intensity after each stimulus using visual analogues scales.
EEG was recorded continuously using a 128-channel EGI (Electrical Geodesics, Inc., USA) system. Faces presented in the unpleasant-odor condition
were rated significantly less pleasant than faces presented in the pleasantor no-odor conditions. Faces presented during unpleasant-odor stimulation were rated significantly less pleasant than the same faces presented
one-second after offset of the unpleasant-odor. ERP responses to faces
showed three prominent components: N170, N400 and the late-positive
potential (LPP, >600 ms). There was an interaction effect in the LPP, which
was stronger for faces presented simultaneously with the unpleasant-odor
compared to the same faces presented after odor offset. Delaying presentation of visual stimulus relative to unpleasant-odor decreased the strength
of hedonic evaluations of faces and amplitude of the LPP. A greater cortical
and subjective response during simultaneous olfactory and visual stimulation may have adaptive role, allowing for a prompt and focused behavioral
reaction if an aversive odor would signal danger.

A42
TESTING DETESTING: THE EFFECT OF TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY
ON CHARACTER JUDGMENTS Justin Reber1, Arianna Rigon1, Katie Croft,

Melissa Duff1,2; 1University of Iowa, 2University of Iowa College of Medicine — It

is estimated that in the US over 6 million people live with Traumatic Brain
Injury (TBI)-related disabilities. Although research has found that individuals with TBI are impaired at recognizing and interpreting social cues, very
little work has investigated TBI patients’ ability to update and manipulate
existing social judgments. The current study used an established paradigm
(Croft et al., 2010) to examine how patients with TBI integrate new information into established judgments of moral character. Briefly, TBI patients
and demographically-matched comparison patients (NC) were instructed
to make baseline moral character judgments based on a person’s physical
appearance, and later asked to update their judgment based upon an action
performed by the person. The action could be morally neutral, positive,
or negative. Preliminary results revealed that participants with TBI appear
to weight both positive (p <.05) and negative (p <.05) information significantly differently from NC participants. This suggests that individuals with
TBI may have difficulty appropriately updating their opinions of people.
For instance, they might have problems crediting people who perform an
act of kindness or adequately revising their opinion of individuals who
commit a moral violation.

2016 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session A

A43
PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES TO EXPRESSIVE AFFECTIVE BODY MOVEMENT (DANCE) AND MUSIC IN INDIVIDUALS
WITH AND WITHOUT AUTISM Beatriz Calvo-Merino1, Julia F Christensen1,

A45
LONGITUDINAL TRAINING IN MEDITATION IS ASSOCIATED WITH
DECREASED PRESTIMULUS ALPHA DURING A SUSTAINED
ATTENTION TASK. Clifford Saron1, Chivon Powers1, Anthony Zanesco1,

social-emotional behaviours constitute a cornerstone of the clinically defining features of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Individuals with ASD
experience difficulties recognising emotional expressions in faces, voices
and whole-body movements. Interestingly, they can discriminate different
emotions in music and respond typically with psychophysiological arousal.
This may suggest that ASD individuals may be more sensitive to emotion
when presented in naturalistic affective expression context (i.e. music).
Here, we assessed if a similar emotional response can be evoked with other
artistic and naturalistic stimuli that include whole body movement (i.e. perception of dance). To test this prediction we compared subjective and physiological emotional responses to dance and music in ASD and typically
developing individuals. Participants were asked to classify the emotion
they felt (subjective emotional responses; happiness, sadness, excitement,
peacefulness, fear) in response to a series of 30 second dance movements or
music excerpts (presented in two blocks). Furthermore, participants rated
the stimuli in terms of the intensity with which they felt the indicated emotion, while their psychophysiological response was recorded online (galvanic skin response, GSR; heart rate, HR). Results showed that individuals
with ASD had difficulties relating to the emotions expressed in dance but
not music at the subjective and physiological level. These results suggest
that ASD participants are sensitive to the valence depicted in music, but not
in dance, supporting that emotion recognition difficulties in ASD may be
relatively specific to the domain of bodily expressed emotions.

activity in the alpha frequency range (8-12 Hz) has been associated with
the efficient deployment and maintenance of attention during sustained
attention tasks. We examined alpha power in electroencephalography
(EEG) recorded from experienced meditators before, during, and after a
12-week intensive Shamatha meditation retreat to explore the electrocortical correlates of previously demonstrated training-related improvements in
these participants (MacLean et al 2010). Participants completed a 32-minute
continuous performance task (CPT) during which they attended to a stream
of long lines (nontargets) and just-noticeably-different short lines (targets),
and were asked to respond when a short line (presented at random 10% of
the time) was detected. We analyzed longitudinal changes in alpha power
1s immediately prior to stimulus presentations in wait-list control participants tested onsite during an initial meditation retreat, and then again
from these same participants when they later underwent training during
a second 12-week retreat. We expected prestimulus alpha power would
decrease with deeper immersion in the meditation training and that this
decline would correspond with longitudinal improvements in discrimination responses. We observed no changes in prestimulus occipital alpha
when participants served as wait-list controls. However, prestimulus alpha
declined across the duration of the 2nd retreat when these same participants
actively participated in the meditation training. These findings suggest
that focused attention meditation may support generalized improvements
in attentional deployment and maintenance in visual sustained attention
tasks. These prestimulus alpha power fluctuations are further discussed in
relation to within-task changes in behavioral discrimination performance
and post-stimulus visual event-related N1 potentials.

Sebastian B Gaigg1; 1City University London, UK — Impairments in reciprocal

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring &
inhibitory control
A44
STIMULATING SUBTHALAMIC NUCLEUS SUBREGIONS SELECTIVELY MODULATES INHIBITORY ACTION CONTROL Scott Wylie1,
Nelleke van Wouwe1, Daniel Claassen1, Joseph Neimat1, Wery van den Wildenberg2; 1Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 2University of Amsterdam —

Patients with basal ganglia disease, particularly Parkinson’s disease, show
specific deficits in inhibitory action control. Studies of Parkinson’s patients
treated with deep brain stimulation (DBS) offer a unique opportunity to
establish causal links between inhibitory action control mechanisms and
basal ganglia function. We previously studied the effects of subthalamic
nucleus (STN) DBS on inhibitory control dynamics in a Simon conflict task,
applying the dual-process activation-suppression model (Ridderinkhof,
2002) to measure the strength of response capture by action impulses and
the proficiency of reactive inhibition engaged to suppress interference from
incorrect action impulses. Results showed that bilateral STN DBS at clinical
settings, in dopamine-medicated PD patients improved inhibitory control
of incorrect action impulses. Here, in PD patients withdrawn completely
from all dopamine medications, we first replicated the finding that bilateral
STN DBS at clinical settings improves selective inhibition of interference
from incorrect action impulses elicited in a Simon task. Next, we recruited
a second group of patients with bilateral electrodes positioned within both
dorsal and ventral subregions of the STN. In separate sessions, we counterbalanced focused stimulation with non-clinical settings in bilateral dorsal
and ventral STN subregions while PD patients performed the Simon task.
Stimulating the dorsal, but not the ventral, STN subregion produced a drastic improvement in selective suppression of action impulses. These findings
further confirm the critical involvement of STN circuitry in inhibitory control of action impulses, but more specifically point to circuitry interfacing
the dorsal subterritories of the STN as representing a key node in selective
inhibition processes.

Brandon King1, Kezia Wineberg1; 1University of California, Davis — Oscillatory

A46
THE NEURAL BASES OF REWARDED “NO ACTION” AND REWARD
DEPENDENCY Chiang-shan Li1,2,3, Sheng Zhang1, Sien Hu1; 1Department of
Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, 2Department of Neuroscience, Yale
University School of Medicine, 3Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale
University — Numerous studies examined the neural correlates of reward

response, focusing on the ventral striatal circuits. Rewarded responses
are often contingent upon an overt action. However, in a natural setting,
actions are rewarding sometimes only when they are not performed, and
few studies have examined the neural bases of rewarded “no-action”. Here,
35 young adults performed a reward go-nogo task during fMRI. A trial
began with a dollar bill and nickel image framed in a square and shown
each to the left or right of fixation (location fixed in each block). After a
randomized period of 1 – 5 s, the square turned green (~3/4) prompting
a quick button press or red, instructing subjects not to respond. Correct
and incorrect trials were each rewarded and penalized with the monetary
amount. In a control block, subjects respond to green and red squares in an
identical design without win or loss. Compared to control trials, rewarded
actions engaged the VS, midbrain, left anterior insula (AI) and medial PFC
including the dACC and SMA, with greater responses to dollar than to
nickel trials. Compared to control trials, rewarded no actions involved activation of the left AI and dACC/SMA and deactivation of the vmPFC. A
direct contrast revealed deactivation of the vmPFC during rewarded no-actions vs. actions. Further, reward dependency as assessed by TPQ was associated with less vmPFC deactivation. These findings describe the neural
processes of rewarded no-actions and suggested that reward dependency
was associated with cerebral responses to rewarded no-actions rather than
actions.

A47
IS THE FRONTOCENTRAL N2 A RELIABLE INDEX OF CONCEALED
INFORMATION? Giorgio Ganis1,2,3, Chun-Wei Hsu1, David Bridges1; 1University of Plymouth, 2Massachusetts General Hospital, 3Harvard Medical School —

Event-related potentials (ERPs) employed in concealed information tests
(CITs) have focused almost exclusively on the P3b component and have
shown that this component is larger for the item of interest (probe) than
control items (irrelevants). Recent studies have begun to examine whether

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

47

Poster Session A	
other ERP components are modulated by concealed information. A seminal study (Gamer and Berti, 2010) suggested that visual probes elicit a
larger frontocentral N2 than irrelevants in a standard CIT. However, this
study did not address the possibility of intrinsic differences among the
stimuli because the same probe and irrelevants were used for all participants and there was no control condition with uninformed participants. We
addressed this issue by counterbalancing stimuli across participants and by
using a control condition with uninformed participants. Results showed
that probes did not elicit a larger frontocentral N2 under these controlled
conditions. Next, we determined the potential role of stimulus differences
in the study by Gamer and Berti, as participants performed onset and target
detection tasks on those same stimuli without any information about a
nominally defined probe item. Results showed a larger N2 for the probe
than the irrelevants, and this effect was indistinguishable from that found
in a matched concealed information condition. These findings show that
a larger frontocentral N2 is not a reliable index of concealed information
in standard CITs. They also indicate that results of CIT studies performed
without item counterbalancing and suitable uninformed control conditions
may be caused by differential intrinsic properties of the stimuli employed.

A48
IMAGING BIOMARKER OF SMOKING ADDICTION AND EVALUATING TREATMENT EFFICACY Yi-Yuan Tang1, Rongxiang Tang2; 1Texas Tech

University, 2Washington University in St. Louis — Previous research conducted

by our team and others show that one mechanism for addiction may involve
a deficit in self-control network including medial prefrontal cortex (PFC)
and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). Mindfulness meditation has been
shown to have the potential to ameliorate negative outcomes resulting from
deficits in self-control associated with addiction. However, this approach
often requires long-term practice to achieve the benefits. Whether shortterm practice could achieve the same goal remains elusive. In our series of
randomized studies, one form of mindfulness meditation, the integrative
body-mind training (IBMT) has been shown to improve attention, cognitive performance, self-control and neuroplasticity as well as treatment of
mental disorders. In this talk I will demonstrate the IBMT effects on smoking addiction and its underlying brain mechanisms using a randomized
controlled trial (RCT) in 15 smokers and15 non-smokers. All participants
received 2-wk (5 h in total) of IBMT or relaxation training (RT), 30 min
per session. Compared to non-smokers, we found a 60% smoking reduction and 30% quitting, and a decrease in craving even in smokers without
an intention to quit. Brain imaging has shown that this behavior change
is accompanied by greater ACC)/medial PFC activity. Our data suggest
the ACC)/medial PFC as biomarker of smoking addiction and short-term
mindfulness meditation reduces addiction through self-control network in
the brain.

A49
EFFECTS OF CONFLICT-DRIVEN ATTENTION ON HIGH AND LOW
LEVEL VISUAL PROCESSING Kerstin Unger1, Rebecca Waugh1, Michael
Worden1; 1Brown University — Compatibility effects in selective attention tasks

are typically reduced following incompatible trials compared to compatible
trials, an observation termed congruency sequence effect (CSE). Relatively
little is known about the nature of the attentional mechanisms that are
engaged in response to recent conflict between incompatible stimulus and/
or response representations. In particular, the existing literature remains
controversial as to whether conflict-induced attentional mechanisms operate at early (or only later) stages of visual processing and work preferably
through enhancement of target information or also by suppression of distractor information. In this study, we examined the relative contribution
of these mechanisms using a modified spatial flanker paradigm with face
and house stimuli as targets and distractors. Individually defined regions
of interest (ROIs) included Fusiform Face Area (FFA), Parahippocampal
Place Area (PPA), and regions within early visual cortex corresponding to
the spatial locations of the target vs. the peripheral distractors. Behavioral
results showed the expected compatibility effect as well as conflict adaption following incompatible trials. Imaging data indicated that the BOLD
response in distractor regions was reduced following incompatible compared to compatible trials, whereas activity was enhanced for the center
target. Furthermore, FFA activation to face targets was reduced following
incompatible trials with face distractors compared to trials with house dis-

48

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
tractors. We observed a qualitatively similar albeit weaker effect for the
PPA’s response to house targets following incompatible trials including
houses vs. faces as distractors. These findings suggest that conflict-induced
attentional mechanisms modulate processing in early and higher-level
visual areas via both suppression and enhancement.

A50
LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE OF MEDITATION-TRAINING
RELATED IMPROVEMENTS IN RESPONSE INHIBITION AND VIGILANT ATTENTION Anthony Zanesco1, Brandon King1, Katherine MacLean1,

Stephen Aichele2, Clifford Saron1; 1University of California, Davis, 2University of
Geneva, Switzerland — The human capacity to maintain vigilant attention is

limited. Sustained attention is effortful, and prone to fatigue, lapses, and
fluctuations with prolonged engagement. Such attentional deficits are pronounced in numerous psychiatric and brain disorders and are affected by
age-related cognitive decline. The deficient and fluctuating nature of attention has historically formed a central motivation for improving sustained
attention through dedicated mental training across many contemplative
traditions, and several longitudinal studies have now provided evidence
that meditation training may facilitate generalized improvements in this
domain. However, the extent to which these improvements are maintained
following the conclusion of intensive training, their dependence on continued meditation practice, and how they interact with other developmental
processes such as aging is poorly understood. Therefore, we examined participants’ performance on a sustained response inhibition task, parameterized using a visual discrimination threshold procedure, across six waves of
assessment: three waves during three months of full-time Buddhist focused
attention meditation training and practice, and the rest over a seven-year
follow-up period. We observed improvements in performance measures of
response inhibition, vigilance, and reaction time variability during training. These improvements were maintained up to seven years following
the intervention. Age-related decrements in response inhibition accuracy
and reaction time variability were moderated by time devoted to meditation practice over this seven year-period. The present study is the first
to provide evidence that intensive and continued meditation training and
practice improves vigilant attention in an enduring manner. Such training
may significantly alter trajectories of age-related cognitive decline across
the lifespan.

A51
REWARD MODULATES PREPARATORY MOTOR CORTEX INHIBITION Wim Notebaert1, Carsten Bundt1, Elger Abrahamse1, Senne Braem1,
Marcel Brass1; 1Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Belgium — Previous

studies demonstrated decreased motor cortex excitability in preparation for
a target (e.g., Duque & Ivry, 2009). In order to understand the functional
characteristics of this inhibition, recent attempts have been made to investigate motivational modulations of this effect. In our study, we presented a
cue (+1 or +0) indicating that participants, respectively, could or could not
receive reward for fast and correct reaction times. We hypothesized that
reward cues would increase anticipatory control processes (Notebaert &
Braem, 2015). We measured corticospinal excitability by means of motor
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and electromyography (EMG)
during the cue-target interval. We therefore presented a TMS pulse 400,
600 or 800 ms after cue onset (600, 400 or 200 ms before target onset). Participants had to respond to lateralized coloured circles with the left or right
index finger (Simon task). Behaviourally, we observed that the reward
cue resulted in faster reaction times, but surprisingly, no modulation of
the Simon effect was observed. Motor evoked potentials showed that for
reward cues (+1), motor excitability gradually decreased in preparation for
the target while this was not observed for neutral cues (+0). Most interestingly, this difference in excitability correlated with BIS (Behavioral Inhibition Scale) scores in the sense that participants with higher BIS scores show
increased motor cortex inhibition in preparation for the target (relative to
neutral trials). Our results therefore indicate that motor cortex inhibition is
a functional mechanism that reflects participants’ motivation.

2016 Annual Meeting	

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Other
A52
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC CORRELATES OF CLINICAL
FATIGUE Ashley Howse1, Ali Walzak2, Bruce Wright2, Olave Krigolson1; 1Neu-

roeconomics Laboratory, University of Victoria, 2Division of Medical Sciences,
University of Victoria — Physician fatigue has a direct impact on the safety

of patients in hospitals worldwide. To date, measures for assessing fatigue
rely largely on self-report that may or may not be valid depending on the
accuracy of the self-report of the physician in question. Here, we report the
results from a study in which we used electroencephalographic (EEG) data
as a direct measure to assess physician fatigue in a clinical setting. Participants in this study were final year medical students who were taking part
in a simulated 12-hour “night on call” following a regular work day. All of
the medical students completed a 10 minute EEG protocol at the beginning
of their work day (baseline), prior to the night on call (pre), and after the
night on call (post). The EEG protocol included two measures of resting
state EEG, an oddball paradigm to measure P300 amplitude, and a learning
paradigm to measure reward positivity amplitude. Not surprisingly, we
found that participants self reported increasing levels of fatigue between
the baseline – pre – post assessment points. Importantly, we also observed
decreases in the amplitude of all of the EEG components that we measured
across the span of measurement points. While our results might appear
somewhat obvious in terms of previous laboratory based findings – our
data provide ecological validity to prior laboratory findings and provide
a basis for the development of an EEG based fatigue assessment protocol
which one might hope could one day improve patient safety.

A53
DOPAMINE FACILITATES LEARNING TO STOP IN PARKINSON’S
DISEASE Nelleke C. van Wouwe1, Daniel O. Claassen1, Joseph S. Neimat1, Kris-

ten E. Kanoff1, Scott A. Wylie1; 1Vanderbilt Medical Center — Disorders associated with altered dopamine function, such as Parkinson’s disease (PD),
disrupt the ability to learn contingencies between actions and outcomes.
However, the mechanisms involved in learning to withhold action to
influence reward and punishment avoidance outcomes has received minimal attention. This study investigated the role of dopamine in learning
to act and learning to refrain from action based on reward or punishment
outcome, in patients with Parkinson’s disease ‘On’ and ‘Off’ dopaminergic (DA) medication (n=18) versus healthy controls (n=30). Subjects performed a probabilistic learning task that orthogonalized action and valence
(action-reward, inaction-reward, action-punishment, inaction-punishment). We tested whether the presence of DA would bias learning towards
action, or reward, or whether it would influence conflict monitoring on
action-outcome associations that violate inherent ‘Pavlovian’ learning
biases. Inherent learning biases (act to obtain reward and inaction to avoid
punishment) were unaffected by PD in comparison to controls. However,
DA modulated the ability to shift away from these biases; more specifically,
with the presence of DA, PD patients were increasingly biased by action-reward associations, which limited action-punishment learning. Without DA
medication, PD patients were more biased by inaction-punishment learning, which hampered inaction-reward learning. Thus, DA influenced the
integration between action and valence in a unique way and it suggests
that DA modulates the violations between action and valence expectations
in reinforcement learning.

A54
INTELLECTUAL ABILITY IS ASSOCIATED WITH THE CAPACITY OF
COGNITIVE CONTROL Yu Chen1,2, Tingting Wu1, Tae Hyeong Kim1, Jin Fan1,3;
1

Queens College, The City University of New York, 2The Graduate Center, The City
University of New York, 3Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai — Cognitive

control is a capacity-limited mental operation to coordinate thoughts and
actions and to select and prioritize information under the condition of
uncertainty, which should be associated with intellectual ability. However,
this relationship has not been investigated due to the lack of a precise measurement of the capacity of cognitive control. In this study, we employed
a perceptual decision-making task with time constraints to quantitatively
estimate the capacity of cognitive control, and also measured the intellectual ability using the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) in 30 par-

Poster Session A
ticipants. Correlation analyses revealed that the full-scale intelligence was
significantly predicted by the capacity of cognitive control (r = 0.51). For the
subscales of the WAIS, only the index of working memory (r = 0.63) was
significantly correlated to the capacity of cognitive control, while the indices of verbal comprehension (r = 0.35), perceptual reasoning (r = 0.32), and
processing speed (r = 0.13) were not. These findings suggest that capacity
of cognitive control is an essential factor confining the intellectual ability,
and that the working memory component of the WAIS is closely associated
with the psychological construct of cognitive control.

A55
THE ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL AND BEHAVIORAL EFFECTS OF
COMPUTERIZED TRAINING ON STRUCTURED SEQUENCE PROCESSING Gretchen N.L. Smith1, Juan Galvis1, Gerardo E. Valdez1, Christopher

M. Conway1; 1Georgia State University — Structured sequence processing (SSP)

is a domain general mechanism used to learn patterns of stimuli that occur
temporally. SSP is vital for the development of social and motor cognition
(Cleeremens et al., 1998) and language (Conway et al., 2010; 2011). Recent
findings have shown that it may be possible to improve SSP with computerized training (Smith, Conway, Bauernschmidt, & Pisoni, 2015). To
further investigate both the neurocognitive and behavioral consequences
of SSP training, typically-developing adults (N=34) were quasi-randomly
assigned to computerized SSP training, active control, or passive control.
SSP training involved reproducing visual-spatial sequences with underlying statistical patterns embedded in them. Following 10 days of training or
control, participants were reassessed on non-trained baseline measures of
SSP. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were used to examine neural changes
elicited during the non-trained SSP task as the result of training. Preliminary
ERP findings indicate that the training modulates the P3a and P3b components. In addition, topomaps suggest a different distribution of electrical
activity between the training and control groups during the non-trained
measure of SSP, especially in frontal regions. Preliminary behavioral results
suggest an improvement to accuracy on the non-trained measure of SSP
following training [t(1,10)=4.87, p=.001], but not following active or passive
control conditions. These findings demonstrate the feasibility of improving
SSP with computerized training and, furthermore, suggest that training-related effects may occur via changes to attention, updating, and/or working
memory.

A56
THE CAPACITY OF COGNITIVE CONTROL Tingting Wu1, Alexander Duf-

ford1,3, Melissa-Ann Mackie1,2, Laura Egan1, Jin Fan1,2,3; 1Queens College, The
City University of New York, 2The Graduate Center, The City University of New
York, 3Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai — Cognitive control refers to

the processes that permit selection and prioritization of information processing in different cognitive domains to reach the capacity-limited conscious mind. Although previous studies have suggested that the capacity
of cognitive control itself is limited, a direct quantification of this capacity
has not been attempted. Additionally, the relationship between cognitive
control and other capacity-limited psychological constructs (e.g., working
memory) remains elusive due to the lack of precise quantification of the
capacity of cognitive control. Here, based on participants’ response accuracy in a time-constrained perceptual decision-making task, we quantified
the capacity of cognitive control as approximately 3 to 4 bits per second. We
also found substantial evidence for null correlations between participants’
capacity of cognitive control and their performance on working memory
span tasks. These findings demonstrated that cognitive control, as a higher-level function, has a remarkably low capacity and is a distinct psychological construct from working memory.

A57
THE EFFECTS OF A STRESS-RELATED CORTISOL INCREASE ON
HIGHER COGNITIVE FUNCTIONS: FALSE MEMORY FORMATION
AND ANCHORING AND ADJUSTMENT Enma Pardilla-Delgado1, Erik W.
Asp2,3, Tony J. Cunningham1, Kelsey A. Warner2, Jessicay D. Payne1; 1University of
Notre Dame, 2University of Iowa, 3Hamline Universtiy — One function of the PFC,

the executive center of the brain, is to affix ‘false tags’ to cognitive representations. Stress can negatively affect PFC activity, due to a high density of
glucocorticoid receptors. In this study we tested the effects of stress-related

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

49

Poster Session A	
cortisol on two higher cognitive functions: anchoring and adjustment, and
false memory. When asked to estimate something, individuals often use a
certain value as an ‘anchor’, and ‘adjust’ away from this value until a reasonable response is reached. The PFC’s ability to false tag helps individuals
adjust away from anchors in a way that is similar to the way we correctly
reject a false memory (i.e., by appropriate source monitoring). In the current
study we assessed the effects of a stressor, or a control manipulation, on
false memory (DRM) performance and a knowledge estimation task (KET).
Saliva was collected before, after, and 40 minutes after the stress manipulation. Cortisol analysis show that our stressor (TSST) was effective, since
the change from baseline to post-stressor peak cortisol differed between
the groups; t(36)=2.16, p=.04. Stress, when compared to the control task,
marginally increased recall of critical lures (i.e., false memories; t (36)=1.9,
p=.07). No effects were observed for recall of studied words. There were no
significant differences in the KET. These preliminary results suggest that, at
least in the DRM task, stress increases false memory, arguably by disrupting monitoring abilities, which are dependent on PFC functioning. However, we found no evidence that stress affects anchoring and adjustment.

A58
CORTICO-CEREBELLAR DYSFUNCTIONS UNDERLYING VERBAL-FLUENCY DEFICITS IN FRIEDREICH’S ATAXIA: A COMBINED
STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL MRI STUDY Imis Dogan1,2,3, Eugenie

Klöpfer1, Sandro Romanzetti1,2,3, Shahram Mirzazade1,2,3, Cornelius J Werner1,2,3,
Ana S Costa1,2,4, Stefan Heim1,3,5, Dagmar Timman-Braun6, Ilaria A Giordano7,8,
Thomas Klockgether7,8, Joerg B Schulz1,2,3, Kathrin Reetz1,2,3; 1Department of
Neurology, RWTH Aachen University, Germany, 2JARA - Translational Brain Medicine, Jülich and Aachen, Germany, 3Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM
1, 11), Research Center Jülich, Germany, 4Neurocognition Unit, Department
of Neurology, Hospital de Braga, Portugal, 5Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, RWTH Aachen University, Germany, 6Department
of Neurology, University Hospital of Essen, Germany, 7Department of Neurology,
University Hospital of Bonn, Germany, 8German Center for Neurodegenerative
Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany — Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA) is a spinocer-

ebellar-degenerative disorder and the most common of inherited ataxias.
Cognitive impairment and underlying cerebro-cerebellar mechanisms in
FRDA are barely understood. In order to investigate the neural substrates
of verbal-fluency deficits, 15 patients with genetically confirmed FRDA
and 15 demographically matched controls underwent neuropsychological testing, structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at
3T. Using a block-design with phonemic and semantic task-conditions, we
compared functional activity and cortico-cerebellar connectivity between
groups. Structural alterations were assessed by means of voxel-based morphometry (VBM) and diffusion-tensor imaging (DTI). Patients showed
deficits in phonemic verbal-fluency, while performances in semantic
fluency did not significantly differ from controls. Functional activity differences were particularly observed for phonemic fluency with patients
exhibiting higher activity in left Brodmann area [BA] 44, anterior insula
and right posterior cerebellum (VI, Crus-I). Functional connectivity was
reduced in patients between cerebellar lobule VI-BA44 and VI-insula, and
correlated with impaired phonemic fluency performance. VBM showed
cerebellar gray matter reductions in FRDA, and white matter degeneration
in the superior (SCP) and inferior cerebellar peduncles (ICP). In controls,
phonemic fluency was positively correlated with volumes in right Crus-I
and SCP, whereas in patients we found a negative association between volumes in Crus-I and activity in BA44. DTI revealed widespread decreases in
fractional anisotropy in FRDA, including SCP, ICP and corticospinal tracts.
Overall, this pattern of increased neural response in cerebellar and fronto-insular regions and the reduced cortico-cerebellar connectivity underlying phonemic verbal-fluency indicates disruptions in cerebro-cerebellar
pathways related to cerebellar damage in FRDA.

A59
GENERAL INTELLIGENCE AND THE EFFICIENCY OF TASKEVOKED BRAIN NETWORK DYNAMICS Doug Schultz1, Michael Cole1;
1

Rutgers-Newark — The efficiency of the human brain is remarkable. It is able
to exceed modern computers on multiple computational demands (e.g.,
language, planning) while consuming the wattage of a light bulb. The mys-

50

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
tery of how the brain can be so efficient is compounded by recent evidence
that all brain regions are constantly active as they interact with each other in
so-called resting-state networks (RSNs). In order to investigate the brain’s
ability to efficiently process complex cognitive demands we compared
functional connectivity during rest and several highly distinct tasks. We
previously found that RSNs are present during a wide variety of tasks, and
that tasks only minimally modify functional connectivity patterns throughout the brain. Here we tested the hypothesis that, while subtle, these taskevoked functional connectivity changes from rest nonetheless strongly
contribute to behavioral performance. Surprisingly, we found across three
diverse domains (language, reasoning, and working memory tasks) that
high performing individuals exhibited more efficient brain connectivity
updates – smaller changes in functional network architecture between rest
and task. These smaller changes suggest that individuals with more efficient brain connectivity updates have especially effective network configurations for general task performance. Confirming this, network update efficiency correlated with cognitive control abilities and general intelligence.
The brain’s efficiency therefore appears to be a key feature contributing to
both its network dynamics and general cognitive ability.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
A60
TDCS-LINKED WORKING MEMORY TRAINING IN THE AGING ELICITS FAR TRANSFER Marian Berryhill1, Jaclyn Stephens1,2, Adelle Cerreta1;
1

University of Nevada, 2Kennedy-Krieger Institute — Cognitive training interventions work to counter age-related cognitive decline. Aging generally
leads to impaired executive function (EF) in domains including working
memory (WM). Recently, advances in methodologies pairing WM training
with transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) reveal lasting improvement to WM and measurable, significant transfer to untrained EF tasks. One
gap in this emerging field, however, is that to date, all interventions have
been laboratory based. A second limitation is that the underlying mechanism(s) of durable tDCS-linked cognitive improvement remain unclear.
Here, we begin to fill these gaps by reporting a longitudinal tDCS-linked
WM training paradigm in the healthy aging that included home-testing,
and ecologically valid transfer measures. Collected measures also included
neuroimaging (fNIRS) and genotyping (COMT val158met). In a betweengroups design, 90 healthy older adults completed 5 sessions of WM training paired with parametric tDCS (Sham, 1 mA tDCS, 2 mA tDCS, 15 min)
targeting prefrontal cortex. After training, we measured transfer on laboratory and ecologically valid tasks. The results showed that all participants
significantly improved on the WM training tasks. However, those receiving
stronger tDCS significantly outperformed the other groups on ecologically
valid far transfer tasks. Additionally, group differences on measures of
cognitive flexibility and cognitive stability were predicted by COMT genotype, indicating a role of prefrontal dopamine signaling in the underlying
mechanism of tDCS-linked EF benefits. No participants dropped out of the
study or complained of discomfort. These findings highlight the value and
translational potential for tDCS-linked interventions in healthy older adults
interested in maintaining cognitive function.

A61
CORTICAL OSCILLATIONS UNDERLYING WORKING MEMORY
FOR ORDERED GROUPS. Jennifer Whitman1, Tzuhan Cheng1, Lawrence
Ward1, Rebecca Todd1; 1University of British Columbia — Maintaining multi-

ple items in working memory in an organized fashion requires a flexible
neural mechanism. One candidate mechanism involves coupling between
fast (40Hz gamma) and slower (5Hz theta) oscillations. Each gamma cycle
corresponds to an individual item in the ordered group. The ratio of the
faster to slower frequencies is thought to match the capacity for an ordered
set (i.e. ~7+/-2 items). Here, we ask whether medium frequency oscillations underlie working memory for serially ordered subgroups. To test this,
we recorded EEG while participants remembered either three groups of
two letters (e.g. SD-FJ-KL) or two groups of three letters (e.g. SDF—JKL),
presented simultaneously for three seconds. After a four second delay, a
single digit prompted recall of subgroup 1, 2, or 3. We hypothesized that
a medium-frequency oscillation would have a slower peak frequency for

2016 Annual Meeting	
subgroups of three items, by a ratio of 2/3. Preliminary analyses employed
time-frequency analysis (Morlet wavelets) to identify frequencies exhibiting task-induced changes in power. These included alpha (8-12Hz), beta,
(18-24Hz), and delta (2Hz) oscillations. The involvement of alpha frequency
oscillations is consistent with previous studies of visual working memory.
Estimates of instantaneous phase within each frequency range were further
examined to probe patterns of coupling between frequencies involving a
shift in the peak frequency within a middle range (e.g. alpha) as a function
of group size. Identification of such shifts can advance understanding of
how working memory can be flexibly organized in a task-relevant manner.

A62
CAN TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION BRING PASSIVELY RETAINED ITEMS IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY BACK INTO
FOCAL ATTENTION? Nathan Rose1,2, Joshua LaRocque2, Adam Riggall1,
Olivia Gosseries1, Michael Starrett1,3, Bradley Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2ACU, Melbourne, 3University of California, Davis — To answer this

question we had participants perform a short-term memory (STM) task that
required maintaining two-items (a face, a word, or coherent dot motion)
over two short delay periods on each trial in which they were cued to maintain one of the items in focal attention while still holding the other item in
STM. We applied a single pulse of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)
to each of the three category selective regions for the three categories of
stimuli (Experiment 1, n = 6) or to the superior parietal lobule (Experiment
2, n = 6; Experiment 3, n = 11) during the delay periods. In Experiments
1 and 2 we simultaneously recorded the electroencephalogram (EEG) and
measured the TMS-evoked response. In Experiment 3 we measured reaction times to recognition probes presented 100 ms, 500 ms, or 2000 ms after
TMS that required recognizing the cued (i.e., actively retained) item (80% of
trials) or rejecting the uncued (i.e., passively retained) item (20% of trials).
Experiments 1 and 2 showed that the TMS evoked response on the EEG
was modulated by both the site of stimulation and the category of the item
that was in the active or passive state of representation. Reaction times for
rejecting recognition probes for the uncued item were slower at shorter
lags between TMS and presentation of the probe. These results suggest that
a single pulse of TMS can induce neural and behavioral evidence for the
“reactivation” of a passively retained item in STM.

A63
COMPUTERIZED WORKING MEMORY TRAINING INDUCES
CHANGES IN INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN CHILDREN WITH NEUROFIBROMATOSIS TYPE 1 (NF1): A PILOT RESTING-STATE STUDY Yuliya Yoncheva1, Kristina K. Hardy2,3, Daniel J. Lurie4,

Krishna Somandepalli5, Roger J. Packer2,3, Michael P. Milham6,7, F. Xavier Castellanos1,7, Maria T. Acosta2,3; 1NYU Langone Medical Center, Department of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, New York, NY, 2Children’s National Health System,
Washington, DC, 3George Washington University School of Medicine, Washington,
DC, 4University of California, Berkeley, Department of Psychology, Berkeley, CA,
5
University of Southern California, School of Engineering, Los Angeles, CA, 6Children Mind Institute, New York, NY, 7Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research,
Orangeburg, NY — Executive function deficits are common in children with

neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). Although computerized training programs
are increasingly used in other neuropsychiatric disorders, empirically evaluated interventions are lacking for NF1. This pilot study examined training
effects on cognition and resting-state intrinsic functional connectivity (iFC)
in children with NF1. In an open pre-/post-test design, we provided 25 sessions (6-10 weeks) of computerized visuo-spatial working memory at-home
training with phone-based coaching assistance (Cogmed®). Sixteen participants (9 male; 11.1±2.3 years) had analyzable pre-/post-test resting-state
fMRI scans and cognitive task data. Standard data preprocessing, including
global signal regression, and calculation of iFC indices used the Configurable Pipeline for the Analysis of Connectomes v. 0.3.3. Two voxel-wise iFC
measures, fractional amplitude of low frequency fluctuations (fALFF) and
regional homogeneity (ReHo), were contrasted pre-/post-test using paired
t-tests. Statistically significant (p<0.05 corrected) regionally specific differences emerged in both iFC measures. Decreased fALFF with treatment was
found in a large cluster spanning thalamus, globus pallidus, lingual and
parahippocampal gyri, brainstem and cerebellum; a second cluster encom-

Poster Session A
passed precentral cortex, supplementary motor area, extending into middle
and superior frontal gyri. Increased ReHo following training was observed
in predominantly visual areas (intra- and supra-calcarine cortex, occipital
pole and lingual gyrus). Changes in iFC significantly correlated with facets
of behavioral improvement post-Cogmed® and with performance on tasks
tapping executive function and visuo-spatial working memory. These findings provide preliminary support that regionally specific iFC changes may
capture treatment-related improvements in cognitive dysfunction in NF1
and motivate independent controlled replication.

A64
DISTRIBUTED FRONTAL AND MEDIAL TEMPORAL WORKING
MEMORY ACTIVITY: EVIDENCE FROM SEEG Elizabeth L. Johnson1,
Jack J. Lin2, Robert T. Knight1; 1University of California, Berkeley, 2University of
California, Irvine — Our ability to hold onto and process information is a hall-

mark of cognition. This working memory (WM) capacity is linked to activities in the lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) and medial temporal lobe (MTL).
Together with non-invasive human neuroimaging and single-unit animal
neurophysiology, intracranial electrocorticography paints a more complete
picture of how these network activities support human WM. Six human
subjects with stereotaxic (sEEG) implants penetrating the lateral PFC, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), and MTL encoded pairs of two colored shapes, presented one at a time in specific spatial positions. Each subject had between
1-11 contacts per region. After a 900-1150-ms maintenance period, they were
prompted to remember “what”, “when”, or “where” information, and then
given 900-1150 ms to process before indicating their response. We investigated the temporal dynamics of 1-200-Hz spectral power during encoding,
maintenance, and processing of subsequently remembered information,
standardized to a pre-trial baseline. The results reported are present across
all subjects and significant at p<0.05, two-tailed, corrected for multiple
comparisons using cluster-based permutation statistics. High-frequency
activity can be used to track dynamic neuronal flexibility as demonstrated
in monkey single-unit research. All sEEG contacts showed transient >70-Hz
increases at encoding. Importantly, data implicate the OFC during WM – a
process traditionally associated with the lateral PFC and MTL. Encoding,
maintenance, and processing were also marked by more sustained 2-25-Hz
increases in each region. These patterns of low-frequency activity emerged
after presentation of the first shape, suggesting recruitment of a distributed
organizational hierarchy to manage pieces of information in WM.

A65
DISCOVERING GATING POLICIES IN THE ABSENCE OF REINFORCEMENT Apoorva Bhandari1, David Badre1,2; 1Brown University, Providence, Providence, USA., 2Brown Institute of Brain Sciences, Providence, USA.
— Coordinating behavior during complex, temporally extended tasks

requires the use of working memory and internal control policies to guide
its use. Computational models have identified ‘gating’ policies that control the updating of information into working memory (input gate), and
its influence on behavior (output gate), and have shown how these might
be slowly learnt using reinforcement learning mechanisms. In novel or
changed environments, however, we must rapidly discover efficient gating
policies that are adapted to the dynamics of the task environment, often in
the absence of explicit reinforcement. The cognitive processes and neural
systems underlying this process remain poorly understood. Here, we provide evidence from behavioral experiments that efficient gating policies
emerge with practice on early trials after a change in the task environment
and that practice effects in reaction time data reflect this process. We use
functional MRI to examine the neural correlates of this process and identify brain regions in the prefrontal cortex that show distinct patterns of
dynamic engagement on early trials. Our results suggest a novel cognitive
process that supports the rapid discovery of efficient gating policies in the
absence of reinforcement.

A66
CHANGES IN NEURAL ACTIVITY UNDERLYING WORKING
MEMORY AFTER COMPUTERIZED COGNITIVE TRAINING IN
OLDER ADULTS Erich Tusch1, Brittany Alperin3, Eliza Ryan1, Phillip Holcomb4,

Abdul Mohammed2, Kirk Daffner1; 1Brigham and Women’s Hospital / Harvard
Medical School, 2Linnaeus University, 3Oregon Health and Science University,
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

51

Poster Session A	
4

Tufts University — Computerized cognitive training (CCT) is marketed to
older individuals trying to counter the impact of aging on cognition. Both
the efficacy and neurocognitive mechanisms underlying CCT remain controversial. In this study, 35 older individuals (age=76, education=18 years,
estimated IQ=121) were randomly assigned to Cogmed adaptive working
memory (WM) training or an active control condition, 5 sessions/week,
~35 minutes/session for 5 weeks. Under adaptive training, task difficulty
is individually adjusted to achieve ~60% accuracy, whereas under the control condition, task difficulty remains the same. Before and after the 5-week
intervention, ERPs were measured while subjects participated in a visual
n-back task with 3 levels of demand (0-back, 1-back, 2-back). Given the
high intellectual capacity of participants, we expected the intervention’s
impact to be limited to the most difficult level. We hypothesized that the
adaptive training would be associated with enhancement of ERP indices
of attention and WM. The adaptive training group exhibited an increase
in the amplitude of the anterior P3a and posterior P3b under the 2-back
condition, a pattern not observed for controls. For 2-back targets, the P3
amplitude change between pre- and post-intervention sessions inversely
correlated with RT change: larger increases in P3 amplitude were associated with larger reductions in RT. This relationship was especially robust
for the P3b. Our findings suggest that adaptive WM training is associated
with increased marshalling of attention, as indexed by the P3a, and the
enhancement of categorization/WM updating processes, as indexed by the
P3b, which may be linked to improved task performance.

A67
WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY PREDICTS DIFFERENTIAL STIMULATION BENEFITS FROM TDCS AND HIGH-DEFINITION TDCS
Filiz Gozenman1, Marian Berryhill1; 1University of Nevada, Reno — Non-invasive

neuromodulatory approaches such as transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) show promise in maintaining or improving working memory
(WM). Previous work shows that transcranial direct current stimulation
(tDCS) does not affect all individuals in the same way. We previously
found that after anodal or cathodal tDCS targeting the right posterior parietal lobe, young adults with higher WM capacity (WMC) benefited more on
a visuospatial WM task than those with lower WMC. This raises two issues.
First, what mechanism accounts for different behavioral outcomes after
identical protocols? And second, for tDCS to become translational, understanding how individual differences predict tDCS-linked benefits is essential. To inform these issues we hypothesized that tDCS benefits high WMC
by diffuse cortical effects and that low WMC participants might benefit
from focal stimulation enabled by high definition tDCS (HD-tDCS). Across
two experiments, two groups of 24 young adults performed visuospatial
or verbal retro-cue (RC) WM tasks. Three sessions (tDCS, HD-tDCS, sham;
1.5 mA, 20 min), targeted right or left parietal cortex, respectively. There
was an interaction of group and session conditions such that the HD-tDCS
selectively improved the RC benefit in the low WMC group and reduced
it in the high WMC group. TDCS had little effect on either group in these
tasks. Linear regression analyses evaluating WMC continuously show that
WMC predicts the performance benefit associated with HD-tDCS. Onesize-fits-all protocols fail and WMC needs to be considered in tDCS-based
interventions. We provide a speculative attentional account for these data.

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
A68
N400 REGULARITY EFFECTS INCREASE IN SIZE ACROSS EARLY
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL Mallory C. Stites1, Sarah Laszlo1; 1State University
of New York, Binghamton — The N400 component of the event-related poten-

tial (ERP) is part of the brain’s normal response to words and other potentially meaningful stimuli. In adults, one of its most robust characteristics
during single word reading is its strong relationship with orthographic
regularity, with larger amplitude N400s being elicited by orthographically
regular items (e.g., words, pseudowords) than orthographically illegal
items (e.g., consonant strings). Despite the prominence of N400 regularity
effects, their developmental timecourse is unclear. It is unknown whether
regularity effects are present immediately at the beginning of reading
instruction, or require years to develop. In the current investigation, we
present ERP findings from a cross-sectional sample of 98 children (grades
K-4) to assess when in the course of development N400 regularity effects

52

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
emerge. Participants viewed a list of regular items (words, pseudowords)
and irregular items (acronyms, illegal letter strings) while monitoring for
own-name targets. Trial-level data was submitted to linear mixed effects
regression (LMER) analyses, to compare the magnitude of regularity effects
across successive grades. Results showed that regularity effects have a prolonged developmental timecourse, increasing in size at least until fourth
grade. Kindergarteners showed no difference between regular and irregular items; first through third graders showed a robust regularity effect, and
fourth graders showed the biggest effect. Findings suggest an initial emergence of N400 regularity effects at the beginning of formal reading instruction that continue to increase in size throughout the grade school years, as
the language processing system becomes more tuned to the orthographic
characteristics of English words.

A69
LANGUAGE QUALITY IN SCHOOL-AGE CHILDREN WITH PERINATAL STROKE: MORPHOSYNTACTIC ERRORS IN CHILDREN WITH
PARIETAL LOBE AND SUBCORTICAL DAMAGE Philip Lai1, Judy Reilly2;
1

University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2San Diego State University — Children with
Perinatal Stroke (PS) provide a unique opportunity to understand developing brain-behavior relations. This study investigated how early brain
damage affect the quality of language produced by investigating errors in
morphology during a conversation. Twenty children with PS (9 with Left
Hemisphere Injury (LHI) and 11 with Right Hemisphere Injury (RHI)) participated. Five children with PS (3 with LHI and 2 with RHI) had great
difficulty with morphology. Within the LHI group, participants #301, #302,
and #311 committed 22.2%, 46.1%, and 30.7% errors rates respectively.
Error rates were calculated by taking the number of errors over the number
of clauses produced. When examining the structures implicated, the only
similarity was parietal lobe involvement. The 6 other LHI with lower rates
of errors, 5 had no damage to the parietal lobe. A closer examination of subjects #301 and #311 showed subcortical damage as these individuals also
produced the least amount of verbal output out of all the PS children. In
the RHI group, participants #316 and #327 had 31.5% and 27.2% error rates
respectively. Participant #316 had subcortical damage while #327 had both
frontal lobe and parietal lobe damage. These results suggest that parietal
lobe involvement, especially with subcortical damage, may play a role in
the quality of language produced. This is especially true for children with
LHI and a lesser degree in children with RHI. Interestingly, 15 individuals
with PS had similar scores to the control group, suggesting the power of
neuroplasticity in the developing brain for language production.

A70
THE BDNF VAL66MET POLYMORPHISM IS ASSOCIATED WITH
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION IN THE DEVELOPING BRAIN WITH
IMPLICATIONS FOR CHILDREN’S COGNITIVE ABILITIES Kaja

Jasinska1, Peter Molfese1,2, Sergey Kornilov1,3,4, Einar Mencl1, Stephen Frost1,
Maria Lee3, Kenneth Pugh1,2,3, Elena Griogorenko1,3,5, Nicole Landi1,2,3; 1Haskins
Laboratories, 2University of Connecticut, 3Yale University, 4Moscow State University, 5University of Houston — We asked whether a common genetic variant in

the BDNF gene (the Val66Met polymorphism) affects brain function and
structure in the young brain during a critical period for the emergence and
maturation of the neural circuitry for reading. BDNF has been associated
with multiple aspects of cognition as well as structural and functional differences in the adult brain. Little is known about the impact of this BDNF
polymorphism on the structure and function of the brain in healthy development, here, we examined how the BDNF Val66Met polymorphism influences 6-10 year-old children’s reading and cognitive abilities, as well as,
brain function during reading, and brain structure (n=78). We found that
children homozygous for the Val allele at the SNP rs6265 of the BDNF gene
outperformed Met allele carriers on reading comprehension and phonological memory tasks. Further, Met allele carriers had greater activation
in reading–related brain regions (left IFG, STG, VWFA) and in the hippocampus during a word reading task suggesting increased engagement of
memory and language regions for Met carriers for reading. With respect
to structure, children who were Met allele carriers had larger right hippocampi than homozygous Val carriers. Differences in cortical thickness
and surface area in frontal, temporal and occipital cortices were observed
between homozygous Val carriers and Met carriers that correspond to dif-

2016 Annual Meeting	
ferent maturational rates and developmental BDNF expression patterns in
these regions. The Val66Met BDNF polymorphism is associated with function and structure of the developing brain and in ways that impact children’s cognitive abilities in development.

A71
RESTING-STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY PATTERNS IN
BILINGUALS REFLECT AGE OF ACQUISITION Jonathan A. Berken1,2,

Xiaoqian Chai1, Jen-Kai Chen1, Vincent L. Gracco1,2, Denise Klein1,2; 1McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, 2Centre for Research on Brain, Language,
and Music, Montreal, Quebec, Canada — Of current interest is how variations

in early language experience shape patterns of functional connectivity in
the human brain. In the present study, we compared simultaneous (two
languages from birth) and sequential (second language learned after age
5 years) bilinguals using a seed-based resting-state magnetic resonance
imaging approach. We focused on the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) as our
region of interest, as recent studies have demonstrated both neurofunctional and neurostructural changes related to age of second language acquisition in bilinguals in this cortical area. Stronger functional connectivity
was observed for simultaneous bilinguals between the left and right IFG,
as well as between the inferior frontal gyrus and brain areas involved in
language control, including the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, inferior parietal lobule, and cerebellum. Functional connectivity between the left IFG
and the right IFG and right inferior parietal lobule brain regions was also
significantly correlated with age of acquisition for sequential bilinguals; the
earlier the second language was acquired, the stronger was the functional
connectivity. In addition, greater functional connectivity between homologous regions of the inferior frontal gyrus was associated with reduced
neural activation in the left IFG during speech production. The increased
connectivity at rest and reduced neural activation during task performance
suggests enhanced neural efficiency in this important brain area involved
in both speech production and domain-general cognitive processing. Taken
together, our findings highlight how the brain’s intrinsic functional patterns are influenced by the developmental timeline in which second language acquisition occurs.

A72
INFERENCES DURING AUDITORY SENTENCE COMPREHENSION
IN THE DEVELOPING BRAIN Salomi S. Asaridou1, Özlem Ece Demir-Lira2,

Sarah Tune1, Susan Goldin-Meadow2, Steven L. Small1; 1Department of Neurology, University of California, Irvine, 2Department of Psychology, The University of
Chicago — Language comprehension involves extracting information from

sentences. These rarely appear in isolation but are embedded in a given
context. As they unfold in time, sentences provide listeners with contextual information that help them compute inferences about the meaning of
upcoming sentences. While there are several studies on how the adult brain
implements such inferences, little is known about these processes in children. In the current study, we investigated how children make inferences
during auditory sentence comprehension. fMRI data were collected from
23 children (12-14yrs old) while they listened carefully to short stories comprised of one context and one target sentence. The target sentence could
either confirm or disconfirm the expectations set up in the context sentence,
thereby decreasing or increasing inference demands (e.g. Context: “Lindsey loved warm weather.” Target: “Summer was her favorite season” vs.
“Winter was her favorite season.”). The data were analyzed using AFNI,
SUMA and Freesurfer, and group statistics were computed on the two-dimensional cortical surface. Our results show increased activation in the
transverse temporal gyri and the superior temporal gyri bilaterally with
increased inference demand. This finding is in agreement with meta-analysis data showing more activation in the auditory cortex when sentences
are less meaningful. We also found increased activation in the left inferior
frontal gyrus (pars triangularis and orbitalis), middle temporal, and angular gyrus, areas that more activated when adult listeners process real-world
violations in speech. In conclusion, children recruit neural networks similar
to those found in adults when making inferences during auditory sentence
comprehension.

Poster Session A

A73
WHITE-MATTER STRUCTURAL PLASTICITY INDUCED BY FOREIGN LANGUAGE LEARNING IN ADULTS Michelle Han1, Zhenghan Qi1,
Todd Thompson1, Keri Garel1, EeSan Chen1, Anastasia Yendiki2, John Gabrieli1;
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Massachusetts General Hospital — Sec-

ond-language learning during adulthood is exceptionally difficult. However, little is understood regarding how language learning reshapes adult
brains. In this study, we examined the structural plasticity of white matter
after intensive language training. 47 subjects were recruited and assigned to
3 groups: language-training (N=14), active control (N=19), and passive control (N=14). Diffusion-weighted images (DWI) were acquired at two time
points spaced 4 weeks apart. Between the two sessions, the language-training and active control groups took part in an intensive training regimen of
either introductory Mandarin or Multiple Object Tracking (MOT), respectively. The passive control group did not participate in either training
program. The DWI data were processed using TRACULA’s longitudinal
stream to generate maps of fractional anisotropy (FA), axial diffusivity
(AD), and radial diffusivity (RD). Whole-brain voxel-wise analyses showed
clusters of significant interaction between scan session and group at the forceps minor and the left inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF), with greater
increase of FA and more reduction of RD in the language-training group
compared to either the active control or the passive control group. Posthoc analyses confirmed a significant increase of FA in the language-training
group (forceps minor, W=-77, p=0.0067; left ILF, W=-81, p=0.0043), while
no significant change was observed in the two control groups. These data
suggest that intensive language training enhances structural connectivity
between two hemispheres as well as within the left language areas.

A74
CONSOLIDATON OF PREDICTION IN DISCOURSE AS A FUNCTION
OF CLOZE PROBABILITY IN YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS Shruti

Dave1, Trevor Brothers1, Matthew Traxler1, Tamara Swaab1; 1University of California, Davis — Electrophysiological effects of prediction benefits have been

found across age during single word, sentence, and discourse level processing (Kutas & Federmeier, 2011); a reduced N400 is found to predicted
versus unpredicted words. We assessed the effects of local and global discourse constraints on prediction in young and older readers. Two-sentence
passages ending in moderate cloze critical words were presented. While
cloze probability was held constant for each of the passages (global context), the second sentence of each passage in isolation was either low cloze
(i.e. “It is obviously a...”) or moderate cloze (i.e. “He had to ask them for
money for summer...”) for the critical words (local context). Both young and
older adults showed significant N400 effects of prediction. Both age groups
also showed a larger N400 prediction effect when cloze probability of the
critical word was primarily driven by the constraint of the first sentence of
the passages rather than by the constraint of both sentences. . We suggest
that readers may have had more time to consolidate their predictions in
passages for which the second sentence required minimal additional integration of content into the discourse representation (i.e., low cloze second
sentence). This effects was particularly pronounced for readers with high
working memory span, for both younger and older adults. This finding is
consistent with previous studies (Boudewyn, Long, & Swaab, 2013) demonstrating increased reliance on global over local context in individuals with
higher working memory spans.

A75
THE FRUIT ATTENTION TASK: A NOVEL METHOD FOR TESTING
INCIDENTAL WORD-OBJECT MAPPING Srishti Nayak1, Diletta Mittone1,
Hiba Salem1, Amanda Tarullo1; 1Boston University — Word-mapping studies
usually employ explicit instructions to remember words, or passive exposure to word-object pairs, to test learning. We developed a novel age-appropriate computerized measure of children’s incidental word-object mapping (IWM) while they are engaged in an unrelated task. We also evaluated
Age and Gender related variation in task performance. 6;0-8;0 year old
children (n=40; females=17) played the Fruit Attention Task (FAT), which
paired each of six fruit images simultaneously with a familiar (English) and
unfamiliar (Hindi) auditory-visual label for 4 seconds. On each trial, the
aim was to indicate via button press which side of the image the English or
Hindi word (counterbalanced) had appeared. Children were thus repeat-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

53

Poster Session A	
edly exposed to novel Hindi fruit labels along with familiar English words
and images, but were not required to remember them. Children completed
12 practice, and 48 test trials, followed by a 15 minute break of distractor
games and free play, before they were tested on word mapping. In the IWM
test, children matched AV Hindi fruit labels to the correct fruit, choosing
from six simultaneously presented images. Each label was randomly presented 3 times, totaling 18 trials. Mean IWM accuracy was significantly
above chance (55%), as was the mean number of fruits identified correctly
all 3 times (approximately 2). Age, but not Gender, significantly predicted
both scores. Results suggest that children learn and retain novel language
word-object pairs incidentally even with brief exposure. The FAT is thus a
promising tool for studying IWM in children, keeping in mind age-related
variation.

A76
STRUCTURAL BRAIN ALTERATIONS IN KINDERGARTENERS WITH
SPEECH SOUND DISORDERS Jennifer Zuk1,2, Bryce Becker1, Elizabeth

Norton1,3, Ola Ozranov-Palchik1, Meaghan Mauer1, Sara Beach2,3, Tiffany P.
Hogan4, John Gabrieli3, Nadine Gaab1,2,5; 1Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience, Boston Children’s Hospital, 2Harvard Medical School, 3McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 4MGH Institute
of Health Professions, 5Harvard Graduate School of Education — Speech sound

disorders (SSD) are characterized by speech production errors that often
lead to unintelligible spoken phrases, and impact roughly 1 in 7 children in
the U.S. Children with SSD often show early phonological deficits and later
co-morbidity with dyslexia, yet it remains unclear to what extent these disorders share similar underlying mechanisms. While reduced gray matter
volume indices in left-hemispheric posterior brain regions have been found
in young children at risk for dyslexia, the structural morphology of children with SSD at the kindergarten age has yet to be explored. Therefore,
the present study investigated the structural correlates of kindergarteners
with SSD compared to those with typical speech abilities while accounting
for phonological skill and risk for dyslexia. It was hypothesized that kindergarteners with SSD would show differential gray matter volume indices
in regions critical for speech production, distinct from those at risk for dyslexia. From an ongoing longitudinal investigation of 186 children with and
without risk for dyslexia, a subset of kindergarteners with and without SSD
has been retrospectively identified. Monolingual American English speaking kindergarteners completed psychometric evaluation and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and groups were matched in age, IQ, gender, phonological ability, and socioeconomic status. Kindergarteners with SSD as
compared to typical speech abilities showed structural brain differences in
gray matter regions critical to speech, including left-hemispheric basal ganglia and bilateral thalamus, insula, and inferior frontal gyrus. These preliminary findings implicate structural alterations in kindergarteners with SSD
that are distinct from typical speech abilities and risk for dyslexia.

A77
DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA: EMOTIONAL IMPACT AND CONSEQUENCES Emily M. Hirst1, Linda S. Siegel2, Urs Ribary1,2,3; 1Simon Fraser Uni-

versity, 2University of British Columbia, 3Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience
Institute, Vancouver, Canada — Dyslexia is a learning disability that requires

better support and continued research. The consequences of dyslexia and
poor recognition and diagnosis may be underestimated. We therefore conducted a comprehensive review into current literature, focusing on consequences for the (i) individual, (ii) family and (iii) society, demonstrating the
need for further research into high-quality diagnosis and intervention of
dyslexia. Based on evidence from 92 articles analyzed, dyslexia and its associated emotional outcomes speaks to the need for proper and early detection of this learning disability. Dyslexia is associated with poor outcomes
in academic, social, emotional, occupational, and economic domains. Dyslexia consists of problems with reading, spelling and writing, resulting in
various primary and secondary consequences. Such consequences are poor
academic and work performance and isolation. Emotional and self-esteem
support for individuals with dyslexia is pivotal in reducing the negative
impact of dyslexia at the level of the individual, the family, and society. The
primary and secondary consequences of dyslexia are highly related and
therefore suggest multiple avenues of support, especially including interventions (e.g. cognitive brain-based programs), academic support, early

54

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
diagnosis and education (family support, social support, and emotional
support). This analysis highlights the need for early, high-quality assessment and diagnosis of dyslexia with support for academic, emotional, and
self-esteem needs. This review further illustrates and recommends routine
screening for dyslexia at early age, proper education, support, including
behavioural and brain-imaging research to improve early and accurate
diagnostic markers for dyslexia.

A78
MATURATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN THALAMIC STRUCTURAL
ASYMMETRY IN CONTROL AND DYSLEXIC READERS Garikoitz
Lerma-Usabiaga1, Manuel Carreiras1,2, Pedro M. Paz-Alonso1; 1BCBL. Basque
Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, 2IKERBASQUE. Basque Foundation for
Science — Neuroimaging and postmortem studies with typical and atypical

readers have underscored functional and structural differences in the thalamus during reading processes (Galaburda et al., 1994; Pugh et al., 2013).
Nevertheless, there is limited evidence of the typical structural maturation
of this brain structure over development. Here, we present results from
two developmental studies aimed at investigating the structural correlates
of thalamic volume and performance on the Rapid-Automatized-Naming
(RAN) task in a group of 24 dyslexic readers and 27 matched controls (Study
I), and characterising across the life span the typical neurodevelopmental
trajectories of thalamic volume and its relation with other structures in 325
individuals (age range: 4-83 years; Study II). In Study I, our results showed
that the left-right thalamic volume asymmetry strongly predicted performance on the RAN task in dyslexic readers, not in controls, and similar
asymmetry effects were also found consistently in other structures within
the visual stream (i.e., V1 and optic radiations). Additionally, different
from dyslexic readers, control readers showed age-related changes in thalamic volume asymmetry, as well as associations between thalamic volume
asymmetry and visual cortex cortical thickness (O’Muircheartaigh et al.,
2015). Study II confirmed the structural patterns found in control readers in
Study I. Overall, our findings highlight the crucial role of the thalamus in
dyslexia and confirm the structural differences observed in controls over a
large cohort of healthy participants.

A79
A DEVELOPMENTAL ERP STUDY OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
IN OCCIPITOTEMPORAL TUNING FOR VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION Elizabeth Sacchi1, Sarah Laszlo1; 1Binghamton University — Dyslexic

individuals often evince reduced left hemisphere (LH) activation in tandem
with increased right hemisphere (RH) activation in response to visual word
forms, a pattern referred to as RH compensation. One proposed mechanism
for RH compensation is overinvolvement of the visual object recognition
system, as the increased RH activation is seen in RH object recognition
areas. Previous work in adults of varying reading abilities has supported
this hypothesis, in that poorer readers differentiate words and objects less
strongly in the RH occipitotemporal system than do better readers. The
current study aimed to explore the interaction of RH de-differentiation for
words and individual reading development. To this end, we collected ERPs
while children in grades 2-10 (who thus had a range of reading abilities)
viewed words, objects, and word/object ambiguous items (e.g., “HEART”
shaped like a heart). This design allows us to examine whether RH de-differentiation is already present in children still learning to read, and whether,
as in adults, RH differentiation of word forms varies according to children’s
reading abilities. Results replicated previous findings in adults: children
who are poorer readers show reduced differentiation of words from other
visual stimuli in the RH occipitotemporal system. We conclude that poor
RH occipitotemporal tuning for word forms is characteristic of individuals
who demonstrate poorer reading behavior even in a developmental population with substantially less reading experience than the typically reading
college students who have been studied with this design previously.

A80
BRAIN ACTIVATIONS OF LEXICAL TONE AND EMOTIONAL
PROSODY PERCEPTION IN SCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN WITH
HIGH-FUNCTION AUTISM Feng-Ming Tsao1, Wei-Chin Hsu2, Huei-Mei Liu3;
1

National Taiwan University, 2National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, 3National Taiwan Normal University — Despite normal verbal intelligence,

2016 Annual Meeting	
children with high-functioning autism (HFA) experience the difficulty in
perceiving emotional prosody, one component of pragmatic language.
However, it remains unclear whether the perceptual deficit in children with
HFA is only restrict to emotional prosody or generalized to lexical tones,
phonetic units of tonal language and having similar acoustic features (e.g.,
pitch variation) with emotional prosody. This study aimed to characterize
perceptual shift between language-specific phonetic (lexical tones) and language-general pragmatic (emotional prosody) components in children with
HFA. School-age children with HFA (n = 10, 8-12 years of age) and typically-developing (TD, n =11) children, matched with chronological age and
general intelligence, participated in this fMRI study. The fMRI tasks were
two paired experimental blocks comparing random vs. fixed target syllable
positions on emotional prosody and lexical tones: Emotion (random) vs.
Emotion (fixed), and Tone (random) vs. Tone (fixed). Same speech stimuli
of both experimental blocks were used in fMRI trials and children judged
whether emotional prosody or lexical tone in a trial were the same or different. Results revealed that perceptual difference between emotional prosody
and lexical tone was activated at Medial Frontal Gyrus (MFG, right hemisphere) in TD children, but Inferior Parietal Lobule (IPL, right hemisphere)
was activated in HFA children. Compared with TD children, HFA children
activated Posterior Cingulate when judging emotional prosody. The activation of IPL in HFA children suggest that HFA children rely more on the
sensory integration mechanism than TD children in switching judgment
between emotional prosody and lexical tones.

A81
SPEECH RHYTHM AND CORTICAL OSCILLATIONS: A STUDY IN
TYPICALLY DEVELOPING CHILDREN Hélène Guiraud1, Karim Jerbi2,

Ana-Sofia Hincapié2,3, Véronique Boulenger1; 1Laboratoire Dynamique Du Langage, CNRS/Université Lyon 2 UMR 5596, Lyon, France, 2Université de Montréal,
Montréal, Canada, 3Pontificia Universidad Catόlica de Chile, Santiago de Chile,
Chile — The current study investigates neural entrainment to speech rhythm

in typically developing children. Growing evidence shows that ongoing
brain oscillations in the theta band synchronize with slow modulations of
speech, which convey syllabic information important for comprehension.
Whether such phase-locking also occurs in children, especially for natural speech produced at a fast rate, has not been investigated. We recorded
brain activity of 15 French native right-handed children (8-13 years old)
using a 275-channel whole-head magnetoencephalography (MEG) system,
while they were listening to natural sentences produced at a normal rate
(6.76 syllables per second) or at a faster rate (9.15 syll/s). Time-frequency
analysis and coupling (coherence) between the MEG signals and speech
temporal envelope were computed with Fieldtrip toolbox. Source-level
analysis was performed with beamforming. Preliminary results show that
activity in the 4-7 Hz range increases in a left fronto-parieto-temporal network for both speech rate conditions, with a decrease of left frontal activity
for fast rate as compared to normal rate speech. Cerebro-acoustic coherence
is observed at 4-7 Hz in the right auditory cortex for normal rate speech,
whereas coupling between brain activity and fast rate speech occurs at 7-10
Hz in the right auditory and the left parieto-temporal junction, suggesting
that cortical oscillations track speech rhythm. These findings seem consistent with models suggesting a role of theta activity in the parsing of syllabic
information and in the establishment of predictions on relevant acoustic
events in speech, ensuring efficient information processing (Ding & Simon,
2014; Peelle & Davis, 2012).

A82
ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN FAMILY STRESS, LANGUAGE INPUT,
AND NEUROCOGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT: EXAMINING ENVIRONMENTAL MECHANISMS FOR BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR Samantha A.
Melvin1, Kristen Gillaspy1, Megan Wenzel1, Kimberly G. Noble1; 1Teachers College, Columbia University — The quantity and quality of language heard in

the home has important implications for children’s language and cognitive development (Weisleider & Fernald, 2013) and for the brain regions
that support these processes (Sheridan, Sarsour, Jutte, D’Esposito, & Boyce,
2012). A separate literature has examined how family stress may influence
children’s neurocognitive and brain development (Ursache, Noble, & Blair,
2015). However, rarely have the home language environment and family
stress been considered concurrently in a single study. We hypothesized

Poster Session A
that greater family stress would be associated with reduced child-directed
language spoken by parents, as well as decreases in children’s neurocognitive development. In a pilot study of 39 five- to seven-year-old children
(M = 6.34 years, 16 males) from socioeconomically diverse backgrounds,
we measured the quantity of adult language heard by children, parent-reported family stress (including measures of material deprivation, perceived
stress, and impact of recent life events) and a series of neurocognitive tests
from the NIH Toolbox, including measurements of receptive vocabulary,
executive function, and memory. Results showed that higher family stress
was associated with lower adult word count (r = -.54, p = .002) and poorer
neurocognitive performance (r = -.36, p = .039). There was no interaction
between stress and word count, and adult word count did not statistically
mediate the link between family stress and neurocognitive performance.
These findings suggest that language input and family stress may contribute independently to children’s neurocognitive development.

A83
NEUROCOGNITIVE CORRELATES OF SYNTACTIC PROCESSING IN
CHILD AND ADULT SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNERS Fatemeh Abdollahi1, Janet G. van Hell1; 1Pennsylvania State University — Second languages

(L2) are taught in millions of classrooms worldwide, but we know little
about the neural correlates of syntactic processing in L2 classroom learners, and the extent to which individual variation in cognitive abilities and
first language (L1) fluency impact L2 processing, particularly in children.
In this study, English adult (18+yr) and child (~10yr) intermediate learners
of L2 Spanish read grammatical and ungrammatical L1 and L2 sentences
of varying syntactic categories, and Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) were
recorded. In the L1, adults, but not children, showed a robust P600 effect
for all grammatical structures, indicating that processing of L1 syntax in
10yr olds is distinctly different from adults. For the L2, group-based ERP
analyses showed that adult L2 learners’ sensitivity to syntactic violations in
the L2 (i.e., P600 or N400 effects) was related to the degree of similarity with
corresponding L1 structures, but their behavioral performance (accuracy in
grammaticality judgment) was at chance. To examine individual variation
in language processing, Response Dominance Indexes (RDIs) were calculated, dividing learners into profiles of N400 or P600 dominance. Clear individual differences in response dominance during L2 processing emerged,
previously averaged out in traditional group-based analyses. Correlations
between RDI and individual difference measures of affect, executive function and working memory revealed no clear patterns. Group level ERP
analyses showed that children, unlike adults, were not significantly sensitive to syntactic violations in the L2. These results show there is great
variability in L2 learners, not captured in traditional group-based analyses.

LANGUAGE: Other
A84
LANGUAGE PROCESSING IN ARABIC DIGLOSSIA: MMN AND
N400 RESPONSES TO SHARED VERSUS NON-SHARED FEATURES IN MODERN STANDARD ARABIC AND SPOKEN ARABIC
Reem Khamis-Dakwar1, Guannan Mandy Shen2, Trey Avery2, Karen Froud2;
1
Adelphi University, 2Teachers College, Columbia University — While recent

years have shown increased brain research into multilingualism, diglossia remains poorly understood. Diglossia is a sociolinguistic situation in
which two language varieties co-exist. In Arabic, for example, spoken dialects (SA) are acquired naturally and used for daily spoken communication;
while Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) is used for formal and written communication, and taught scholastically. The few Arabic ERP studies have
focused on orthographic processing [1-5], but little work has examined cognitive representations of, and interactions between, diglossic varieties [e.g.
6, 7]. In this study, we examined phonemic and lexical processing in eight
speakers of Levantine Arabic, learners of MSA since first grade. We examined mismatch negativity (MMN) responses to Arabic phonemic contrasts
that are either shared between MSA and SA, or unique to MSA; and N400
responses to auditory lexical decision, with words either shared between
MSA and SA, or unique to MSA. Pseudowords either followed phonotactic
constraints of Arabic (“lexical pseudowords”) or used English phonotactics
(“phonological pseudowords”). Arabic speakers showed significant MMN
enhancement to shared speech contrasts. In response to MSA-only speech

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

55

Poster Session A	
contrasts, a positivity in the MMN latency range was observed. For lexical
decision, a small N400 to lexical pseudowords and a positivity to phonological pseudowords were observed. N400 differences for MSA-only real
words were evident only when proficiency and current Arabic use were
controlled for. These results highlight the need to control for diglossic factors, especially exposure to and use of MSA, in investigations of cognitive
processing for the two language varieties in Arabic diglossia.

A85
CROSS-MODAL ERP PRIMING EFFECTS IN ADULTS WITH DYSLEXIA Priya Mitra1, Marianna D. Eddy2,3, Phillip J. Holcomb1,4; 1Tufts Univer-

sity, 2U.S Army Natick Soldier Research, Development, and Engineering Center,
3
Center for Applied Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Tufts University, 4San Diego
State University — We used a cross-modal, repetition priming paradigm

in combination with the recording of event-related potentials in order to
investigate the time course of mapping orthographic units onto phonological units among both typical readers and individuals with dyslexia.
Stimuli consisted of repeated and unrelated prime-target pairs with primes
presented visually and targets presented auditorily. Pairs were comprised
of either high frequency words or pronounceable pseudowords with no
orthographic neighbors, allowing us to better distinguish lexical and sublexical mappings between orthographic and phonological representations.
As expected, typical readers show a large, widespread cross-modal priming effect for both word and pseudoword stimuli, such that unrelated
auditory targets elicit a larger N400 than repeated targets. An interaction
between group and lexical status revealed that the dyslexic group’s N400
repetition priming effects were smaller and occurred later than controls’ in
the pseudoword condition, but comparable real word priming effects were
seen in both groups. These findings suggest that individuals with dyslexia
are able to effectively map between orthographic and phonological representations at the lexical level, but may struggle to map sublexical graphemes
onto their associated phonemes. We also measured participants’ phoneme
discrimination abilities using a mismatch negativity (MMN) paradigm.
Among individuals with dyslexia, the size of the MMN correlated with the
mean amplitude of their cross-modal priming effects for real words. This
correlation was not seen in typical readers.

A86
CHANGES IN RESTING STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN PERSONS WITH APHASIA FOLLOWING SUCCESSFUL
WORD-FINDING TREATMENT Chaleece Sandberg1; 1Penn State University

— Persons with aphasia (PWA) who are trained to generate abstract words

(e.g., justice) in a specific context-category (e.g., courthouse) have been
shown to improve not only on the trained items, but also on concrete words
(e.g., lawyer) in the same context-category (Sandberg & Kiran, 2014). However, the underlying neural mechanisms of this behavioral gain are not
fully understood. To help further our understanding of this brain-behavior
relationship, the current study compares changes in resting state functional
connectivity MRI (rs-fcMRI) in PWA before and after treatment to normal
scan-scan changes in rs-fcMRI in healthy age-matched controls, using ROIROI analysis in the CONN toolbox. Ten (5 M) healthy right-handed adults,
aged 47-74 (M 62.6), and seven (5 M) right-handed PWA, aged 47-75 (M
60) and in the chronic stage of post-stroke recovery, each participated in
two fMRI scans, approximately 10 weeks apart. During the 10 week period,
PWA received word-finding treatment, but the age-matched controls did
not. As predicted, healthy adults showed few changes in rs-fcMRI from
scan to scan. However, PWA who responded to trained items, and also
generalized to nontrained items, showed more changes in rs-fcMRI than
the control group, both within and outside of the default mode network.
These results complement and extend our previous work, in which we
found increases in task-based functional connectivity related to successful treatment outcomes (Sandberg, Bohland, & Kiran, 2015), by showing
that changes in intrinsic activity can occur after successful therapy, making
rs-fcMRI a promising tool for capturing treatment-induced neuroplasticity
in PWA.

56

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

A87
BILINGUAL WORD SEGMENTATION: A CROSS-LANGUAGE ERP
INVESTIGATION. Annie C. Gilbert1, Inbal Itzhak1, Baum Shari1; 1McGill University — An extensive body of research on word segmentation across lan-

guages has shown that different languages rely on different cues and strategies to segment meaningful units from the speech stream. For instance,
English listeners tend to rely on lexical stress to locate word onsets, whereas
French listeners will use phrase final lengthening to locate word offsets.
These cross-language differences can make it difficult for L2 learners,
who cannot simply transfer their L1 strategies onto the new language, but
instead must learn a new set of cues and adopt a different approach to segmentation. To investigate this, we designed an EEG task in which EnglishFrench bilinguals listened to English and French sentences with ambiguous
syllable strings containing either two monosyllabic words (e.g. key we) or
one bisyllabic word (e.g. kiwi). Auditory sentences were produced with
context-specific natural prosody. A picture prompt representing either the
first monosyllabic word (e.g. a key), or the bisyllabic word (e.g. a kiwi) was
presented at the offset of the first syllable of the ambiguous region. Each
sentence was paired with each picture, permitting us to compare responses
to the same pictures presented with different utterances. Preliminary analyses reveal differences in early visual components to the same pictures presented in different utterance segmentation contexts, in both the dominant
and non-dominant languages, although the specific pattern of responses
varies across languages. The results are considered with regard to L2 language proficiency and cognitive demands indexed by the N1 and N2 components.

A88
BRAIN OSCILLATIONS IN BILINGUAL SPEECH PROCESSING Jon

Andoni Dunabeitia1, Manuel Carreiras1,2,3, Margaret Gillon-Dowens4, Alejandro
Pérez1; 1Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, 2University of the
Basque Country, 3Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, 4University of Nottingham Ningbo — Neuronal oscillations play a key role in auditory percep-

tion of verbal input, with the oscillatory rhythms of the brain showing synchronization with specific frequencies of speech. Here we investigated the
neural oscillatory patterns associated with perceiving native, foreign, and
unknown speech. Spectral power and phase synchronization were compared to those of a silent context. Power synchronization to native speech
was found in frequency ranges corresponding to the theta band, while no
synchronization patterns were found for the foreign speech context and the
unknown language context. For phase synchrony, the native and unknown
languages showed higher synchronization in the theta-band than the foreign language when compared to the silent condition. These results suggest
that neural synchronization patterns are markedly different for native and
foreign languages.

A89
CHANGES IN THE COMPLEX AUDITORY BRAINSTEM RESPONSES
INDUCED BY TRAINING ON A PERCEPTUAL LEARNING FOR
SPEECH TASK Stephanie Del Tufo1,2, Emily Myers1,2, Megan Speed1, Erika
Skoe1; 1University of Connecticut, 2Haskins Laboratories — While individuals

flexibly adapt to talker-specific phonetic variation, it is unknown whether
this flexibility differs in individuals with dyslexia. Perceptual learning for
speech is a paradigm that induces a reorganization of phonetic space to
accommodate new variation in speech input. In experiment one, intensive
(3-day) lexically-guided exposure (see Kraljic & Samuel, 2008) was intended
to implicitly introduce listeners to a talker in which one phoneme (either
/s/ or /sh/) was replaced with an ambiguous token (an /s/--/sh/ blend).
Following exposure, listeners performed a phonetic categorization task to
determine the extent of exposure-induced reorganization of phonetic category processing. In a mixed logistic regression the inclusion of reading
ability (typical vs. dyslexic readers) in the model significantly increased the
model fit, suggesting that typical and dyslexic readers diverge in the degree
to which they show exposure-related phonetic changes. In experiment two,
the complex Auditory Brainstem Response (cABR) was used to assess
changes in the electrophysiological response following lexically-guided
exposure. During the cABR, listeners passively listened to two phonetic
category endpoints (/s/ and /sh/) as well as the ambiguous midpoint (i.e.
50% /s/ & 50% /sh/). Following training, change in cABR encoding was

2016 Annual Meeting	
reflective of training induced phonetic reorganization (despite the acoustics remaining the same on day 1 and day 3). Specifically, the cABR for
the ambiguous midpoint moved closer to the training induced category
endpoint and away from the non-trained endpoint. Across experiments,
intensive training resulted in behavioral and electrophysiological evidence
of reorganization of phonetic space.

A90
PROCESSING ACCENTED SPEECH IN A SECOND LANGUAGE:
INSIGHTS FROM ERPS DURING SENTENCE COMPREHENSION
IN BILINGUALS Sarah Grey1, Laura C. Schubel1, James M. McQueen2,3, Janet

G. van Hell1; 1Pennsylvania State University, 2Radboud University, 3Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour — We examined the effects of accented

speech on non-native listeners’ sentence comprehension using event-related potentials (ERPs). Previous research shows that speaker identity
cues such as accent affect the neural correlates of spoken language comprehension. For example, Dutch native listeners showed equivalent N400s
for semantic processing of native- and foreign-accented Dutch speech,
and a P600 during grammatical processing of native-accented Dutch, but
no P600 for foreign-accented Dutch (Hanulikova et al., 2012); similar ERP
findings have been shown with Spanish native listeners (Romero-Rivas
et al., 2015). Native listeners such as those tested in previous studies may
use the accent cue differently than non-native listeners, who have a unique
experience as both speakers and listeners of the non-native language.We
tested 25 Dutch-English bilinguals who listened to sentences in English,
their non-native language. Sentences were spoken by a native American
English-accented speaker and a Chinese-English accented speaker while
EEG was recorded; sentences were either correct, or contained a semantic anomaly or grammatical error in the use of subject pronouns (he/she).
We analyzed comprehension accuracy and ERPs. Comprehension accuracy
was high for both accent conditions. In the American English-accented condition, ERP results showed N400s to both grammatical and semantic errors;
for semantic errors the N400 was preceded by an anterior positivity. In the
foreign Chinese-English accented condition, semantic anomalies also elicited an N400, but with a delayed onset; there were no effects for grammatical errors. These results provide insight on the effects of accented speech on
the neural correlates of non-native sentence comprehension.

A91
NUMBER JUDGMENT PERFORMANCE IS MODULATED BY TASK
IN A CASE OF NUMBER ALEXIA. Anne-Marie Schuller1,2, Samuel Di Luca1,
Charlotte Sosson1, Christine Schiltz1; 1University of Luxembourg, 2Rehazenter —

Numbers are processed in both hemispheres: Whereas the left hemisphere
allows converting the visual form of Arabic digits into verbal output, the
right hemisphere is predominantly involved in giving access to quantity representation. Here we report the case of a person with a left brain
lesion (KB), who is showing alexia for numbers, despite preserved digit
writing. Residual number processing capacities were investigated through
three computerized number judgment tasks: Parity (odd/even), magnitude (smaller/larger than 5) and ordinality judgment (before/after 5). On
192 trials, a forced-choice judgment task was done by KB on single digits,
presented in auditive and visual modality. Results demonstrate preserved
number processing capacities on auditive input. For visual input, however,
access to semantic knowledge was impaired, with KB performing at chance
level on the parity task. In the magnitude task, performance was modulated by the distance effect (linear trend F (1,23) 8.432; p <0.05), with digits
close to 5, accuracy dropped at chance level, while remoter digits (e.g. 1 or
9) where discriminated above chance (75-88%). Astonishingly, in the ordinality task KB showed an order effect (linear trend F (1,23) 8.903; p<0.005),
with better than chance accuracy for the first three digits (80%). These facilitation could result from counting strategies, acting as a topdown modulation of visual representations of digits in the right hemisphere. The results
highlight the functional difference between verbal and visual, as well as
cardinal and ordinal number processing and are discussed in the light of
the hemispherical organization of the number processing system.

Poster Session A

A92
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AN AUTISM- ASSOCIATED POLYMORPHISM ON CNTNAP2, BRAIN STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY
AND MULTISENSORY SPEECH INTEGRATION Lars A. Ross1, Victor A.

Del Bene1,2, Young Jae Woo1, Sophie Molholm1, Gizely Andrade1, Brett S. Abrahams1, John J. Foxe1,3; 1Albert Einstein College of Medicine & Montefiore Medical
Center, 2Ferkauf Graduate School of Psychology, Yeshiva University, 3The Ernest J.
Del Monte Institute for Neuromedicine, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry — There is evidence that Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)

is associated with impaired ability to integrate information from different
sensory modalities. A possible source of this deficit may be aberrant white
matter connectivity, which has repeatedly been reported in ASD. A key
question is whether behavioral differences in multisensory integration
(MSI) can be explained by ASD- associated genetic susceptibility and to
what extent this variability is mediated by structural white matter connectivity. CNTNAP2, a gene on chromosome 7 encoding a cell adhesion
protein (Caspr2) of the neurexin superfamily, has been suggested to confer
ASD risk and has frequently been associated with language development.
In this study we investigated the relationship between genotype of a single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP: rs7794745) at the CNTNAP2 locus, structural white matter connectivity as assessed by diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI) using tract based spatial statistics (TBSS), and performance on a multisensory speech integration task in a cohort of neurotypical adults. We
found significant group differences between risk and non-risk carriers in
audiovisual performance and widespread differences in fractional anisotropy (FA) in white matter tracts as well as significant correlations between
audiovisual performance and FA. Mediation analysis revealed that FA in
white matter regions in the precentral gyrus, parts of the optic radiation
and the anterior corona radiata served as mediators of the effect of genotype on performance. Our findings provide novel insights into genetic and
neurobiological sources of inter-individual variability in MSI and a possible
neurogenetic pathway for multisensory speech processing deficits in ASD.

A93
THE INFLUENCE OF LANGUAGE ON NONLINGUISTIC LEARNING Sofia Vallila-Rohter1, Swathi Kiran2; 1MGH-Institute of Health Professions,
2

Boston University — It is widely accepted that humans are capable of learning without language. Many studies have demonstrated that pre-verbal
children are sophisticated statistical learners, adept at extracting pattern
regularities from a sound stream as they acquire language (Saffran, Aslin,
& Newport, 1996; Saffran, Newport, & Aslin, 1996). As adults, however,
we engage in multiple additional types of learning, many of which require,
or benefit, from the development of verbal strategies and rules (Ashby &
Maddox, 2005; Smith & Grossman, 2008). Under other conditions, the ability to verbalize may bias adults towards implementing verbal strategies,
even when implicit, procedural, mechanisms would lead to more effective
learning (Vermaercke et al., 2014). Thus, language ability presents a potentially important factor for the execution of learning in adults. What happens,
therefore, in adulthood, when a language system that is fully developed
becomes compromised, as is the case across disorders such as Alzheimer’s,
Parkinson’s disease and aphasia? In the current study, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine the neural regions
involved when individuals with aphasia (n=8) completed feedback-based
and paired associate nonlinguistic category learning tasks. Results demonstrated a relationship between the engagement of left-hemisphere language
regions and success with feedback-based learning. This relationship was
not observed following paired-associate instruction. Results provide support for the hypothesis that instruction method can impact strategy and
neural engagement in learning. Results will be discussed in the context of
language deficits and whether participants utilize optimal strategies in the
presence of impairment.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

57

Poster Session A	

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
A94
PROSPECTIVE MEMORY: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF A CLINICAL MEASURE Sarah Raskin1, Erin Aisenberg1,
Tessa Bloomquist1, Consuelo Pedro1; 1Trinity College — Prospective memory

(PM) involves the ability to form and realize intentions after a delayed
period of time (Einstein & McDaniel, 1990). The purpose of this experiment
is to examine the relationship between a clinical measures of PM and an
event-related potential paradigm (West & Ross-Munroe, 2002). Electrophysiological data was collected while performing a computerized laboratory PM measure and was compared to a clinical measure, the Memory
for Intentions Screening Test (MIST) (Raskin, Buckheit, & Sherrod, 2011)
in healthy adults (HA), and individuals with acquired brain injury (ABI).
Results revealed that individuals with ABI performed significantly worse
than HA on all variables of the MIST except for the 24 hour task. Similar
findings were obtained for the laboratory measure performance. MIST total
score was found to be significantly correlated with performance on the laboratory task and with the formation LPC waveform, previously shown to
differentiate intention trials from ongoing trials. Both the N300 and formation LPC waveform were found to be significantly different in amplitude
between HA and ABI. The N300 was significantly correlated with eventbased PM but not time-based PM on the MIST. These findings lend support
to the notion that PM has multiple components and that the separate waveforms are correlated with separate aspects of PM.

A95
A TWO-DAY CONSOLIDATION PERIOD IMPROVES MEMORY FOR
OTHER-RACE FACES TO A GREATER EXTENT THAN MEMORY FOR
SAME-RACE FACES Bryant P. Reininger1, Greg A. Caparis1, Carly C. Reier1,
Carmen E. Westerberg1; 1Texas State University — After learning, memories are

transformed for long-term storage through systems consolidation, which
optimally occurs during sleep. During this process, memories are strengthened and undergo qualitative changes that are adaptive for survival.
Recent research indicates that the correspondence between new memories
and future goals and motivations can influence the extent of these changes.
Accordingly, memories that vary in social relevance may be differentially
impacted by consolidation. It is well documented that memory is superior for same- compared with other-race faces. This finding is frequently
attributed to motivational differences in remembering in-group versus
out-group members at encoding. Yet, the extent to which these memory
differences persist following consolidation is unknown. Here, Hispanic
and Caucasian participants studied same- and other-race faces. Recognition memory was tested immediately and after a delay that included
two nights of sleep, for which subjective sleep measures were obtained.
Whereas memories for same-race faces did not improve across the delay,
a significant improvement for other-race faces was observed. Furthermore,
this improvement was correlated with subjective sleep measures across the
delay (Experiment 1). Importantly, when immediate memory for same- and
other-race faces was equated by increasing study time for other-race faces
(Experiment 2), the same pattern of results was present, indicating that
greater perceptual expertise with same- versus other-race faces could not
account for the results. Thus, although a memory benefit for same- versus
other-race faces may initially exist, consolidation processes can counteract
such differences, suggesting that motivational factors that influence face
memory encoding are less relevant during memory consolidation.

A96
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL
MEMORY CONJUNCTION ERROR SUSCEPTIBILITY Aleea L. Devitt1,2,

Lynette J. Tippett1,2, Daniel L. Schacter2, Donna Rose Addis1,2; 1School of Psychology & Centre for Brain Research, The University of Auckland, 2Brain Research
New Zealand, 3Department of Psychology, Harvard University — Because of its
reconstructive nature, autobiographical memory (AM) is subject to a range
of distortions. One distortion involves the erroneous incorporation of features from one episodic memory into another, known as a conjunction
error. Given that healthy aging is generally associated with increased rates
of false memories, we investigated for the first time the impact of aging

58

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
on vulnerability to AM conjunction errors. We also explored potential
cognitive processes underlying the formation of these errors. A recombination paradigm was used to elicit AM conjunction errors in young and
older adults, where novel past events were imagined using recombined
details taken from authentic AMs. On a subsequent source monitoring test,
conjunction errors occurred when recombined detail sets were incorrectly
judged as depicting real memories. Participants also completed a battery
of neuropsychological tests targeting relational memory and inhibition.
Overall, older adults were more susceptible to AM conjunction errors
than younger adults. Results indicated that a decline in inhibitory control
may underlie the increased rates of AM conjunction errors with age, and
account for some of the individual variation in conjunction error susceptibility in younger adults. In contrast, relational memory functioning does
not appear to contribute to AM conjunction error rates. These findings
speak towards an overreliance on the sense of familiarity garnered by the
individual details of a conjunction lure as contributing to the formation
of AM conjunction errors. Disinhibition may also contribute to excessive
binding between details originating from separate memories by allowing
related, though irrelevant, memory traces to be activated.

A97
FORGETTING IS MORE WORK THAN REMEMBERING Tracy H. Wang1,

Katerina Placek2, Jarrod A. Lewis-Peacock1; 1University of Texas at Austin, 2University of Pennsylvania — Forgetting is often passive, but it can also be an

active process providing control over the tenure of undesired thoughts.
Prior work suggest that different strategies may underlie deliberate forgetting: direct suppression by top-down control mechanisms or active substitution of thoughts during memory rehearsal (Benoit & Anderson, 2012).
Based on these and recent findings on incidental forgetting (Lewis-Peacock & Norman, 2014), we hypothesize that deliberately induced neural
competition between memories contributes to the intentional weakening
of unwanted memories. Here, we used item-method directed forgetting
(N=20) to test whether the intention to forget produces competitive neural
dynamics that lead to weakening of memory items. Applying multi-voxel
pattern analysis to fMRI data in ventral temporal cortex revealed that item
processing was stronger following an instruction to forget vs. an instruction to remember. Moreover, neural processing of items that were intentionally forgotten was stronger compared to items that were incidentally
forgotten. Finding increased processing during directed forgetting is consistent with an active forgetting process requiring more, rather then fewer,
neural resources. Preliminary analyses identified a non-monotonic plasticity relationship between neural activity associated with the intention
to forget and subsequent memory such that items that were moderately
activated were more likely to be forgotten, compared to items that were
more weakly or more strongly processed. This relationship did not hold
for items that participants were told to remember. Together, these results
corroborate the existence of active forgetting, and suggest that the induction of competitive neural dynamics between memories may contribute to
deliberate forgetting.

A98
STIMULUS PROPERTIES MAY ENHANCE ASSOCIATION-MEMORY BY RECRUITING HIPPOCAMPAL ACTIVITY Jeremy B. Caplan1,
Chris R. Madan2,1; 1University of Alberta, 2Boston College — The hippocampus

is thought to support association-memory, particularly when tested with
cued recall. One of the most well known and studied factors that influences accuracy of verbal association-memory is imageability; participants
remember pairs of high-imageability words better than pairs of low-imageability words. High-imageability words are also remembered better in tests
of item-memory. However, we previously found that item-memory effects
could not explain the enhancement in cued recall, suggesting that imageability enhances association-memory strength. Here we report a fMRI study
designed to ask, what is the role of the hippocampus in the memory-advantage due to imageability? We tested two alternative hypotheses: 1) Recruitment Hypothesis: high-imageability pairs are remembered better because
they recruit the underlying hippocampal association-memory function
more effectively. Alternatively, 2) Bypassing Hypothesis: imageability
recruits extra-hippocampal regions to better organize the pair, enhancing
memory in a way that bypasses the hippocampus, as has been found, for
example, with explicit unitization-imagery strategies. Results found, first,
hippocampal BOLD signal was greater during study and recall of high-

2016 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session A

than low-imageability word-pairs. Second, subsequently recalled pairs had
greater hippocampal activity than subsequently forgotten pairs, but this
did not interact with imageability, challenging the bypassing hypothesis,
but consistent with the predictions derived from the recruitment hypothesis. Our findings suggest that certain characteristics of stimulus may leverage— rather than avoid— the associative function of the hippocampus to
support superior association-memory.

recollection network is generically sensitive to successful recollection, the
recollection-related activity they manifest carries information about recollected content.

A99
APPROACH AND AVOIDANCE MOTIVATION MODULATE HUMAN
SPATIAL EXPLORATION AND LEARNING IN A REAL-LIFE ENVIRONMENT Kimberly S. Chiew1, Alasdair Newson1, Laura Lerebours1, Lee K.

of California, Santa Barbara — Group-averaged fMRI results have clearly

Gans1, Jordan Hashemi1, Nathan J. Clement1, Mai-Anh T. Vu1, Guillermo Sapiro1,
Nicole E. Heller2, R. Alison Adcock1; 1Duke University, 2Dwight Center for Conservation Science, Pepperwood Foundation — Exploration and learning of large,

open-ended spaces is key to adaptive behavior, yet remains a complex computational problem for cognitive science. Prior work indicates that motivational framing has broad effects on cognition and behavior: in particular,
approach motivation may be associated with enhanced exploration and
memory of a virtual-reality environment (Murty et al., 2011), which may
be due to enhanced dopaminergic engagement under approach vs. avoidance-motivated learning (Duzel et al., 2010). We aimed to investigate these
effects outside the laboratory, by examining exploration and subsequent
memory for an art exhibit thematically focused on relationships between
humans and the natural environment. Motivational framing was manipulated via an exhibit statement at entry describing potential human response
to environmental problems in terms of gaining rewarding outcomes (Promotion condition) or avoiding punishing outcomes (Prevention condition).
The exhibit was otherwise unchanged between conditions. Participants
freely explored the exhibit and were tracked via video camera. 24 hours
later, participants returned for free recall and spatial memory tests of the
exhibit. Measures of personality, reward responsivity, and environment
attitudes were also collected. Despite equivalent exhibit exploration time
across framing conditions, profiles of exploration and movement through
the exhibit differed by motivational condition. Further, the relationship
between exploration time and subsequent memory was significant in the
Promotion, but not Prevention, condition. Similarly, personality and environmental attitudes predicted behavior only under Promotion. Thus, in
this real-world setting, the specific motivational context constrained the
expression both of individual predictors of motivated engagement with the
exhibit and of memory depth-of-encoding effects.

A100
DECODING THE CONTENTS OF RECOLLECTION WITHIN THE
CORE RECOLLECTION NETWORK Preston Thakral1, Tracy Wang2, Michael
Rugg3; 1Harvard University, 2University of Texas at Austin, 3University of Texas
at Dallas — Recollection – retrieval of qualitative information about a past

event – is associated with enhanced neural activity in a consistent set of
neural regions (the ‘core recollection network’) regardless of the nature of
the recollected content. Here, we employed multivariate pattern analysis
(MVPA) to assess whether the content of recollected information could be
decoded from retrieval-related fMRI activity in core recollection regions,
including the hippocampus, left angular gyrus, medial prefrontal cortex
and posterior cingulate. During study, participants viewed objects and
concrete words that were subjected to different study tasks. Test items
were words that corresponded to studied words, the names of studied
objects, or unstudied words. Participants judged whether the items were
recollected, familiar, or new by making ‘remember’, ‘know’ and ‘new’
responses, respectively. MVPA was restricted to voxels within regions of
the core recollection network, in each of which univariate analysis revealed
conjoint recollection effects (remember > know) for both objects and words.
Multivariate classifiers were trained with the test phase data to discriminate remember trials based on their study history (remember-object versus
remember-word trials). The classifier was then tested on a separate set of
test phase data. The study history of the remembered test items could be
reliably decoded in every core recollection region. Additional analyses
revealed that these findings did not extend to know responses. The results
indicate that while aggregate neural activity in the members of the core

A101
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES VARY ACROSS NETWORKS AND
TRIAL TYPES Benjamin Turner1, Evan Layher1, Michael Miller1; 1University

demonstrated that some patterns of task-related brain activity are common
across participants. However, this approach ignores a fundamental truth
of neuroimaging: patterns of activity are often more variable across individuals than they are consistent. Earlier work has shown that a substantial
proportion of this variability can be explained from a relatively small set of
individual difference factors, including anatomy, strategy, personality, and
so forth (Miller et al., 2012). Here, we extend this work on individual differences in two directions. First, we examine how the relationship between
brain activity and other individual differences factors varies across functional brain networks. Second, we investigate whether this relationship
differs across different trials within a given task. Our results demonstrate
unsurprisingly that both dimensions matter: the relationship between
neural similarity and similarity along other individual difference factors
depends on both the functional brain network and the putative cognitive
process. More importantly, our results suggest that the nature of these relationships is empirically interesting in its own right. For instance, there is
a greater proportion of explainable variability on trials requiring less task
engagement; the relative explanatory power of different groups of variables
differs between trials, with state of mind for instance explaining a relatively
larger portion of the variability in these lower-engagement trials; and these
relationships further vary across networks, with performance-related variables for example explaining more variability in networks proposed to be
task-engaged. Funding statement: this research was supported by the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies under grant W911NF-09-D-0001.

A102
PHASE OF SPONTANEOUS SLOW OSCILLATIONS DURING SLEEP
INFLUENCES MEMORY-RELATED PROCESSING OF AUDITORY
CUES Laura Batterink1, Jessica Creery1, Scott Cairney2, Gareth Gaskell2, Ken
Paller1; 1Northwestern University, 2University of York — Slow oscillations during

slow-wave sleep (SWS) play an important role in memory consolidation,
regulating interactions between hippocampal and cortical networks. Slow
oscillations appear as high-amplitude, synchronized EEG activity, corresponding to active up-states of depolarization and subsequent down-states
of hyperpolarization. Memory reactivations occur spontaneously during
SWS, and can also be induced by presenting learning-related cues associated with a prior learning episode during sleep. This technique, targeted
memory reactivation (TMR), selectively enhances memory consolidation.
Given that memory reactivation is thought to occur preferentially during
the slow-oscillation up-state, we hypothesized that TMR stimulation effects
would depend on the phase of the slow oscillation. Participants learned
arbitrary spatial locations for objects that were each paired with a characteristic sound (e.g., cat—meow). Then, during SWS periods of an afternoon nap, half of the sounds were presented. When object location memory
was subsequently tested, recall accuracy was significantly better for those
objects cued during sleep. We report here that this memory benefit was
predicted by slow-oscillation phase at the time of stimulation in data re-analyzed from several experiments. For cued objects, location memories were
categorized according to amount of forgetting from pre- to post-nap. Conditions of high versus low forgetting corresponded to stimulation timing at
different slow-oscillation phases, suggesting that learning-related stimuli
were more likely to be processed and trigger memory reactivation when
they occurred at the optimal phase of a slow oscillation. These findings
provide insight into the mechanisms of memory reactivation during sleep,
supporting the idea that reactivation occurs preferentially during cortical
up-states.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

59

Poster Session A	

A103
EFFECTS OF BRIEF ELECTRICAL STIMULATION TO THE AMYGDALA IN HUMANS ON MEMORY FOR NEUTRAL STIMULI Cory
Inman1, Kelly R. Bijanki1, David I. Bass1, Joseph R. Manns2, Robert E. Gross1,
Stephan Hamann2, Jon T. Willie1; 1Department of Neurosurgery, School of Medicine, Emory University, 2Department of Psychology, Emory University — Emo-

tional events are often remembered better than neutral events, and this
emotional benefit to memory depends on the amygdala, a key brain region
involved in both memory and emotion. Based on similar studies in rodents,
the present study examined whether brief electrical stimulation to the
amygdala in humans immediately following the presentation of neutral
stimuli enhances recognition memory. To determine the effects of amygdala stimulation on memory, we recruited epilepsy patients undergoing
intracranial EEG monitoring in whom either unilateral or bilateral depth
electrodes were surgically implanted in the amygdala. Subjects underwent
either sham or acute bipolar electrical stimulation to electrode contacts in
either the left or right amygdala (8 trains of 4 pulses at 50 Hz and 0.5 mA
for 1 second) immediately following presentation of neutral object photos
as local field potentials (LFPs) were simultaneously recorded. Recognition
memory was tested immediately and one day later. Preliminary results
suggest that amygdala stimulation improved subsequent recognition of
the object images at both delays. Patients were subjectively unaware of the
effects of amygdala stimulation. In summary, these findings suggest that
brief electrical stimulation to the human amygdala delivered immediately
after the presentation of neutral objects may enhance episodic memory for
neutral stimuli.

A104
IS THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE SENSITIVE TO THE TIME ORIENTATION OF MENTAL CONSTRUCTIONS? Daniela Palombo1,2, Scott

M. Hayes1,2, Kristina M. Peterson1,2, Margaret M. Keane3,1,2, Mieke Verfaellie1,2;
1
VA Boston Healthcare System, 2Boston University School of Medicine, 3Wellesley
College — The medial temporal lobe (MTL) is involved in remembering past

events as well as imagining future experiences. For instance, fMRI studies
of healthy adults demonstrate MTL engagement during future thinking and
amnesic patients with MTL damage are impaired in imagining the future.
Intriguingly, work by Andrews-Hanna and colleagues (2010) shows that
the MTL is preferentially engaged when individuals think about the future
relative to thinking about the present, suggesting that future time orientation drives MTL engagement. Yet, the observed MTL difference may be due
to differential demands on scene construction, because future probes were
more episodic and present probes were more semantic in nature. The present study explored the alternative account that scene construction, rather
than future time orientation, is responsible for the MTL difference observed
by Andrews-Hanna et al. (2010). Using fMRI, we directly contrasted MTL
activity in (1) present- and future-oriented conditions equated in scene
construction demands, and (2) high- and low-scene construction conditions equated in future thinking demands. Consistent with the alternative
account, the MTL, in conjunction with other midline regions, was more
active for high- versus low-scene construction conditions. By contrast, MTL
differences were not observed for future versus present conditions. Moreover, multivariate analyses revealed that the magnitude of MTL activation
was associated with the extent to which participants pictured a scene but
was not associated with the extent to which participants thought about the
future. These findings are important as they help disambiguate the putative
contribution of the MTL to imagination.

A105
A THETA-BURST TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION
INVESTIGATION OF THE FEELING-OF-KNOWING Anthony J Ryals1,
Jonathan T O’Neil1, Joel L Voss1; 1Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine — Feeling-of-knowing (FOK) judgments involve prospective

memory monitoring, whereby an individual must reflect on instances of
retrieval failure (i.e., misses) and then estimate the likelihood of correctly
identifying missed items later. Little is known regarding neural mechanisms for FOK judgments. Recent evidence implicates anterior prefrontal
cortex (aPFC) in memory awareness, with left aPFC lesions specifically
associated with reduced FOK accuracy. We used theta-burst transcranial

60

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
magnetic stimulation (TBS) to temporarily modulate aPFC to test for effects
of hemisphere on memory and FOK accuracy. For each subject, left and
right aPFC (Brodmann area 9) and vertex (sham) locations were identified based on structural MRI. Prior to performing associative recognition
memory tasks incorporating trial-level FOK judgments, one of these targeted locations was stimulated during each of three separate sessions (in
counter-balanced order). Preliminary findings indicate reduced recognition
memory accuracy following left aPFC TBS stimulation compared to vertex
TBS. Furthermore, trial-by-trial estimates of the accuracy of FOK judgments (i.e., correlations between FOK judgments and subsequent accuracy)
were reduced following left aPFC TBS. These findings are consistent with
those from lesion-deficit studies in small samples of individuals with aPFC
damage, highlighting the crucial role of aPFC in memory and memory
awareness. Discussion will include implications for prospective awareness
disruptions in clinical populations as well as future directions involving
additional repetitive TBS parameter manipulations.

A106
CONTEXT REINSTATEMENT CAN HELP AND HINDER EPISODIC
MEMORY: A RECONSTRUCTIVE RETRIEVAL ACCOUNT Manoj Doss1,
Jamila Picart1, David Gallo1; 1University of Chicago — Context is critical for epi-

sodic memory. The reinstatement of an encoding context at retrieval can
facilitate memory of a studied event. Although context reinstatement can
support successful, hippocampally-dependent memory retrieval, it is also
possible that context reinstatement can contribute to reconstructive processes that drive false memories. We tested this hypothesis using a recognition memory task that has been shown to engage the hippocampus. In
our paradigm, participants encoded objects superimposed over scenes (e.g.
cat on the beach) across two days separated by 24 hours. After the second
encoding session, participants were given a memory test for the objects that
included the same objects (targets; e.g. the same cat), similar objects (similar
lures; e.g. a cat posing or colored differently), or new objects (e.g. dissimilar
lures; a leprechaun), and needed to make a corresponding response from
memory (“same,” “similar,” or “new”). Additionally, context reinstatement
was manipulated at retrieval by either presenting the targets or lures on
the same scene (congruent; e.g. beach) or different scene (incongruent; e.g.
forest) as the corresponding object from encoding. Typical context reinstatement effects were observed for targets, such that hit rates were greater
for congruent compared to incongruent scenes. Critically, false alarms to
similar lures also were increased by context reinstatement, and these effects
were larger after a delay. These results suggest that context reinstatement
effects that have been attributed to the hippocampus not only support true
memory, but also can contribute to error-prone reconstructive processes at
the time of retrieval.

A107
REWARD RETROACTIVELY ENHANCES MEMORY CONSOLIDATION FOR RELATED ITEM. Vishnu Murty1, Anuya Patil2, Joseph Dunsmoor2,
Elizabeth Phelps2, Lila Davachi; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2New York University —

Murty VP, Patil A, Dunsmoor JE, Phelps EA(?), Davachi L Reward motivation is thought to enhance episodic memory in order to support future
adaptive behavior. However, information that may seem inconsequential
during encoding can gain affective significance based on future experiences. A prominent animal model of ‘behavioral tagging’ has demonstrated
that memory for neutral information can benefit from periods of enhanced
plasticity after learning via memory consolidation. We have previously
shown that fear conditioning can retroactively strengthen memory for
related information; however, these mechanisms have not yet been tested
in the appetitive domain. To investigate these processes, participants first
incidentally encoded trial-unique pictures of animals and tools. Following
this, participants underwent an instrumental conditioning session in which
novel pictures drawn from a stimulus category was associated with a higher
monetary reward than the other category. Reward contingencies were
counterbalanced across categories between participants. Participants then
performed a surprise memory test either immediately or after a 24-hour
delay. Results indicated that during the immediate memory test there was
no influence of reward on memory. However, at the 24-hour delay, reward
enhanced memory not only for items appearing during conditioning, but
also for related items presented prior to conditioning —i.e., memoranda
drawn from the same category as rewarded information. These findings

2016 Annual Meeting	
suggest that reward motivation can facilitate memory for seemingly inconsequential information by facilitating consolidation. Further, these findings
provide greater evidence for mechanisms of behavioral tagging in humans.

A108
ACROSS-SUBJECT REPRESENTATIONAL CONSISTENCY DURING
ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL OF SCENE IMAGES Erik Wing1, Benjamin
Geib1, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke University — Past research has shown that infor-

mation pertaining to stimulus identity can be detected in distributed patterns of brain activity, both during active perception and during memory
retrieval. While the majority of these analyses are performed within subjects, the feasibility of cross-subject methods (using data from one subject
to predict neural or behavioral responses in another subject) has also been
demonstrated. In the present study, we examined cross-subject representational similarity in an experiment where subjects viewed scene pictures
paired with descriptive labels at encoding and later mentally recalled the
images given only the word labels. In examining the consistency of information corresponding to perceiving individual scenes (encoding) across
subjects, we found pattern similarity increases for matched scenes in perceptual processing regions—including cuneus and lateral occipital areas—
and also in somewhat more anterior regions of ventral occipitotemporal
cortex (VOTC). An analogous comparison that focused on trials where only
scene labels were shown (retrieval) also showed effects in occipital cortex.
In addition, cross-subject consistency in encoding-retrieval similarity (ERS)
was found both in early visual cortex and in posterior midline, near retrosplenial cortex (RSC). The findings based on encoding data point towards
some measure of cross-subject consistency in brain patterns for scene perception. Consistency of stimulus-specific patterns that incorporate both
phases (ERS) may also be driven by conceptual information common to
scenes and their corresponding labels, particularly in regions like posterior
midline, which previous research has linked to supporting semantic context and conceptual relationships.

A109
HIGH VALUE LEADS TO IMPROVED EXPLICIT RECOLLECTION,
BUT REDUCED IMPLICIT MEMORY, WHEN LEARNING KALEIDOSCOPE IMAGES Michael S. Cohen1, Larry Cheng1, Ken A. Paller1, Paul
J. Reber1; 1Northwestern University — Recognition judgments typically rely

on MTL-dependent explicit memory, but in some cases, participants can
make accurate guesses seemingly driven by implicit memory (e.g., Voss et
al. 2008). These “implicit recognition” effects provide a rare opportunity
to observe interactions between implicit and explicit memory systems, but
have also proven somewhat challenging to study. Here, we use a value-directed recognition (VDR) paradigm to elicit recognition responses that
either depend on explicit memory or benefit from a contribution of implicit
memory. Two novel kaleidoscope images were shown simultaneously in
two different spatial quadrants during study, one marked high-value and
one low-value, in blocks of 16 stimuli. After each study block, participants
performed source memory (quadrant) and yes-no recognition to assess
explicit memory. Explicit memory was better for high point-value items,
likely due to increased encoding effort. After all 7 study blocks, participants
also completed a forced-choice recognition memory test, previously shown
to be more sensitive to contributions of implicit memory. Here, there was
an interaction between value and confidence, with low point-value items
tending to produce higher levels of accurate guessing on the forced-choice
test than high-value items. Thus, previously reported effects of VDR—
improved explicit memory for high-value items—extend from verbal
memory to novel, non-verbalizeable stimuli, while more robust implicit
memory contributions can be elicited from items marked low-value. This
approach will enable further investigation of the neural basis of interactions between these two forms of memory, and of when implicit memory
representations inform guesses on recognition memory tests.

A110
TARGETED MEMORY REACTIVATION DURING SLEEP WITH PREVIOUSLY IMAGINED IMAGES: NO INCREASE IN FALSE OR VERIDICAL MEMORIES. Iliana Vargas1, Ken Paller1; 1Northwestern University —

Many findings suggest that sleep is important for memory consolidation.
For example, reactivation of specific neuronal firing patterns in rats occurs
during slow-wave sleep in both the hippocampus and the visual cortex.

Poster Session A
These results imply that sensory areas involved in visual perception can be
reactivated during sleep without visual stimuli. One way to study memory
consolidation during sleep is to reactivate memories with auditory stimulation; Targeted Memory Reactivation (TMR) with sounds associated
with prior learning can strengthen memories for cued information. In this
experiment, we examined whether we could increase false memories for
imagined objects using TMR. Previous research has shown that vivid imagining can lead to false memories for imagined objects (Gonsalves & Paller,
2000). We asked participants to imagine common objects when cued with
the corresponding word. On some trials, participants saw a photograph of
the object as well as an associated sound; on other trials, they only heard
the associated sound. During the NREM portion of an afternoon nap, participants were presented with half of the sound cues for the objects that
were only imagined. Results showed no differences in false memory for
cued versus uncued imagined-only objects. In a similar experiment, we
used verbal cues during NREM sleep for objects that were both seen and
imagined, and we found that TMR did not lead to improved memory for
those objects. We thus speculate that false or veridical memories as studied
with the Gonsalves/Paller procedures are not amenable to change using
these TMR methods.

A111
EFFECTS OF POST-ENCODING STRESS ON BRAIN ACTIVITY
ASSOCIATED WITH EMOTIONAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL. Andrew

M. McCullough1, Maureen Ritchey1, Charan Ranganath1, Andrew P. Yonelinas1;
1
University of California, Davis — Studies have shown that acute stress after

learning enhances recognition memory performance, and evidence from a
variety of experimental methods suggests that stress influences memory
via the combined actions of glucocorticoid hormones and adrenergic activity (in the hippocampus and amygdala, respectively) both during and
after the encoding episode. Little is known, however, about whether those
processes translate into differences in neural activity during successful
retrieval. Thus, we used a novel fMRI paradigm to examine how post-encoding stress influences neural activity associated with successful recognition of emotional and neutral pictures. Fifty participants completed the
cold-pressor test or a control task after encoding, and recognition memory
was tested 24 hours later in the MRI scanner. A region of interest analysis
revealed that stress had selective effects on recollection-related activity for
emotional pictures. That is, stress led to significant increases in recollection-related activity in the amygdala (p<.05), as well as the anterior (p<.01)
and posterior hippocampus (p<.05) for negative emotional pictures, but did
not influence memory-related activity for neutral pictures (all p’s >.3). The
results suggest that post-encoding stress preferentially impacts the medial
temporal lobe processes involved in retrieving emotional rather than neutral materials, and support the theory that post-encoding stress influences
memory via mechanisms in both the amygdala and hippocampus.

A112
INTERACTIVE IMAGERY AND THE ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY OF
ASSOCIATION-MEMORY Yvonne Y. Chen1, Shrida S. Sahadevan1, Sandra
A. Wiebe1, Jeremy B. Caplan1; 1University of Alberta — Interactive imagery is a

highly effective strategy for learning associations between pairs of words;
for example, to remember CHAIR–CUP, one might imagine a cup on
a chair. Our group recently showed that the peg-list method, a strategy
known to be effective in memorizing serial lists, could also be adapted to
lists of pairs. To use the peg-list method, one forms interactive images combining each new list-item with one of a standardized set of pre-memorized
“peg” words, corresponding to numbers; for example, 1–BUN, 2–SHOE, …,
10–HEN. We asked, does the peg-list method operate on the same interactive-imagery process (linking CHAIR to BUN) as interactive-imagery binding the paired items themselves (CHAIR to CUP directly)? Our hypothesis
was that the ERP subsequent-memory effect for inter-item interactive imagery would resemble the subsequent-memory effect that predicted recall of
the pegs themselves. Research on expert knowledge raises an alternative
possibility, that the peg-list method operates on different cognitive processes, specialized for binding new learning onto prior knowledge. One
group studied pairs using interactive imagery, and a second group used
the peg-list method, and memory was tested with cued recall. Peg-list participants were also asked to report the peg associated with each studied
item. The subsequent-memory effect was significant for interactive-imag-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

61

Poster Session A	
ery-based cued-recall at 400-800 ms, but for item–peg recall, at 800-1200 ms.
Moreover, the topographic patterns were dissimilar between the two strategies. Our findings suggest interactive imagery binds pegs to words differently than item-item imagery, possibly exploiting the benefits of anchoring
new information to previously learned knowledge.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Other
A113
A META-ANALYTIC REVIEW OF HUMAN HABIT LEARNING Tara K.

Patterson1, Barbara J. Knowlton1; 1University of California, Los Angeles — Studies

of habit learning come in a variety of forms. Three of the most common
means of studying habits are by observing behavior during probabilistic
classification, maze navigation, and instrumental learning. Experiments
in non-human animals using maze navigation and instrumental learning
tasks have implicated the striatum in the development of habitual behavior,
and there is evidence suggesting that within the striatum, the dorsolateral
striatum (analogous to the putamen in the human brain) underlies habitual
behavior while the dorsomedial striatum (analogous to the caudate in the
human brain) underlies non-habitual, goal-directed behavior. To assess the
degree to which this functional heterogeneity is present in the human striatum, we conducted a meta-analytic review of the human fMRI experiments
that have employed these three common assays of habit behavior. We
found that in studies employing the probabilistic classification task, activations were more anterior and tended to include both caudate and putamen,
while studies employing maze navigation reported activation of the body
and tail of the caudate. Studies using an instrumental learning paradigm
reported activation of the putamen, consistent with work in non-human
animals.

A114
PAIRED ASSOCIATE ENCODING INFLUENCED BY ENTRAINED
THETA POWER Nicholas Ketz1, Randall O’Reilly1, Tim Curran1; 1Department of

Psychology and Neuroscience, University Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO — EEG

studies of long-term memory have generally shown successful encoding
to be positively correlated with theta power, and alpha and beta power
to be negatively correlated. Some studies have entrained these oscillations
through visual stimulation at the desired frequency in an attempt to induce
changes in memory performance. Results from these studies, however,
have been mixed, and the oscillatory relationships with memory can change
depending on the encoding and/or retrieval task used. We sought to clarify these issues within the encoding of paired associates, and testing with
old/new recognition followed by cued-recall in an attempt to measure both
item and associate level memory. Critically, participants were entrained
during encoding with 6Hz (theta), 10Hz (alpha), and 20Hz (beta) visual
stimulation as well a non-periodic baseline condition to test the hypothesis
that theta entrainment would increase cued-recall performance and alpha/
beta might impair performance. A behavioral study showed increased
cued-recall performance for 6Hz compared to baseline, and no other significant differences in cued-recall or recognition. A follow-up EEG study
showed a significant increase in power for each entrainment frequency in
its respective condition, however no significant differences in behavioral
performance were found. Subject level, and trial level models of entrained
power predicting memory performance showed a significant relationship
with cued-recall in the 6Hz condition only, and no relationship with recognition memory. These EEG results suggest entrained theta power enhances
the encoding of paired associates, however inconsistent behavioral results
suggest there are mitigating factors not yet accounted for.

A115
EFFECTS OF BRAIN STIMULATION ON MEMORY AND METAMEMORY. Elizabeth Chua1,2, Rifat Ahmed1; 1Brooklyn College of the City University of New York, 2Graduate Center of the City University of New York — Previous

research has shown that activity in the prefrontal and temporal cortices
correlates with successful retrieval of semantic information. Furthermore,
these regions have also been implicated in the “feeling-of-knowing” that
currently inaccessible information can be retrieved later. The goal of this
study was to use high definition transcranial direct stimulation (HD-tDCS),
a non-invasive form of brain stimulation, to determine if these regions

62

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
had a causal role in memory and the feeling-of-knowing. Participants first
attempted to recall the answer to a general knowledge question, then gave
a feeling-of-knowing (FOK) judgment, followed by a 4 alternative forced
choice recognition task. Participants completed the same task with different
questions under 3 different tDCS conditions: left frontal stimulation, left
temporal stimulation, and sham stimulation. Participants receiving tDCS
over the DLPFC showed worse recall than those receiving tDCS over the
lateral temporal cortex, t(26)=-2.31,p<0.03, but there were no differences in
recognition performance. We next examined the effects of stimulation on
FOK ratings, and there was a significant accuracy x stimulation interaction
[F(2,52)=7.52, p<0.001], with a bigger difference in FOK ratings for hits and
misses for the frontal group compared to the other groups, suggesting that
the frontal group was more metacognitively accurate. Using a trial-by-trial
measure of metacognitive accuracy, da, the frontal group showed better
FOK accuracy compared to the temporal group, t(26)=2.55, p<0.02. These
data show that HD-tDCS over the left DLPFC has effects on both memory
and metamemory.

A116
CONTEXTUAL FEAR GENERALIZATION IS MODULATED BY CONTEXT PRE-EXPOSURE AS WELL AS TIME UNTIL FEAR RETRIEVAL

Marta Andreatta1, Dorothea Neueder1, Evelyn Glotzbach-Schoon1, Andreas Muehlberger2, Paul Pauli1; 1Department of Biological Psychology, Clinical Psychology,
and Psychotherapy, University of Würzburg, Germany, 2Department of Clinical
Psychology and Psychotherapy, University of Regensburg, Germany — In animals,

an increase in time between fear acquisition and fear retrieval causes fear
generalization. Such fear generalization is prevented by pre-exposure to the
context (CTX) before its association with an aversive unconditioned stimulus (US). We investigated the effects of pre-exposure and time-passing on
human fear generalization. On Day1, 42 participants (pre-exposure group)
explored two virtual offices, while 41 participants (no-pre-exposure group)
explored a virtual stadium. On Day2, participants learned to associate
one office (CTX+) with unpredictable USs, and another office (CTX-) with
safety. On Day3, participants visited CTX+, CTX-, and a new generalization context (G-CTX). Half of the participants of each group returned either
24h (recent test) or 2weeks (remote test) later. After successful context
conditioning, we found fear generalization for verbal responses (G-CTX
was rated as negative, arousing and anxiougenic as CTX+, and more than
CTX-), but safety generalization for startle responses (startle attenuation to
CTX- and G-CTX vs. CTX+). The pre-exposure compared to the no-pre-exposure group showed facilitated extinction for verbal responses (equal
ratings for CTX+ and CTX-) presumably due to latent inhibition effects.
Moreover, memory traces of the contexts might have weakened with time
since participants of the remote test group exhibited comparable startle
responses to all three offices (fear generalization). In summary, participants
generalized fear on an explicit level (ratings), an effect that could be weakened by pre-exposure to the context but did not change with time. On an
implicit level (startle), participants generalized safety and the passage of
time caused forgetting of contextual fear.

A117
CONTINGENCY AWARENESS AS A PREREQUISITE FOR DIFFERENTIAL CONTEXTUAL FEAR CONDITIONING Patric Meyer1,2, Christian
Baeuchl1, Michael Hoppstädter1, Herta Flor1; 1Department of Cognitive and
Clinical Neuroscience, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim / Heidelberg University, 2School of Applied Psychology, SRH University Heidelberg — Contingency awareness during fear conditioning describes the

phenomenon of becoming consciously aware of the association between
a conditioned stimulus (CS) and an aversive stimulus (US). Despite the
fact that the development of contingency awareness is known to be necessary for associative learning in some conditioning paradigms, its role in
contextual fear conditioning, a variant that uses a context-CS instead of a
cue, has not been characterized thus far. We investigated in this study, if
contingency awareness is a prerequisite for contextual fear conditioning
and if subjects classified as aware differ from unaware subjects on the
hemodynamic, autonomic and behavioral level. To this end we applied a
previously developed paradigm (Baeuchl, et al., 2015) during functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and skin conductance response (SCR)
recordings. SCR analyzes revealed that only aware subjects got conditioned

2016 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session A

to the US-associated CS (CS+). Brain activity related to the CS+ was more
strongly pronounced in fear associated areas like the insula in the aware
relative to the unaware group. Finally, the hippocampus was functionally
connected to cingulate cortex and posterior medial frontal gyrus in aware
subjects relative to unaware subjects. These task-related differential connectivity patterns suggest that information exchange between the hippocampus and regions involved in expression of conditioned fear and decision uncertainty is crucial for the acquisition of contingency knowledge.
This study demonstrates the importance of contingency awareness for
contextual fear conditioning and points to the hippocampus as a potential
mediator for contingency learning.

A118
PATTERNS OF CARDIAC RESPONDING FOLLOWING INTENSIVE
MEDITATION PREDICT LONG-TERM ENCODING OF EMOTIONAL
SCENES Brandon G. King1, Anthony P. Zanesco1, Phillip R. Shaver1, Tonya L.

Jacobs1, Quinn C. Conklin1, Clifford D. Saron1; 1University of California, Davis
— Our willingness to engage in altruistically-motivated behaviors is pro-

foundly influenced by how we react when exposed to others’ distress.
Accordingly, Buddhist contemplative traditions have developed sophisticated training regimens that focus, in part, on increasing awareness and
elaborated processing of suffering in order to promote compassionate
responding. Here, we present data from a longitudinal, wait-list controlled
study examining whether intensive meditation training in a formal retreat
setting is associated with increased stimulus processing of representations
of suffering. Instruction included meditation designed to increase one’s
capacity to sustain attention over time, and to develop benevolent and
compassionate traits and attitudes. Participants passively viewed emotionally evocative images, which varied in negative thematic content (human
suffering vs. violent threat), at both the beginning and end of a three-month
training period. Cardiac waveforms, acquired over a six-second viewing
interval, were used to index stimulus salience via the orienting response.
During retreat, training participants exhibited enhanced cardiac deceleration to suffering-relevant, but not threat-relevant, stimuli; no changes were
observed in the control group across assessments. Approximately seven
years later, training participants completed a recognition task assessing
their remote emotional memory for images initially encoded at the end
of the retreat. Greater cardiac orienting during retreat predicted higher
memory accuracy and lower intensity ratings for images of suffering, but
not threat, that were initially viewed over six years prior. Overall, these
findings suggest that certain forms of contemplative training may selectively enhance the motivational significance of themes of human suffering,
promoting lasting effects on recollective experience.

A119
ANTEROLATERAL ENTORHINAL CORTEX VOLUME LOSS CORRELATED WITH ALTERED INTRA-ITEM CONFIGURAL PROCESSING Lok-Kin Yeung1, Rosanna Olsen2, Hannah Bild-Enkin1, Maria D’Angelo2,
2

2

1

1,2

Arber Kacollja , Doug McQuiggan , Anna Keshabyan , Jennifer Ryan , Morgan
Barense1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, Toronto
ON — The anterolateral entorhinal cortex (alERC) is one of the regions

affected earliest by Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathology (Khan et al, 2014).
Thus, it is of critical importance to elucidate its cognitive functions, which
would support the development of inexpensive cognitive tests for the earliest symptoms of AD. As the alERC receives inputs from the perirhinal
cortex, and projects into the CA1 subfield of the hippocampus, we theorized that it would be involved in the binding of features into complex
item/object representations. To investigate this possibility, high-resolution
T2-weighted structural scans (0.43x0.43mm in-plane) were acquired for a
group of 35 community-dwelling, ostensibly healthy older adults (59-81
years old), and manual segmentation was performed on the hippocampal
subfields (CA1, CA3/DG, subiculum) and the MTL cortices (ERC, PRC,
PHC) following the Olsen-Amaral-Palombo protocol (see Yushkevich
et al, 2015). The entorhinal cortex was further subdivided into anterolateral (alPRC) and posteromedial (pmERC) halves, following the protocol
of Maass et al (2015). Participants performed an incidental viewing task
on individual, computer-generated, configural objects (comprised of two
interchangeable halves bound together) while their eye movements were
recorded as an indirect measure of novelty. We found that alERC volume -

but none of the other MTL/hippocampal areas evaluated - was correlated
to increased viewing to the central region where the parts of the configural
object were conjoined, and decreased viewing to peripheral regions. This
suggests that changes in intra-item configural processing may serve as a
proxy for alERC dysfunction, and thus an early marker of AD detection.

A120
FOUR THE SAKE OF SPATIAL COGNITION – APOLIPOPROTEIN E
Ε4, SPATIAL PERFORMANCE, AND HIPPOCAMPAL VOLUME IN
HEALTHY YOUNG ADULTS Eva Stening1, Jonas Persson1, Elias Eriksson2,

Lars-Olof Wahlund3, Henrik Zetterberg4,5, Hedvig Söderlund1; 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Institute of Physiology and Neuroscience, Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Division of Clinical Geriatrics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology,
the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden,
5
UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, UK — The apolipoprotein

E (APOE) ε4 allele has been linked to episodic memory decline and hippocampal atrophy in both healthy and demented elderly populations. In
young adults, the association between APOE ε4 and cognition shows a
different pattern, with ε4 carriers often showing better episodic memory
compared to non-carriers. Spatial memory, however, has not been thoroughly assessed in relation to APOE in spite of its dependence on the hippocampus. Here, we assessed the effect of APOE genotype on a variety of
spatial and episodic memory tasks as well as hippocampal head, body and
tail volume, assessed through manual tracing, in young adults (20-35 years
old). We also assessed potential interactions with sex. APOE ε4 had positive
effects on spatial function and memory and object location memory, but no
effect on word recognition. Men were superior to women in spatial function and memory, but there were no sex differences in the other tasks, and
there was no interaction between APOE genotype and sex. Despite APOE
ε4 carriers excelling in spatial tasks, no difference related to genotype was
found in hippocampal volume. However, multivariate analyses on hippocampal structural covariance suggested that APOE ε4 carriers differ in how
their anterior and posterior hippocampus are related to the rest of the brain.
Our findings suggest a specific positive effect of APOE ε4 on tasks with spatial components, and fill a gap in our understanding of the relation between
APOE genotype and cognition in young age.

A121
DISTINCTIVE VIRTUAL REALITY ENVIRONMENTS PROVIDE CONTEXTUAL SUPPORT TO MITIGATE INTERFERENCE DURING THE
LEARNING OF TWO HIGHLY SIMILAR LANGUAGES Joey Ka-Yee
Essoe1, Niccolo Reggente1, Ailieen A. Ohno1, Priyanka S. Mehta1, YounJi Baek1,
Jacob Yu Villa1, Gabriel M. Hughes1, Dana Frostig1, Xin Song1, Jesse Rissman1;
1
University of California, Los Angeles — When studying multiple sets of poten-

tially confusable material, learners are often subject to interference. For
instance, if one were traveling to a foreign country where two languages
are spoken and wished to learn a common set of vocabulary in both languages, it might prove challenging to keep track of which translation went
with which language. We examined whether distinctive virtual environments (VEs) could provide learners with contextual support during encoding, such that during later retrieval of information learned in one particular
context, they could mentally reinstate that context to facilitate recall. Participants learned translations for 50 English words: 10 were learned only in
Swahili, 10 only in Chinyanja, and 30 in both languages. Participants were
divided into two groups: a Dual-Context group who learned each language
in a different VE, and a Single-Context group who learned both languages
in the same VE. Prior to cued recall for each foreign word, participants
were instructed to mentally reinstate either the VE room in which they
had learned the word (congruent) or a room in the other VE (incongruent).
When tested in a non-VE setting after an overnight delay, results revealed
that congruent context reinstatement aided Dual-Context participants’ ability to recall high interference words. In striking contrast, congruent context
reinstatement was detrimental to participants in the Single-Context group
who had learned the competing translation within the same VE. These
results demonstrate how virtual reality can provide memorable contexts,
helping to compartmentalize knowledge during learning and providing
cues for interference-resistant recall, via mental reinstatement.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

63

Poster Session A	

A122
ECOLOGICAL PROSPECTIVE MEMORY ASSESSMENT IN EARLY
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE: EVIDENCE FROM VIRTUAL REALITY Val-

entina La Corte1,2, Valentine Facque1,2, Maria Abram1,2, Agnès Michon4, Aurélie
Guignebert4, Bruno Dubois4,5, Pascale Piolino1,2,3; 1Institute of Psychology, University Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cite, France, 2INSERM UMR 894, Center of
Psychiatry and Neurosciences, Memory and Cognition Laboratory, Paris, France,
3
University Institute of France, Paris, France, 4Institut de la Mémoire et de la Maladie d’Alzheimer (IM2A), Départment de Neurologie, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière,
AP-HP, Paris, France, 5Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière (ICM), CNRS
UMR 7225- INSERM U1127 Paris, France; Sorbonne Universités, Université
Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, Paris, France — Prospective memory (PM) is the
ability to form, maintain and execute intended actions after a delay, in the
appropriate context in the future. The realization of intentions consists in
remembering that something has to be done in the future, remembering the
exact action to be executed (retrospective component) and the context in
which it has to be done (prospective component). According to the context
of the intention retrieval, three different types of PM have been defined:
time-based (TB), event-based (EB), and activity-based (AB) actions. The aim
of this study was to investigate the cognitive mechanisms underlying PM
deficits in healthy elderly subjects and in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) patients
using a naturalistic environment crated with virtual reality. Participants
walked in a virtual town comprising general urban elements such as building, traffic lights, pedestrians etc...and then they performed a retrospective
(RT) and a prospective memory tasks. Preliminary results show that AD
patients are impaired in both tasks. Nevertheless they are more impaired
in the RT compared to the PT. Within the PT they were deeply impaired in
time-based tasks compared to event-based tasks. Furthermore congruent
links between cues and actions facilitate execution of intentions in eventbased tasks. These finding suggest that virtual environments entail considerable potential for the assessment of PM in neurodegenerative diseases
and they pave the way to future applications in cognitive rehabilitation
programs focused on PM.

A123
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF NON-CONSCIOUS RECOGNITION
MEMORY Trevor T-J Chong1, Masud Husain2, Clive R Rosenthal2; 1Macqua-

rie University, Australia, 2University of Oxford, United Kingdom — Recognition

memory enables us to discriminate whether an event has occurred in the
past, and is thought to be driven by medial temporal areas, including the
hippocampus and parahippocampal cortex. Although recognition memory
is widely interpreted to reflect the conscious retrieval of episodic traces, we
recently reported evidence of recognition memory in the absence of visual
awareness for stimuli presented at study and at test (Chong, Husain &
Rosenthal (2014). Current Biology, 24, R1033-5). In the present experiment,
we used functional magnetic resonance imaging to probe the neural basis
for this effect by using a conventional study-and-test design. Participants
were presented with a series of individual words in the study phase, followed by a series of probe single-word retrieval cues in the test phase. Critically, all words in both phases were masked from visual awareness, and
participants were required to judge whether the word-based retrieval cues
were old (studied) or new (unstudied). Signal detection theory based analyses revealed that observers recognised masked old words, despite being
unaware of the stimuli in both phases. Medial temporal areas were significantly more active for subsequent hits compared to subsequent misses
(‘non-conscious subsequent memory effect’), whereas non-conscious recognition memory was associated with separate regions of the temporal cortex.
Together, these findings demonstrate that distinct temporal areas play a
role in the encoding and retrieval of mnemonic events related to non-conscious recognition memory. These results challenge current neurobiological accounts of recognition memory that are centered on the conscious
retrieval of episodic traces or familiarity.

2016 Annual Meeting

METHODS: Neuroimaging
A124
THE RELATIONSHIP AMONG GRAY MATTER CORTICAL THICKNESS, BRAIN ACTIVITY, AND BILINGUAL BACKGROUND VARIABLES Aurora I. Ramos Nunez1, David Vazquez2, Maya R. Greene1, Kelly A.
Vaughn1, Adam Felton2, Brandin Munson1, Christine Chiarello2, Arturo E. Hernandez1; 1University of Houston, 2University of California Riverside — The lexical

representations of two languages are always active in the bilingual brain
and to effectively manage two languages, the bilingual person has to select
the correct language in the correct context (Green, 1998). Cognitive control processes that might require additional brain networks beyond those
classically involved in language processing are involved. Regions such as
prefrontal, anterior cingulate cortices, inferior parietal lobule, and caudate
have been found to be involved in such processes (Abutalebi & Green,
2007). The present study examined whether or not bilingual experience
shapes the structure and function of cognitive and language regions. Participants were 49 Spanish-English bilinguals (age range = 18-34) who learned
English between 0 and 17 years of age. Cortical thickness measures were
obtained from a high-resolution T1-weighted anatomical scan. Functional
activity during a picture-naming task requiring switching between the two
languages on a trial-by-trial basis was acquired in a functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) scanner. The present study found two major
results: 1) Learning a second language early in life was related to thicker
cortex of the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), a cognitive
control region, and 2) Thicker cortex of cognitive control regions including DLPFC, inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC),
and superior temporal gyrus (STG) was associated with greater functional activity during a difficult condition that required switching between
naming pictures in the two languages. These results carry implications for
the understanding of how language experience shapes the functional and
neural correlates of the bilingual brain.

A125
FEATURE SELECTION PRIOR TO CLASSIFICATION BASED MVPA:
UNIVARIATE ANALYSIS IS NOT ALWAYS OPTIMAL Joshua Koen1,
Michael Rugg1; 1University of Texas at Dallas — Multi-voxel pattern analysis

(MVPA) has become a popular method of fMRI analysis. Given the large
number of potential features (voxels) in a typical fMRI study, researchers
frequently perform feature selection prior to MVPA, with the goal of identifying features likely to be most discriminative to the variables of experimental interest. One common approach to feature selection is to select the
voxels that show the largest differences in univariate BOLD signal between
different experimental conditions. Here, we investigated the role of such
a feature selection approach in classifier-based MVPA. Participants performed one of four tasks (Artist, Function, Pleasantness, and Vacation)
on a series of words while undergoing fMRI. For each encoding task, we
selected the 250 voxels that showed the largest “task-selective” responses
as identified by univariate contrasts, and used these four feature sets to
classify the four tasks using cross-validation. The results indicated that,
across participants, each of the four feature sets was able to accurately classify all four of the tasks. Moreover, a feature set selective for one task (e.g.,
Artist) was able to discriminate above chance between the three other tasks.
Furthermore, for two of the four feature sets, classification accuracy was no
better than it was for a random selection of 250 of the voxels that did not
belong to any of the four original feature sets. These results suggest that
the use of univariate contrasts for MVPA feature selection does not always
identify the voxels that are most diagnostic for multi-variate classification.

THINKING: Other
A126
RESTING-STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY ENCODES HIGHER-ORDER (BUT NOT LOWER-ORDER) COGNITIONS G. Andrew

James1, Tonisha E. Kearney-Ramos2, Jennifer L. Gess1, Jennifer S. Fausett1,
Clinton D. Kilts1; 1University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR,
2
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC — Growing evidence

64

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting	
suggests that functional connectivity during wakeful rest may encode cognitive ability. However, the generalization of these findings across studies and cognitive modalities is limited by between-study differences in
samples, statistical methodology, and cognitive assessments. To address
this barrier, we evaluated resting-state neural representations of clinically-validated neuropsychological assessments spanning multiple cognitions
within a large normative adult sample. Forty-five participants (mean(sd)
age=31(9.6) years; 18 male and 27 female) completed a resting-state functional MRI scan and neuropsychological assessments spanning motor,
visuospatial, language, learning, memory, attention, working memory, and
executive function performance. Robust linear regression related cognitive
performance to resting-state connectivity among 200 a priori determined
functional regions of interest (ROIs). All regressions of neuropsychological performance to resting-state connectivity (surviving false-discovery
rate correction for multiple comparisons, q≤0.05) were negative, suggesting
that functional independence among brain regions at rest facilitates cognitive performance. Furthermore, significant brain-behavior relationships
were exclusively observed for higher-order cognitions (learning, working
memory, and executive function) but not lower-order cognitions (motor
performance, visual perception, and language). Our findings are consistent
with graph theoretic analyses which characterize the brain as dynamically
reorganizing to facilitate cognitive task demand. We provide a methodologically rigorous statistical framework for mapping brain-behavior relationships in healthy adults and will translate these findings to clinical decision-making in patients with psychiatric or neurological illnesses.

METHODS: Neuroimaging
A127
WHEN MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN SIMILARITY AND GLOBAL ACTIVATION ARE INTERTWINED: ASSESSING APPROACHES TO DISENTANGLING CORRELATION FROM ACTIVATION Karen F. LaRocque1,
Tyler Davis2, Kenneth A. Norman3, Jeanette A. Mumford4, Russell A. Poldrack1,
Anthony D. Wagner1; 1Stanford University, 2Texas Tech Unversity, 3Princeton University, 4University of Wisconsin-Madison — A growing practice in functional

magnetic resonance imaging is to apply parallel univariate and pattern
similarity analyses, with univariate analyses targeting hypotheses about
a region’s engagement during events, and pattern similarity analyses targeting hypotheses about how events are represented within a region. In
order to use these two types of analyses to answer substantively different
questions about psychological and neural processing, it is necessary that
estimates of pattern similarity between experimental events are not contaminated by the magnitude of global activation elicited by these events.
Here, we use simulated data to demonstrate that global activation and
pattern similarity (as assessed by correlation), although theoretically independent, are often intertwined in practice. Specifically, we demonstrate
that increased global activation for trials within a given condition may (a)
add new shared variability or (b) increase the ability to detect pre-existing
shared variability in the patterns of activation elicited during these trials,
selectively increasing observed pattern similarity between these trials.
Given this influence of global activation on observed pattern similarity, we
then assess whether it is possible to statistically separate the contributions
of global activation and underlying pattern similarity to observed activation patterns using several popular statistical techniques — regression
approaches, matching activation across conditions, and inclusion of control
conditions. Through additional simulations, we demonstrate that the efficacy of these techniques depends on a variety of signal parameters that are
difficult to specify in practice, highlighting the need for interpretive caution
when drawing distinct inferences from univariate and pattern similarity
analyses.

A128
ELASTIC NET CLASSIFICATION OF AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER: INDIVIDUAL-LEVEL DIFFERENCES USING INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL-CONNECTIVITY OF SALIENCE- AND VALUATION-SENSITIVE NETWORKS Merage Ghane1, John A. Richey1, Ralph-Axel Müller2,
Colleen P. Chen2, Kenneth T. Kishida3; 1Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, 2San Diego State University, 3Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute

Poster Session A
— Social decision-making requires the determination of relevant informa-

tion (i.e., salience-processing) and actions that lead to optimal outcomes
(i.e., value-based decision-making). Atypical behavior related to deficits
in salience- or value-based processing has been identified in individuals
with Autism Spectrum Disorder(ASD). Individual-differences in neural
processes supporting these computations likely contribute to heterogeneity
characteristic of ASD; however, this has yet to be shown. We demonstrate
that individual-level resting-state functional connectivity(rs-fcMRI) within
and between task-relevant, a-priori defined, regions-of-interest in valuation- and salience-sensitive networks can be used to differentially classify ASD and typically-developing(TD) individuals. Our sample included
rs-fMRI data from 41-ASD(M-age=13.90, SD=2.68) and 44 matched TD(Mage=13.12,SD=2.83) adolescents. Data were preprocessed using standard
procedures. We produced a pair-wise correlation matrix between 28
regions from peak-task activation coordinates for salience-sensitive and
valuation-networks(Litt et al., 2011). Subject-level correlation-coefficients
were r-z’ transformed and separated into valuation,salience,and between
salience-valuation network connections. We trained four cross-validated
penalized logistic-regression models(two within-, one between-networks,
and one combination model) using a variable selection and model regularization approach called “elastic-net”(Zou and Hastie, 2005). Model fit was
calculated and validated on an age-matched sample of publicly available
data. Area under the curve(AUC) for each model was 0.8969, .9124, .9762,
.9978 with sensitivity and specificity of 90.24%, 73.17%, 95.12%, 97.56% and
75.00%, 100%, 93.18%, 100% respectively. Validation sample AUCs’ were
.6498, .6279, .7744, .7559 with sensitivity and specificity of 86.36%, 86.36%,
45.45%, 77.27% and 51.85%, 48.14%, 100%, 77.78% respectively. Each model
performed differentially at the individual-level, with implications for the
heterogeneous presentation and complex treatment of ASD.

A129
NETWORK REPRESENTATIONAL SIMILARITY ANALYSIS OF
VISUAL AND SEMANTIC STRUCTURE Christopher Cox1, Urvashi Oswal1,

Matthew Lambon Ralph2, Robert Nowak1, Timothy Rogers1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2University of Manchester — Representational Similarity

Analysis (RSA) seeks brain regions that encode representational similarities among stimuli. We developed a new approach for whole-brain RSA
that can discover arbitrarily structured brain networks (possibly widely
distributed and non-local) that encode similarity information. We pose
RSA as a sparsity-regularized multi-task regression problem. This allows
us to search over all subsets of voxels (not just localized clusters) to detect
similarity-encoding networks. We apply this Network RSA (NRSA) to the
analysis of simulated and real fMRI datasets. In both datasets a single set
of visual stimuli are associated with two target similarity structures---visual and semantic---specified a priori. Simulations demonstrate the kinds of
structure that NRSA is sensitive to. With real fMRI data, NRSA was used to
discover the voxels that encode these structures and to generate predicted
similarity structures to evaluate the model fit. Searchlight RSA was also
conducted. Both the predicted visual and semantic structures fit the originals better than chance. When modeling visual similarity structure, voxels
in early visual areas and middle temporal gyrii were discovered; when
modeling semantic structure, voxels in the posterior ventral temporal lobes
and the anterior temporal lobes were discovered. The Searchlight RSA discovered visual structure in early visual areas, and semantic structure in
the posterior ventral temporal lobes, but not the anterior temporal lobes.
The points of consistency between Searchlight RSA and NRSA support the
validity of the new method, while the differences highlight advantages of
NRSA and have implications for how visual and semantic structure are
encoded in the brain.

A130
PREDICTING AN INDIVIDUAL’S AGE FROM THEIR CORTICAL
STRUCTURE Christopher Madan1, Elizabeth Kensinger1; 1Boston College —

Despite inter-individual differences in cortical structure, cross-sectional
and longitudinal studies have demonstrated a large degree of population-level consistency in age-related changes in brain morphology. Our
goal was to determine how accurately we could predict an individual’s age
based on estimates of cortical structure obtained using FreeSurfer. We used
complexity of the cortical ribbon, i.e., unparcellated gray matter, quantified using fractal dimensionality analyses, as previous research has shown

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

65

Poster Session A	
cortical complexity to decrease as a function of age. This analysis outputs a
single value for each individual’s structural MRI, representing whole-brain
cortical complexity. This framework was trained using T1-weighted MRI
volumes obtained from nearly 1200 individuals, aged 18-97, collected from
multiple sites, and evaluated using two datasets obtained from independent scanning sites. We found predictions to have an average error of 12
years. As changes in cortical structure are non-linear over the lifespan, we
additionally constrained our analyses to older adults (aged 50+), reducing
our training set to 650 individuals. In held-out test samples, predictions
were off by 6 years. As it is well-known that some regions are more susceptible to cortical atrophy, we calculated regional cortical complexity,
but found minimal prediction improvement. For comparison, whole-brain
mean cortical thickness resulted in poorer predictions, errors of 14 and 7
years, respectively; regional cortical thickness did reduce age predictions
to 10 and 6 years, respectively. Thus, we were successful at obtaining reliable age predictions from cortical structure. Furthermore, despite cortical
thinning occurring differentially over the cortex, cortical complexity may
decrease similarly across the cortex.

A131
THE EFFECT OF MUSIC ON RESTING-STATE FMRI Ziyong Lin1, Elisabeth Wenger2, Simone Kühn2; 1University of Michigan, 2Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development — Previous studies have

shown that different mental states may produce changes in variability of
fMRI resting state. We investigated the effects of listening to different types
of music on 5 min resting state fMRI. We tested 29 adults (18-28 years old),
each measured with MRI over two consecutive time points, approximately
12 weeks apart. Participants were musicians recruited in Berlin, Germany.
At each time point, all participants underwent 3 resting state conditions:
no music, listening to a piece by Johann Sebastian Bach (classical), and listening to a piece by Anton Webern (atonal). The fMRI images were preprocessed and analyzed by using the DPARSF toolbox v3.1, focusing on
regional homogeneity (ReHo). The patterns of ReHo were consistent for
the two time points, that is, there was no change over time in how participants listened to the musical pieces. We observed similar patterns of ReHo
in Bach conditions compared to no music condition. Interestingly, participants showed significantly higher ReHo in bilateral temporal regions
when listening to the atonal compared to the classical pieve (left superior
temporal gyrus, peak MNI coordinate -45 30 9, 516 voxels in this cluster;
right superior temporal gyrus, peak 54 -15 3, 696 voxels; p < 0.05, with
FDR correction). One may suspect that the very unusual, atonal music of
Webern elicits a stronger, or more intense listening response indicated by
more coherence in auditory cortex than “more typical”, in our culture wellknown music such as a piece by Bach.

A132
EMPIRICAL VALIDATION OF DIRECTED FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY ACROSS FMRI AND MEG Ravi D. Mill1, Anto Bagic2, Walter Schnei-

der2, Michael W. Cole1; 1Rutgers University, Newark, 2University of Pittsburgh
— Mapping directions of influence within the human brain connectome

represents the next phase in understanding its functional architecture. To
this end, the efficacy of various methods of directed functional connectivity (or effective connectivity) have been investigated in the fMRI and
MEG literatures, primarily via recovering “ground truth” connectivity patterns embedded in simulated datasets. However, such approaches rely on
numerous assumptions in the generative models used to simulate neuroimaging data. We explore a different strategy involving empirical data in
which a ground truth directed connectivity structure could be anticipated
with confidence. Specifically, we exploited the established “sensory reactivation” effect in episodic memory, in which the retrieval of sensory information leads to reactivation of regions implicated in the perception of that
sensory modality. Subjects underwent separate fMRI and MEG scanning
whilst performing a paired associate task in which the onset of a visual
stimulus cued reactivation of its auditory associate (“Visual-Auditory”
condition), and the onset of an auditory stimulus cued reactivation of its
visual associate (“Auditory-Visual” condition). This task format enables
a powerful empirical validation by inducing a reversal in information
flow between sensory brain regions, i.e. from visual to auditory cortices
in the “Visual-Auditory” condition, and from auditory to visual cortices
in the “Auditory-Visual” condition. This reversal was successfully recov-

66

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
ered across different directed connectivity algorithms (including Granger
Causality and Bayes Network models), and across fMRI and MEG imaging
modalities. These results extend simulation studies of directed connectivity, and begin to elucidate the dynamics that integrate brain regions during
task performance.

A133
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION OF
THE SECOND GRADE BRAIN Stephen Bailey1, Laurie Cutting1; 1Vanderbilt University — Recent studies have shown that the healthy adult brain has

an efficient organization for transferring information by segregating into
functionally related “communities” that have similar patterns of activity.
Knowing how this organization arises throughout development and how
it facilitates specific cognitive skills is of crucial interest. However, few
studies have investigated individual differences in community structure.
Here, we compare the functional brain organization of a large number of
second-graders (N = 74) using a commonly-cited set of 264 whole-brain
ROIs to the original adult data (Powers et al., 2011). Six minutes of resting-state functional MRI data was acquired while children fixated on a
crosshair. Confounding signals from motion, CSF and white matter tissue
were removed using the CONN toolbox. We compared the group average
network with the community assignments from Powers et al. Community
assignment in the present dataset was largely similar (normalized mutual
information = 0.579). This suggests that on the average functional organization for second graders is largely similar to adults. However, at the individual levels, there is significant deviation from the template, as estimated
by normalized mutual information coefficients were lower (mean=0.293,
std=0.059). Upon further investigation, we found that, despite regressing
out motion from the fMRI timeseries, the total number of outlier volumes
had a significant negative correlation with the degree of mutual information (r = -0.352). These results contribute to our growing understanding
of the impact of motion on metrics of network architecture and provide
a foundation for further analysis of individual differences and cognitive
traits.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition
A134
A ROLE FOR THE AUDITORY-MOTOR DORSAL STREAM IN PROCESSING NON-WORDS Keith Doelling1, Andrew Heusser1, Gwyneth Lewis1,

Bijan Pesaran1, David Poeppel1,2; 1New York University, New York, NY, 2Max Planck
Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, Frankfurt, Germany — The role of activity in

motor and sensorimotor brain regions for perceiving speech continues to
elicit controversy. Despite claims for a causal role of motor activation in
speech perception, most studies that argue for motor effects in clear speech
use syllable discrimination tasks. These tasks arguably require fine-grained
phonemic analysis that is unnecessary in processing known words. Here
we test the hypothesis that the dorsal sensorimotor pathway is specifically
engaged when listeners process non-words – phonotactically legal items
for which the subject has no lexical-semantic entry – even in pure listening
tasks. Such a role, while not necessary for typical speech perception, would
be essential for both language development and the learning of new words
in adulthood. To test this hypothesis, we ran a 2x2 design memory experiment, contrasting words vs. non-words and heard vs. spoken items. We
provide potential evidence for a facilitative interaction between non-word
processing and speech production, perhaps reflecting use of similar neural
pathways. MEG data suggest that regions related to motor activity are also
driven by specific lexical characteristics of non-words but not words, even
in a task with no production component. Taken together, these data point
to a split of functions between the ventral and dorsal pathways in dealing with known and unknown words, respectively, presumably due to the
types of phonological analyses they provide.

A135
NEURAL CORRELATES OF PLANNING AND MONITORING DURING
MUSIC PERFORMANCE Brian Mathias1, William J. Gehring2, Caroline
Palmer1; 1McGill University, 2University of Michigan, Ann Arbor — In order to
produce complex auditory sequences such as language and music quickly
and accurately, performers engage in the planning of upcoming sequence

2016 Annual Meeting	
events, as well as the monitoring of their productions via auditory feedback. We investigated neural correlates of performers’ planning and monitoring processes by presenting altered auditory feedback during a music
performance task. Altered auditory feedback has previously been shown to
disrupt performance, particularly when feedback contents match planned
events. Pianists performed isochronous melodies from memory at a cued
production rate while EEG was recorded. Pitch feedback heard by pianists
was occasionally altered to match either an immediately upcoming Near
Future pitch (next sequence event) or a more distant Far Future pitch (two
events ahead of current event) in the sequence. The timing of pianists’ keypresses slowed down after Near – but not Far – Future feedback, suggesting greater interference of Near Future feedback with planning processes.
Greater slowing was associated with a larger feedback-related negativity
(FRN), which was elicited by both feedback types. Auditory sensory potentials elicited by the pitch event immediately following the altered auditory
feedback were enhanced (increased N1/decreased P2) following Near
Future feedback compared to Far Future feedback; these attention-related
enhancements suggest that feedback monitoring is more influenced by
the perception of auditory feedback that matches immediately upcoming
sequence events compared to more distant events. Overall, findings support a role of planning in the performance of complex musical sequences,
but suggest that planning occurs with limited scope.

A136
NEURAL PROCESSING OF MULTIPLE MELODIC VOICES: THE
ROLE OF MOTIF IDENTITY Madeline Huberth1, Takako Fujioka1; 1Stanford
University — Musical textures can contain one or multiple motifs that repeat

in different melodic lines (voices). Previous event-related potential (ERP)
studies have shown that the mismatch negativity (MMN) reflects encoding of melodic motifs. Also, when two voices sound simultaneously, the
encoding of the upper voice is advantaged. Interestingly, our recent results
showed that the upper voice advantage may extend to non-simultaneous
(i.e. alternating) voices, even if voices contain the same motif. The present
study is aimed at examining whether differentiation between upper and
lower voices is enhanced when each voice has its own motif. Thus, we
recorded electroencephalogram (EEG) from 13 musicians, and compared
MMN responses across voices and number of motifs present. For 20% of
trials in each voice, the 5th note contained a contour-changing deviant.
Within one voice, motif entry pitch varied within one-half-octave range;
the pitch separation between voices was one octave on average. Results
showed that, regardless of the number of motifs, upper voice MMN was
larger and earlier compared to lower voice MMN, replicating the upper
voice advantage seen in non-simultaneous motifs. MMN in the two-motif
condition was larger in both voices compared to the one-motif condition.
Particularly, MMN was attenuated in the lower-voice shared-motif condition. The results suggest that voices are better encoded when each has a
distinct melodic identity, perhaps because melodic identity serves to differentiate different streams similarly to other acoustic features.

A137
TIMING PREDICTABILITY OF THE UPCOMING SOUND SEQUENCE
ENHANCES REGULARITY ENCODING IN THE HUMAN AUDITORY BRAINSTEM Natàlia Gorina-Careta1,2, Katarzyna Zarnowiec1,2, Jordi

Costa-Faidella1,2, Carles Escera1,2; 1Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior
(IR3C), University of Barcelona, Catalonia-Spain, 2Brainlab - Cognitive Neuroscience Research Group, University of Barcelona, Catalonia-Spain — Neural activ-

ity in the auditory system is reduced after repeated stimulation. This phenomenon, known as repetition suppression (RS), is thought to be the neural
mechanism underlying regularity encoding, a critical function of the human
auditory system. It has been demonstrated that timing predictability influences the encoding of regularities in the auditory cortex, but its effect in a
subcortical level remains unknown. This study was set out to investigate
whether timing predictability influences the brainstem response to repetitive sounds and ascertain if RS can be observed at the auditory brainstem.
We recorded the human auditory brainstem frequency–following response
(FFR) to consonant–vowel stimuli (/wa/) delivered in two timing conditions. In the Predictable timing condition, stimuli were delivered with isochronous stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) of 366ms; in the Unpredictable
timing condition, SOA varied randomly between 183 and 549ms. When
contrasting the FFR to both timing conditions, a decrease of amplitude was

Poster Session A
found for the Predictable condition compared with the Unpredictable one.
Pitch strength values indicated a stronger phase-locking to the stimulus F0
when the timing was predictable and showed separable patterns in the two
timing conditions across the history of repetitions. Additionally, the amplitude of the FFR was more suppressed as the history of stimulus repetitions
increased, irrespectively of the timing condition. Our findings confirm that
repetition suppression is observed at the human auditory brainstem and
demonstrate, for the first time, that timing predictability of the incoming
stimulation influences the brainstem response to repetitive sounds, eliciting
a better and faster encoding of regularities.

A138
WHERE THE RHYTHM PLAYS: USING MACHINE LEARNING TO
LOCATE THE ENCODING OF RHYTHM Michael P. Notter1,2, Michael

Hanke3, Micah M. Murray1,2,4,5, Eveline Geiser1,6; 1The Laboratory for Investigative Neurophysiology (The LINE), Department of Radiology, and Neuropsychology
and Neurorehabilitation Service, University Hospital Center and University of
Lausanne, Switzerland, 2EEG Brain Mapping Core, Center for Biomedical Imaging
(CIBM), Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Psychoinformatics lab, Institute of Psychology
II, Otto-von-Guericke-University and the Center for Behavioral Brain Sciences,
Magdeburg, Germany, 4Department of Ophthalmology, University of Lausanne,
Jules-Gonin Eye Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Department of Hearing and
Speech Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA, 6McGovern Institute,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA — Hearing necessarily unfolds over time, and the brain generates auditory experiences by
integrating acoustic temporal patterns over the range of several seconds.
Differences in the relative temporal proximity between acoustic events lead
to temporal grouping perception, also referred to as rhythm. Both where
and how the brain produces the perception of rhythm remains unknown.
Most studies on rhythm perception have applied standard univariate analyses of functional MRI (fMRI). However, these types of analyses are often
unable to distinguish between different activation patterns within identical
neural populations. By contrast, a multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) is
able to identify specific spatial or temporal distributions of brain activity
associated with perceptual categories. We used PyMVPA, a python based
MVPA-toolbox, to test whether the perception of two different rhythms can
be decoded from cortical activation patterns. fMRI data were used to train
a linear SVM classifier to identify the activation pattern specific for either
rhythm. Results indicate that activation patterns within auditory cortices,
the right inferior temporal gyrus, and the premotor cortex help discriminating rhythm. For the first time, we are able to show that the auditory cortex
can distinguish between different rhythms. This finding indicates that both
sensory and higher cortical areas are involved in rhythm discrimination.

A139
SIZE MATTERS: AN ERP STUDY OF INTERVAL SIZE JUDGEMENTS
IN AUDIOVISUAL INTEGRATION Wy Ming Lin1, Kellyn Maves1, Janani Iyer1,
Psyche Loui1; 1Wesleyan University — Interval size can be determined by spa-

tial distance between two visual events or pitch distance between two auditory events. Little is known about whether neural mechanisms for determining interval size are similar or different between sensory modalities. In
this experiment, participants performed an audiovisual interval size judgment task while EEG was recorded. Auditory stimuli were small or large
pitch intervals (1-2 or 9-10 semitones respectively) and visual stimuli were
small or large distances traveled by dots on a screen. Trials were either unimodal or audiovisually congruent or incongruent. Audiovisual congruent
and incongruent trials were grouped into congruent standard/incongruent
deviant blocks and incongruent standard/congruent deviant blocks, thus
controlling for the effect of stimulus deviance. Behavioral data show significant main effects of and significant interaction between deviance and
congruence. ERPs for visual and auditory events show robust N1 effects.
The second event within an interval elicited a P300, and ERPs for deviant
and/or incongruent events elicited an MMN, which correlated with interval size. Source localization of the MMN using LORETA showed peaks
of activity centering on Brodmann Areas 47, followed by 45, 46, and 44.
Finally, ERPs for audiovisual events resemble unimodal auditory events
up to 200 ms post-stimulus, but more closely resemble unimodal visual

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

67

Poster Session A	
events at 200-600 ms post-stimulus. These results suggest an early auditory
followed by a late visual and frontal integration that together give rise to
interval size estimation.

A140
A PSYCHOPHYSICAL MEASURE OF AUDITORY IMAGINATION IN
JAZZ MUSICIANS Emily Przysinda1, Psyche Loui1; 1Wesleyan University —

Imagination is the skill of mental simulation. A core construct of imagination is creativity: the ability to produce work that is novel, useful and
desirable (Sternberg, Lubart, Kaufman, & Pretz, 2005). The current study
uses jazz improvisation as a model for understanding domain-specific creativity and imagination. We have developed a battery of behavioral and
electrophysiological tests to investigate the development of creativity and
imagination in non-musicians, classical musicians, and jazz musicians.
Specifically, in a scale imagery task (modified from Navarro-Cebrian and
Janata, 2010) we ask participants to listen to a scale (either major, harmonic
minor, or blues) and judge whether the last note is modified in pitch. Trials
are presented in a perceptual condition, where all notes play, and an imagery condition, where some of the notes are left out. This task allows us
to create a psychometric function that measures the accuracy of auditory
imagery relative to auditory perception. Preliminary data showed that all
subjects performed significantly above chance, but jazz and classical musicians are more accurate than non-musicians in auditory imagery as well
as perception. The psychometric function of jazz musicians is comparable to that of classical musicians, but showed a steeper slope compared to
non-musicians. Furthermore, all participants were more accurate on major
and minor scale trials compared to the blues scale. Together, results suggest
that classical and jazz musicians have an advantage in auditory imagery,
which may be useful in creative improvisation.

A141
STABILITY OF THE P1-N1-P2 AND T-COMPLEX OF THE AUDITORY
EVOKED POTENTIALS (AEP) TO NATURAL SPEECH IN INDIVIDUAL SUBJECTS Monica Wagner1, Colleen O’Brien1, Francesca Mingino1, Evis
Haxhar1, Zahra Hejazi1, Valerie L. Shafer2; 1St. John’s University, Queens, New
York, 2The Graduate Center, City University of New York — Atypical P1-N1-P2

and T-complex waveforms of the AEP found in individuals with auditory
processing deficits may result from an absence of a synchronized neural
response to an acoustic feature within a spoken word. Alternately, atypical sensory waveforms may result from instability in neural responding to
an acoustic feature. In the current study we assess stability of single trial
P1-N1-P2 and T-complex responses to naturally spoken non-words in 48
healthy adults. Electroencephalograms (EEG) were recorded while participants listened to the words, which contained the phoneme sequence
onsets “st”, “set”, “pt” and “pet”. Half of the single trial responses to each
word type were randomly selected and compared to the remaining half of
the responses (i.e., split epoch averages). Pearson’s correlation coefficient
was used to assess association between these split epoch averages for the
P1-N1-P2 and T-complex for each subject. Results found split epochs to be
highly correlated for the P1-N1-P2 complex and moderately correlated for
the T-complex. Root mean square (RMS) was calculated as a single measure of amplitude for each split epoch waveform. Amplitude values for the
split P1-N1-P2 and T-complex waveforms were found to be highly similar
for each subject for all word types. Also, we identified 65 single trials to
be sufficient for obtaining reliable P1-N1-P2 and T-complex waveforms to
multiple productions of natural speech. This research provides benchmarks
for future studies examining stability of cortical sensory responses in individuals with auditory processing deficits.

A142
MOTOR SYSTEM EXCITABILITY INTERACTS WITH AUDITORY
RHYTHMS IN BEAT PERCEPTION TC Chiang1, Daniel J. Cameron1, Jessica
A. Grahn1; 1Brain and Mind Institute, The University of Western Ontario, London
ON, Canada — Humans synchronize movements with the perceived, reg-

ular emphasis (the beat) in musical rhythms. Neural activity during beat
perception is dynamic, time-locked, and largely based in the motor system
(Fujioka et al., 2012; Nozardan et al., 2011). Past research has indicated that
motor system excitability may increase at particular times related to the
beat, 100 ms before, or on, the beat (Cameron et al., 2012). Here, we charac-

68

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
terized the time course of motor system excitability during beat perception.
Participants (n=15 & 14) listened to beat-based and non-beat-based auditory rhythms (35s, in three tempi, presented in random order). Single pulse
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS, 110% of motor threshold) was
applied to dominant motor cortex at specific time positions (asynchronies)
before the beat (0-20% of the inter-beat interval). Motor evoked potential
(MEP) amplitudes were recorded with electromyography from the first
dorsal interosseous muscle (FDI) to index motor system excitability. Mean
normalized MEP amplitudes were greater at beat positions (asynchrony =
0), as well as 1.25% and 2.5% before the beat, for beat-based vs. non-beatbased rhythms. This indicates that motor system excitability is dynamically
modulated, peaking just before the beat occurs.

A143
A COMPARISON OF FREE-FIELD AND HEADPHONE BASED
SOUND LOCALIZATION USING SOLOARC Amara Balhorn1, Roman

Tyshynsky1, Jacob Westerberg1, Jeremy Loebach1; 1St. Olaf College — The

SoLoArc is a free-field audiovisual localization apparatus designed to
present sound in a 180° arc from speakers placed every 5° and lights every
2.5°. The arc can be positioned for azimuth, front/back, or vertical localization. A Matlab interface allows stimuli of any frequency and intensity
to be delivered to each speaker and light independently. Here, we present
data from 3 studies, comparing free-field sound localization in the azimuth
with synthetic Interaural Level Difference (ILD) and Interaural Time Difference (ITD) cues presented over headphones. 48 normal hearing participants
completed 3 sound localization tasks: localization of a 440 Hz sinusoid with
ITDs varying +/-640 microseconds, localization of a 6000 Hz sinusoid
with ILDs varying +/- 21 dB, and a 1000 Hz sinusoid at 70 dB from the
SoLoArc, and indicated their response on a table of angles. Regression analyses revealed that while each method was related to the ideal, the free-field
localization task was more accurate (ITD: R2=.891, F(1,12)=98.924, p<0.001;
B=.858, t=9.946, p<0.001); (ILD: R2=.891, F(1,12)=98.924, p<0.001: B=.858,
t=9.946, p<0.001); (Free-field: R2=.989, F(1,12)=1047.901, p<0.001; B=.887,
t=32.371, p<0.001), and participants reported that the free-field task was
easier to complete and more natural and intuitive. Future research plans
include testing audiovisual integration in vertical and horizontal planes,
FEF activity during a saccade countermanding task.

A144
MOTIVATION AND SPEECH CATEGORY LEARNING: A
DUAL-LEARNING SYSTEMS APPROACH Y. Catherine Han1, Seth Koslov1,
W. Todd Maddox1, Bharath Chandrasekaran1; 1University of Texas at Austin
— Social and cognitive neuroscience research suggests that the brain sys-

tems involved in motivation and cognition overlap. A three-factor motivation-cognition framework was proposed by Maddox and Markman (2010)
who argued that a “fit” between global and local motivation increases frontally mediated reflective processing, whereas a “mismatch” increases striatally mediated reflexive processing. Our previous imaging work indicated
the striatum as the primary mediator of speech category learning (Yi, et al,
2014). Thus, we predict enhanced speech category learning under regulatory mismatch conditions relative to regulatory fit conditions. We tested
this prediction in native English speakers learning Mandarin tone categories under one of four conditions constructed from the factorial combination of a Global Motivation (Promotion or Prevention) manipulation with a
Local Motivation (Gains or Losses) manipulation. Promotion focused participants could earn an entry into a raffle drawing for $50 if they exceeded
a performance criterion. Prevention focused participants were given the
raffle ticket upon entry into the lab but were told that they would lose it if
they did not exceed a performance criterion. Gains condition participants
earned points on each trial with the goal of gain-maximization, and Losses
condition participants lost points on each trial with the goal of loss-minimization. As predicted, regulatory mismatch participants (Promotion-Losses
and Prevention-Gains) showed faster speech category learning than those
in a fit (Promotion-Gains and Prevention-Losses). Neurobiologically-inspired computational modeling suggested that individuals in a regulatory
mismatch shifted to a striatal, reflexive strategy more quickly than those in
a regulatory fit, and evidenced less perceptual noise.

2016 Annual Meeting	

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory
A145
SLOW AND STEADY WINS THE RACE: DOES MULTISENSORY
ENHANCEMENT IN OLDER ADULTS REFLECT SLOWER UNISENSORY PROCESSING? Samuel Couth1, Emma Gowen1, Ellen Poliakoff1;
1

The University of Manchester — Previous studies have demonstrated greater
multisensory reaction time (RT) facilitation for older adults compared to
younger. Typically, these studies compare the distribution of RTs for the
multisensory stimulus to the distribution of RTs for the unisensory stimuli
combined (i.e. the race model). For older adults, the multisensory response
probability is usually greater than that predicted by the race model (i.e. race
model violation), suggesting that multisensory enhancements are due to
coactivation (i.e. multisensory integration) of bimodal stimuli. Since ageing
is a variable process, we explored individual differences in race model violation and how this might relate to unisensory processing speed. Younger
(n=34) and older adults (n=30) made speeded responses to visual, auditory
or tactile stimuli, or any combination of these (bi-/tri-modal). The test of
the race model suggested greater coactivation of audiovisual stimuli for
older adults compared to younger, but only for individuals who demonstrated race model violation. Moreover, unisensory RTs were significantly
slower for individuals who demonstrated race model violation, and there
was a significant positive correlation between fastest unisensory RTs and
the magnitude of race model violation, for both age groups. Therefore
multisensory response enhancement may be related to slower unisensory processing, rather than integration per se. Specifically, multisensory
integration is not necessarily stronger for older adults, but rather multisensory enhancements are more observable for older adults due to their
slower responses. Nevertheless, the fact that multisensory RT facilitation is
observed for older adults with slower unisensory RTs has implications for
therapeutic interventions and technology for the elderly.

A146
FLUCTUATIONS IN PRE-STIMULUS NEURAL ACTIVITY REFLECTED
IN THE BOLD RESPONSE INFLUENCE REPORTING OF TACTILE
STIMULI Matt Craddock1, Ellen Poliakoff2, Wael El-Deredy2, Ekaterini Klepousniotou1, Donna Lloyd1; 1University of Leeds, UK, 2University of Manchester,
UK — Increasing evidence suggests that intrinsic fluctuations in ongoing

brain activity influence the probability of detecting near-threshold sensory
stimuli. We examined whether such fluctuations also influence reports
of stimuli which are not present (false alarms). During fMRI, 17 participants performed the Somatic Signal Detection Task (SSDT). In the SSDT,
near-threshold tactile stimuli are delivered alone or paired with light
flashes, which increases hit rates. Light flashes which occur without tactile
stimuli also increase false alarms. A 20ms tactile pulse was delivered at the
participant’s sensory threshold to their left index finger on tactile present
trials, either alone or with a simultaneous flash from an LED directly above
their finger. On tactile absent trials, the light sometimes appeared alone.
Participants reported whether they had felt a touch using a response box
in their right hand. In an analysis of stimulus-locked activity, we found
a significant interaction between vision and touch across multiple areas
including ipsilateral SI, SII and premotor cortex and bilateral V1. We then
examined pre-stimulus activity as a function of response. On tactile present
trials, BOLD activity was significantly greater in ipsilateral somatosensory
and premotor cortex prior to hits vs. misses and significantly greater in
extrastriate areas prior to misses vs. hits. Finally, on tactile absent trials,
pre-stimulus activity was higher for false alarms vs. correct rejections
in ipsilateral premotor cortex. Our results suggest that fluctuations in
pre-stimulus activity in ipsilateral somatosensory and premotor cortices
are a determinant of both correct detections and false alarms.

A147
FROM VISION TO VOICE: ESTABLISHING BI-DIRECTIONALITY IN
AUDIO-VISUAL INTEGRATION Colleen Paul Latzke1, Ferrinne Spector1;
1

Edgewood College — Most people do not overtly associate visual stimuli
to sounds. Nonetheless, there are established consistencies in associations
across the auditory and visual domains (e.g., lower pitch, darker colors;
higher pitch, lighter colors; Hubbard, 1996; Marks, 1974). Much of this

Poster Session A
research involves audio-visual integration, when an auditory stimulus elicits a visual response. The purpose of this study is to examine visual-audio
integration, when a visual image elicits an auditory response. By doing
this, we can examine whether cross-modal associations remain consistent
regardless of whether the stimulus is presented in the auditory or visual
domain. We created sixteen images based on form constants commonly
present in synesthetic visualizations and mild hallucinations (Betancourt,
2007; Klüver, 1926). Images came from three general categories: lattice, circular, and free-form. Participants (n = 40) viewed the images and produced
a vocal sound (≤10 seconds) that they believed to effectively “describe” the
viewed image. Vocal sounds were audio/video recorded for analysis of
relative pitch, rhythm, intervallic patterns, and melodic modality. Results
with a subset of responses (n = 11) suggest that there are systematic associations between elements of a visual stimulus and vocal response matching
those that are established cross-modal associations. For example, lighter
colored images elicited higher pitched vocalizations. These results suggest
that consistencies in associations across auditory and visual domains are
robust to bi-directionality, providing further evidence that multisensory
associations may represent a universal sensory code by which all sensory
information can be translated.

A148
TRIGGERING THE USE OF EXTERNAL SPACE IN CONGENITALLY
BLIND INDIVIDUALS Stephanie Badde1,2, Pia Ley1, Brigitte Röder1; 1Univer-

sity of Hamburg, 2New York University — When localizing a tactile stimulus,

humans automatically integrate information about its locations on the body
and within (visual) space. This process seems to partially depend on early
visual experience: Seeing and late-blind participants’ performance decreases
when body and space locations conflict, e.g., when touch is applied to
crossed hands. Congenitally blind participants do not show crossing effects
in tasks that do not require remapping of touch into external space. We
tested whether emphasizing external space could trigger integration, measured by crossing effects, in congenitally blind participants. The first task
accentuated external space by requiring participants to indicate the location
of the first of two successive tactile stimuli, each to one hand, with respect
to its side of space rather than by indicating the hand that received the
first touch. In the second variation of the task, trials randomly comprised
two tactile stimuli, two auditory stimuli, or one of each modality. A subset
of congenitally blind participants showed crossing effects in the first task,
which accentuated external space through the response mode. When external space was additionally stressed by interleaving auditory trials, crossing
effects were larger and occurred in all participants. These results suggest
that the abilities to remap tactile stimuli into external space and to integrate
the resulting coordinates can develop in the absence of vision. Rather the
automaticity of the integration process seems to critically depend on early
vision. Additionally, the results suggest that combining touch and audition
might facilitate the exploration of external space by blind individuals.

A149
DISSOCIABLE NEURAL MECHANISMS OF EXPECTING “WHAT”
AND “WHEN” IN THE AUDITORY PROCESSING STREAM Ryszard

Auksztulewicz1,2, Anna C. Nobre1, Charles E. Schroeder3,4, Wolf Singer5, Karl Friston2, Lucia Melloni3,5,6; 1University of Oxford, UK, 2University College London, UK,
3
Columbia University, NY, USA, 4Nathan Kline Institute, NY, USA, 5Max-Planck
Institute for Brain Research, Frankfurt, Germany, 6NYU Langone Medical Center,
NY, USA — The brain infers statistical regularities in the environment to guide

behavior, however whether expecting various stimulus attributes relies on
similar mechanisms remains unknown. We collected electrocorticographic
data from 6 participants undergoing presurgical diagnosis of pharmacologically resistant epilepsy. In the experimental paradigm, participants were
asked to respond to auditory stimuli, which could be predictable or not
with respect to their identity and/or temporal onset. We analyzed the auditory evoked response at grid electrodes implanted over temporal and prefrontal lobes. Significant main or interaction effects of “what” and “when”
expectancy were identified in all subjects. Object-based (“what”) predictions increased the amplitude of late (420-460ms post-stimulus) potentials
at prefrontal electrodes, while temporal (“when”) predictions increased
the amplitude of both early (180-310ms) and late (430-450ms) potentials
over prefrontal and premotor cortex. Finally, “what” and “when” predictions showed an interactive effect on the amplitude of the evoked response

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

69

Poster Session A	
(peaking at 165ms) in the superior temporal gyrus. We then employed
dynamic causal modeling to explain the observed responses. This technique enables fitting of the observed responses using biologically realistic
mean-field models of coupled dynamical systems. We based our model
architecture on three regions (sensory, prefrontal, and premotor) using
canonical cortical microcircuits, and compared alternative models of connectivity and gain modulation by object-based and time-based predictions.
In the optimized model, object-based predictions increased top-down
dependent gain modulation in sensory regions, consistent with their reliance on NMDA-dependent short-term plasticity. Temporal predictions, on
the other hand, increased the gain of premotor areas, possibly via classical
neuromodulatory mechanisms.

A150
MENTAL MOTOR IMAGERY REVEALS A DISTORTION OF THE
BODY SCHEMA IN EATING DISORDERS Juliann B. Purcell, B.A.,

MSc1,2,3, Caitlin Breslin, B.A.3, Samantha Winter, M.S.4, Nicole C. White, M.S.1,2,3,
Michael R. Lowe, Ph.D.4, H. Branch Coslett, M.D.1,2,3; 1Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 2Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, University
of Pennsylvania, 3University of Pennsylvania, 4Drexel University — One account

of eating disorders, such as anorexia and bulimua nervosa, is that they
reflect a distortion of the body schema such that one’s body is perceived as
heavier than it really is. We tested this hypothesis by asking subjects with
eating disorders and normal subjects to trace with the index finger of their
right hand or imaging tracing movements along or around 6 body parts;
we reasoned that subjects with eating disorders would imagine body parts
thought to be sensitive to distortion from eating disorders (e.g., stomach,
thigh, and buttocks) to be larger than they are, but would imagine body
parts not likely to be sensitive to distortion from eating disorders (e.g.,
head, shin, forearm) to be represented accurately. As the time to mentally
simulate actions is approximately the same as the time required to execute
the action, we predicted that the ratio of imagined to real action tracing of
the “sensitive” body parts would be larger than the ratio for “insensitive”
body parts. Participants included 41 healthy women and 42 subjects with
eating disorders, including Anorexia Nervosa (n=20), Bulimua Nervosa
(n=13), and Eating Disorder NOS (n=9). As predicted, subjects with eating
disorders, but not controls, exhibited significantly higher ratios of imagined
to real actions for the “sensitive” as compared to “insensitive” body parts.
These data support the hypothesis that eating disorders are consisted with
a distortion of the body schema in which one’s body is perceived to be
heavier than it really is.

A151
EMBODIMENT MODULATES MULTISENSORY PERCEPTION OF
VISUAL AND TACTILE STIMULI IN MOTION R. M. Joly-Mascheroni1,
Sonia Abad-Hernando1, Bettina Forster1, Beatriz Calvo-Merino1; 1City University
London, UK — This study explores how biological attributes modulate mul-

tisensory perception of stimuli in motion. Participants judged the simultaneity of two biologically congruent or incongruent events which were
perceived both visually and tactually. In all conditions, tactile stimuli
were delivered to the palms of the participants’ hands. In experiment 1,
visual stimuli could be either biologically congruent with the tactile stimuli
(two hands suggesting a clapping movement) or incongruent (geometrical shapes performing the same apparent movement). We measured the
differences in point of subjective simultaneity (PSS) during the perception
of visuo-tactile events in these two conditions. Results showed the PSS
increased significantly in the biologically congruent visuo-tactile condition, compared to the incongruent condition. In experiment 2, we further
explored the biological modulation of this effect by comparing two types of
visual biological stimuli: hands (highly congruent with the tactile stimuli)
and ears (a biological stimulus non-congruent with the tactile event to be
judged for simultaneity). Results showed an increase in the PSS for both the
visuo-tactile biologically congruent and incongruent conditions, although
the pattern of responses show this increase is larger for the hand condition. Overall results suggest that biological congruency between tactile and
visual events modulates the delay on the perception of simultaneity. The
size of this delay increases with the level of biological congruency between
the visual and tactile stimuli, suggesting that embodiment mechanisms
modulate multisensory processing.

70

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

A152
AUDIOVISUAL CUES IMPROVE SPATIOTEMPORAL MOVEMENT
ACCURACY FOLLOWING LEFT HEMISPHERE STROKE. Spenser

Haffey1, Elanor Schoomer1, Alicia MacKay1, Brian Herman1, Brenda Hanna-Pladdy1; 1University of Maryland Baltimore — Patients with limb ideomo-

tor apraxia (IMA) are impaired in retrieval of tool-use action that results
in functional dependence following left hemisphere stroke (LHD). Rehabilitation efforts for IMA have previously focused on motor as opposed
to cognitive paradigms, and thus have displayed limited utility. There is
anecdotal evidence that providing sensory cues may improve retrieval of
spatiotemporal object-action features. In this study, we evaluated skilled
movement accuracy across sensory cue conditions (verbal, auditory, visual,
multisensory) in patients with LHD (n=46) and healthy controls (n=127).
LHD patients were impaired relative to controls, with the greatest impairment for cortical relative to subcortical lesions. Patients with LHD cortical
lesions improved in accuracy across conditions, consistent with greater
access to movement representations when auditory motion attributes were
added to visual object features (multisensory cues). Furthermore, all sensory cue conditions reduced temporal errors in LHD patients with cortical
and subcortical lesion locations, while visual cues reduced spatial errors for
patients with cortical lesions. The addition of visual cues to auditory cues
reduced semantic errors for patients with LHD cortical involvement. These
results suggest that visual object features provide salient spatial cues, while
audiovisual multisensory cues provide temporal and semantic features of
object-related action. Our findings are consistent with the established relationship between auditory processing and skilled movements, evidence of
auditory mirror neurons, and the left hemisphere cortical representation of
spatial and semantic aspects of skilled movements.

A153
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS EVOKED BY CARMEN IN MUSICIANS AND DANCERS Hanna Poikonen1, Mari Tervaniemi1, Petri Toiviainen2;
1

University of Helsinki, Finland, 2University of Jyväskylä, Finland — Event-related

potentials (ERPs) evoked by simple tones in the brain have been extensively
studied. However, in reality the music surrounding us is spectrally and
temporally complex and dynamic. Thus, the research using natural sounds
is crucial in understanding the operation of the brain in its natural environment. Music is an excellent example of natural stimulation, which, in
various forms, has always been an essential part of different cultures. In
addition to sensory responses, music elicits vast cognitive and emotional
processes in the brain. When compared to laymen, professional musicians
have stronger ERP responses in processing individual musical features in
simple tone sequences, such as changes in pitch, timbre and harmony. Here
we show that the ERP responses evoked by rapid changes in individual
musical features are more intense in musicians than in laymen also while
listening to long excerpts of the composition Carmen. The P200 amplitudes are significantly larger for musicians when compared to dancers
and laymen. Interestingly, the P200 latencies of musicians are significantly
shorter whereas the latencies of laymen are significantly longer when compared to dancers. These results, gained with a novel ERP methodology for
natural music, suggest that we can take the leap of studying the brain with
long pieces of natural music also with the ERP method of electroencephalography (EEG) as has already been made with functional magnetic resonance (fMRI), these two brain imaging devices complementing each other.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
A154
METHYLPHENIDATE IMPROVES PERFORMANCE AND ALTERS
BRAIN CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN THE INSULA AND MOTOR
CORTEX DURING AND AFTER A MUSCLE FATIGUING EXERCISE.

Michael King1, Laurie Rauch1, Samantha Brooks1, Dan Stein1, Kai Lutz2,3; 1University of Cape Town, South Africa, 2University of Zurich, Switzerland, 3Cereneo
Center for Neurology and Rehabilitation, Switzerland — A central fatigue theory
proposes that motor drive is limited to maintain homeostasis. The insula
has been identified as a key structure for processing disturbed homeostasis
and the decision to terminate exercise. The insula and motor cortex (M1) are
thought to interact to limit motor drive during muscle fatigue. Stimulants,

2016 Annual Meeting	
such as Methylphenidate (MPH), can enhance motor drive during exercise.
However, the neural correlates of MPH-related force improvements are
unknown. This study examines the effect of MPH on behavioral performance and the cortical response to a muscle-fatiguing handgrip task. In
a double blind counter balanced design subjects (n=16) ingested placebo
or MPH and subsequently performed three functional magnetic resonance
imaging scans: (1) pre-task resting scan (2) task scan during handgrip and
(3) post-task resting scan. We investigated seed-based effective connectivity (EC) during the task and functional connectivity (FC) pre- and post-task.
Our results show that MPH was associated with an increase in force and
a task-related change in EC from negative to positive between the insula
and hand motor area. After the task we observed interhemispheric M1 FC
disruption, which was more pronounced in MPH conditions. Similar to our
EC findings, MPH was associated with a post-task change in FC from negative to positive correlation between the insula and hand motor area. Our
study suggests that (1) MPH can improve exercise performance (2) MPH
may lift an inhibitory influence on M1 during fatigue and (3) changes in
brain connectivity, which were altered in MPH conditions, continue after
exercise has stopped.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory
A155
MULTISENSORY INTEGRATION IN REAL TIME: STATISTICAL OPTIMALITY AND VARIABILITY Benjamin Rowland1, J. William Vaughan1, Barry
Stein1; 1Wake Forest School of Medicine — Synthesizing information from

multiple senses confers substantial benefits in detecting, localizing, and
identifying environmental events. Indeed, animals appear to use all of the
available sensory information when tested with discrete stimuli, thereby
approaching statistical optimality. The aim of the present study was to
determine whether this capability extends to human subjects dealing with
continuous events. To examine this possibility, human subjects (n=20, 12
male, 8 female) manually tracked an expanding/contracting annulus and/
or the oscillations of an FM tone. Task difficulty was increased by substantial contamination of the signal. The frequency of oscillation in one or both
modalities subtly shifted on some trials. In addition to baseline tracking
performance, we analyzed the probability and rapidity with which subjects detected changes in the underlying pattern, began their shift to a new
behavioral pattern, and re-established stable tracking. The results show
that the largest multisensory enhancements are realized in both detecting
changes and the speed of adapting to them. While the performance of most
subjects neared the predictions of the statistically-optimal model, there was
significant individual variability (albeit no significant gender difference),
with a few subjects failing to show any multisensory benefit at all. These
observations suggest that averaging across groups tends to obscure the
very different multisensory integration capabilities of different individuals,
and the fact that some may or may not engage this process in a given task.
Supported by NIH grant R03NS079849 and the Tab Williams Fund.

A156
EXPLORING THE ROLE OF BROCA’S AREA DURING MATHEMATICAL PROCESSING Xiaofang Yang1, Amy Daitch1, Dhruba Banerjee2,
Josef Parvizi1; 1Stanford University, 2The University of California, Irvine — We

recorded electrocorticography (ECoG) signals in patients implanted with
intracranial electrodes in the left frontal lobe when they were performing
numerical tasks with different complexity, including reading of single
and double numerals and English words, or solving math equations. We
also recorded from Broca’s area when participating patients listened and
recalled stories with numerical words (such as numerals, ordinals, and
quantifiers). Pathological electrodes were excluded during pre-processing,
and high-frequency broadband (HFB) signals were extracted to examine
the dynamics of brain activity. The results showed a significant increase
of HFB activity in Broca’s area with anatomical selectivity when patients
were solving math equations. Distinctive HFB responses were also found
in sub-regions of Broca’s area during three processing stages when subjects
were reading numerals and number words versus non-number words with
similar phonological features. Moreover, when patients were listening to
narrative stories or recalling them, the occurrence of HFB activity in Broca’s area had significant co-occurrence with the presence of ordinals and

Poster Session A
quantifiers compared to numerals. This study provides novel evidence that
Broca’s area may be playing an important role in processing mathematical
concepts.

A157
AGE-RELATED COMPENSATORY NEURAL NETWORKS IN MULTISENSORY INTEGRATION Brenda Hanna-Pladdy1, Hyun Choi1; 1University of

Maryland Baltimore — Age-related neural changes can reflect either difficulty

recruiting specialized neural networks or plastic reorganization such as
bilateral recruitment for compensation. To elucidate the neural mechanisms
of multisensory representations in aging, we developed an event-related
fMRI study to identify the neural substrates of audiovisual tool-use representations. The current study evaluated BOLD signal while 14 young (ages
23-35) and 14 older adults (ages 60-74) made decisions about spatiotemporal aspects of limb movements in response to pictorial images and action
sounds of 25 manipulable objects. The paradigm contrasted multisensory
conditions with either congruent or incongruent audiovisual stimuli. The
incongruent condition required reliance on action sounds and inhibition
of mismatched object images during movement decisions. Younger adults
displayed greater activations for left primary striate and left inferior and
superior parietal regions during both multisensory conditions, but greater
bilateral parietal activation during the multisensory incongruent condition.
Older adults recruited additional bilateral cingulate and right superior
temporal regions across multisensory conditions, but greater right anterior
temporal and bilateral inferior frontal regions during audiovisual integration. During the incongruent condition, older adults had additional activations in the right orbitofrontal, right hippocampal and amygdala regions.
Brain activation patterns for younger adults revealed the expected left posterior cortical network for spatiotemporal movement features, but greater
bilateral parietal activations during auditory modulation of multisensory
movement representations. The pattern of activations in older adults
was consistent with compensatory mechanisms of hemispheric reduction
during audiovisual integration as well as during auditory modulation of
multisensory contextual information.

THINKING: Decision making
A158
EFFECT OF CHOICE DIFFICULTY ON LOCAL FIELD POTENTIALS
IN FRONTAL EYE FIELD OF NONHUMAN PRIMATES Jacob Westerberg1, Paul Middlebrooks2, Jeffrey Schall2; 1St. Olaf College, 2Vanderbilt University — This study continues an investigation of the role of the frontal eye

field (FEF) in perceptual decision-making. Here we report an analysis of the
local field potentials recorded in FEF activity of monkeys performing a saccade choice countermanding task. A trial began when the monkey fixated
a spot in the center of the screen. After fixation, two targets appeared in
the periphery. After the targets appeared, a 10 by 10 cyan/magenta checkerboard appeared. Saccade choice was specified by the fraction of cyan
and magenta in the checkerboard. Choice difficulty was varied between
trials by varying the fraction of cyan and magenta. On a subset of trials, a
stop signal instructed monkeys to cancel the saccade. Here we report that
evoked local field potential power varied as a function of choice difficulty.
This result indicates that the neural correlates of choice difficulty can be
measured across multiple levels of analyses.

A159
NETWORK ORGANIZATION OF THE THE BRAIN IN THE IOWA
GAMBLING TASK Taylor Bolt1, Paul Laurienti2, Robert Lyday2, Ashley
Morgan2, Dale Dagenbach1; 1Wake Forest University, 2Wake Forest School of
Medicine — Changes in functional brain network organization between rest

and a complex decision-making state (Iowa Gambling Task) were examined using graph-theoretical based analyses of fMRI data. While previous
functional neuroimaging studies have examined task-based activations
during the Iowa Gambling Task, changes in network organization have not
been explored. In this study, a repeated measures design was used in which
participants were scanned during four alternating sessions of rest and the
IGT allowing assessment of changes in network organization across sessions of the same task as well as changes between tasks. Global network
organization shifted from a local, clustered organization (high connectivity

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

71

Poster Session A	
among neighboring nodes) at rest to a more global, integrated organization
(high efficiency of information transfer across the network) during the Iowa
Gambling Task. In addition, network organization was relatively stable
(did not change) across sessions of the rest and the Iowa Gambling Task.
Regional analyses of the Default Mode Network and Fronto-Parietal Network revealed differential patterns of change in regional network organization from rest to the Iowa Gambling Task. The degree of locally clustered
organization in the Fronto-Parietal Network was negatively correlated with
performance in the Iowa Gambling Task, consistent with its role as a global
hub of cognitive control. The results suggest that global and regional network organization is significantly modulated between states, but also and
fairly stable over time across sessions of the same task. In addition, these
results suggest that graph-theoretical approaches may be fruitfully applied
to the study of other cognitive tasks.

A160
MULTIDIMENSIONAL MESSAGE FEATURES MODULATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN THE PERSUASION NETWORK Richard

Huskey1, J. Michael Mangus1, René Weber1; 1University of California Santa Barbara – Media Neuroscience Lab — A growing body of research investigates

the neural basis of attitude and behavior change (Falk et al., 2009). To date,
the majority of work on the so-called “persuasion network” relies on standard brain-mapping paradigms while only a handful of investigations
have assessed functional connectivity. For instance, Ramsay and colleagues
(2013) observe functional connectivity between affective and executive
structures during strong (but not weak) argument strength (AS) public
service announcements (PSAs) while Seelig and colleagues (2014) found
inconclusive evidence that message sensation value (MSV) modulates
occipital-temporal connectivity. However, persuasion is a multidetermined
construct that results from an interaction between message features and
audience characteristics (Weber, et al., 2013). The present study exposes 28
subjects to anti-drug PSAs in a 2x2x2 mixed-factorial design where MSV,
AS, and subject drug-use risk were systematically varied. Psychophysiological interaction analyses (Friston, et al., 1997) were used to test functional
connectivity with seed regions selected from previously reported results.
Contrary to Seelig et al. (2014), results reveal occipital-temporal (e.g., MTG)
and affective (e.g., amygdala) functional connectivity under high MSV
among high-risk subjects. While no significant clusters emerged when
seeding from Ramsay’s LIFG, their socioemotional persuasion hypothesis
received support when seeding from the MPFC (Falk et al., 2012) which
projected into affective structures (e.g., putamen, insula) for high MSV
and high AS PSAs among high risk subjects. We propose that research on
the neural basis of persuasion must continue to investigate network-level
effects while accounting for theoretically relevant (and multidimensional)
interactions between message features and targeted audiences.

A161
TOP-DOWN EFFECTS ON FEEDBACK PROCESSING: EFFECTS OF
FEEDBACK VALIDITY ON FEEDBACK-LOCKED EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS Benjamin Ernst1, Franz Wurm1, Marco Steinhauser1; 1Catholic
University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt — The evaluation of external feedback is

an important prerequisite for optimal decision-making. This also requires
taking into account the reliability of feedback so that learning from potentially invalid feedback is prevented. However, it is not yet clear how and to
which extent information about feedback validity affects feedback processing. On the one hand, it is conceivable that top-down control suppresses
the utilization of potentially invalid feedback for early reinforcement learning. On the other hand, it might be that only later attentional processes are
affected while reinforcement learning remains unaffected. In the present
study, we considered electrophysiological correlates of feedback processing – the feedback-related negativity (FRN) and the P3 – to investigate how
knowledge about feedback validity affects feedback processing. Participants had to use feedback in a deterministic trial-and-error learning task
to maximize their reward. Feedback was sometimes invalid, i.e. it provided
false information about the outcome of a decision. The probability of invalid
feedback varied between blocks. Importantly, half of the participants were
informed about this probability at the beginning of each block, whereas the
other half was not. We found that while prior information did not affect the
amplitude of the FRN, it did affect both the P3a and the P3b. The results

72

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
indicate that processing of low validity feedback was suppressed. However, this top-down effect was restricted to attentional processes whereas
reinforcement learning was unaffected.

A162
ENGAGEMENT AND COGNITIVE WORKLOAD IN COMPLEX,
AUTHENTIC ENVIRONMENTS: MODELING THE CARDIOVASCULAR RESPONSE TO INFORM MENTAL EFFORT Amy Jo Haufler1, Greg-

ory F. Lewis2, Maria I. Davila2, FT Case1, Stephen Porges2; 1The Johns Hopkins
University Applied Physics Laboratory, 2University of North Carolina School of
Medicine — Novel approaches are needed to quantifying cognitive work-

load to mitigate stress-related performance decline typically observed in
complex, authentic work environments. The purpose of this study was to
examine cardiovascular activity (HR, HRV, pulse-wave trend) as indices of
mental effort under conditions of varying cognitive challenge. Nine subjects (8 Male) completed nine blocks of SynWork (Elsmore, 1994). The cardiovascular response was acquired by contact sensors (ECG, BioPac) and
a stand-off pulse monitor (PhysioCam). Both contact and stand-off sensor
signals were processed off-line and modeled to identify heart rate variability parameters associated with mental effort. During exploratory analysis
of the stand-off sensor system, a novel parameter extracted from the video
derived pulse signal was identified (i.e., variance in the slow (0.04 – 0.10
Hz) baseline wander of the raw pulse wave). All parameters were quantified in 30-second windows and stepwise discriminate function analysis
revealed respiratory sinus arrhythmia, low frequency heart rate variability
and heart period as the parameters contributing to engagement (baseline
v easy condition) for each sensor. Cognitive workload level (easy vs. hard
conditions) was only distinguished in 1 of 8 models for the ECG model. The
magnitude of pulse wave baseline wander, a possible indicator of vasomotor activity, improved the classification for the PhysioCam with 5 of 8
models converging on a significant solution. The Cognitive Effort Tracker
software program was developed to illustrate modeled engagement and
workload in near real-time to demonstrate the technology and signal processing to detect, assess, and interpret human performance compatible
with authentic, complex work environments.

A163
THE NEURAL UNDERPINNINGS OF TEMPORAL CONTEXT IN
EXPLORATION Hans Melo1, William Cunningham1, Adam Anderson2; 1Univer-

sity of Toronto, 2Cornell University — Objective: When confronted with making

a choice in an uncertain environment, we must decide whether to exploit
a known option or explore a less familiar but potentially more rewarding
option. Previous work on this exploitation-exploration dilemma reveal
that orbito-frontal cortex (OPFC) and interparietal sulcus are associated
with explorative behaviour. However, the temporal dynamics of this process remains poorly understood. By combining multimodal neuroimaging (fMRI and EEG) with computational modeling we aimed to assess the
influence of pre-trial neural activation in current choice outcome. Methods:
Functional Magnetic Brain Imaging (fMRI) activity was collected from 74
healthy individuals while participants performed a four-arm bandit gambling task. A further 14 individuals also performed the task while EEG
recordings were obtained. Multilevel models were implemented to test an
effect of pre-trial neural activity. Results: fMRI analysis show activation of
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and interpatrietal sulcus in previous trial predicting current trial choice. Consistent with these results, power analysis
of EEG data in dorsal frontal and parietal regions revealed a significant
effect of alpha power in the time leading predicting decision at current trial.
Conclusions: Our work elucidates the temporal dynamics of exploratory
behaviour in humans. In particular we show how neural processes leading
to the current decision trial influence whether individuals choose to explore
versus exploit. More generally, these results provide a much needed consideration of the temporal context in which decision-making takes place.
Acknowledgements: CIHR #490407 to William Cunningham, John Templeton Foundation #490225 to Adam Anderson, Varela Award # 494241
to Hans Melo.

2016 Annual Meeting	

A164
TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF REWARD-BASED TWO-STEP DECISION MAKING Cristian Buc Calderon1, Myrtille Dewulf1, Tom Verguts2, Wim
Gevers1; 1Center for Research in Cognition & Neurosciences, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, 2Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University — Recently,

Solway & Botvinick, (2012) proposed a computational model where
goal-directed decision-making would result from Bayesian inversion of a
probabilistic generative model of reward. A specific case of goal-directed
decision-making refers to a two-step sequential decision-making situation
of which the possible action outcomes are known beforehand. Imagine
going out in search for food. Heading left leads to the subsequent possibility of getting either pizza or burgers, whereas heading right affords you
Thai-food or burritos. Importantly, the model predicts distinct decision
dynamics at the first-step (i.e. heading left/right) depending on the reward
values associated with each food option. Specifically, the model predicts
slower first-step decision times (DTs) when the highest reward and highest mean reward are associated with different choices (mean-max conflict).
In contrast, faster DTs are expected when the highest reward and highest
mean reward are associated with the same choice (no mean-max conflict).
Indeed, it is hypothesized that the optimal choice is initially computed on
the basis of mean rewards associated with each first-step choice; inducing an initial bias for the irrelevant choice in mean-max conflict trials. To
assess this assumption we tested 15 participants in a two-step sequential
decision-making task. As predicted by the model, our results show that
mean-max conflict trials elicited slower DTs compared to no mean-max
trials. Moreover, the proportion of choices involving the highest reward
was lower in the mean-max condition. Our study suggests that during the
decision process, the outcomes (i.e. expected rewards) of potential actions
are progressively unraveled.

A165
MAPPING OUT THE REPRESENTATIONAL SPACE FOR DECISIONS USING EEG DELTA OSCILLATIONS Atsushi Kikumoto1, Theo
A.S. Schäfer2, Tessafay Samejima1, Dagger Anderson1, William McGuirk1, Ulrich
Mayr1; 1University of Oregon, 2Phillips-Universität Marburg — Perceptual deci-

sion making requires the process of translating sensory evidence into a
representational space that identifies action-relevant categories (decision
evidence). Although the neural dynamics of evidence integration have
been investigated, it remains unclear how the representational space is
organized for sensory versus decision evidence, how this representation
adapts to task demands, and how it contributes to individual differences
in decision making quality. We decoded the representation of evidence
during a multisample categorization task using multivariate pattern classification analysis of scalp-recorded EEG. Participants made binary judgments about the degree the average orientation of a series of Gabor patterns
(sensory evidence) was on average closer in terms of their angular distance
(decision evidence) to either the cardinal or the diagonal axis. We found
that the representational space of sensory evidence showed a graded, feature-selective property. In contrast, the representation of decision evidence
was characterized both by graded coding of the strength of the evidence,
and by a non-graded, binary coding along category boundaries. The neural
measure of decision evidence predicted––to a much larger degree than the
measure of sensory evidence––trial-by-trial errors as well as individuals’
performance. As expectations about the dominant category for a series of
stimuli increased, the binary, category distinction in the decision evidence
representation was strengthened. Furthermore, when decision rules shifted
from block to block, the category boundary was flexibly adjusted, indicating that the translation from sensory to decision evidence is under topdown control. These findings demonstrate a novel and robust approach to
characterizing decision-relevant representations.

A166
CHARACTERIZING INTUITIVE JUDGMENT PROCESSES IN THE
SOCIAL DOMAIN Laura F. Mega1,2,3, Kirsten G. Volz2; 1Graduate School of

Neural and Behavioral Sciences, Tuebingen, Germany, 2University of Tuebingen,
3
Hans Boeckler Foundation — Nonverbal signals such as facial expressions
are of paramount importance for social encounters. Their perception predominantly occurs without conscious awareness and is effortlessly inte-

Poster Session A
grated into social interactions. Among the most widely purported explanans of such social judgment behavior are dual-process theories (DPT)
of social psychology. These posit that mental processes underlying social
phenomena can be divided into two distinct types of processing: Intuitive/
Automatic (Type1) and Deliberative/Reflective (Type 2). Despite the prevalence of DPT, both the psychology and philosophy community have been
entrenched in critical debates about the characteristics and the interplay
between the supposedly two distinct process types. In the present study,
we investigated the cognitive process(es) involved in social judgments in
a task that is highly motivationally relevant to species as social as humans:
face perception. Two groups of participants judged the authenticity of
emotional expressions, while their eye movements were recorded. Direct
comparison of the two instruction groups revealed a differing viewing pattern. The intuitive pattern closely resembles a holistic viewing strategy; a
finding that is supported both by a smaller amount of fixations and relatively longer fixation durations. The holistic pattern is in line with evidence
showing that intuition is related to processing the “gestalt” of an object,
rather than focusing on details. Our work thereby makes an important contribution to the study of intuition and DPT by providing an objective and
distinguishable operating measure of intuitive processing in a real world
social judgment task.

A167
VANILLA, VANILLA BUT WHAT ABOUT PISTACHIO? COGNITIVE
CONTROL RESOURCES ORCHESTRATE DIRECTED-EXPLORATION, BUT NOT RANDOM-EXPLORATION. Irene Cogliati-Dezza1,

Andreagiovanni Reina2, Filip Van-Opstal1, Axel Cleeremans1; 1Consciousness,
Cognition & Computation Group, Center for Research in Cognition & Neurosciences, Free University of Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Computer Science,
University of Sheffield, United Kingdom — Imagine you are in ice-cream shop

and you are faced with the decision of what ice-cream to order. Will you
choose your favourite taste (i.e. vanilla) or will you explore different
options discovering a new taste that may turn out to become your new
favourite (i.e. pistachio)? This example illustrates the dilemma between
exploiting high-rewarded/well-known options and exploring new ones.
Several authors have proposed that cognitive control process might be
necessary when switching from a highly rewarded/well-known option
(i.e. vanilla) to an uncertainty one (i.e. pistachio). However, exploring the
unknown can be achieved both using a random or directed strategy. Hence,
the cognitive dynamics behind it might remarkably differ depending on
the policy adopted. We measured behavioural dynamics of exploration
and exploitation, elicited by a 2-armed-bandit task, under active cognitive control manipulation. Specifically, participants were engaged in a
working-memory task while they were solving sequential decision-making problems. We classified trials according to whether the actual choice
was the one predicted by our model to be the option with highest expected
value (exploitation), lower expected value (random-exploration) or higher
informative value (directed-exploration). Results showed that draining the
availability of active cognitive control only affected participants’ ability to
directly explore the environment. Under this condition participants were
producing more deterministic choices reducing their shift toward the highest informative option. We concluded delineating a possible dual-process,
which separately supports random-exploration and directed-exploration.

THINKING: Problem solving
A168
THE EFFECTS OF TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION OVER PREFRONTAL AND OCCIPITAL CORTEX FOR FLEXIBLE
OBJECT KNOWLEDGE RETRIEVAL Evangelia G. Chrysikou1, Hannah M.
Morrow1, Austin Flohrschutz1; 1University of Kansas — Research has shown that

inhibitory transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) over left prefrontal
cortex (PFC), relative to excitatory or sham stimulation, can improve performance on flexible thinking tasks; studies have also suggested that such
tasks may benefit from excitation of right frontotemporal cortex. Further,
functional neuroimaging investigations have reported increased activity in
occipitotemporal cortex during flexible object knowledge retrieval. Here,
we examined whether altering activity in PFC and occipital cortex regions
using tDCS would facilitate performance on an open-ended task. We

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

73

Poster Session A	
showed participants images of everyday objects and asked them to report
aloud either the common or an uncommon use for them while undergoing
tDCS. A forward digit span was also used as a negative control task. In
Experiment 1, participants received excitatory tDCS over right PFC with
concurrent inhibitory tDCS over left PFC, the reverse montage, or sham
stimulation. In Experiment 2, participants received excitatory tDCS either
over right or left occipital cortex or sham stimulation. Concurrent bilateral
stimulation of the PFC, regardless of polarity, did not alter performance
on any task. In contrast, although excitatory tDCS over occipital cortex did
not have an effect on participants’ performance on the control task, stimulation over right occipital cortex tended to facilitate the speed in which participants generated responses and the number of responses produced for
the uncommon uses task. These results contribute to our understanding of
the role of this region in object processing and suggest that over-excitation
of right occipital cortex may promote access to flexible object knowledge
retrieval.

A169
EEG OSCILLATORY ACTIVITY DURING THE DECISION TO GIVE UP
PROBLEM SOLVING Masahiro Kawasaki1,2, Eri Miyauchi1; 1University of
Tsukuba, 2RIKEN, Brain Science Institute — There have been some models to

explain psychological processes of giving up in problem solving and decision making, however, neural mechanism of such behavior has not been
fully investigated. This study aimed to explore the mechanism of giving
up processes by investigating changes of the brain activity during giving
up decisions on problem solving with electroencephalograph (EEG) measurements. In the experiment, participants were instructed to solve riddles
(in Japanese) presented on a computer display and either to press a keyboard button when they solved the riddles or to press another keyboard
button when they gave up solving the riddles. After the solving session,
answers were presented and participants were asked either to press a keyboard button when their answers were correct or to press another keyboard
button when their answers were wrong for the riddles participants solved.
For the riddles participants gave up on solving, participants were asked
either to press a keyboard button when the answers were convincing or
to press another keyboard button when the answers were not understandable. The time-frequency analysis for the EEG data showed the transient
enhanced theta activities on the frontal regions just before both of the onsets
of pressing keyboard to solve the riddles and to give up the riddles. Interestingly, the duration and amplitude of the theta activities between two
situations were significantly different from each other. Our results suggest
that the EEG modulations may reflect different processes of giving up in
problem solving and decision making.

A170
EFFECTS OF PACED BREATHING ON COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY
Bradley Ferguson1, Brianne Herriott2, Allison Halt3, David Beversdorf4,5,6,7,8; 1University of Missouri Interdisciplinary Neuroscience Program, 2University of Missouri School of Medicine, 3Washington College, 4University of Missouri Department of Radiology, 5University of Missouri Department of Neurology, 6University of
Missouri Department of Psychology, 7University of Missouri Thompson Center for
Autism & Neurodevelopmental Disorders, 8Director, Center for Translational Neuroscience, University of Missouri — Previous studies show a decline in problem

solving capacity with stress, and that propranolol, a nonselective beta-adrenergic antagonist, can decrease these effects. Further studies demonstrate
that cognitive flexibility is regulated by the noradrenergic system and can
be improved with propranolol, even in the absence of stressors. In order
to determine if meditation could be utilized in place of propranolol, we
examined if similar cognitive improvements could result from a slowed
breathing technique, an easily implemented proxy to meditation. Furthermore, we assessed if changes in heart rate variability due to slowed breathing were associated with increases in cognition. Anagram task performance
was compared in 30 participants using a within-subject design. Electrocardiogram readings, blood pressure, and stress perception were recorded
during independent sessions of normal breathing and paced breathing
exercise for 10 minutes, respectively. After completion of a normal or paced
breathing exercise, participants completed cognitive assessments. Dependent-sample t-tests assessed differences in blood pressure or heart rate.
Blood pressure was significantly different between breathing conditions

74

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
only at the end of the study. No significant differences were found between
heart rate, heart rate variability, or stress perception. Overall, performance
on cognitive tasks was not significantly different between breathing conditions. However, linear regression revealed a significant positive association between the letter fluency change score and the standard deviation
in heart rate change score, a measure of heart rate variability, suggesting
inter-individual variability in response to paced breathing. Future studies
may wish to investigate if daily paced breathing exercises can increase cognitive function.

A171
TASK DEPENDENT NUMERICAL REPRESENTATIONS IN NUMBER
SYMBOLS DRIVE INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN MATH Andrew Mattarella-Micke1, Bruce McCandliss1; 1Stanford University — Fluency with numer-

ical symbols is essential for mathematical development in children. However, while previous research has proposed that the phonological (Evans 
et al., 2014) or magnitude (Holloway & Ansari, 2009) bases of numerical
symbols are critical for math, few have investigated the underlying representation directly. Further, confounds with reaction time and difficulty
implicate executive function and response selection as an alternative explanation for the functional neuroanatomy (Gobel et al., 2004) and individual
differences (Fuhs & McNeil, 2013) observed. To explore the role and importance of different representations of number, we asked children to make
judgments of numerical similarity depending on the dimension of “sound”
or “amount”, to tap into representations of phonology and quantity respectively. While stimuli were matched across the two conditions, children
activated right intraparietal sulcus (IPS) when asked to compare based on
amount, and bilateral inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) when asked to compare
based on sound. An index of phonological or quantity similarity predicted
IPS modulation and reaction time (RT) their respective tasks, however only
the quantity-related measure of representational similarity predicted individual differences in math outcomes. This relationship remained robust
controlling for task RTs, and for two measures of executive function. Task
dependent access to symbolic magnitude representation is a critical aspect
of math development.

A172
THE AHA! EXPERIENCE: INSIGHT SOLUTIONS PRODUCE DELTA-BAND, ERN-LIKE REWARD SIGNALS. Brian Erickson1, Monica Truelove-Hill1, John Kounios1; 1Drexel University — The defining feature of creative

insight is a sudden burst of positive emotion at the moment of solution.
We present a candidate EEG time-frequency signal for this event that
bears a strong resemblance to the reward related positivity (RewP; alternatively, error related negativity, ERN) that occurs in gambling and other
feedback tasks. Our subjects solved anagrams and reported their solution
strategy as insightful or analytic on each problem. Time-frequency analysis
of solution-related epochs reveals a peri-solution delta-band positivity in
trials solved with insight versus analytic strategy, cluster-wise significance
p=.014 (analyses in SPM12). This result resembles time-frequency analyses
of gambling win trials reported by Foti et. al. (2014) and others. A great deal
of prior work on gambling tasks also shows that smaller win/loss ratios
elicit larger RewP signals; similarly, we find that subjects with fewer insight
solutions exhibit larger peri-solution delta-band power, cluster-wise significance p<.001. Prior literature has tied gambling task win-related delta-band activity to basal ganglia activation and reinforcement learning.
Thus, our results may suggest a mechanism for the application of reinforcement-learning theories to creativity. With further study, this linkage may
help to explain the human imperative to undertake creative challenges,
how effective choices are selected during the creative process, and how creative behavior may be learned and self-reinforcing.

Poster Session B
ATTENTION: Multisensory

LANGUAGE: Other

B1
MATCHING A SHAPE WITH A SOUND: DOES SOUND-SHAPE
CORRESPONDENCE MODULATE A NEURONAL SIGNATURE OF
VISUAL SHAPE PROCESSING? Sylvia Guillory1, Hiu Mei Chow1, Vivian

B3
SILENT LIP READING GENERATES SPEECH SIGNALS IN AUDITORY CORTEX L. Jacob Zweig1, Marcia Grabowecky1, Satoru Suzuki1, Vernon L.

dence, the association between information of one sense (e.g. a “bouba”
nonsense word) to that of another sense (e.g. a round shape), is a form
of multisensory phenomenon found across development and cultures.
However, how crossmodal correspondence might modulate information
processing across modalities is not well understood. Here we used crossmodal correspondences between the visual and auditory domain to characterize neural processing of congruent and incongruent sound-shape pairs.
Steady-state visual evoked potentials were used to assess processing of a
visual object, where enhancements at target frequencies have been associated with greater neural processing. We hypothesized that sound-shape
congruence would modulate processing. 10 subjects passively viewed a
2-D object flickering at 20 Hz. The object was either a round or spiky shape.
For a given shape, participants completed 4 conditions: no sound, neutral
sound (repeated “beep”), congruent sound (e.g. “kiki” was paired with
a spikey), and incongruent sound (e.g. “baba” was paired with a spikey
shape). Shape type (spikey or round) was counterbalanced across participants, and order of conditions was counterbalanced within participants.
We found no difference in visual shape processing (our 20Hz EEG signal)
based on whether the sound was congruent or incongruent. Interestingly,
there was a trend for a neutral sound to enhance the 20Hz signal compared
to no sound, suggesting there is an automatic increase of attention induced
by a sound, regardless of cross-modal congruence, consistent with previous
literature.

tion in noisy environments (e.g., McGettigan et al., 2012) and crossmodally
activate auditory cortex (e.g., Pekkola et al., 2005). What specific information do visual lip movements relay to auditory cortex? We investigated this
question by recording electrcorticographic (ECoG) activity from electrodes
implanted within primary/secondary auditory cortex of the brains of epilepsy patients, evoked by four representative auditory phonemes (/ba/, /
da/, /ta/, and /tha/) or by visual lip movements (visemes) articulating
these phonemes. We constructed an ensemble of deep convolutional neural
networks to determine whether the identity of these four phonemes/visemes could be independently decoded from auditory cortical activity in
response to either auditory-alone or visual-alone trials. Statistically significant decoding of viseme identity would provide evidence of visual coding
of phoneme representations in auditory cortex. We first verified that phoneme information was reliability decoded with high accuracy from auditory-phoneme-evoked activity in auditory cortex. Next, we critically demonstrated that phoneme identity information was also reliably decoded from
visual-lip-movement-evoked activity in both the left and right auditory
cortices in the absence of any sound, indicating that visemes generate
phoneme-specific activity in auditory cortex. Furthermore, the pattern of
activity evoked in auditory cortex by each representative phoneme/viseme
was similar across auditory and visual trials (e.g., the classifier trained to
identify visemes successfully decoded phonemes with comparable accuracy), suggesting that visual lip movements crossmodally activate auditory
speech processing in a content specific manner.

1 1

Ciaramitaro ; University of Massachusetts Boston — Crossmodal correspon-

B2
VISUAL WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY PREDICTS AUDITORY
SELECTIVE ATTENTION IN BILINGUAL ADULTS Jimena Santillan1,

Amanda Hampton Wray2, Eric Pakulak1, Theodore Bell1, Helen Neville1; 1University of Oregon, 2Michigan State University — Extensive evidence suggests that

working memory (WM) capacity is closely linked to attentional control
in the visual domain (Engle, 2002). Our lab has demonstrated an association between visual working memory (WM) capacity and an event-related
potential (ERP) measure of auditory selective attention in monolingual
English-speaking adults (Giuliano et al., 2014). The present study extends
this work by testing this relationship in a sample of Spanish-English bilingual adults, while controlling for language proficiency and socioeconomic
status (SES). Twenty-nine participants completed an auditory selective
attention ERP paradigm in which they were simultaneously presented
with two different narrative stories in English and were asked to attend
to one story while ignoring the other. Neural responses were elicited by
identical probes embedded in both attended and unattended narratives,
and compared between attention conditions. Participants also completed a
visual change detection task to measure WM capacity, standardized tests
of language proficiency, and maternal education was used as a proxy for
SES. WM capacity was a significant predictor of attentional modulation of
the N1 component in the auditory selective attention task, controlling for
English proficiency and SES (b = -.80, p < .01). A supplementary median
split analysis revealed that the high WM capacity group displayed significantly larger neural modulation to attended stimuli compared to the low
WM capacity group. Together, these findings provide further evidence
that WM capacity and selective attention are closely linked independent of
sensory modality, and also suggest that this relationship may be relatively
independent of second language proficiency and childhood SES.

Towle2, James Tao2, Shasha Wu2, David Brang1,2; 1Northwestern University, 2University of Chicago — Visual lip movements improve auditory speech percep-

THINKING: Decision making
B4
LEARNING AND UPDATING OF STIMULUS-REWARD ASSOCIATIONS ARE REFLECTED BY ELECTRICAL BRAIN ACTIVITY Berry van

den Berg1,2, Benjamin Geib1, Rene San Martin1,3, Marty Woldorff1; 1Center for
Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, 2University of Groningen, Groningen, the
Netherlands, 3Universidad Diego Portales, Santiago, Chile — In gambling tasks,

learning to associate stimuli with reward requires the continuous monitoring of gains and losses. Previous research (San Martin et al., 2013) identified
feedback-related brain responses associated with learning stimulus-reward
associations. While the feedback-related negativity (a frontocentral negative-polarity ERP deflection peaking ~250ms after feedback onset) distinguished losses from gains, the P3 (central positive-polarity ERP at between
300-500ms) predicted whether participants were going to change their bet
on the subsequent trial. A major unanswered question, however, is how the
updating of stimulus-reward associations is actually implemented in the
brain. Here, we sought to utilize the temporal resolution of EEG to map the
cascade of processes underlying such learning and updating. Participants
were presented with mini-blocks of 20 trials. On each trial, participants had
to choose (and wager on) either a face or a house. In each mini-block, either
the face or the house was more likely to lead to a gain. Behaviorally, participants were in most cases able to learn in each 20-trial block whether
the face or house was the more likely object to be rewarded. Neurally, we
replicated that the P3 is larger when participants were going to switch their
choice on the next trial, while also showing that this general enhancement
effect does not indicate the direction of the switch. Following this effect,
oscillatory EEG activity over the face area reflected the specific direction of
stimulus-reward learning. Collectively, these results delineate the neural
cascade underlying the learning and updating of stimulus-reward associations during probabilistic decision-making tasks.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

75

Poster Session B	

ATTENTION: Multisensory
B5
EXPLORING SOCIAL INFLUENCES ON BRAIN POTENTIALS
DURING ANTICIPATION OF TACTILE STIMULATION Guannan Shen1,

Joni N. Saby1,2, Peter J. Marshall1; 1Temple University, 2University of Washington
— This study explored social influences on electrophysiological responses

during the anticipation of tactile stimulation. It is well-known that broad,
negative-going potentials are present in the ERP between a forewarning
cue and a tactile stimulus. More recently, it has been shown that the alpharange mu rhythm shows a lateralized desynchronization over central sites
during anticipation of tactile stimulation to the hand. The current study
used a joint tactile discrimination task in which a visual cue signaled that
an upcoming stimulus would either be delivered to the participant’s hand,
to their task partner’s hand, or to neither person. The cue appeared 1500
ms before the target tactile stimulus, and it indicated who (self vs. other
vs. nobody) and which hand (left vs. right) the target stimulus would be
delivered to. For the condition in which participants anticipated the tactile
stimulation to their own hand, a strong negative potential was observed in
the ERP at central sites around 500 milliseconds prior to the tactile stimulus. Significant mu rhythm desynchronization was also present in the same
time window prior. The magnitudes of the ERPs and the mu desynchronization were greater in the contralateral than in the ipsilateral hemisphere.
Similar ERP and EEG changes were not present when the visual cue indicated that stimulation would be delivered to the task partner. However, the
ERP waveforms and the time-frequency plots showed other subtle differences during anticipation of stimulation of the partner and the condition
in which neither the participant or the partner received tactile stimulation.

B6
NARRATIVE ENGAGEMENT: WHAT ARE YOU WILLING TO GIVE
UP? Samantha Cohen1, Simon Henin2, Lucas Parra2; 1The Graduate Center of

the City University of New York, 2The City College of the City University of New York
— What is the neurological basis of narrative engagement? To investigate

the mechanism and phenonmenology underlying engagement, best understood as the sacrifice of scarce resources to continue receiving narrative
content, the data obtained from time-restricted subjects was compared to
the extent to which stimuli evoked reliable electroenecepholographic (EEG)
responses across subjects. A large sample of over 1,000 subjects was forced
to allocate a restricted time period among a range of narrative stimuli with
a total duration longer than that allotted (e.g. allocation of scare resources
to the most engaging videos). This experimental time restriction was then
validated by comparing it with data obtained from the public who watched
them until they become no longer interested (e.g. cost of spending time
on them exceeded their value). These behavioral metrics for engagement,
utilizing the scarcity of time, were compared to the extent to which the
evoked EEG responses of a separate group of individuals synchronized
across subjects. This inter-subject correlation (ISC) measures the ability of
the stimulus to drive responses similarly across subjects. To test the prediction that ISC is a marker of enhanced engagement, the ISC evoked by the
stimuli was compared to the extent to which they retained subjects despite
extrinsic time pressures. A strong correspondence was found between the
neural reliability evoked by the stimulus and its ability to retain viewers. Therefore, when a narrative engages neural activity reliably, people
commit more temporal resources to the stimulus.

B7
MULTISENSORY DIVIDED ATTENTION: ROLE OF THETA OSCILLATIONS Arielle Keller1, Lisa Payne2, Robert Sekuler1; 1Brandeis University,
2

Swarthmore College — Alpha oscillations play a role in suppressing distractions when just one sensory modality must be attended, but are the same
neural mechanisms involved when attention must be paid to multiple sensory modalities? For an answer, we investigated how divided attention
impacted processing of auditory and visual sequences. In Experiment 1,
subjects performed an oddball task with either auditory, visual, or concurrent audiovisual sequences in separate blocks, while the electroencephalogram was recorded using high-density scalp electrodes. During a
divided-attention audiovisual condition, an oddball (a rare and unusual
stimulus) could occur in either the auditory or the visual domain, requir-

76

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
ing that attention be divided between modalities. Fronto-central theta band
(4-7 Hz) activity was strongest in this audiovisual condition. Given that
theta-band activity has previously been associated with both multisensory
processing (Sakowitz et al., 2000) and working memory (Gevins et al., 1997),
Experiment 2 sought to differentiate these possible roles of fronto-central
theta activity during multisensory divided attention. Using a modified version of the oddball task from Experiment 1, the results of Experiment 2
showed that theta power was present in single-modality conditions and
was independent of working memory load. Ruling out theta’s association
with multisensory processing and working memory, we concluded that
fronto-central theta activity is likely a marker of divided attention.

B8
VISUAL AND AUDITORY PERCEPTION ARE DIFFERENTIALLY
AFFECTED BY MENTAL IMAGERY AND INNER SPEECH Mario Villena-González1, Ismael Palacios-García1, Vladimir López1, Eugenio Rodríguez1;
1
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile — Mind wandering

has been studied assuming that the specific content of thoughts (such as
visual imagery or inner speech) does not differentially affects the brain processing of external stimuli. Nevertheless, no direct study has addressed this
issue. In order to directly assess the impact of thought content on perception
we carried out two experiments leading the hypothesis that visual imagery reduces visual sensory processing in a larger extent than inner speech,
while the last might negatively impact in auditory modality. We recorded
the brain activity of participants while they were exposed to a visual stimulus (experiment 1) and to an auditory one (experiment 2) during three
different conditions: a) executing a task on the stimulus (externally oriented attention), and two conditions involving inward turned attention; b)
generating an inner speech or c) performing visual imagery. Event-related
potential results showed that visual P1 and auditory N100 amplitudes were
significantly attenuated during both task involving inward attention compared with the externally oriented. When both inward turned conditions
were compared, a stronger attenuation of processing to the visual stimuli
was observed during the visual imagery condition. Analogously, the processing of auditory stimulus was more reduced during the inner speech
condition. Our results show that attentional resources allocation to external
stimuli during self-generated thoughts is differentially affected by the sensory modality of thoughts.

B9
METHODOLOGICAL INNOVATIONS FOR EXAMINING FLOW EXPERIENCES IN BRAIN IMAGING CONTEXTS Britney Craighead1, Richard
Huskey1, Michael Miller1, Rene Weber1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara
— We introduce a novel procedure that allows for the testing of the neural

basis of flow. Flow is a positively valenced psychological state characterized
by focused attention and reward that is thought to result from a balance
between task challenge and individual skill (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). The
central prediction of the synchronization theory of flow (Weber et al., 2009)
understands flow as an emergent property of a network synchronization
process that manifests itself in functional connectivity between attentional
and reward structures. However, despite 40 years of research, there is no
well-established procedure for experimentally manipulating the construct.
In three behavioral experiments, we validated a protocol for manipulating
flow. This included development of an open-source video game stimulus
that allows for a high degree of experimental control while providing a
log of in-game events (e.g., player wins/loses, x/y mouse position) with
a 16ms resolution. Three conditions were manipulated: (1) boredom – low
challenge/high skill, (2) frustration – high challenge/low skill, and (3) flow
– balanced challenge/skill. Supporting theoretical predictions, secondary
task reaction times collected during gameplay were longest during the flow
condition. Similarly, self-reported flow was greatest when game challenge
and player skill were balanced. The implications of these studies are twofold. First, we are pleased to introduce an open-source tool that enables
examining the relationship between task difficulty, attention, and affect
using a naturalistic stimulus while providing considerable experimental
control and data reporting. Secondly, this paradigm provides a crucial
foundation for our lab’s current investigations into the neural basis of flow.

2016 Annual Meeting	

B10
PREDICTING LEARNING OUTCOMES OF INSTRUCTIONAL VIDEO
CONTENT USING NEURAL MAKERS OF ENGAGEMENT Denise
Robles1, Simon Henin1, Samantha Cohen2, Lucas Parra1; 1The City College of New
York, 2The Graduate Center of the City University of New York — Although student

engagement is correlated with academic success, the mechanism by which
this attentional focus translates into improved performance is unknown.
We hypothesized that the level of neural reliability evoked by educational
stimuli, measured via the inter-subject correlation (ISC) of electroencephalogram (EEG), would predict the extent to which subjects acquired and
retained stimulus-related knowledge. To assess this, subjects’ knowledge
base was assessed before and after exposure to educational videos. The
reliability of each individual’s neural responses, recorded while watching
the videos, was compared to their peers to establish a metric for their relative attentional engagement with the stimuli. Neural reliability was correlated with an improvement on test scores after exposure to the educational videos. This suggests that ISC is a marker of the stimulus-related
attentional mechanisms necessary for successful leanings. In the future, ISC
could be used as a metric when designing and assessing online educational
content and presentation style.

ATTENTION: Other
B11
ECG, PUPILLOMETRY, AND EYE GAZE MEASURES OF MIND
WANDERING ACROSS TASKS Daniel M. Roberts1, Daniela Barragan1,
Steven D. Chong1, Carryl L. Baldwin1; 1George Mason University — Recent work

has sought to identify the processes underlying mind wandering, or disengagement from a primary task being performed, in a variety of contexts
including reading. Understanding the processes underlying mind wandering has the potential to support mitigation techniques, which may be
especially important in operational contexts such as automobile driving. In
the present experiment, participants completed three experimental blocks,
including two drives on a desktop driving simulator and the sustained
attention to response task (SART). Participants self-reported instances of
mind wandering via button press while completing each task. While participants completed the simulated drive and SART tasks, electrocardiogram
(ECG), eye tracking, pupil dilation, and body posture were recorded. Periods of mind wandering were defined as -13 to -3 seconds relative to each
self-report button press, while periods of an alert state were defined as +3 to
+13 seconds relative to the same button press. Linear mixed effects models
were used to investigate the effects of task (driving, SART) and state (mind
wandering, alert) on each outcome measure. For both the driving and SART
tasks, ECG derived heart rate, pupil dilation, and the standard deviation of
eye gaze location were all diminished within the time window immediately
prior to self-reported mind wandering, relative to the time window following the self-report. Some differences between the current results and those
previously found within reading tasks may be related to the demand of the
primary task being performed.

B12
BREATH-FOCUSED YOGA FACILITATES PERCEPTUAL SENSITIVITY AND VIGILANT ATTENTION MORE THAN MOVEMENT-FOCUSED YOGA Chivon Powers1, Laura Schmalzl2, Anthony Zanesco1, Neil Yetz2,
Erik J Groessl2, Clifford Saron1; 1UC Davis Center for Mind and Brain, 2UC San
Diego School of Medicine — Yoga-based practices (YBP) typically involve

a combination of movement sequences, conscious breath regulation, and
techniques to engage attention. Little is known about whether effects of
YBP result from the synergistic combination of movement, breath, and
attention or if one or a subset of these components yields similar effects.
Here we compare performance on a 32-minute response inhibition task
(RIT) in novices who participated in one of two 8-week yoga programs: a
movement-focused practice (involving movement, breath and controlled
gaze), or a breath-focused practice (involving breath and controlled gaze).
Both practices were based on the Ashtanga Vinyasa system. 65 healthy participants were randomly assigned to one of the two programs consisting
of two weekly classes led by a yoga instructor and a daily home practice
assisted by videos. We assessed data from 40 participants (m=17, f=23; ages

Poster Session B
18-35) who completed the RIT before and after the program. We calculated
A-prime from behavioral responses as a measure of perceptual sensitivity, and Response Time Coefficient of Variability (RTCV) as a measure of
attentional stability. Overall perceptual sensitivity improved only in the
breath-focused yoga group. The breath-focused group also demonstrated
reductions in RTCV over the course of the 32-minute session. These results
suggest that, relative to a movement-focused practice, a breath-focused
practice may improve vigilant attention by facilitating increases in response
inhibition and reductions in reaction time variability. Differences in movement and breath-focused YBP are interpreted in terms of mechanisms of
endogenous and exogenous attention.

B13
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF WILLED ATTENTION: FRONTAL
ALPHA AND FRONTAL THETA. Jesse Bengson1,2, Alexander Morales2,
Natalia Khodayari2, George Mangun2; 1Sonoma State University, 2University of
California-Davis — An individual’s attention may be captured in an exog-

enous (reflexive) manner, or be deployed as a result of endogenous (voluntary) processes. . Numerous studies have explored the neural correlates
of voluntary attention when cued by external informative or instructive
cues (e.g., arrows), but much less is known about the neural correlates of
attention when allocated by a purely volitional decisional process in the
absence of external information (termed willed attention). We used EEG
recordings and employed a willed attention paradigm in which individuals
chose whether to attend to the left or right visual field locations, or to keep
attention fixed upon a central fixation marker. We found that decisions to
attend relative to no-attend trials are characterized by increased frontal
theta (4-7) and alpha (8-13) rhythms in the cue to target interval. We also
found that willed shifts of attention induced alpha lateralization by 1100
ms post cue that was dependent upon the degree to which frontal alpha
increased in response to a decision to attend, supporting a role for frontal
alpha in top-down voluntary attentional control. No association was found
between decision-induced frontal theta and alpha lateralization. However,
decision induced frontal theta was found to correlate with the degree to
which attention increased the visual-sensory P1 target evoked response.
These data provide novel insight about the mechanisms of attentional control and add to the literature by isolating attentional control as a volitional
top-down process independent of external cues.

B14
EXPLORING INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN ATTENTIONAL MODULATION OF THE SOMATOSENSORY EVOKED POTENTIAL Ashley R.
Drew1, Andrew N. Meltzoff2, Peter J. Marshall1; 1Temple University, 2Institute for
Learning & Brain Sciences, University of Washington — Directing one’s atten-

tion to the spatial location of a stimulus enhances neural activity within
corresponding sensory areas. This phenomenon has been studied extensively in the visual modality, although there is increasing interest in selective attention in the tactile modality. Here we explore correlates of individual variation in neural responses during a tactile selective attention
task. Specifically, we tested whether self-reported individual differences
in mindfulness are related to attentional modulation of SEPs (somatosensory evoked potentials) to tactile stimulation. EEG was recorded from 29
participants whose left and right index fingers were stimulated using an
inflatable membrane (60 ms tactile stimulus, 4-5 s ISI). Across blocks, participants were instructed to focus their attention on the sensation of the tactile stimuli or toward their breathing. A median split of mindfulness scores
(Cognitive and Affective Mindfulness Scale-Revised) yielded lower (N=14;
M=30.3; SD=2.8) and higher (N=15; M=38.5; SD=2.0) mindfulness groups.
SEPs were examined at C3 and C4, contralateral to the finger being stimulated. Similar effects of attention to tactile stimulation were observed for
both groups for early SEP components (P50/N80/P100). Group differences
were apparent for later, slow components in the SEP (200-300 ms), with
the higher mindfulness group showing an enhanced and more sustained
positivity than the lower mindfulness group during attention to the tactile
stimulation compared with attention to breathing. These novel findings
suggest further directions for exploring the neural correlates of individual
differences in selective attention abilities.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

77

Poster Session B	

B15
EVENT-RELATED LATERALIZATIONS INDEX INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN SPATIAL BIAS AND TOP-DOWN CONTROL OF SELECTIVE ATTENTION Iris Wiegand1, Anders Petersen1, Thomas Habekost1; 1Center
for Visual Cognition, University of Copenhagen — Selective attention controls

the distribution of our visual system’s limited processing resources to stimuli in the visual field. According to Bundesen’s computational “Theory of
Visual Attention” (TVA), the share of resources spend on a given stimulus
can be quantified by its attentional weight, w-value. By modeling an individual’s performance in a partial report task (i.e., displays with targets and
distracters, and displays with only targets), two independent parameters
of visual selection can be estimated: 1) top-down control α, the efficiency
to select relevant over irrelevant information, wD/wT, and 2) spatial bias
wIndex, an attentional weight bias towards the left versus right hemifield,
wL/(wL+wR). In this study, we combined a partial report task with EEG
and identified neural correlates of TVA parameters of visual selection: Topdown control α was correlated with the N2-posterior-contralateral (N2pc),
an event-related lateralization (ERL) towards the target elicited in displays
with bilateral target-distracter configurations. Lower N2pc amplitudes
were associated with better top-down control, indicating that the component indexes individuals’ efficiency in allocating processing resources to
relevant information for selection in space. Spatial bias wIndex correlated
with ERLs computed separately for displays with targets presented in the
left- or right hemifield. Left-right asymmetries in sustained ERLs were
associated with individual’s estimated left-vs.-right-ward bias. For the first
time, we discovered direct neural indices of inter-individual differences in
two distinct visual selection functions formally defined in the computational TVA framework and its neural interpretation (NTVA).

B16
CONTROL OVER EXTENT AND TIMING OF DISTRACTOR-BASED
RESPONSE ACTIVATION Kerstin Jost1,2, Mike Wendt3, Aquiles Luna-Rodriguez2, Andreas Loew2, Thomas Jacobsen2; 1RWTH Aachen University,
2
Helmut-Schmidt-University/University of the Federal Armed Forces Hamburg, 3Medical School Hamburg — In choice reaction time tasks, such as the

Eriksen flanker task, performance is often influenced by the presence of
nominally irrelevant stimuli, referred to as distractors. Recent research
provided evidence that distractor processing can be adjusted to distractor
utility: Distractors were more attended to and they also more strongly activated a related motor response when they were predictive for the upcoming target/response. In an ERP-study, we investigated whether not only
the extent of distractor processing but also the timing of distractor-based
response activation is subject to strategic control. In a temporal flanker task,
in which a distractor stimulus preceded the target, we manipulated distractor utility (75% vs. 25% congruent distractor-target combinations) as well as
the SOA between distractors and targets (350 vs. 1000 ms). Distractor utility
affected early visual processing of the distractors (evidenced by amplitude
modulations of the P1 and N1) independently of the SOA. Importantly, distractor-locked lateralized-readiness potentials occurred overall later when
the SOA was long and not reliably when the utility was low and the SOA
was long. These findings demonstrate strategic control of both extent and
timing of distractor-based response activation.

B17
CAN I EAT THIS? DISGUST SENSITIVITY MODULATES EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS TO FEEDBACK REGARDING EDIBILITY John

Treffalls1, Natalie Ceballos1, Allison Zborowski1, Frank DePalma1, Rebecca
Lopas1, Reiko Graham1; 1Department of Psychology, Texas State University —

Feedback-related negativity (FRN) indexes neural activity to losses/errors
during risk-taking, with timing and distribution similar to the N2 (implicated in error-related processing and salience). In this study, we examined
the sensitivity of the N2 to processes related to appetitive motivations. Eighteen undergraduates (10 female, mean age = 21.1 years) viewed ambiguous
close-ups of foods/drinks or nonfoods/drinks, and indicated whether or
not they could consume the objects. Feedback (an unambiguous image/
information about stimulus type) was then provided. Disgust sensitivity
(DS) was assessed and used to create two groups: a moderate/high (n =
9) and a low (n = 9) group. Analyses focused on the N2 to feedback-re-

78

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
lated events; P3 amplitudes were also assessed as an index of subsequent
resource allocation. N2 amplitudes differed as a function of DS: those high
in DS showed large N2s to all feedback. In contrast, N2 amplitudes in the
low DS group were highest for food/correct and nonfood/incorrect trials.
With respect to the P3, amplitudes were highest to food/correct items.
There was also a DS group x feedback interaction, such that enhanced
amplitudes for correct relative to incorrect trials were more pronounced for
the low DS group than the high DS group. Although tentative, results suggest that the FRN/N2 is sensitive to appetitive motivations, indexing attentional capture to disgust-related feedback, but that this may be modulated
by DS. Individuals low in DS attend to motivationally-relevant feedback
(i.e., food/correct and nonfood/incorrect), whereas individuals high in DS
may attend more generally to feedback related to edibility.

B18
EARLY ATTENTION AND MEMORY OUTCOMES FOLLOWING
PROTON RADIATION THERAPY FOR PEDIATRIC BRAIN TUMORS
Casey L. Evans1,2, Julie A. Grieco1,3, Torunn I. Yock1,3, Margaret B. Pulsifer1,3;
1
Massachusetts General Hospital, 2Suffolk University, 3Harvard Medical School —

Purpose: Conventional photon radiation therapy for brain tumors is associated with negative cognitive sequelae, particularly in children. Minimizing
unnecessary exposure to radiation is critical. Proton radiation (PRT) provides better targeting of tumors and spares healthy tissues outside the target
region. Therefore, it is expected that radiation-related cognitive sequelae
would be less after PRT. Attention and memory post-PRT were examined given their relevance for learning and academic success. Methods: 44
patients, ages 6.58-21.67 years (M=13.09, SD=3.59; 50%<12.7years) at PRT
initiation (baseline, BL), were administered age-appropriate standardized
measures assessing intelligence (IQ), attention, and visual/verbal/working
memory at BL and ≥1year follow-up (M=2.58, SD=1.67). Results: Patients
were 52% male; 93% Caucasian. Histology was medulloblastoma (36%),
glial (23%), craniopharyngioma (16%), and other (25%). Median lesion size
was 912.50mm^2. 41% had hydrocephalus. Most received resection (77%),
involved-field PRT alone (55%), chemotherapy (59%), and had supratentorial tumors (57%). BL/follow-up mean scores were in the average range
and unchanged at follow-up. Age, histology, hydrocephalus, radiation
dose, chemotherapy, resection, and location were not significantly related
to change on any measure. Mean scaled scores approached significance
for lower verbal memory for females at follow-up (p=0.069). Conclusion:
At follow-up from PRT, intelligence, attention, and memory were intact
and largely stable. Younger patients did not fare worse. Females did not
make age-appropriate gains in verbal memory, although no decline was
observed. Early outcomes compare favorably with the literature. PRT
shows promise as a treatment for pediatric brain tumor patients, reducing
specific cognitive sequelae and increasing the potential for learning and
academic success.

B19
STRESS AND AND VISUAL ATTENTION TO FOOD IN HEALTHY
WEIGHT AND OVERWEIGHT/OBESE WOMEN Avery Ferguson1, Natalie
Ceballos1, Roger Samson1, Chris Prickett1, Reiko Graham1; 1Department of Psychology Texas State University — Previous studies suggest that mood state

may impact both the appeal of different types of food, and participants’
food choices. The current study assessed the effects of stress on attention
to food pictures, as indexed via eye-movements. Women (Mage = 23) in
BMI categories of healthy weight (n = 12) or overweight/obese (n = 10)
viewed high calorie savory, high calorie sweet, and low calorie foods before
and after a math stressor. At both time points, high calorie foods captured
attention more quickly. However, low calorie foods held participants’
attention longer during the first fixation. Stress effects on attentional maintenance were reflected in greater total fixation duration and total fixation
count before stress versus after stress. Further, an interaction of food type
x BMI group was noted for total fixation duration. In the healthy weight
group, attentional maintenance to high calorie sweet foods was decreased
compared to other food types. The overweight/obese group did not show
this pattern. For total fixation count, attentional maintenance to high calorie sweet foods was decreased compared to other food types regardless of
BMI. Additional analyses indicated that emotional eating tendencies were
correlated with both attentional capture and maintenance before stress,
while hunger was correlated with maintenance of attention after stress.

2016 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session B

Taken together, these findings suggest that food type may be a more salient
feature for the initial capture of attention, while stress and BMI may exert a
greater influence on attentional maintenance.

associated with emotional processing, IFG, MFG and IN. Greater IN activation in more extraverted and open older compared to young individuals
may be of importance for age-specific differences in emotional processing.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Development &
aging

B22
SAFETY SIGNAL LEARNING AS A NOVEL MECHANISM FOR FEAR
REDUCTION DURING ADOLESCENCE Dylan Gee1, Dominic Fareri2,

B20
BRAIN-TO-BRAIN SYNCHRONY PREDICTS STUDENT ENGAGEMENT AND SOCIAL DYNAMICS IN THE CLASSROOM: A
CROWD-SOURCING NEUROSCIENCE STUDY. Suzanne Dikker1,2, Lu

Wan3, Ido Davidesco1, Lisa Kaggen4, Jess Rowland1, James McClintock5, Matthias Oostrik, Jay Van Bavel1, Mingzhou Ding3, David Poeppel1,6; 1New York University, 2Utrecht University, 3University of Florida, 4Stanford University, 5Trevor Day
School, 6Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics — Introduction & Meth-

ods: How does the brain support real-world dynamic group interactions?
To investigate this question, we recorded simultaneous EEG from twelve
high school students and their teacher during eleven 50-minute classes,
spread out across the school year. We focused our analyses on brain-tobrain synchrony [1], quantified as the inter-brain-coherence between students across EEG frequency bands as they participated in regular classroom activities (lecturing, group discussion, watching videos). Results:
Increased classroom engagement was correlated with more synchronous
brain activity between the students as a group: Students reported higher
levels of engagement for watching videos and group discussion, and brainto-brain synchrony was higher during these classroom activities than when
the teacher was reciting or lecturing. In addition, brain-to-brain synchrony
between pairs of students was correlated with how close they felt to each
other. Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the first study to repeatedly
record brain activity from multiple people simultaneously as they engage
in everyday activities outside of a laboratory environment. We applied this
paradigm in the context of classroom interactions and found that brainto-brain synchrony across students predicted student engagement and
social cohesion. Both have been found critical to the student learning experience [2]. These findings suggest that brain-to-brain synchrony might be
a biomarker for dynamic classroom interactions. As such, they provide
a potentially promising new avenue for investigations into the neuroscience of group interactions ‘in the wild.’ References: [1] Hasson et al. 2012.
Trends Cogn Sci 16(2):114-21; [2] Reyes et al. 2012. J Educational Psychology 104(3):700-712.

B21
FUNCTIONAL CORRELATES OF PERSONALITY AND EMOTIONAL
FACES IN YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS Ninni Persson1, Natalie C Ebner2,
Tian Lin2, Håkan Fischer1,3; 1Department of Psychology, Stockholm University,
Sweden, 2Department of Psychology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA,
3
Aging Research Center, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. — Individ-

ual differences in personality may affect perceptions of emotional states in
others. Studies investigating the link between personality and blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) activation to facial expressions of emotion are
scarce. We assessed the influence of personality on peak BOLD activation
from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in the middle frontal (MFG), inferior frontal (IFG), and insula (IN) gyri to happy and angry
faces contrasted with a low-level baseline, in young (n= 30, 20-31 years)
and older (n=30, 65-74 years) adults, using a facial emotion identification
paradigm. Self-reported information about neuroticism, extraversion, and
openness was included (NEO-PI). Latent difference score models gauged
the influence of personality on BOLD activation. Individuals with higher
levels of neuroticism had decreased BOLD in left IN and right IFG and in
the MFG to angry faces, after accounting for age. Greater openness predicted activation of IN, controlling for the influence of age. Age magnified
the effect of openness and extraversion on BOLD response to angry facial
expressions, to greater activation in older adults. Inter-individual differences in personality did not explain BOLD activation to happy faces. Our
findings suggest that the personality trait neuroticism is associated with
increased neuronal response to negative (angry) cues in key structures

Laurel Gabard-Durnam3, Christina Caldera4, Bonnie Goff4, Martin Monti4, Tanja
Jovanovic5, BJ Casey1, Nim Tottenham3; 1Weill Cornell Medical College, 2Adelphi
University, 3Columbia University, 4UCLA, 5Emory University — Frontoamygdala

circuitry and the ability to extinguish fear undergo dynamic changes across
normative development. Translational studies in mice and humans have
demonstrated a period of diminished cued fear extinction during adolescence, raising the question of whether adolescents may benefit from efforts
to optimize fear reduction through novel mechanisms that bypass prefrontally-mediated extinction processes. Rodent studies have shown that safety
signals effectively reduce anxiety to threat and prevent the development
of new fears. Because they provide a context for the conditioned stimulus
(CS), safety cues may rely on hippocampal projections to frontoamygdala
circuitry and thus be particularly useful during adolescence. The present
fMRI study examined the development of safety signal learning across
childhood and adolescence (7-17 years old). Though children and adolescents both showed robust hippocampal activation to the CS paired with
the safety cue, only adolescents showed increased prefrontal activation and
downregulation of amygdala reactivity that was associated with behavioral
evidence of safety learning. Our findings suggest that safety signals may
be a powerful way to reduce fear during this developmental window. This
study is expected to have important implications for optimizing treatments
for anxiety in youth based on the biological state of the developing brain.

B23
LIFESPAN CHARACTERIZATION OF INTER-NETWORK STRUCTURAL COVARIANCE: A BIG-DATA CROSS-SECTIONAL MRI
STUDY Katherine Aboud1, Yuankai Huo1, Hakmook Kang1, Ashley Ealey2, Bennett Landman1, Laurie Cutting1; 1Vanderbilt University, 2Agnes Scott College —

Recent studies have characterized brain development in terms of morphological synchronization across brain regions. These structural covariance
networks not only map onto functionally identified cognitive systems,
but also correlate with a range of cognitive abilities across the lifespan; for
instance, IQ has been found to correlate with structural covariance between
frontal, temporal, and parietal regions. However, despite advances in within-network covariance examinations (e.g. covariance of regions within the
language network), no studies to date have characterized inter-network
structural covariance patterns (e.g. how language networks covary with
visual networks). In the current study, we performed a cross-sectional
analysis of volumetric network covariance in over 5000 subjects ranging
in age from 5-95. Whole brain segmentation (133 label) was conducted by
a multi-atlas segmentation framework. Regions of interest were grouped
into 15 networks, including primary sensory, language, memory, and executive networks. The cross-age growth curves of each group were fit using
a restricted cubic spline regression with bootstrap validation. Hierarchical
clustering analysis was performed on the resulting network growth curves.
Our findings showed significant, age-dependent inter-network covariance
patterns. Specifically, children (5-12 years) showed pronounced network
modularity, reflective of differential growth rates in associative versus primary sensory networks. Adolescence (13-18 years) and young adulthood
(19-29 years) were marked by developmental stability (i.e. higher inter-network covariance), followed by a degradation of cross-network covariance
in middle to older age groups (30-95 years). Interestingly, these covariance
fluctuations were differentiated by sex and education level. This is the first
study to characterize inter-network covariance trends across the lifespan.

B24
DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN THE PERCEPTION OF VOLUNTARY AND INVOLUNTARY EMOTIONAL VOCALIZATIONS Sinead H.Y.

Chen1, Saloni Krishnan1,2, Samuel Evans1, Stella Guldner1, Ana Gomes1, Nermin
Khamosia1, Cesar Lima1, Sophie Scott1; 1University College London, 2University
of Oxford — How does age affect the perception of emotion? Laughter and
crying are fundamental to the human experience and are produced and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

79

Poster Session B	
heard right from infancy to adulthood. While laughter and crying can be
helpless or involuntary, voluntary versions can be deliberately used in
social situations. In this study, we investigate the perception of emotional
vocalizations across age. In a large-scale study conducted in the Science
Museum, London, we tested 1,847 visitors. Participants were played vocalizations varying in voluntariness (involuntary/voluntary) and emotion
(laughter/crying); they rated emotional sounds on 5-point Likert scales for
their perceived authenticity (‘How real do you think the emotion is?’) and
their contagiousness (‘How much do you want to join in?’). Only data from
1,723 participants (1,010 females) who passed our catch-trials criterion was
further analysed. Preliminary analyses showed that the developmental trajectories for perception of voluntary and involuntary expressions differed:
with age, the difference between authenticity ratings increased (laughter:
R2 = 0.22, p <0.001; crying: R2 = 0.26, p <0.001). The same was true of the
contagion ratings (laughter: R2 = 0.21, p <0.001; crying: R2 = 0.10, p <0.001).
Our results suggest a shaping of the response to voluntary sounds over the
lifespan, rather than to involuntary sounds. This indicates an important,
but differential, role for social factors and experience in learning about the
perception of emotional vocalizations.

B25
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN AUDITORY EMOTION PROCESSING IN OLDER ADULTS ARE REFLECTED IN BRAIN STRUCTURE
Cesar Lima1, Nadine Lavan2, Samuel Evans1, Zarinah Agnew3, Sophie Scott1;
1
University College London, 2Royal Holloway University of London, 3University of
Californa, San Francisco — We use a multitude of nonverbal cues to infer

others’ emotional states in social interactions, such as facial expressions,
body postures, touch, or vocal information. Being effective at perceiving
these cues is crucial for interpersonal functioning at any age. Although a
number of studies report group-level age-related decline in emotion recognition accuracy, much less is known about the neural basis of inter-individual differences at older ages. In this study, 34 older adults (Mage =
59.2 years) and 23 younger ones (Mage = 29.6 years) completed an emotion
recognition task in the auditory domain, using nonverbal vocalizations
(e.g., laughter, crying, screams). Participants also underwent an MRI scan;
T1-weighted volumetric images were acquired in a Siemens Avanto 1.5
Tesla system, including 32-channel head coil. Behaviourally, age-related
decrements were observed for positive and negative emotions, but performance varied considerably among older adults: those performing above
the median of the group reached youth-like accuracy levels. We conducted
a voxel-based morphometry analysis, and found neuroanatomical differences between older adults showing preserved auditory emotion recognition and those showing declining performance: higher performance was
associated with increased grey matter volume in bilateral temporal systems
known to support vocal communication, and with attenuated structural
decline in these systems when compared to younger adults. These differences do not include the primary auditory cortex – they are likely to reflect
inter-individual variability in ageing trajectories of systems supporting
emotion-specific processes. These results are discussed in relation to theoretical perspectives on emotional ageing.

B26
ANTICIPATION OF A LIVE SOCIAL REWARD MODULATES NETWORK INTEGRATION IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD Dustin Moraczewski1,

Laura Anderson1, Katherine Rice1, Elizabeth Redcay1; 1University of Maryland College Park — The motivation to interact with others (i.e., social motivation)

is critical to successful social development. However, the neural circuitry
supporting social motivation is typically examined using non-interactive
rewards (e.g., photographs of faces), which may not capture the dynamics
of real-world social interaction. In the current fMRI study, we examined
how anticipation of a real-time social interaction modulates reward and
social brain systems. We targeted middle childhood because, although this
is a period of expanding social spheres and social brain specialization, little
is known about the neural circuitry supporting social motivation during
this age. Twenty-two children (11 male, mean age = 10.6) participated in a
modified incentive delay paradigm. Participants believed that they would
receive live feedback from the experimenter on successful trials. We used
task-based activation and functional connectivity graph theoretical metrics
(e.g. modularity; clustering coefficient) to examine interactions with reward
and social brain networks. Whole-brain contrasts show that anticipation

80

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
of a live ¬¬social reward significantly modulated social reward regions
including the orbitofrontal cortex, amygdala, and fusiform gyrus. Further,
behavioral ratings of how “live” the social feedback felt were positively
related to ventral striatum activity. In examining the integration of reward
and social brain regions, we found significantly less modularity during the
live condition (i.e. more network integration) and higher network-wide
clustering of the ventral striatum. Taken together, these results illustrate
changes in functional network organization during the anticipation of an
ecologically valid social reward, an important step toward understanding
the developing social brain in a real-world context.

B27
NEURAL AND BEHAVIORAL EVIDENCE FOR INFANTS’ SENSITIVITY TO TRUSTWORTHY FACES Sarah Jessen1, Tobias Grossmann1,2; 1Max
Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 2University of Virginia —

Evaluating another person regarding her character traits is essential during
social encounters. Previous studies show that adults and preschool-aged
children reliably evaluate a person’s face with respect to its trustworthiness and dominance. However, it is unclear whether the sensitivity to facial
cues of trustworthiness and dominance exists early in development and
can therefore be considered an early emerging and foundational aspect
of face evaluation. We therefore examined event-related brain responses
(ERPs) and behavior (looking time) in 7-month-old infants viewing faces
varying parametrically in perceived trustworthiness (Experiment 1) or
dominance (Experiment 2). Experiment 1 revealed that infants’ looking
time increased monotonically with increasing trustworthiness of the face
(F(1,25) = 5.96, p=.022, η2 = 0.19), suggesting a preference for trustworthy
faces. Furthermore, the degree of trustworthiness of the face modulated
ERP responses previously linked to emotional face processing in infancy
(F(1.97,51.21)=3.37, p=0.043, η2 = 0.11). In agreement with prior adult studies, infants’ detection of facial cues of trustworthiness seems to rely on processes similar to those used when detecting emotional information from
faces. Critically, faces varying with respect to dominance did not elicit any
behavioral or neural effects (all η2 ≤ .02) in Experiment 2. Taken together,
the current findings shed light on the developmental origins of face evaluation: At the age of 7 months infants are sensitive to facial cues of trustworthiness but not dominance. This suggests that trustworthiness can be
considered an early-developing dimension along which faces are discriminated, whereas dominance requires more time and experience to develop.

B28
FURTHER EVIDENCE FOR INCREASED CORTICAL THINNING
DURING CHILDHOOD AND ADOLESCENCE IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER Cynthia Peng1, Esha Mehta1, Kirsten O’Hearn2, Greg-

ory Wallace1; 1The George Washington University, 2University of Pittsburgh
— Although many studies have found atypical brain structure associated

with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), very few to date have explored
differences in longitudinal brain changes. Therefore, in the current study
we compare longitudinal changes in cortical thickness among youth with
ASD versus typically developing (TD) youth. 13 youth with ASD (diagnosed using DSM-IV criteria and both the Autism Diagnostic Interview
and the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule) and 17 TD youth each
provided two anatomic magnetic resonance imaging scans obtained
at two time points. Groups were matched on age (ASD scan 1=13.23+/2.66, scan 2=14.86+/-2.72; TD scan 1=13.75+/-2.45, scan 2=15.52+/-2.49),
IQ (ASD=107.69+/-14.09; TD=106.88+/-10.91), and sex ratio (male:female
– ASD=11:2; TD=13:4). The CIVET brain-imaging pipeline (v2.0) along
with SurfStat image analysis suite were used to derive vertex-level cortical
thickness values and complete longitudinal analyses. Annualized change
([thickness time 2–thickness time 1]/duration between scans) in cortical
thickness was mapped to the surface across 81,924 vertices and compared
between ASD and TD groups. Results revealed several regions where
greater cortical thinning was observed in the ASD than the TD group;
however, only one area in the left hemisphere that encompasses the insula
survived family-wise error correction (at the 0.01 level) for multiple comparisons. Follow-up cross-sectional analyses revealed that this increased
cortical thinning was driven by thinner cortex in this same region in the
ASD (vs. TD) group at time 2. These findings add to the growing literature
suggesting that ASD is characterized by an atypically increased cortical
thinning during the dynamic developmental period of adolescence.

2016 Annual Meeting	

B29
EMOTIONAL FACE PROCESSING DEVELOPMENT IN FULL AND
PRE-TERM INFANTS: A QUANTITATIVE ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAM STUDY. Cintli Carolina Carbajal Valenzuela1, Efraín Santiago Rodríguez1, Gina Lorena Quirarte1, Thalía Harmony Baillet1; 1Instituto de Neurobiología, U.N.A.M. — Goals: To test the hypothesis that full-term and pre-term

infants differ in their development of emotional face processing. Methods:
A comparative, longitudinal study was conducted in premature and term
infants at four and eight months of age. Absolute power of the electroencephalogram was analyzed in both groups during five conditions of an
emotional face processing task: positive, negative, and neutral faces, nonface and rest. Results: Differences between conditions of the task at four
months were limited to rest versus non-rest comparisons in both groups.
Eight-month-old born-at-term infants had increases (p≤0.05) in absolute
power in the left occipital region at the frequency 10.16 Hz and in the right
occipital region at 3.52, 12.89, and 16.02 Hz during a positive face in comparison to a neutral face. They also had absolute power increases in the
left occipital region at 1.95 Hz and in the right occipital region at 2.34 and
3.52 Hz during positive- compared to non-face stimuli. In contrast, positive, negative, and neutral faces elicited the same responses in pre-term
infants. Conclusion: Our study provides electrophysiological evidence that
emotional face processing develops differently in pre-term infants than in
full-term infants, who have bilateral occipital increases in absolute power
while processing positive- in comparison to neutral- and non-face stimuli
at eight months old, suggesting that premature birth alters brain development mechanisms such as myelination process and consequently complex
cognitive functions.

B30
INCREASED PTSD SYMPTOMATOLOGY AND GERIATRIC DEPRESSION RELATE TO DECREASED VOLUME IN CORTICAL AREAS
ASSOCIATED WITH SELF-REFERENTIAL AND WORKING MEMORY

Lindsay K. Knight1, Farah Naaz2, Brendan E. Depue2,3; 1University of Louisville,
Interdisciplinary Program in Translational Neuroscience, 2University of Louisville, Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 3University of Louisville,
Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology — Previous studies show

geriatric depression may double the risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease
(AD). Individuals with a clinical diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) are also at higher risk for depression, as well as AD. Therefore, the aim of the present analyses was to better understand how geriatric depression and/or PTSD may predict morphometric features in brain
regions know to be affected in AD (e.g., medial temporal lobe). To do so,
we investigated cortical surface-based morphometry of 42 Vietnam War
veterans diagnosed with PTSD. Data were obtained from the Alzheimer’s
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database, funded by the National
Institute on Aging and the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering. Behaviorally, the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) and
PTSD symptomatology was correlated within the group (p=.02), such that
increased depression was related to increased PTSD symptomatology.
Subsequently, FreeSurfer morphometric measures (i.e., volume, thickness,
and surface area) were regressed with the GDS and lifetime PTSD symptomatology, controlling for age and intracranial volume. Results indicated
that decreased volume in the left superior frontal gyrus was related to
both increased scores of geriatric depression, as well as more severe PTSD
symptoms. Additionally, increased PTSD severity was related to decreased
volume in the anterior right temporal lobe (i.e., inferior temporal/fusiform
gyrus). These results suggest that increased geriatric depression and greater
PTSD severity was associated with 1) prefrontal cortical regions associated
with self-referential or working memory (i.e., BA10, medial BA8) and 2)
multimodal sensory areas that project to the hippocampus (i.e., anterior
fusiform gyrus).

B31
WHITE MATTER MATURATION IN TEMPOROPARIETAL JUNCTION
AND ITS CONNECTION TO PREFRONTAL CORTEX SUPPORTS
THE EMERGENCE OF THEORY OF MIND Charlotte Grosse Wiesmann1,
Jan Schreiber1, Tania Singer1, Nikolaus Steinbeis1,2, Angela D. Friederici1; 1Max

Poster Session B
Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 2Universiteit Leiden —

Understanding what other people think and believe is a hallmark of human
cognition and is referred to as Theory of Mind (ToM). In human development, a milestone in ToM is achieved around the age of 4 years when
children start understanding that others can have false beliefs about the
world. To date, however, it is unclear what determines this developmental
breakthrough. In particular, the neural mechanisms supporting this crucial
step are unknown. Here, we related this behavioral change from failing to
passing false belief tests to the maturation of brain structure in 43 three- and
four-year-old children. Conducting a tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS)
analysis, we showed that the development of false belief understanding
correlated with increased white matter maturation in the core adult ToM
network, i.e. right temporoparietal junction (TPJ), medial temporal gyrus,
precuneus and medial prefrontal cortex. Probabilistic tractography from
seeds in these regions yielded a network connecting temporoparietal and
prefrontal brain regions. Children’s false belief performance correlated in
particular with connectivity between the TPJ and the anterior inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) via the arcuate fascicle. These associations were independent
of any co-occurring development of language or executive functions and
differed from earlier-developing anticipatory looking false belief tasks. The
present findings thus indicate that both, white matter maturation in brain
regions that support belief processing in adults, as well as an increased connectivity of the dorsal pathway connecting the belief processing region TPJ
to the IFG pave the way for the emergence of a mature ToM.

B32
AN ALE META-ANALYSIS OF FACIAL PROCESSING IN AUTISM

Zachary Grulke1, Edward Hubbard1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — People

with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) often have social deficits that are
tied to facial processing (e.g., Golari et al., 2006). The aim of the current
study was to identify consistent differences between the brain regions
recruited by typically developing (TD) individuals and individuals with
ASD when they process faces throughout development. We therefore conducted an Activation Likelihood Estimation (ALE) meta-analysis of face
processing in ASD. We included studies that used whole-brain scans that
focused on facial processing tasks (e.g. determining in faces were familiar
and responding to emotional faces), and directly compared activation in
individuals with ASD to activation in TD individuals. Peak voxel coordinates and sample sizes were entered into GingerALE (v. 2.3) to create ALE
maps, and data were visualized in Mango (v. 3.5.1). Initial results replicate previous findings (Aoki et al., 2014; Nomi & Uddin, 2015) showing
that ASD individuals had reduced activation in the extended face network,
including the fusiform face area (FFA), fusiform gyrus, and the amygdala, than did TD individuals. In contrast, our meta-analysis identified no
regions that were more strongly activated in ASD than in TD individuals.
However, previous meta-analyses have examined differences between
groups without considering development. Differences in adults may be
consistent with early differences, or due to differential experiences with
faces (due to reduced attention to them). We will therefore conduct further
analysis to explore potential age x diagnoses interactions consistent with
atypical developmental trajectories in the neural mechanisms underlying
facial processing.

B33
NEURAL CONNECTIONS FOSTER SOCIAL CONNECTIONS: A DIFFUSION-WEIGHTED IMAGING STUDY OF SOCIAL NETWORKS Wil-

liam Hampton1, Ashley Unger1, Rebecca Von Der Heide1, Ingrid Olson1; 1Temple
University — While we know adolescence is a period marked by important

social and neural development, little is known about how an adolescent’s
social network size might affect neurocognitive development or vice
versa. Neuroimaging research has identified several brain regions, such as
the amygdala, as key to this affiliative behavior. However, white matter
connectivity among these regions, and its behavioral correlates, remain
unclear. Here we tested two hypotheses: that an amygdalocentric structural white matter network governs social affiliative behavior and that this
network changes during adolescence. We measured social network size
behaviorally, and white matter microstructure using probabilistic diffusion tensor imaging in a sample of neurologically normal adolescents and
young adults. Our results suggest amygdala white matter microstructure
is key to understanding individual differences in social network size, with

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

81

Poster Session B	
connectivity to other social brain regions such as the orbitofrontal cortex
and anterior temporal lobe predicting much variation. In addition, participant age correlated with both network size and white matter variation in
this network. These findings suggest that amygdala white matter is key to
understanding individual differences in social network size, and that adolescence may constitute a critical period for the optimization of structural
brain networks underlying affiliative behavior.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
B34
ADHD AND EMOTION DYSREGULATION: AN ISSUE WITH TOPDOWN OR BOTTOM-UP PROCESSING OF EMOTIONAL STIMULI? Brittany Alperin1, Christiana Smith1, Sarah Karalunas1; 1Oregon Health

and Science University — Emotion dysregulation is prevalent in adolescents

with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and is related to
clinical impairment, but substantial heterogeneity exists. Within ADHD,
subgroups of children experience difficulty regulating either positive/
approach emotions or negative/withdrawal emotions; however, the mechanisms underlying these differences remain unclear. Context-specific
problems with emotion regulation may reflect differences in bottom-up
emotional reactivity, top-down emotion regulation, or both. In the current
study, event-related potentials were collected from 60 adolescents (30 with
ADHD, mean age=13 years) while they completed an emotional go/no-go
task with three conditions: happy (positive/approach), fear (negative/
withdrawal), and neutral. The N170 was used as a marker of bottom-up
attention capture by emotional face stimuli and the late positive potential
(LPP) was used as a marker of top-down emotion processing. Ratings of
emotional response style were collected using the well-validated Early
Adolescent Temperament Questionnaire. Consistent with prior literature,
typically-developing adolescents exhibited a larger N170 to fearful faces
and a larger LPP to fearful and happy faces. Neither the N170 nor LPP differed between emotion conditions for adolescents with ADHD, likely due
to within group heterogeneity. Within the ADHD group, N170 responses
to happy faces predicted ratings of positive/approach emotion dysregulation, whereas LPP to fearful faces predicted negative/withdrawal emotion
dysregulation. Results suggest dysregulation of positive/approach-related
emotions in ADHD is driven by bottom up over-reactivity, whereas dysregulation of negative/withdrawal-related affect reflects a decrease in topdown control. These findings help clarify pathophysiological mechanisms
of emotion dysregulation in ADHD, which is essential for developing interventions that directly target mechanisms of impairment.

B35
THE PARIETAL BRAIN ACTIVATION IN PROCESSING FACIAL
EXPRESSION AND EMOTIONAL PROSODY Shih-Tseng T. Huang1,2,

Ming-Chun Lee1; 1Department of Psychology, National Chung-Cheng University,
Taiwan, 2Center for research in Cognitive Science, National Chung-Cheng University, Taiwan — Twenty young adults participated in an ERP experiment

measuring the brain activation in processing acoustic emotional prosody
and facial expression. Congruous and incongruous of angry and sad face
and voice were presented. In each congruous pair, an angry (or sad) voice
fragment accompanied with a congruous angry (or sad) facial expression.
Each incongruous pair contained an angry voice prosody was paired with
a sad face, or a sad face paired with an angry voice. In each run there were
two kinds of percentage in combinations of the congruous and incongruous
trials. Five runs contained 85% congruous trials (as standard pairs) and 15%
incongruous trials (as deviant pairs). The other five runs contained 85%
incongruous trials and 15% congruous trials. The results found both P120
and N170 at Pz were higher than Fz and Cz and N170 at Cz was higher than
Fz. It was found that higher mean amplitudes (MAs) of P300-500 at Fz, Cz,
and Pz on incongruous trials when presented as standard. It was also found
higher activation of P300-500 at Fz on congruous trials when presented as
deviants. Similar results were found in P500-800 at Fz and Pz. And, right
hemisphere with higher activation in P300-500 at P4 than at P3. The Results
suggested higher activation in processing emotional information at parietal

82

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
lobes from early stage. Furthermore, a higher activation in the frontal lobes
and at right parietal lobe in the integration the emotional information of
face with voice of P300-500.

B36
WHEN NEUTRAL TURNS SIGNIFICANT: BRAIN DYNAMICS OF
RAPIDLY FORMED ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN NEUTRAL STIMULI
AND EMOTIONAL CONTEXTS Mathias Weymar1, Carlos Ventura-Bort1,

Andreas Löw2, Julia Wendt1, Florin Dolcos3, Alfons O. Hamm1; 1University of
Greifswald, 2University of the Federal Armed Forces Hamburg, 3University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — The capacity to associate neutral stimuli with

affective value is an important survival strategy. In the present study we
used event-related potentials (ERPs) to investigate brain dynamics of
associative emotional learning when participants were confronted with
multiple heterogeneous information. Thirty-one participants viewed 144
different objects (e.g., household objects, tools) in the context of 144 different emotional and neutral background scenes. During each trial, neutral
objects were shown in isolation and then complemented by the background
scene. All 144 pairings were presented once and repeated in a second block
(random order), to compare ERPs in response to neutral objects before and
after single association. Our results showed clear differences in the ERPs at
early and late stages of processing. After single pairing, neutral objects previously encoded in the context of emotional scenes, evoked a larger P100
over occipital electrodes in the time range between 140 and 180 ms, compared to objects previously paired with neutral scenes (second block). Likewise, larger late positive potentials (LPP) were observed over centro-parietal electrodes (400-700 ms) for objects from emotional contexts, relative to
neutral contexts. The data provide evidence for fast associative learning
even when confronted with heterogeneous information. Our electrophysiological results indicate heightened perceptual and sustained elaborative
processing for neutral information when previously encoded in emotional
context, which could assist in understanding binding mechanisms in anxiety and stress.

B37
STRUCTURAL BRAIN CORRELATES OF CALLOUS-UNEMOTIONAL
TRAITS AND/OR AGGRESSION IN TYPICALLY-DEVELOPING
ADOLESCENTS Nora Maria Raschle1, Willeke Martine Menks1, Lynn Valérie

Fehlbaum1, Iyad El Qirinawi1, Graeme Fairchild2, Stephane de Brito3, Beate Herpertz-Dahlmann4, Christine Freitag5, Christina Stadler1; 1Psychiatric University
Clinics Basel, CH, 2University of Southampton, UK, 3University of Birmingham, UK,
4
RWTH Aachen, DE, 5J.W. Goethe University Hospital Frankfurt, DE — Conduct

disorder (CD) characterized by severe aggressive and antisocial behaviour
in youth displays distinct behavioural and neuronal characteristics. However, callous-unemotional (CU) traits are suggested to delineate a meaningful subtype within CD as indicated by genetic, behavioural and neuroimaging research (e.g., structural changes within amygdala, prefrontal
cortex, insula). To date, CU traits have been almost exclusively studied in
clinical samples displaying additional problems (e.g., aggression). It is thus
not possible to know whether the observed alterations in brain structures
are associated with the CU traits per se or a combination of CU traits and
corresponding CD symptoms. We collected structural neuroimaging in 223
typically developing children as part of the ongoing FemNAT-CD project
(FP7no602407). Participants were characterized using standardized clinical
interviews/testing, including assessments targeting CU traits/aggression.
Individuals were assigned CU status according to the presence/absence
of CU traits (CU+/CU-) and aggression. Restricted by the smallest group
(CU-/aggression) voxel-based morphometry was performed in 78 individuals using an extreme-groups approach (mean 13y; each subgroup N=18;
gender, age, site-matched). Analysis using standard pre-processing and
DARTEL normalization/smoothing preceded a 2-by-2-full-factorial analysis (with/without callousness/aggression). Significant main effects of callousness (bilateral amygdala, anterior/middle cingulate) and aggression
(inferior parietal/occipital) were identified as well as an interaction effect
within areas including right insula, cingulate and frontal cortices (p<0.005,
k=10). Post-hoc two sample-T-tests and ROI analyses provide further indication for the direction and effect within each subgroup (with/without CU
traits/aggression). We provide evidence that there are both unique and
common effects of CU traits and aggression on adolescent brain structure.

2016 Annual Meeting	

B38
SEROTONERGIC MODULATION OF AMYGDALA CONNECTIVITY
DURING VIRTUAL AGGRESSION Martin Klasen1, Dhana Wolf1, Patrick

Schelenz1, Krystyna Mathiak2, René Weber3, Mikhail Zvyagintsev1, Florian Zepf4,
Klaus Mathiak1; 1RWTH Aachen University, Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy, and Psychosomatics, 2RWTH Aachen University, Department of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychotherapy, and Psychosomatics, 3University of
California Santa Barbara, Department of Communication, 4University of Western Australia, School of Paediatrics and Child Health — Neural transmission

in serotonergic amygdala projections have been discussed as contributing
to the emergence of aggressive behavior. In a previous study (Klasen et
al., 2013), the serotonergic antipsychotic quetiapine modulated functional
amygdala connectivity during virtual aggression. Changes in amygdala
connectivity were accompanied by changes in state aggression. However,
it remains unclear whether these brain-behavior effects can be attributed to
the modulation of serotonergic projections. The present fMRI study investigated the selective serotonin effects on the neural correlates of aggression
in 39 healthy male participants in a double-blind and placebo-controlled
cross-over design. On three separate days, serotonergic transmission was
enhanced by the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) escitalopram,
reduced via acute tryptophan depletion (ATD), or unaltered in a placebo
condition. In accordance with previous studies (Mathiak and Weber, 2006;
Weber et al., 2006; Klasen et al., 2013), virtual violence during a video game
served as model for aggression during the fMRI measurements. To study
cortico-limbic connectivity, the amygdala served as anatomically a priori
defined seed region. Serotonin modulation effects (SSRI, ATD, and placebo) on functional amygdala connectivity were calculated in a repeated
measures ANOVA and subsequent post-hoc tests. Connectivity between
amygdala and bilateral Nucleus accumbens increased linearly with higher
available serotonin. Conceivably, the transmitter synchronizes the amygdala with the brain reward system and may thus enhance the rewarding
value of aggressive acts.

B39
MOBILE MOOD TRACKER (MMT): A MOBILE HEALTH APP TO
ASSESS MOOD STATES IN DEPRESSION Mor Nahum1, Tom Van

Vleet1,2, Vikram Rao3, Julie Mirzabekov3,4, Vikaas Sohal3, Deanna Wallace3,
Morgan Lee3, Alit Stark-Inbar1,4, Heather Dawes3, Michael Merzenich1, Edward
Chang3; 1Posit Science Corporation, San Francisco, 2Veterans Administration,
Martinez, 3UC San Francisco, 4UC Berkeley — Depression is characterized

by a range of emotional, cognitive and behavioral symptoms. Lack of
inter-treatment patient-provider continuity contributes to the high relapse
rate in depression, emphasizing the need to develop tools that facilitate
patient monitoring outside the clinic. To this end, we developed a Mobile
Mood Tracker (MMT) application, designed to provide remote ecological
momentary assessment of emotional and cognitive states using a combination of validated questionnaires (PHQ-9, GAD-7), a novel immediate
mood scaler (IMS; a 22-item rating scale), and the Emotion Matcher (EM), a
behavioral assessment to implicitly capture attention biases in depression
using emotional faces. 86 participants (age: 34.5±12 years), with depression
levels ranging from minimal (n=22) to severe (n=23) completed the MMT
assessments. The results indicated that both GAD-7 (r=0.76, p<.0001) and
IMS (r=0.61, p<.001) scores were correlated with PHQ-9. A hierarchical
linear regression model predicting PHQ-9 score (n=29) showed that 51%
of the variance was accounted for by a model combining IMS and EM, confirming the validity of these two measures to predict depressed mood. In
addition, in the 52 participants that completed two or more MMT sessions,
IMS variability across sessions showed an interesting pattern of correlation
with depression level: minimal-to-mildly depressed individuals showed
positive correlation (n=27, r=.43; p<.03), moderately depressed individuals
showed no correlation (n=16; r=.28), and severely depressed individuals
showed negative correlation (n=10, r=.85; p<.002) with level of depression.
Together, these data provide evidence for the effectiveness of MMT as a
remotely-deployed tool to assess current mood state and mood changes
over time.

Poster Session B

B40
INTOLERANCE OF UNCERTAINTY IS ASSOCIATED WITH
RESPONSE DISINHIBITION DURING ANTICIPATION OF PUNISHMENT, NOT REWARD Jessica Lake1, Zachary Infantolino2, Laura Crocker3,
Jeffrey Spielberg4, Cindy Yee1, Wendy Heller5, Gregory Miller1,5; 1University of
California, Los Angeles, 2University of Delaware, 3VA San Diego Healthcare
System, 4VA Boston Healthcare System, 5University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Intolerance of uncertainty (IU) is associated with excessive worry

and increased activation in regions implicated in emotion processing.
Although high IU is typically assumed to have maladaptive consequences,
particularly for the anticipation of aversive outcomes, its modulation of
performance has rarely been examined, and differential effects during the
anticipation of positive versus negative outcomes have yet to be explored.
This study investigated whether IU differentially affects performance and
neural activity during the anticipation of uncertain negative and positive
outcomes contingent on performance and explored whether IU effects
were driven primarily by the prospective or inhibitory anxiety subscale,
which are thought to reflect anxiety about future events and how uncertainty inhibits behavior, respectively. During fMRI, participants performed
a modified monetary incentive delay task during which they were motivated by possible reward and/or punishment contingent on reaction time.
Greater IU was associated with faster reaction time and reduced activation
in regions associated with response inhibition on punishment-possible relative to no-punishment-possible trials. Given that response disinhibition
was associated with higher inhibitory anxiety scores, the subscale may
be better conceptualized as a measure of the degree to which uncertainty
influences behavior, rather than how much it specifically inhibits behavior.
In contrast, reward anticipation did not modulate performance or neural
activity. Activity in right inferior frontal gyrus partially mediated the relationship between IU and reaction time during punishment anticipation.
These findings suggest that in nonclinical populations IU modulates motivated behavior via the disinhibition of responding during punishment but
not reward.

B41
AN ERP STUDY OF FRONTAL AND RIGHT PARIETAL ACTIVATION
IN PROCESSING FACE AND VOICE Ming-Chun Lee1, Shih-Tseng Huang1,2;
1

Department of Psychology, National Chung-Cheng University, Taiwan, 2Center for
research in Cognitive Science, National Chung-Cheng University, Taiwan — Con-

gruous and incongruous faces and voices of angry and sad emotion were
presented. In a congruous angry (or sad) pair, an angry (or sad) face was
presented with an angry (or sad) tone. The incongruous angry pairs contained an angry face presented with a sad tone, or a sad face with an angry
tone. Similarly, the incongruous sad pairs contained sad face with neutral
tone or neutral face with sad tone. Twenty young adults participated. In the
event-related potential procedure, in half of the runs, congruous emotional
pairs trials were presented in 85% and the incongruous pairs were in 15%
of the trials. In the other half, congruous trials were presented in 15% and
incongruous pairs were in 85% of the trials. The results found higher mean
amplitudes (MAs) of P300-500 on congruent than on incongruent pairs. It
was also found a significant interaction of emotion and sex on P300-500
at F3 and F4, suggesting male participants performed higher activation
on the incongruent trials than on the congruent trials. Higher activation
was found at right parietal lobe of P4 than at left of P3 in P300-500. When
85% of the trials were congruous, higher activation was found at right (P4)
than of left parietal (P3) lobe in P500-800. The results suggested that males
tended to perform higher activation of P300-500 on the incongruent trials
than females and compared to the left parietal lobe, a higher activation of
right parietal lobe was found.

B42
THE PROCESSING OF MORAL SALIENCE DURING A SEMANTIC
ASSOCIATION TASK Gunes Sevinc1,2, Nathan Spreng1; 1Cornell University,
Ithaca, 2Yildiz Technical University, Turkey — The neural correlates of morality

have been associated with the default network for its role in mental simulation. However, little is known about how the moral content of a stimulus is
initially processed, and how this processing is influenced by moral valence.
To investigate this relationship, we examined neural correlates of detecting

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

83

Poster Session B	
moral salience and the consecutive processing of moral content with fMRI
in 22 young adult participants. In this task, participants read a brief vignette,
then completed the vignette by selecting one of two related sentences. The
correct, most semantically related sentence, and the incorrect sentence
options involved immoral, moral or neutral statements . The processing
of moral salience was implicit to the task. Analysis of RT data revealed
that semantically correct neutral statements were the fastest to process
and immoral statements were the slowest. Neuroimaging data were analyzed with partial least squares. The first latent variable dissociated both
the moral and immoral conditions from the neutral. Moral and immoral
response selection engaged dorsal anterior cingulate, medial prefrontal
and posterior cingulate cortex, the temporoparietal junction, and anterior
insula. A second latent variable dissociated the immoral from moral conditions. For the immoral condition, the temporal unfolding of neural activity
engaged the temporoparietal junction and right superior temporal sulcus
at the initial phases; and anterior insula and medial frontal regions later.
These results suggest a contribution of the salience network to moral processing, in addition to the default network, and emphasize studying moral
cognition within the framework of dynamic network interactions.

B43
PRESTIMULUS BRAIN ACTIVITY ENHANCES THREAT PERCEPTION Tamara Sussman1, Akos Szekely1, Aprajita Mohanty1; 1Stony Brook University — Research on the perceptual prioritization of threatening stimuli

has focused primarily on the physical characteristics and evolutionary
salience of these stimuli. However, perceptual decision-making is strongly
influenced by prestimulus factors such as goals, expectations, and prior
knowledge. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we test
the hypothesis that prior threat-related information and related increases in
prestimulus activity play a key role in subsequent threat-related perceptual
decision-making. After viewing threatening and neutral cues, participants
detected perceptually degraded threatening and neutral faces presented at
individually pre-determined perceptual thresholds in a perceptual decision-making task. Threat cues improved both perceptual sensitivity and
the speed of detection. In anticipation of threatening faces, threat cues were
associated with greater activity in superior temporal sulcus (STS), a key
brain region involved in emotional face processing. Threat cues were also
associated with subsequent increases in activity in the fusiform gyrus for all
faces and in the amygdala specifically for threatening faces. Finally, threat
cue-related STS activity predicted subsequent improvement in the speed
and precision of perceptual decisions. Present findings establish the importance of top-down factors and prestimulus neural processing in understanding how the perceptual system prioritizes threatening information.

B44
DOES CONTEXT LEARNING GUIDE THREAT DETECTION: A COMPARISON OF THREAT AND NON-THREAT TARGETS Akos Szekely1,
Suparna Rajaram1, Aprajita Mohanty1; 1Stony Brook University — It is hypoth-

esized that threatening stimuli are detected better due to their salience or
physical properties. However, these stimuli are typically embedded in a
rich context, motivating the question whether threat detection is facilitated
via learning of contexts in which threat stimuli appear. Learning of regularities within visual contexts is known to guide faster detection of embedded
targets (Ls and Ts in contextual cueing effect). Using a variant of the contextual cueing paradigm in Experiment 1, we presented new or old spatial
configurations consisting of schematic faces and established that context
learning facilitates detection of non-threatening schematic faces. In Experiments 2 and 3, we used threatening and non-threatening schematic faces
as embedded targets within each experiment and found that when participants are required to detect both types of stimuli within one sequence of
learning experiences, detection of threatening faces is facilitated through
context learning, while this effect reverses for non-threatening faces. Present
findings establish context learning for threat detection and show that this
learning obstructs context learning for non-threatening targets. These findings show that, in addition to the importance of stimulus salience shown in
the literature, learning of context facilitates threat detection. This detection
is driven not only by stimulus properties as theorized traditionally but also
by the learning of contexts in which threatening stimuli appear. Further
work may focus on how context learning of threat may contribute to the
development and maintenance of PTSD and anxiety disorders.

84

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development
& aging
B45
ADHD INTERACTS WITH AGE TO PREDICT THETA RELATIVE
POWER IN YOUNG CHILDREN (AGES 3-7 YEARS) Jenna Snyder1,

Margaret Sheridan1; 1University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill — Resting elec-

troencephalogram (EEG) in children diagnosed with ADHD (8 years and
older) is characterized by elevated theta, decreased beta, and elevated
theta/beta ratios compared to peers (Loo 2012). Few studies have examined
resting EEG in children with and without ADHD younger than 7 . Because
early childhood is an important one for the stabilization of symptoms of
ADHD (Law, 2014) learning more about the neural correlates of ADHD in
this age range is of primary importance. Participants (N= 174) ages 3 y – 7
y 3m participated in eyes-open resting (EEG). Recordings were acquired
using a EGI 128 HydroCel Sensor Net in NetStation (250Hz sampling, 0.1
to 100.0 Hz bp filter) and the power density spectrum was extracted using
EEG Lab in Matlab. Participants (N=96; 74 Male) did and did not (N=78;
45 Male) meet criteria for ADHD. There was no main effect of diagnosis
on relative power in any frequency band (theta[5-8Hz], alpha [9-11Hz],
beta [12-30Hz]) for any electrode. However, there was a significant age x
diagnosis interaction for relative power in theta and beta over right parietal (p=0.001; p=0.025 respectively); in theta power over occipital (p=0.004)
and in beta power over left parietal (p=0.037) and for the theta/beta ratio
over left frontal (p=0.026), right parietal (p=0.001), and occipital (p=0.043)
scalp cites. Children who met criteria for ADHD had larger changes in EEG
power with age than controls. The presence of an age by diagnosis interaction likely reflects the extensive developmental change in this population
in early childhood.

B46
SLEEP DISTURBANCE IS ASSOCIATED WITH LOWER EXECUTIVE
CONTROL NETWORK AND DEFAULT MODE NETWORK CONNECTIVITY IN OLDER ADULTS Kristine Wilckens1, Helmet Karim1, Howard Aizen-

stein1, Daniel Kay1, Daniel Buysse1; 1University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine
— Disturbed sleep is commonly associated with poor executive function

in older adults. Sleep involves neural synchrony over the frontal cortex.
Disruption of this process may weaken connections of the executive control network. Alternatively, sleep may indirectly affect executive function
through the salience network which allocates attentional resources and
initiates switching between executive control and default mode networks.
Using subjective sleep disturbance assessed with the Hamilton Depression Questionnaire and resting-state functional connectivity in 42 older
adults with depression, we assessed whether sleep disturbance was associated with connectivity in the executive control network, default mode
network, and salience network. Each subject-specific region-of-interest to
region-of-interest connectivity matrix was thresholded at r<0.19 to target
the strongest functional connections. Sleep disturbance measured by the
summed sleep disturbance score was significantly associated with lower
connectivity in the left executive control network, rho = -0.35, p=0.02, and
the default mode network rho = -0.24, p=0.02. The relationship in the executive control network remained significant after controlling for age, sex,
and depressive symptoms. Sleep disturbance was not significantly associated with the right executive control network or the salience network; nor
did the salience network mediate relationships between sleep disturbance
and the executive control or default mode network. We conclude that older
adults’ self-report sleep is associated with lower connectivity in networks
commonly associated with executive function. Future work will investigate
whether specific sleep features, such as slow-wave sleep generated by the
frontal cortex, may drive the putative effect of sleep on connectivity of the
executive control network.

B47
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EXECUTIVE FUNCTION INDEX MEMORY
PRESERVATION IN OLD AGE Kelly Polnaszek1, Nicole Dosamantes1, Sina
Malekian1, Robert Morrison1; 1Loyola University Chicago — While preservation

of the ability to learn new information is critical for successful aging, relatively little is known about the factors contributing to its variability in old

2016 Annual Meeting	
age. Likewise, deficits in long-term memory abilities are a diagnostic factor
in Alzheimer’s disease and its precursor, Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment. Research has suggested that executive function may be a critical
factor in determining memory function, particularly when medial temporal
lobe experiences degeneration. To investigate this interaction we recruited
39 older adults from the Northwestern University Cognitive Neurology
and Alzheimer’s Disease Center Clinical Core and divided them into three
groups based on age and long-term memory ability as measured using
the RAVLT Delay (Memory-Matched Controls: 65-79 YO, RAVLT M=11.5;
Age-Matched Older Controls: 80-89 YO, RAVLT M = 5.7; Super-Agers:
80-91 YO, RAVLT M = 11.5). All participants completed a mutli-task testing
session including completing a visual Go-No-Go task while recording their
brain waves using scalp electroencephalography (EEG). The groups did not
differ in either trial accuracy or RT; however, No-Go accuracy was significantly correlated with RAVLT score across groups (r=.50). Event-related
potentials (ERPs) demonstrated distinct patterns of neural activity across
groups. Specifically, Super-Agers showed an enhanced left-frontal P2 ERP
relative to age matched and younger controls. Super-Agers show a similar No-Go/Go subtraction P300 ERP relative to younger memory-matched
controls, but greater than their age matched peers. Together these results
suggest that executive function and the corresponding cognitive control
network may be an important factor in preserving memory function in old
age.

B48
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF
TRIAL-TO-TRIAL VARIATIONS OF REACTION TIME Nancy Adleman1,
Gang Chen2, Richard Reynolds2, Anna Frackman3, Varun Razdan4, Daniel Weissman5, Daniel Pine2, Ellen Leibenluft2; 1Catholic University of America, 2National
Institute of Mental Health, NIH, 3Harvard Medical School, 4Virginia Tech Carilion School of Medicine, 5University of Michigan — Intra-subject variation in

reaction time (ISVRT) is a developmentally-important phenomenon that
decreases from childhood through young adulthood in parallel with the
development of executive functions and networks. Prior work has shown a
significant association between trial-by-trial variations in reaction time (RT)
and trial-by-trial variations in brain activity as measured by the blood-oxygenated level-dependent (BOLD) response in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies. It remains unclear, however, whether such
“RT-BOLD” relationships vary with age. Here, we determined whether
such relationships vary with age in a cross-sectional design. Replicating
prior findings, we observed strong RT-BOLD relationships in many brain
regions including the fronto-parietal association cortex and thalamus.
In addition, some of these relationships were negative (increased BOLD
associated with decreased RT) at around the time of stimulus presentation
and positive several seconds later. Finally, greater peak activation in fronto-parietal cortex and other key brain regions in trial N was associated with
faster RT in trial N+1. Critically for present purposes, all RT-BOLD relationships increased with age. Thus, RT-BOLD relationships may serve as
“biomarkers” of development.

B49
TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ASSOCIATIVE LEARNING: GREATER
CONTRIBUTION OF STIMULUS SALIENCY IN ADOLESCENCE.
Alaina Pearce1, Kathleen Farr1, Chandan Vaidya1,2; 1Georgetown University,
2
Children’s Research Institute — Associative learning (AL) involves acquisi-

tion of predictive relationships between two stimuli, which depends upon
stimulus saliency (e.g, novelty), a bottom-up attentional process. AL also
requires flexible updating of associations through processes dependent on
top-down executive function such as unlearning associations and learning
associations with previously irrelevant stimuli. The Learned Irrelevance
(LIrr) paradigm examines these processes by manipulating cue-target associations in a letter detection task. Cue-target pairing is either random or
predictive, with predictive associations cued by either a novel or previously
irrelevant letter. Faster responses for predictive than random associations
indicates AL, with more AL observed for novel than previously irrelevant
cues indicating LIrr, reflecting updating processes. While executive processes mature progressively in typical development, adolescence is marked
by heightened sensitivity to novelty, providing a useful model for examining bottom-up and top-down processing in AL. Three groups (children:

Poster Session B
n=24; 7-10.5 years; adolescents: n=24; 11-14.5 years; young adults: n=26)
completed the LIrr paradigm and a neuropsychological measure of executive function, the Dellis-Kaplan Executive Function System. We hypothesized that heightened sensitivity to novelty in adolescents would result in
a larger LIrr effect, indicated by a greater difference between AL for novel
and previously irrelevant cues. Indeed, we observed better AL and more
LIrr for adolescents. Executive function was associated with AL, with a
step-wise regression model indicating cognitive flexibility was most predictive. Thus, AL is differentially sensitive to stimulus saliency through the
time course of typical development.

B50
ASSOCIATION OF DEMENTIA RISK FACTORS AND EX-GAUSSIAN
REACTION TIME COMPONENTS OF THE STROOP TASK. Dhawal

Selarka1,2, Lynn Hasher1,2, Larry Leach2, Kelly Murphy1,2, Gillian Rowe2, Malcolm
Binns2, Brian Levine1,2, Angela Troyer1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research
Institute, Baycrest Health Sciences — It has been well documented that sub-

jective memory complaints and a family history of Alzheimer’s disease can
be associated with neurological pathology well before diagnosis. Detecting
cognitive changes at this early stage can be difficult. Recent research with
reaction time (RT) tasks has begun to focus on the tau parameter, that is,
the elongated tail of the ex-Gaussian distribution, as a measure of response
time inconsistency. Previous studies using the Stroop task have found that
the RT tau statistic (on the incongruent condition only) can be used to differentiate between participants who later go on to develop dementia and
those who do not, whereas the mean RT is not sensitive to these subgroup
differences. We examined tau estimates on the incongruent condition of an
internet-administered Stroop task in a sample of 400 middle age and older
adults, and found these were associated with the dual presence of memory
complaints and family history of dementia. This effect was not found when
analyzing the other features of the RT distribution (i.e. the mean or standard deviation), or in any of the other Stroop conditions (i.e. neutral or congruent). Therefore, measures of RT inconsistency can be sensitive to subtle
cognitive changes associated with subjective memory complaints and a
family history of dementia; future work will focus on examining how the
tau parameter relates to brain function.

B51
TASK-SPECIFIC CONNECTIVITY AND RESPONSIVENESS OF
DISTRIBUTED FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS PREDICT PERFORMANCE AND MEDIATES AGE-RELATED COGNITIVE DECLINE
ACROSS TASKS David Samu1, Karen L Campbell2, Meredith A Shafto1, . Cam-

CAN3, Lorraine K Tyler1; 1University of Cambridge, 2Harvard University, 3Cambridge Centre for Ageing and Neuroscience (Cam-CAN), University of Cambridge
— Ageing is accompanied by cognitive decline in some domains, such as

long-term memory and fluid intelligence, while cognition is preserved in
others, like language comprehension or crystallised intelligence. Performing a complex cognitive task is thought to require the orchestrated co-activation and suppression of specific neural networks across distributed
regions of the brain. In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that
decline in task-evoked responsiveness and coupling of domain-specific
and domain-general brain networks is one of the functional mechanisms
responsible for age-related cognitive decline. Using a population-derived
sample from the Cambridge Centre for Ageing and Neuroscience (www.
cam-can.org) project (N=98, aged 23-87), we carried out an Independent
Components Analysis on fMRI data from 3 different cognitive tasks. Cognitive performance was related to responsivity and functional connectivity
of task-relevant brain networks for two tasks exhibiting age-related cognitive decline (fluid intelligence and picture naming) and for a cognitively
preserved task (syntactic comprehension). Our results indicate that 1)
task-specific responsiveness and functional connectivity predict cognitive
performance in all three tasks, 2) age-related change in the two declining
tasks is significantly mediated by strong concurrent decline in the responsiveness of task-relevant networks, and 3) preserved cognition during syntactic comprehension is associated with the lowest degree of age-related
change in network responsiveness and connectivity. Collectively, these
results point to task-evoked responsiveness and connectivity of distributed

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

85

Poster Session B	
brain networks, required for successful cognition throughout the adult lifetime, as potential functional markers of cognitive decline in age-affected
cognitive domains.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Goal
maintenance & switching
B52
WHITE MATTER AND TASK-SWITCHING: A DIFFUSION TENSOR
IMAGING STUDY Antonino Vallesi1, Eleonora Mastrorilli1, Alessandra Bertoldo1; 1University of Padova, Italy — The capacity to flexibly switch between

different task rules has been previously associated with distributed fronto-parietal networks, predominantly on the left hemisphere but with an
additional right prefrontal recruitment with non-verbal rules. It is thus
likely that the white matter connectivity between these regions is critical
in sustaining the flexibility required by task-switching. Thus, this study
examined the relationship between white matter microstructure and
task-switching performance in different paradigms: classical color-shape,
spatial-only and verbal-only tasks. The main results showed a role of anterior portions of the corpus callosum (genu and body) in sustaining better
task-switching performance. In particular, a higher fractional anisotropy
and a lower radial diffusivity in these white matter regions were associated
with smaller mixing costs both in the spatial task-switching paradigm and
in the color-shape one. No association was found with behavioural measures obtained in the verbal version. The results are interpreted by suggesting that a more efficient inter-hemispheric connectivity is especially
necessary, within the frontal lobes, when the task-switching capacity has to
be applied to tasks with non-verbal components, which are likely to recruit
right prefrontal regions together with left prefrontal regions classically
involved in task-switching.

B53
NEURAL SYNCHRONY FOR COGNITIVE CONTROL: A COMPUTATIONAL MODEL Tom Verguts1; 1Ghent University — A core aspect of cognitive

control is how arbitrary task rules are rapidly implemented (e.g., within the
time frame of a typical psychology experiment). Despite the broad empirical research interest in this question over recent years, it lacks a compelling
theoretical account. I propose a neural synchrony model for cognitive control, combining the concept of binding-by-synchrony that is familiar from
visual perception and attention (Fries, 2005; Gray & Singer, 1989) with earlier learning models for the implementation of instructions (Ramamoorthy
& Verguts, 2012). The model implements “binding by random bursts”, in
which a prefrontal area (medial frontal cortex; MFC) enhances the strength
information transmission to a cortical processing area from just one of its
afferent projection areas by transient, synchronizing, input to both areas.
This input is a random and unselective theta-frequency (approx. 5 Hz)
burst. The choice of posterior areas that are affected is determined by interaction between the MFC and the lateral frontal cortex (LFC). I test model
performance on a classical problem for cognitive control – the Stroop task.
I demonstrate that greater MFC theta power causes better (behavioral) performance, along with greater gamma-frequency (approx. 40 Hz) power in
posterior processing areas, stronger gamma-frequency synchrony between
posterior processing areas, and stronger theta-gamma phase-amplitude
coupling both within and between areas. Thus, the model solves the central computational problem for cognitive control of rapidly implementing
arbitrary task rules, whilst making rich contact with extant behavioral and
neurophysiological data.

B54
ANTICIPATED TEMPORAL DELAY TRIGGERS DISTINCT TYPES OF
PROACTIVE CONTROL: DOUBLE DISSOCIATION WITH EEG Jacqueline Janowich1, James F. Cavanagh1; 1University of New Mexico — AX-CPT (AX)

is a standard task used to assess expectancy in cognitive control, but task
timing varies between studies and correlates with systematic differences in
performance. This timing- behavior interaction suggests that task timing
may instantiate distinct control processes. Here, we investigate how proactive (preparatory) control is instantiated based on known timing delays
between an informative cue and its paired test probe. We recorded EEG

86

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
(n=33) in AX with separate blocks of short and long cue-probe delays.
Behavioral Shift Index (BSI), indexing use of proactive vs. reactive control,
was compared between short and long delay. Supporting the significant
delay length - cue likelihood interaction in accuracy, we found a double dissociation in EEG markers of proactive control. In Short delay, mid-frontal
(FCz) P2 amplitude, a marker of task switching, was significantly elevated
for rare cues. Further, P2 amplitude was significantly (positively) correlated
with BSI for Short delay, suggesting elevated proactive control with greater
P2. Posterior parietal sites (P3/4) also showed elevation of task-switching
P1 amplitude for rare cues only during Short delay. In Long but not Short
delay, delta power was dynamically enhanced for rare cues, and delta
enhancement significantly correlated with BSI only in Long delay, indicating a selective link between delta enhancement and an increase in reactive
control. EEG double dissociation suggests that delay latency guides instantiation of distinct control processes, and prompts consideration that AX no
longer be conceived as a unitary task across timing parameters.

B55
FRONTAL AND PARIETAL BETA-BAND OSCILLATIONS TRACK
CONTEXT-RELEVANT REWARD PROCESSING Vincent Man1, William
A. Cunningham1; 1University of Toronto — Approach and avoidance describes

two motivational systems respectively characterized by reward-seeking
or loss-aversive behaviours (Gray, 1990). These systems have been delineated across levels of complexity, whereby the flexibility of motivational
mechanisms increase when considering higher-order processes on top of
immediate responses to stimuli (Elliot, 2006). We examined flexibility in
gain versus loss-prevention processing with a novel monetary reward task
that incorporates a contextual manipulation. Healthy adults (n = 96) were
instructed to match one of three shapes to a sample shape while we simultaneously recorded 64-channel EEG data. Upon a successful response, one
shape was associated with monetary gain, another shape was associated
with the prevention of monetary loss, and the third was associated with
neither gain nor loss. To manipulate context, in one block of trials more
monetary reward could potentially be gained than lost whereas in another
block the potential outcomes were reversed. Time-frequency analyses on
the neural data revealed a neural signature in the beta frequency band (12.530 Hz) for context-appropriate cue processing. When it was more adaptive
to focus on loss-prevention, frontopolar electrodes (Fp1) exhibited greater
beta power for loss-prevention cues compared to gain cues 180ms following cue presentation for ~390ms. In the context where it was more adaptive
to focus on gains, parietal electrodes (Pz) exhibited greater bursts of beta
power for gain cues compared to loss-prevention cues upon stimulus onset
until the next trial. The results demonstrate an interaction between context,
stimulus, and brain space, providing evidence of context-relevant reward
processing in the brain.

B56
SEQUENCE COMPLEXITY AND CONTEXT: THE ROLE OF EXPECTATION IN PLANNING AND EXECUTION OF TASK SEQUENCES David
Braun1, Starla Weaver2, Catherine Arrington1, Kaitlin Reiman1, Glenn Wylie3;
1
Lehigh University, 2Oklahoma City Univerity, 3Kessler Foundation — Successful

completion of action plans involves memory processes, such as encoding
and retrieval of tasks within the plan, interleaved with cognitive control
processes needed to coordinate performance of specific tasks. The task span
paradigm (Logan, 2004) captures these processes by requiring subjects to
study a task sequence, then execute the tasks in the appropriate order on
a series of bivalent stimuli. The present research examines how the expectation of difficulty influences the recruitment of cognitive control through
manipulations of sequence complexity and context. Sequence complexity
varied parametrically as a function of the number of task switches within
the list: 1, 2, or 3 switches in a sequence of six tasks. Context varied through
the presentation of sequences drawn from “decks” biased toward either
easy (1- and 2-switch) or hard (2- and 3-switch) sequences. Analyses of
behavioral (Experiment 1) and neural (Experiment 2) data showed effects
of expectation on performance measures and recruitment of neural activity.
As expected, RTs at encoding and retrieval vary systematically as a function of complexity, but this effect is influenced by expectation. Specifically,
equivalent 2-switch sequences elicit longer RTs when appearing in the
easy deck compared to the hard deck. Additionally, pupilometry suggests
increased cognitive effort during performance of these sequences within

2016 Annual Meeting	
the easy context. Preliminary analyses of fMRI data suggest greater inhibition of the default network during sequences that are expected to be more
difficult. These data speak to the roles of expectation and preparation in the
planning and execution of task sequences.

B57
FRONTOPOLAR CORTEX CONNECTIVITY SUPPORTS INTEGRATION OF EXTERNAL INFORMATION WHEN VALID FOR SUBSEQUENT DECISIONS Yoonjin Nah1, Scott Huettel2, Jihyun Cha3, Ian G
Dobbins3, Sanghoon Han1; 1Yonsei University, 2Duke University, 3Washington University in St. Louis — The functional contribution of frontopolar cortex to var-

ious executive functions remains a matter of debate. We conducted fMRI
studies to investigate the role of networks including frontopolar cortex in
the updating of an initial stimulus-driven judgment as a function of intermediate external information. On each trial, participants viewed a briefly
presented face image, made a gender judgment about that image, viewed
a recommendation about the gender of the face, and then had the option to
change or maintain the initial judgment (i.e., using or ignoring the recommendation). The key manipulation between two groups (Predictive, n = 19;
Anti-predictive, n = 20) was the predictability of recommendation’s correctness (85% valid versus invalid). Evidence for updating previous decisions
based on external information was found in frontopolar, anterior cingulate,
insula, and other regions; from these, we created regions of interest (ROIs)
from which time-series were extracted. Pairwise cross-correlation coefficients between ROIs were analyzed using functional connectivity multivariate pattern analyses (fcMVPA) with a linear support vector machine algorithm. The analyses revealed that patterns of functional connectivity can
consistently discriminate how the Predictive and Anti-predictive groups
differentially utilized the recommendation for revising decisions, with
accuracy of 82 to 97% across 6 runs. To directly explore the role of frontopolar, seed-based fcMVPA were also conducted and showed again significant
group classification accuracy (66~82%) relative to random permutation
testing. These findings demonstrate that revising a previously executed
judgment based on an external recommendation recruits frontopolar network computations when predictability of the recommendation is reliable.

B58
MULTIVARIATE DOUBLE DISSOCIATION OF FRONTOSTRIATAL
COMPONENTS OF TASK CONTROL Angie A Kehagia1, Rong Ye1, Orla M

Doyle1, James B Rowe2,3,4, Trevor W Robbins4,5; 1Department of Neuroimaging,
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King’s College London,
UK, 2Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, UK, 3MRC
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, 4Behavioural and Clinical
Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, UK, 5Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, UK — Cognitive control has traditionally been
associated with the frontal lobe, based on observations of control deficits
in patients with frontal lesions. However, evidence from patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD) indicates that the basal ganglia also contribute to control, depending on the abstraction of the rules that are switched. To date,
neuroimaging studies have focused on frontoparietal regions but failed to
address subcortical contributions. We scanned 17 healthy volunteers while
they performed a task switching paradigm that previously dissociated
frontal lesion from PD patients. Data were processed in SPM8, a general
linear model was fitted and parameter estimates for task-related activation for each condition were extracted from distinct masks of the frontal
lobe and basal ganglia. We applied Gaussian process classification (GPC)
using a linear kernel within PIPR (http://www.kcl.ac.uk/ioppn/depts/
neuroimaging/research/imaginganalysis/Software/PIPR.aspx) in order
to discriminate between switch-repeat conditions. To visualise the regions
driving the classification performance, we estimated the weights of the forward (generative) model from the discriminative model weights. At 1000
permutations, switch-repeat classification accuracy for concrete rules was
significant at 88% in the basal ganglia, but not in the frontal lobe (58%).
The inverse pattern was obtained for abstract rules, whereby the conditions
were successfully discriminated in the frontal lobe (82% classification accuracy) but not in the basal ganglia (47%). The results of this neuroimaging
study thus demonstrate a strong double dissociation between the frontal

Poster Session B
lobe and basal ganglia in cognitive control and highlight the utility of multivariate approaches in investigations of functions that rely on distributed
and overlapping neural substrates.

B59
AN EYE-TRACKING INVESTIGATION OF CUE AND TARGET PROCESSING IN TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT Annie Zheng1, Joshua McBride1,
Joel E. Martinez2, Lauren Deschner1, Jessica A. Church1; 1University of Texas at
Austin, 2Princeton University — Large differences between adults and children

have been observed in behavior and neural control networks during task
switching performance. We assessed eye movements of adults (ages 18-27
years) and children (ages 8-16 years) during task switch processing under
variable working memory demand. During the first 1500ms when the task
cue was presented, children fixated significantly longer than adults on
the cued rule (t=19.84, p<0.01), whereas adults looked longer at response
choices (t=16.9, p<0.01). While adults fixated significantly longer on choices
than cued rules (t=44.52, p<0.01), children spent the same amount of time
on rules and choices (t=1.25, p=0.8). When the target stimulus appeared,
children spent significantly more time fixating on response choices (t=4.29,
p<0.01), but a similar amount of time as adults on the target (t=2.53, p=0.13),
leading to overall slower responses (t=34.92, p<0.01). We used 250ms time
bins to assess dwell times spent in competing stimulus areas: rule, response
choices, and target. Under a ‘winner-take-all’ strategy, the data revealed a
delayed and unstable fixation pattern in children, relative to adults, with
longer initial rule fixation and more shifting between the choices and target
when responding. Overall, the eye movement differences described above
at both the rule loading and response selection stages provide insights into
how preparatory control processing may influence lower child performance during cued task switching.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
B60
INTERPLAY OF FRONTOPARIETAL CONTROL NETWORKS FOR
UPDATING AND PROTECTING THE CONTENTS OF VISUAL WORKING MEMORY Nicholas Myers1, Mark G Stokes1, Anna C Nobre1; 1University of
Oxford — When retaining items in working memory (WM), we can update

new information to the currently held set. This ability comes at the expense
of what is already in WM – we tend to forget previously encoded memories. For optimal behavior, new information should only be encoded if
it is behaviorally relevant. Frontal and parietal cortex has been shown to
make contributions to the flexible control of WM, but whether identical
areas are invoked for different control operations is poorly understood. We
explored strategic updating in working memory with functional magnetic
resonance imaging (N=19) as observers performed a cued visual WM precision task. Observers encoded orientation information from a first display
into working memory. After a delay, a cue indicated whether the previously encoded item (protect condition) or a concurrently presented new
item (update condition) would be probed. After a further memory delay,
observers recalled the remembered angle. Both protecting and updating
activated a dorsolateral fronto-parietal network. In addition, protect cues
activated cingulo-opercular areas, possibly reflecting the retrieval of previously encoded information. Update cues activated lateral occipital cortex
that could indicate a sustained visual response to a WM-relevant object.
While lateral prefrontal and parietal regions showed comparable response
amplitudes to both update and protect cues, multivariate pattern analysis
in these regions reliably separated the two cue types. The fronto-parietal
network could therefore act as a flexible hub for various forms of control
over WM, influencing which WM contents are represented in visual cortex.

B61
CAUSAL PARIETAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO DUAL-TASK WORKING
MEMORY AND VISUAL ATTENTION PERFORMANCE Anastasia Kiyonaga1, John Powers1, Yu-Chin Chiu1, Tobias Egner1; 1Duke University — We constantly need to keep information temporarily in mind, but this working
memory (WM) must also compete with variable demands for our attention in the environment. In a recent fMRI study from our lab, areas of left

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

87

Poster Session B	
and right posterior parietal cortex (PPC) displayed a robust interaction
between working memory and visual attention demand levels. Activity in
these respective regions presented distinct relationships with behavioral
measures, however, in that the left PPC related uniquely to WM recognition, and the right PPC related instead to visual search speed. Here, we
took a causal approach to examine how the brain manages the competition between WM and attention demands. Participants remembered one
or two images for a later test, then searched for a target among either similar or distinct distractors during the delay. We delivered 10Hz trains of
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) during the WM delay, over left
and right parietal targets determined by fMRI activation foci. Visual search
performance was disproportionally affected by left PPC stimulation when
WM load was high, and by right PPC stimulation when WM load was low.
The results suggest that participants may engage in distinct visual attention
strategies—and rely differentially on left and right PPC—depending on the
concurrent level of WM load. The PPC, therefore, plays a causal role in
coordinating WM and visual attention demands.

B62
NEURAL CORRELATES OF ENCODING, RETRIEVAL, FOCUS
SWITCHING, AND UPDATING PROCESSES Savannah Cookson1, Gregory Colflesh2, Eric Schumacher1, Paul Verhaeghen1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2University of Maryland — Working memory refers to the space in the

mind in which information is temporarily stored and manipulated during
cognition. Cowan (1995, 2001) proposed a two-tiered structure for working memory distinguishing a capacity-limited zone of immediate access,
labeled the focus of attention, from a larger, “activated” portion of long
term memory (LTM) which is available and capacity-unlimited but not
immediately accessible. Behavioral research has previously demonstrated
distinctions between the operations of new item encoding, simple retrieval
of a single item, switching focus between items, and updating existing
representations with new information. The current experiment aimed to
understand the differences in the neural correlates of these processes using
fMRI. Participants completed blocks of 5 types of tasks. In the single item
retrieval task, participants encoded a single stimulus and determined
if subsequent targets matched that first stimulus. In the 3-item retrieval
task, participants made the same judgments, but had to switch between
three different comparator stimuli. In the updating task, participants again
switched between three comparator stimuli, but were instructed to update
the comparator stimuli with the most recently presented targets. By contrasting 3-item with 1-item retrieval, we attempted to isolate activity specific to focus switching. By contrasting updating with 3-item retrieval, we
attempted to isolate activity specific to updating. Despite all three block
types showing significant activity versus baseline during both the initial
stimulus encoding and subsequent retrieval/updating processes, the difference in activity between block types was minimal at both time-points,
suggesting equivalent recruitment of neural structures across conditions.

B63
AGE OF FIRST EXPOSURE TO FOOTBALL AFFECTS WORKING MEMORY AND DEFAULT MODE NETWORK CONNECTIVITY DURING WORKING MEMORY TASK PERFORMANCE Eleanna

Varangis1, Kelly Giovanello1, Stephanie Lane1, Michael Clark1, J.D. DeFreese1,
Kathleen Gates1, Kevin Guskiewicz1; 1The University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill — Past studies on concussion in samples of retired athletes have focused

on the effect of number of concussions on cognitive function decades after
injury. However, recent research has suggested that timing of first exposure
to concussive and subconcussive impacts may also be a risk factor for cognitive deficits later in life. While results indicated differences in cognitive
function based on age of first exposure to football, it is unclear whether
concussion history or later-life football exposure may have also affected
results, and what neural mechanisms might underlie such impairment.
The present study examined the effect of age of first exposure to football
on standard cognitive task performance (RBANS), in-scanner n-back task
performance, and measures of functional neural connectivity in fronto-parietal and default mode networks during performance of an n-back working memory task. Number of concussions sustained and exposure after
high school were controlled for at each level of analysis to ensure no contamination by these variables. Results showed no differences in cognitive
or n-back task performance between the three groups, however they did

88

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
indicate disrupted patterns of functional connectivity based on age of first
exposure. These findings indicate that, independent of the effects of concussion history and later-life exposure, age of first exposure to football may
affect neural circuitry underlying cognitive processing. While the present
study did not show any cognitive deficits in this sample, such functional
inefficiency during task performance may indicate elevated risk for cognitive deficits later in life.

B64
THERAPEUTIC EFFECT OF AEROBIC EXERCISE, REPETITIVE TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION, AND ENRICHED ENVIRONMENT ON CHEMOTHERAPY-INDUCED COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT
IN RATS Se Hee Jung1,2, Woo Hyung Lee1; 1Seoul National University College

of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea, 2Seoul National University Boramae Medical
Center, Seoul, South Korea — Goals To investigate whether the chemother-

apy-induced cognitive impairment (CICI) can be reversed by therapeutic
interventions and which therapeutic intervention would be effective in
patients with CICI Methods We used 9-week old male Sprague-Dawley
rats. Doxorubicin (DXR) was administered with a single intravenous injection (10 mg/kg) via a tail vein. Rats were divided into 4 difference groups;
(1) aerobic exercise (AE), (2) repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
(rTMS), (3) enriched environment (EE), and (4) control group. All the therapeutic interventions started day 4 after DXR injection and continued for 2
weeks. We evaluated rats with behavior tests including rotarod test, radial
arm maze test, novel object recognition test, elevated plus maze test, and
tail suspension test at day 0, 3, 7, 14, and 21. Western blot was performed at
day 21 with β-amyloid, amyloid precursor protein (APP), total tau, phosphorylated tau, and postsynaptic density protein-95 (PSD-95). Results Spatial working memory was significantly improved in AE group at day 14
and day 21(p<0.05). Depression was significantly improved in rTMS group
and EE group at day 21. Western blot showed that β-amyloid expression
was significantly decreased in the prefrontal cortex of EE group and in the
hippocampus of rTMS group. However, there was no significant difference
in the expression of APP, phosphorylated tau and PSD- between groups
in the prefrontal cortex, the hippocampus and the cerebellar cortex. Conclusion We suggested that AE can ameliorate deficits in spatial working
memory and rTMS and EE are specifically effective in depression developed after systemic chemotherapy.

B65
MIND-READING WITHOUT THE SCANNER: BEHAVIORAL DECODING OF WORKING MEMORY CONTENTS Emma Wu Dowd1, John M.
Pearson1, Tobias Egner1; 1Duke University — Sophisticated machine learning

algorithms are increasingly applied to functional neuroimaging data to
characterize internal cognitive states. But can we “mind-read” without the
scanner? While multivariate pattern classification has successfully decoded
the contents of working memory (WM) from neural activity, the current
study aimed to classify mental representations in WM from behavior—
specifically, by capitalizing on the robust finding that active maintenance
of visual items in WM biases visual attention toward memory-matching
objects. In a dual-task paradigm, participants held one of four colors in WM
while performing a series of visual searches for slanted line targets among
vertical line distractors. The WM color could reappear in the subsequent
search displays as a task-irrelevant stimulus feature that either coincided
with the location of a target (“valid”) or a distractor (“invalid”), or could
fail to reappear (“neutral”). Compared to neutral trials, response times
were faster on valid searches and slower on invalid searches, replicating the
classic effect of attentional capture by WM. We used linear support vector
machine and logistic regression methods to classify the four WM colors,
based on normalized response times from the intervening visual searches.
WM representations were successfully decoded from behavior alone, both
within individuals and between individuals, such that a classifier trained
on data from a group of individuals could predict single-trial WM content
in another, new individual. The current study provides proof-of-concept
for applying machine learning techniques to simple behavioral outputs to
decode information about specific internal cognitive states, even so far as to
be generalizable across individuals.

2016 Annual Meeting	

B66
WORKING MEMORY PROVIDES A COGNITIVE INTERFACE
BETWEEN EPISODIC MEMORY AND FUTURE THINKING Paul F.

Hill1, Rachel A. Diana1; 1Virginia Tech — In recent years, investigators have

become increasingly interested in the common neurocognitive basis of
episodic memory and future thinking. Working memory (WM) may provide the cognitive workspace necessary to temporarily maintain and organize disparate episodic details into a coherent future event; however, this
hypothesis has not been systematically tested. In this fMRI study, 25 young
adults were cued to imagine future events while simultaneously performing a modified Sternberg task. This dual-task interference paradigm was
designed to parse the respective contributions of maintenance and manipulation demands on future event construction. Data were analyzed using
psychophysiological interaction analyses to identify brain regions demonstrating disrupted functional connectivity in response to increased WM
demands. Both maintenance and manipulation trials were associated with
disrupted functional coupling between dorsal medial prefrontal cortex,
left temporal pole, and right temporoparietal junction. These regions have
been observed to represent a distinct default network subsystem supporting retrieval of conceptual information about oneself. Manipulation trials
were further associated with disrupted coupling between the right anterior
hippocampus and ventromedial and lateral prefrontal regions related to
retrieval monitoring and inhibitory control. Our results suggest that distinct WM components support the interplay between episodic memory and
future event construction. Access to an autobiographical knowledge base
likely provides the contextual framework for imagining detailed events.
Executive retrieval processes may aid in verifying the relevance and subsequent integration of constituent episodic and sensory details into a unitary
event depiction.

B67
PHYSIOPATHOLOGICAL MECHANISMS OF INTENTIONAL AND
INCIDENTAL WORKING MEMORY BINDING IN SCHIZOPHRENIA

David Luck1,2, Stéphanie Grot1,2, Isabelle Soulières1,3, Olivier Lipp1; 1Institut
Universitaire en Santé Mentale de Montréal - Research Centre, 2dpt psychiatry,
Université de Montréal, 3UQAM — Working memory is particularly affected

in schizophrenia. However, some processes are more affected than others.
Patients with schizophrenia have more difficulties to hold in memory the
association between multiple pieces of information than information itself.
This type of associative process is commonly referred to as memory binding. Recent results from our lab showed that incidental binding, without
conscious effort to associate information, are preserved in patients. By
contrast, intentional binding, with conscious effort to associative information, is altered in patients. This fMRI study attempted to demonstrate
that specific deficits for intentional binding rely on prefrontal hypoactivity in schizophrenia. Twenty patients with schizophrenia and 20 matched
controls were scanned while memorizing three coloured words and three
coloured ellipses. In the intentional binding condition, the three words
were central and separated from the three ellipses. Participants had to
mentally link the verbal and spatial information sharing the same color
(e.g. the word in red must be associated with the position defined by a red
ellipse). In the incidental binding condition, words were directly presented
in ellipses. Behavioural analyses revealed lower performance in patients
for intentional, but not incidental, binding relative to controls. FMRI analyses showed that deficits for intentional binding in patients were related to
lower activity in the right prefrontal cortex. No between-group differences
were significant for incidental binding. The present results suggest specific
deficit for intentional binding in schizophrenia. We expect our research to
contribute to the elaboration of therapeutic tools that may improve cognition in schizophrenia.

B68
DECODING HIERARCHICAL REPRESENTATIONS OF COMPLEX
SEQUENCES IN EEG OSCILLATORY ACTIVITY Atsushi Kikumoto1,
Caitlin Corona1, Tessafay Samejima1, Ulrich Mayr1; 1University of Oregon — Per-

forming a series of complex actions requires task-relevant information to
be organized in a hierarchical manner, where higher-level plans specify the
order of subplans/chunks, which in turn specify the order of basic elements.
Currently, little is known about how hierarchical representations are coded

Poster Session B
and what their demands are for working-memory (WM). Participants
remembered 9-element sequences of orientations constructed from three
chunks of three elements each (e.g., abc-bca-cab), and had to make serial
match/mismatch decisions to presented probes. Error patterns reflected
the hierarchical structure with increased error rates at chunk transitions,
an effect that was particularly large for individuals with low WM capacity.
To assess the neural codes underlying hierarchical control structures, we
applied multivariate decoding analysis to the pattern of oscillatory EEG
activity. The scalp distribution of theta and alpha-band activity coded independently not only the identity of basic elements, but more importantly also
the order within chunks, the chunk identify, and the order across chunks.
In principle, WM limitations could affect either all representational codes
in a uniform manner, or selectively constrain higher-level representations.
Interestingly, we found a clear representation of the chunk identity only in
high WM individuals, but not in individuals with low WM capacity. Same
patterns of results were replicated with self-paced sequences to account for
the retrieval difficulty effect covering with positions. These results suggest
that EEG oscillations tracks the current position within a complex sequence
and can be used to pinpoint the source of WM constraints during when
operating with hierarchical control structures.

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
B69
AN INVESTIGATION OF BEHAVIORAL CROSS-LANGUAGE NEIGHBORHOOD DENSITY EFFECTS IN EARLY AND LATE BILINGUALS
Giordana Grossi1, Amanda Lane1, Maria Talloni1; 1State University of New York,
New Paltz — Psycholinguists have asked how words from different lan-

guages are organized in the bilingual lexicon and whether words from one
language are unconsciously activated when bilinguals read in the other
language. This seems to be the case. Cross-language neighborhood density
effects have been found in both progressive demasking and lexical decision
tasks (van Heuven et al., 1998). These effects were stronger when participants read in their second compared to the first language. Electrophysiological experiments with late bilinguals reported a modulation of the N400
amplitude that followed this asymmetric pattern; however, early bilinguals
did not show such modulation (Grossi et al., 2012; Midgley et al., 2008).
In this study, we tested the hypothesis that these participants might have
been able to block interference from the other language during single word
reading. Late and early English-Spanish bilinguals performed a progressive demasking task with English and Spanish words, presented in counterbalanced order. High and low cross-language neighbors were matched
on relevant orthographic and lexical variables, both within and across languages. No effects of cross-language neighborhood density were observed
for Spanish words. However, an inhibitory effect was found for English
words in both groups of bilinguals. This effect did not reflect cross-language activation, as it was present in a group of control participants as well.
Studies using non-factorial designs have also failed to provide evidence for
behavioral effects of cross-language neighborhood density; therefore, the
finding that such variable influences bilinguals’ performance in progressive demasking tasks still awaits replication.

B70
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF FREQUENCY AND
ICONICITY IN AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE Karen Emmorey1, Zed

Sevcikova Sehyr1, Katherine Midgley1, Phillip Holcomb1; 1San Diego State University — Event-related potentials (ERPs) were used to investigate the neural

dynamics of single sign recognition, identifying electrophysiological components associated with lexical frequency and iconicity. The study capitalizes on a database of ~1000 signs rated for frequency and iconicity. We
recorded ERPs from deaf signers (N = 38) and hearing nonsigners (N = 22)
while they watched video clips of 400 ASL signs. Deaf signers performed a
semantic categorization task, monitoring for rare signs (10% of trials) that
referred to persons (e.g., DOCTOR, GIRL). Hearing nonsigners monitored
for a rare repeated sign (10% of trials). The results indicate a clear effect of
frequency for deaf signers. Low frequency signs produced a more negative
ERP response compared to high frequency signs, starting 100-200 ms after
sign onset with a broad distribution across the scalp. This frequency effect
was not observed for hearing nonsigners. The polarity and time course

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

89

Poster Session B	

2016 Annual Meeting

of the ASL frequency effect parallels what has been observed for spoken
words, indicating that the neural response to lexical frequency is independent of language modality. For deaf signers, highly iconic signs elicited a
more negative response that was right lateralized over frontal sites, starting 300-400 ms after sign onset. For hearing non-signers, iconicity did not
modulate neural responses at frontal sites. For both groups, iconic signs
elicited a more negative response at posterior sites, although this response
began later for hearing nonsigners. These data are beginning to suggest a
distinct neural signature for iconic signs, which is different for signers and
non-signers.

latter finding is consistent with previous studies showing a lack of rhyme
sensitivity in children with reading impairment. These findings provide
some insights into the mechanisms underlying the long-established link
between phonological abilities and reading skill.

B71
A TIME-COURSE ANALYSIS OF THE FACTORS THAT MAY AFFECT
THE FEED-FORWARD REPRESENTATION IN SPEECH-MOTOR
CONTROL Noriko Tanigawa1, Srikantan S. Nagarajan2, John F. Houde2; 1Univer-

people with aphasia to illuminate mechanisms of error monitoring in
speech. Twelve participants with aphasia completed a 615-item naming
test twice over the course of two weeks. For each trial in which an error
was produced, trained experts coded the type of response (e.g., semantic
error, phonological error), the presence of error detection (indicated by a
changed or overtly rejected naming attempt), and whether the error was
repaired to the correct response. For each detected error, latencies of the
error onset, error offset, onset of overt detection, and onset of a repair (if
present) were measured. Mixed-effects regression models indicated a significant effect of error type (semantic vs. phonological) on the time from
error offset to repair onset, with a median repair time of 1937 ms for semantic errors and only 394 ms for phonological errors. However, for trials in
which the first evidence of error detection was not a repair, time from error
offset to error detection was statistically comparable for the two error types;
median detection time was 877 ms for semantic errors and 947 ms for phonological errors. Fast repair times for phonological errors align with views
that speech is monitored prior to articulation (e.g., inner speech monitor
or production-based monitor). In contrast, slower repair (but not slower
detection) times for semantic errors may reflect increased time required to
program a correction, starting with the semantic concept.

sity of Oxford, 2University of California, San Francisco — In speech-motor con-

trol, it is hypothesized that a feed-forward representation is generated and
incoming signals are compared against it to issue correction commands.
To identify the factors to which it might be sensitive and the distinctive
time-courses in which their influences might manifest, the present study
analyzed voice responses to feedback perturbation between [i:] and [u:]
in California English, where phonological, socio-phonetic, cognitive, and
neural models make differential predictions. 11 participants (128 Latin-squared trials each) read aloud a prompt word (heed or who’d) displayed on a screen, as they heard individualized online playback of their
own voice in which F1 and F2 of the vowel of the prompt word were unaltered or shifted to those of the counterpart. Adaptation was calculated in
mels every 3ms for 400ms as the ratio of the projection of the response’s
displacement vector onto the shift vector to the magnitude of the shift
vector. 30ms-step mixed-effects multiple regression removed predominant
participants’ idiosyncrasy and identified place-feature perturbation as the
primary factor causing shift-following responses for [i:] and compensatory
responses for [u:] (0-400ms) (time-windows in parentheses). California-native Caucasians followed shifts whereas other groups compensated (120360ms). Subthreshold shift-following responses developed (270-400ms)
as the number of trials increased. Contrarily, shift-following responses
decreased (0-400ms) as vowel onset latencies increased and (300-360ms)
as right-handedness scores increased. In speech-motor control, modifiable
feed-forward representation may sequentially target asymmetric phonological features, socio-indexical phonetic information, and iterated contextual input, following the minimal effort principle. Compensatory responses
may require extra preparedness and greater left-hemisphere dominance.

B72
WAS THAT A PIBU I JUST SAW? USING AN ARTIFICIAL LEXICON
TO CHARACTERIZE THE LINK BETWEEN PHONOLOGICAL ABILITIES AND READING DEFICITS IN CHILDREN Jeffrey Malins1, Jan Frijters2, James Magnuson1,3, Candice Goerger4, Bonnie Buis1, W. Einar Mencl1,
Rose Sevcik4, Kenneth Pugh1,3,5, Robin Morris4, Stephen Frost1; 1Haskins Laboratories, 2Brock University, 3University of Connecticut, 4Georgia State University,
5
Yale University — We assessed the extent to which reading ability in children

is associated with individual differences in phonological competition effects
as well as the dynamics of word learning. A group of children with a range
of reading abilities weighted toward the lower tail of the typical distribution (N = 37; 13 female; mean age 11;2 with a range of 8;4- 15;5; mean Woodcock-Johnson Broad Reading score of 83 with a range of 53-110) learned
an artificial lexicon consisting of pseudowords associated with pictures of
novel animals. In each trial, subjects were presented with two pictures on
a computer screen and subsequently heard a spoken pseudoword. Children were asked to click on the animal associated with the pseudoword,
after which they were given feedback. Importantly, in each trial the names
of the pictures overlapped one another in either word-initial phonemes
(cohort competitors; e.g., /pibu/ vs. /pibo/), word-final phonemes (rhyme
competitors; e.g., /pibu/ vs. /dibu/), or were unrelated (e.g., /dibo/ vs. /
bupa/). Subjects completed six learning blocks; within each block, each of
the eight items was presented in each of the three competitor conditions.
Compared to children with higher reading scores, children with lower
reading scores showed (1) exaggerated competition effects for cohort competitors; (2) reduced rhyme effects, especially in initial learning blocks. This

90

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

B73
THE TIMING OF SPONTANEOUS DETECTION AND REPAIR OF
NAMING ERRORS IN APHASIA Julia Schuchard1, Erica Middleton1,

Mackenzie Stabile1, Myrna F. Schwartz1; 1Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute — This study examined the timing of self-detected naming errors in

B74
THE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF MULTIMODAL OCCIPITOTEMPORAL CORTEX DURING READING COMPREHENSION Yi-Hui
Hung1,2, W. Einar Mencl1,2, Jason D. Zevin3, Stephen Frost1, Peter Molfese4,1,
Jay Rueckl4,1, Kenneth Pugh1,2,4; 1Haskins Laboratories, 2Yale University, 3University of Southern California, 4University of Connecticut — It has been shown

that occipitotemporal cortex not only responds to visual words but also
is sensitive to speech. It is unclear what neural mechanisms underlie the
change from visual-specific to multimodal in occipitotemporal cortex. Possibly, occipitotemporal cortex becomes multimodal because it connects to
phonological areas (e.g., supramarginal gyrus (SMG) and inferior frontal
gyrus (IFG)). Alternatively, occipitotemporal cortex connects to semantic
areas (e.g., middle temporal gyrus) which are also connect to speech areas,
and thus becomes multimodal because it receive activation from the phonological areas via shared connection with semantic regions. In the present
study, neural connectivity was compared between occipitotemporal areas
which respond to print only and which respond to both print and speech.
During fMRI recording, participants were presented with single words
and non-linguistic stimuli either visually or auditorily. The same participants then read stories presented in multiple one-minute blocks. Fifty seed
voxels in the occipitotemporal cortex which responded to words more
than non-linguistic stimuli visually were selected to be the print-only area.
Another 50 seed voxels which responded to words more than non-linguistic stimuli visually and auditorily were selected to be the print-and-speech
area. Connectivity was defined by correlations between the time series of
the seed voxels and other voxels in the whole brain during story reading.
The result showed that the print-and-speech area connected to the bilateral
IFG and the bilateral SMG more strongly than the print-only area. This suggests that occipitotemporal cortex becomes multimodal because it couples
with the IFG and SMG for phonological decoding.

B75
PROACTIVE AND REACTIVE CONTROL DURING BILINGUAL LEXICAL ACCESS IS DRIVEN BY DIFFERENT PORTIONS WITHIN THE
PREFRONTAL CORTEX Francesca Martina Branzi1, Pedro Paz-Alonso1, Clara

Martin1,2, Manuel Carreiras1,2; 1Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language,
2
IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science — Both “proactive” and “reactive” control is at play during bilingual lexical access (Wang et al., 2009).

2016 Annual Meeting	
However, the exact neural mechanisms are still relatively unexplored. Here
we investigate whether during bilingual language production (1) proactive control would be driven by the anterior ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
(vlPFC, BA47), pre-activating the target language, and (2) reactive control
would be driven by the mid-vlPFC (BA45), supporting post-retrieval control processes. To that end we conducted an fMRI study wherein bilinguals
named pictures in two languages. We manipulated: (1) the cue-picture
time interval (long and short to engage or prevent proactive control (Czernochowski, 2015); and, (2) the cognate status, to capture the presence of
selective pre-activation of the target language (non-cognate versus cognate
words). If reactive and proactive control is supported by different portions
within the PFC (Badre & Wagner, 2007), enhanced responses are expected
in the BA45 when conditions rely on reactive control (short versus long
intervals) and enhanced responses are expected in the BA47 when conditions rely on proactive control (long versus short intervals). This dissociation was found. In addition, during short intervals, we observed a cognate
effect in the BA47, reflecting the parallel activation of the two languages. In
contrast, during long intervals, the cognate effect was not present, suggesting the pre-activation of the target language. Together, these data suggest
that (1) proactive and reactive control is driven by different portions within
the PFC and (2) that selective pre-activation of the target language is supported by the BA47 (Bar et al., 2006).

B76
THE NATIVE LANGUAGE TUNES PREDICTION PROCESSES
ACROSS MULTIPLE LANGUAGES Nicola Molinaro1,2, Francesco

Giannelli3, Sendy Caffarra1, Clara Martin1,2; 1BCBL, Basque center on Cognition,
Brain and Language, 2Ikerbasque, Basque foundation for science, 3University of
Milano-Bicocca — Language production abilities in young children depend

on learning to predict. As a consequence, prediction processes could be
tuned to the properties of the language learned first. We tested this hypothesis by studying language prediction of high proficient Spanish speakers
who have been exclusively exposed either to Spanish (N=24) or Basque
(N=24) before the age of three. Participants were involved in a Spanish
sentence reading task. Prediction was studied recording ERPs time-locked
to gender marked determiners that could be followed by either highly
expected “gender transparent” (whose “–a/–o” ending is gender informative) or “gender opaque” nouns (uninformative ending). The target determiner was either consistent with the gender of the expected or the unexpected noun. Spanish natives revealed a similar ERP prediction effect for
both the opaque and the transparent conditions, i.e., a negative going effect
for unexpected determiners starting ~250 ms in posterior scalp regions. We
interpret it as evidence for similar prediction strategies based on lexically
encoded gender information. Basque natives showed the same pattern for
both opaque and transparent words. Crucially, transparent determiners
showed an earlier prediction effect starting ~170 ms in central-anterior
scalp regions, evidence for prediction strategies relying on gender information encoded at the sub-lexical level. We conclude that language prediction is tuned to the properties of the native language. Basque, compared to
Spanish, presents a more reliable one-to-one mapping of sub-lexical units
onto specific linguistic features. This induces Basque speakers to predict
based on sub-lexical information (when available) even in their non-native
language.

LANGUAGE: Other
B77
MANIPULATING MENTAL WORKLOAD DURING AUDITORY WORD
PROCESSING: N400 REPETITION EFFECTS He Pu1, Phillip J. Hol-

comb1,2, Katherine J. Midgley2, Marianna Eddy1,3; 1Tufts University, 2San Diego
State University, 3U.S. Army Natick Soldier Research, Development, and Engineering Center — Previous ERP research looking at the effect of mental workload

on cognitive processing has mainly utilized dual-task paradigms involving a primary task where mental workload is manipulated, and a secondary oddball task. Mental workload has been shown to influence the P300
component to secondary task oddball stimuli with increasing workload
attenuating and delaying the P300. However, the oddball task is arguably
an artificial paradigm and usually involves unnatural stimuli. Therefore,
workload effects with this task lack ecological validity making it less suit-

Poster Session B
able for many real world situations. In the current study we used a more
naturalistic paradigm (auditory word comprehension) as the secondary
task in a dual-task paradigm. Specifically, we were interested in whether
changes in mental workload would impact N400 repetition priming effects,
a well-studied measure sensitive to lexico-semantic processing (e.g. Rugg,
1990; Holcomb & Grainger, 2006). Native English monolinguals (n=24)
played a video game (primary task) with three difficulty levels while listening to a stream of English words (secondary task) containing repeats on
average every fourth item. In one condition, participants passively listened
to the words and in another they pressed a foot-pedal to repeats while they
played the video game. Results indicated that N400 repetition effects were
larger in the active than passive condition. Importantly, across workload
levels, N400 repetition effects decreased as workload increased. These findings extend earlier work using less naturalistic stimuli and paradigms and
suggest that the N400 can be used as a sensitive measure of mental workload in many real world contexts.

B78
A FUNCTIONAL TRANSCRANIAL DOPPLER SONOGRAPHY
(FTCD) STUDY OF HEMISPHERIC DOMINANCE DURING SILENT
SPEECHREADING PROCESSING. Eva Gutierrez-Sigut1, Rachel Wayne2,
Heather Payne1, Mairead MacSweeney1; 1University College London, 2Queen’s
University — Perceiving a speaker’s articulatory movements plays an

important role in spoken language comprehension (McGurk & MacDonald, 1976). fMRI studies have shown that left hemisphere activation for
silent speechreading is modulated by speechreading skill and hearing
status (deaf vs. hearing; Capek et al., 2008). fTCD is reliable in establishing hemispheric dominance during cognitive tasks (Deppe et al., 2004) and
is sensitive to task difficulty (Payne et al., 2015). However, in fTCD studies, laterality indices (LIs) are often stronger for language generation than
for receptive tasks (Buchinger et al., 2000). Here we aimed to determine
whether a receptive silent speechreading task elicits measurable lateralization in the TCD signal, and whether the strength of such an effect relates
to a word’s intelligibility. Nineteen right-handed hearing English speakers
performed a semantic judgment task using silent speechreading. We measured LIs for nonsense mouth movements (gurns) and English words. We
also tested the effect of word intelligibility (easy vs. difficult). Results show
stronger LIs for words than gurns, 67% of participants had negative LIs
(right dominance) for gurns while 60% had positive LIs (left dominance)
for words. No differences related to word intelligibility were observed.
There was no correlation between LI and speechreading skill. Our findings
contribute to our understanding of which task difficulty factors contribute
to the fTCD signal. The results show that fTCD is sensitive to the distinction between linguistic and non-linguistic mouth movements and therefore
may be useful to study hemispheric language dominance in special populations such as those born deaf.

B79
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EARLY-STAGE VISUAL PROCESSING
DIFFERENCES IN DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA Lisa Levinson1, Karen
Froud1; 1Teachers College, Columbia University — Reading requires the success-

ful recruitment and coordination of brain networks in order to translate
visual symbols into phonemes. It is poorly understood however, whether
disrupted low-level visual analysis contributes to reading disabilities such
as dyslexia. Some research has suggested that within the visual system,
deficiencies in one of the pathways – the magnocellular pathway – may
contribute to reading difficulties (Stein, 2003). Studies of the development
of these visual pathways suggest the magnocellular pathway follows a protracted course of development (Mitchell & Neville, 2004; Coch et al., 2005;
Gunn et al., 2002; Sherman, 1985; Hickey, 1977), which raises the possibility
that it is more vulnerable to pathological change during development and
has the potential for greater plasticity. The current study examined group
response differences to stimuli tailored to the unique parameters of the
magnocellular and parvocellular pathways using P1, N1, P2 components of
the event-related potential waveform to index early-stage visual processing. To understand potential maturational confounds, this study examined
groups of children (ages 9-10) and adults, with and without dyslexia. These
data provide support for early-stage-visual processing differences between
individuals with dyslexia and controls for the magnocellular biased stimulus condition but not the parvocellular biased stimulus condition. Given

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

91

Poster Session B	
that dyslexia manifests in so many ways necessitates a more nuanced
understanding of the neural mechanisms that underpin reading disorders.
Due to the compounding impact of small disruptions on learning, refining
our knowledge of these underlying mechanisms will foster earlier identification and potentially more focused interventions that could yield better
outcomes.

B80
ROLE OF THE MOTOR SYSTEM IN PERCEPTUAL CATEGORIZATION OF AMBIGUOUS SPEECH SOUNDS Yue Sun1,2, Sharon Peperkamp1; 1Ecole Normale Supérieure (PSL Research University), 2Max Planck
Institute (MPIEA) — The role of sensorimotor interaction during speech

perception is a long-standing research topic in neurobiology of language.
Recent studies suggested a modulatory role for the motor system in speech
perception, particularly in aiding perceptual categorization of speech
sounds in adverse perception conditions (e.g., D’Ausillo et al., 2009). In the
current study, we examined whether the involvement of the motor system
is enhanced during the perception of non-native speech sounds that are
acoustically ambiguous between two native sound categories and are hence
more difficult to identify than prototypical exemplars of these categories.
Participants were asked to perform different tasks on auditory stimuli that
contained either a prototypical or an ambiguous vowel. Electroencephalogram was recorded during the experiment and the activation of the motor
system was measured with event-related-desynchronization (ERD) of the
mu rhythms (8-12 Hz and 14-20 Hz) at sensors over premotor cortices and
supplementary motor areas. Our results show that listening to stimuli with
ambiguous vowels induces larger mu-ERD over left motor cortices than
those with prototypical vowels. Moreover, the effect of ambiguity is greater
in tasks that require explicit access to the vowel categories than tasks that
do not. These findings demonstrate that the activation of the motor system
during speech perception is modulated by the perceptual difficulty that is
due to the sound inventory of listeners’ native language; specifically, they
suggest an involvement of the motor system in the perceptual mapping of
ambiguous, non-native, speech sounds onto native categories.

B81
LATERALITY AND UNILATERAL DEAFNESS: PATIENTS WITH CONGENITAL RIGHT EAR DEAFNESS DO NOT DEVELOP ATYPICAL
LANGUAGE DOMINANCE Lise Van der Haegen1, Frederic Acke2, Guy Vingerhoets1, Ingeborg Dhooge2, Els De Leenheer2, Qing Cai3, Marc Brysbaert1; 1Ghent
University, Belgium, 2Ghent University Hospital, Belgium, 3East China Normal University, China — Auditory speech perception, speech production and reading

lateralize to the left hemisphere in the majority of healthy right-handers.
In this study, we investigated to what extent sensory input underlies the
side of language dominance. We measured the lateralization of the three
core subprocesses of language in patients who had profound hearing loss
in the right ear from birth and in matched control subjects. They took part
in (1) a semantic decision listening task involving speech and sound stimuli
that were contrasted against noise (auditory perception) (2) a word generation task in which subjects had to mentally generate words beginning with
a target letter or repeat a nonword (speech production) and (3) a passive
reading task in which words were contrasted against chequerboards (reading). The results show that a lack of sensory auditory input on the right
side, which is strongly connected to the contralateral left hemisphere, does
not lead to atypical lateralization of speech perception. Speech production
and reading were also typically left lateralized in all but one patient, contradicting previous small scale studies. Other factors such as genetic constraints presumably overrule the role of sensory input in the development
of (a)typical language lateralization.

B82
BLENDING SOCIAL INTERACTION IN DIGITAL INSTRUCTION
FACILITATES THE PERCEPTION LEARNING IN MANDARIN TONE:
EVIDENCE FROM A MEG STUDY Rose Ru-Whui Lee1,2, Kevin Chun-Hsien
Hsu2, Sheng-Kai Lin2, Yao-Ting Sung1, Kuo-en Chang1, Denise Hsien Wu3, Ovid
Jyh-Lang Tzeng1; 1National Taiwan Normal Univerity, 2Academia Sinica, 3National
Central University — Many studies on bilingualism suggested that extended
period of bilingual experience reorganized the language network and the

92

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
cognitive control areas in the brain. Besides, there is much evidence on
learning effect induced by digital game/instruction for different kinds of
cognitive tasks. Most studies evaluated the learning effect induced through
human-computer interaction. But little has paid attention to efficacy of the
digital instruction blended with social interaction in person. This study
explored the role of social interaction in digital language learning and found
that human interaction was critical. This study used MEG neuroimage data
to show the difference of activation in the brain areas responsible for cognitive functions after an intensive short-term digital training program for
learning Chinese as a second language, especially when lexical tones were
included in encoding and were perceived in processing the learning materials. Participants of the experiment were foreign graduate students learning
Chinese as their second language. In the MEG experiment of the multi-deviant oddball paradigm for discrimination of Mandarin tones, the magnet
mismatch field (MMNm) activity between acoustically dissimilar contrast
(T3/T1) and acoustically similar contrast (T3/T2) were measured in the
course of pre-learning and post-learning. We map out the specific source
of activation by ROI (Region of Interest) method. The results showed that
the underlying neuron activation changed dynamically in response to the
degree of perceived linguistic features embedded in the auditory stimuli,
especially when the stimuli were driven by social interaction.

B83
RECOVERY FROM CONDUCTION APHASIA DEPENDS ON CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE RIGHT HEMISPHERE: A CASE STUDY

Alex Teghipco1, Frank Garcia1,4, Madalina Tivarus3, Sue Smith2, Webster Pilcher2,
Bradford Mahon1,2,4; 1Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of
Rochester, USA, 2Department of Neurosurgery, University of Rochester Medical
Center, USA, 3Department of Imaging Sciences, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, 4Center for Language Sciences, University of Rochester, USA — Conduc-

tion aphasia is a language deficit characterized by impaired speech repetition and spared productive and receptive language, and is associated with
damage to the left arcuate fasciculus, a white matter tract connecting Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas. We used functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and cognitive neuropsychological testing to longitudinally evaluate a 26 yr old male (AE) who underwent
an awake neurosurgical procedure to remove a left temporoparietal tumor
that was infiltrating the arcuate fasciculus. Preoperative fMRI revealed
left hemisphere dominance for language, and preoperative DTI revealed
an intact left arcuate fasciculus. During the awake procedure to remove
the tumor, AE developed a pure conduction aphasia. Consistent with AE’s
intraoperative conduction aphasia, postsurgical DTI revealed that the posterior section of the left arcuate fasciculus had been removed along with
the tumor. Over a period of three months after surgery, AE progressively
recovered from his conduction aphasia. A series of whole-brain functional
connectivity analyses were conducted on resting fMRI data acquired preoperatively and at multiple time points postoperatively. Two findings
emerged: 1) consistent with the destruction of the arcuate fascilusus, there
was a reduction in functional connectivity between left Wernicke’s area
and left Broca’s area postoperatively (compared to preoperatively), and 2)
there was an increase in functional connectivity of the right hemisphere
homologue of Wernicke’s area to left Broca’s area postoperatively (compared to preoperatively). This suggests the intriguing possibility that AE’s
recovered repetition abilities after surgery depend on the recruitment of
homologous structures in the undamaged right hemisphere.

B84
DEGREE OF FOREIGN ACCENT IN BILINGUAL CHILDREN PREDICTS SURFACE AREA OF THE BILATERAL SUPERIOR TEMPORAL
GYRUS Pilar Archila1, David Vasquez2, Arturo Hernandez1; 1University of Houston, 2University of California, Riverside — Accurate and efficient processing

of second language (L2) speech sounds has been associated with different
characteristics of brain anatomy (Golestani et al., 2007, 2011). The goal of the
present study was to evaluate the effect of foreign accent, age, and age of
acquisition (AoA) on the anatomy of the bilateral superior temporal gyrus
(STG). Spanish-English bilingual children between the ages of 6 and 10
and an AoA mean of 5 yrs participated in this study (N = 32). Participants’
speech samples were recorded while reading a list of 168 English words.
Their foreign accent was judged on a 9-point scale by English monolin-

2016 Annual Meeting	
guals. High-Resolution whole-brain T1-weighted images were acquired in
a 3T Siemens scanner (192 slices, 1x1x1 voxel size, 87.5% FoV Phase). Two
multiple regressions were conducted, one for each outcome variable: the
left hemisphere STG and the right hemisphere STG. The predictor variables
were foreign accent, age, and AoA. Results showed that in bilingual children, foreign accent predicted surface area of the bilateral STG independent
of age and AoA. That is, children with native-like accents in L2 had larger
surface areas of the bilateral STG, independent of the age of the child and
when the child learned the L2. These results indicate that foreign accent,
which significantly correlated with L2 proficiency (r = -.66, p < 0.001), better
predicts the size of the STG bilaterally than actual age or AoA. It appears
that abilities in speech perception, as measured by foreign accent, influence
the anatomy of the STG.

B85
NATURE AND TIMING OF PERILESIONAL ACTIVATION IN POSTSTROKE LANGUAGE RECOVERY Anika Stockert1, Julian Klingbeil1, Max
Wawrzyniak1, Katrin Wrede1, Dorothee Saur1; 1Leipzig University Hospital, Germany — Poststroke aphasia recovery evolves in time. Increased perilesional

activity associated with treatment-related language improvements has
been confirmed in the chronic phase (Fridriksson et al., 2012), but has not
yet been systematically demonstrated during the early phases of stroke
recovery. The pathophysiology of stroke suggests that perilesional reorganisation evolves within days, lasting for months after stroke, while increased
neuronal excitability might provide a basis for perilesional neuroplasticity
(Schiene et al., 1999). We compared fMRI BOLD response to speech (SP)
and reversed speech (REV) using an auditory comprehension paradigm
administered repeatedly (acute (t1)≤1 week, subacute (t2)=1-2 weeks,
chronic (t3)>6 months post-onset) to patients with stroke affecting left frontal (FC, N=17) or temporoparietal cortex (TPC, N=17). Language activation (SP>REV) obtained from three perilesional ROIs expanding stepwise
to 39mm beyond the lesion (DISTANCE) was compared across TIME and
to the improvement of language comprehension/production. An ANOVA
revealed a significant TIME x DISTANCE interaction (F(4)=2.9, p=.025)
with increased activation from t1 to t3 and t2 to t3 (p<0.05) in perilesional
regions far from the lesion site. While a re-activation from t1 to t2 (r=.44,
p<0.05) and from t2 to t3 (r=.46, p<0.05) contributed to an early improvement of language comprehension in TFC, improved language production
was predicted by a later increase in activation from t2 to t3 (r=.42, p<0.05)
in FC. To conclude, a remapping of cortical language representations in
undamaged left cortices is likely to commence during subacute phase of
recovery and improvements of specific language functions differentially
involve frontal or temporal perilesional areas.

B86
AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE IN CHINESE POEMS: COMBINING
COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS AND NEUROPHYSIOLOGY Xiangbin Teng1, Min Ma2, David Poeppel1,3, Xing Tian4; 1New York University, 2The City
University of New York, 3Max Planck Institute, 4New York University Shanghai —

Poetry is deeply rooted in many human cultures and often elicits intense
aesthetic experiences. Recently, cognitive neuroscientists have begun to
study the neural mechanisms that underpin aesthetic experience. Here we
generated poems using computational procedures from natural language
processing and employed magnetoencephalography (MEG) to investigate
the neural correlates of making aesthetic judgments. Artificial poems that
mimic the highly structured format of traditional Chinese poems were
generated using recent implementations of recurrent neural networks. All
poems are comprised of four sentences, with five monosyllabic words in
each sentence. Each auditory word was individually synthesized to eliminate coarticulation cues. Native Mandarin speakers listened to the poems
that were presented as an isochronous sequence of syllables. Listeners’
subjective evaluations of aesthetic pleasure were collected and MEG concurrently recorded. We argue that the artificial poems evoked a sense of
beauty depending on the parameters used in the generation algorithms.
Moreover, the neural oscillations in the lower frequency bands (theta, 4-8
Hz and delta, < 4 Hz) correlated with poems that were evaluated as more
pleasing. These results suggest that the methods from computational linguistics, neurophysiology, and crowdsourcing can be combined to investigate the complex and still somewhat underspecified issues surrounding
aesthetic experience.

Poster Session B

LANGUAGE: Semantic
B87
WORD-PAIR PRIMING WITH BIASED HOMONYMS: N400 AND
LPC EFFECTS Gabriela Meade1,2, Donna Coch1; 1Dartmouth College, 2San

Diego State University & University of California, San Diego — Biased homonyms

are words that have the same lexical form and at least two different meanings, one of which occurs more frequently than the other(s). In an event-related potential investigation of the effects of meaning frequency in biased
homonym processing, we used a lexical decision task with a 250 ms stimulus onset asynchrony. Isolated homonym primes (e.g., ruler) preceded
targets that were associated with the dominant meaning of the homonym
(e.g., inch), associated with the subordinate meaning (e.g., king), unrelated
words (e.g., claw), or nonwords (e.g., smole). Both dominant and subordinate associates elicited smaller amplitude N400s and LPCs than unrelated
targets (i.e., were primed). The N400 priming effect was greater for dominant than subordinate associates, reflecting automatic processing of meaning frequency. In contrast, the LPC priming effect was similar for dominant
and subordinate associates. This pattern of differential effects of meaning
frequency is consistent with theories that posit an initial processing advantage for the dominant meaning of biased homonyms. However, these data
suggest that subsequent cues provided by even a single word context can
boost activation of the subordinate meaning to the extent that it becomes
similar to the level of activation of the dominant meaning.

B88
UNDERSTANDING HYPOTHETICAL EVENTS IN DISCOURSE Veena

Dwivedi1; 1Brock University — In a self-paced reading study, 48 participants

read 32 2-sentence discourses, followed by comprehension questions. Our
previous ERP work showed that sentences containing modal auxiliaries
were sensitive to previous context. In the current work, we extend this
finding to investigate whether sensitivity to context is modulated by type
of modal auxiliary. Context sentences (S1) were either Hypothetical or (S1’)
Control (factual), and the subsequent continuation sentence (S2) contained
one of two modal auxiliaries, either should or would. S1: The reporter is
daydreaming about a possible interview question. S1’: The reporter regrets
the interview question. S2a/b: It should/would cause a public uproar. We
hypothesized the reading times for would vs. should sentences would differ
when they followed Control contexts, since would is known to require a
hypothetical context (Stump, 1985; Dwivedi, 1996). This is not the case for
should, e.g, Jane would buy that car (if she had the money) vs. Jane should
buy that car--the latter sentence does not require a hypothetical scenario to
be interpreted. No evidence of differences in reading times at continuation
sentences between different contexts was found. However, question-answer response accuracy did pattern as expected along the semantic requirements of would vs. should. Participants were less accurate in answering
questions for would when it was preceded by a Control vs. Hypothetical
context; this was not the case for questions in response to should sentences.
We interpret these findings as consistent with a language processing model
that is heuristic first, algorithmic second.

B89
THE N400 COMPONENT OF THE EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIAL REFLECTS IMPLICIT SEMANTIC PREDICTION ERROR: EVIDENCE FROM A CONNECTIONIST MODEL OF SENTENCE COMPREHENSION Milena Rabovsky1, Steven Hansen1, James McClelland1;
1

Stanford University — The N400 component of the event-related brain potential is widely used in research on language and semantic memory, but the
specific cognitive functions underlying N400 amplitudes are still unclear
and actively debated (Kutas & Federmeier, 2011). Recent simulations with a
connectionist model of word meaning suggest that N400 amplitudes might
reflect implicit semantic prediction error (Rabovsky & McRae, 2014) in line
with early discussion by McClelland (1994). Here, we extend these simulations to sentence comprehension, using a connectionist model of sentence
processing (McClelland et al., 1989) to simulate a number of N400 effects
obtained in empirical research. In the model, sequentially incoming words
update the representation of sentence meaning and, important for present
purposes, this representation not only reflects sentence meaning as apparent from the constituents presented so far, but also reflects the model’s best
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

93

Poster Session B	
guess interpretation of the meaning of the sentence as a whole, predicted
based on the statistical regularities in the model’s environment. As each
new word comes in, the representation of sentence meaning is updated and
this update reflects the implicit prediction error contained in the previous
representation. Simulating influences of semantic congruency, cloze probability, a word’s position in the sentence, semantic and associative priming,
repetition, and interactions between repetition and semantic congruency,
we found that this update of the predictive representation of sentence
meaning consistently patterned with N400 amplitudes. These results yield
further support to the idea that N400 amplitudes reflect implicit semantic
prediction error (McClelland, 1994; Rabovsky & McRae, 2014).

B90
NEURAL BASIS OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION IN ENCODING AND
RETRIEVAL INTERFERENCE Andrew Jahn1, Hannah Jones1, Clinton Johns1,

Dave Kush1, Morgan Bontrager1, Stephen Frost1, Julie Van Dyke1; 1Haskins Laboratories — Recent evidence points to retrieval interference from semantic

distractors as a primary source of difficulty during thematic integration,
while interference from phonological distractors plays a role only at encoding (Kush et al., 2015; Van Dyke & McElree, 2006). The current study used
an event-related fMRI design to examine the neurological basis of these
effects. An analysis of subdivisions within the left lateral prefrontal cortex
revealed that only encoding interference was associated with significant
activation in BAs 47 and 44/45, while both encoding and retrieval interference elicited significant activations within the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). These results suggest that the DLPFC responds to
resolution of verbal conflict regardless of the type of interference that is
processed. Inferior frontal areas show greater specificity to phonologically-based encoding interference, while medial regions are associated with
selection of the necessary object in order to complete filler-gap dependency.

B91
COGNITIVE CONTROL ABILITY INFLUENCES PREDICTION
DURING COMPREHENSION FOR OLDER ADULTS: EVIDENCE
FROM ERPS Megan Zirnstein1, Janet G. van Hell1, Judith F. Kroll1; 1Pennsylvania State University — Young adult comprehenders tend to form expecta-

tions for upcoming input, especially when the meaning of the text or utterance is strongly constrained (Federmeier, 2007; Van Berkum, 2008). When
expectations are met, this often results in a reduced N400 ERP response to
expected words (Federmeier et al., 2002; 2007). However, when expectations are not met, and unexpected input is encountered, costs arise, often
in the form of a late, frontally distributed positivity. Although younger
adults typically predict during reading, older adults are less likely to do
so, especially if they perform more poorly on tasks of executive function
(i.e., category fluency task; DeLong et al., 2012; Federmeier et al., 2010).
In a recent study (Zirnstein et al., under review), better inhibitory control
was associated with a reduction in the frontal positivity when predictions
were disconfirmed, suggesting that control plays a role in determining how
readers mediate this type of conflict. In the current study, older adults read
sentences of varying semantic constraint while their EEG was recorded
and completed measures of cognitive control ability. Our results replicated
prior work (Wlotko et al., 2012), where some but not all older adults exhibited a frontal positivity ERP effect. In particular, how older adults balance
between proactive goal maintenance and correctly suppressing irrelevant
information influenced (1) whether they were likely to predict and (2) the
level of cost when those predictions were not fully realized. We discuss
these findings in the context of cognitive decline and its effect on comprehension and executive function.

B92
STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL DYNAMICS OF BILINGUAL
READING AS A FUNCTION OF THE AGE-OF-ACQUISITION Myriam
Oliver1, Manuel Carreiras1,2, Pedro Paz-Alonso1; 1BCBL.Basque Center on Cognition,Brain and Language. Donostia-San Sebastian,Spain, 2IKERBASQUE, Basque
Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain. — Neuropsychological and neuroimaging research have extensively demonstrated the involvement of left-lateralized perisylvian regions in reading processes. Recent evidence has
suggested that, compared to monolinguals, bilingual readers may exhibit
a weaker left-lateralized pattern of regional activations and a more exten-

94

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
sive engagement of left perisylvian and right-hemisphere homologous
regions (Park et al., 2012). Here, we sought to investigate lateralized patterns between bilinguals as a function of age-of-acquisition using a multimodal neuroimaging approach, with fMRI, cortical thickness and DTI data.
A total of thirty-six right-handed bilinguals with Spanish as their L1, who
learned Basque as their L2 before age 3 (early bilinguals; n = 18) or after age
6 (late bilinguals; n = 18), participated. Region-of-interest analysis revealed
a similar recruitment of left and right language-related regions in both early
and late bilinguals except for the left and right pars triangularis. Moreover,
functional connectivity analyses confirmed a tighter coactivation among
left and right pars triangularis in early but not in late bilinguals for reading
in L1 relative to reading in L2. Importantly, structural analysis revealed
increased cortical thickness in right pars triangularis for early relative to
late bilinguals. Diffusion MR tractography of the anterior part of the corpus
callosum connecting left and right pars triangularis revealed differences
between early and late bilinguals. Altogether, these findings provide strong
converging evidence of structural and functional changes involving left
and right triangularis as a function of AoA of the L2.

B93
EVENT PROCESSING IS AFFECTED BY AN INTERACTION
BETWEEN ACTUAL AND CANONICAL EVENT PROPERTIES AND
LANGUAGE: A VISUAL ERP STUDY Annika Andersson1, Marianne Gull-

berg1; 1Lund University — Languages differ in how events are described, but

little is known about how language interacts with online event processing.
To explore this question we examined placement events in Swedish. Swedish has three obligatory placement verbs, sätta, ‘set’, ställa ‘stand’, lägga,
‘lay’, and lacks a superordinate general term like English put (Gullberg &
Burenhult, 2011; Viberg, 1999). Every placement event in Swedish must be
labeled by one of the three verbs, whose choice depends on object properties, and the object’s relationship to the ground. The current study investigates how sensitive Swedes are to the relationship between event properties
and verb labels. Native speakers (N = 20, 18-35-years) watched images of a
hand placing an object on a table followed by visually presented sentences
that were either congruent or incongruent with the images while event-related potentials were recorded and time-locked to the placement verbs. We
varied object properties such as ± base (e.g., glass/orange), spatial extension (e.g., tall/short glass), and orientation (vertical/horizontal). The three
verbs were combined with each image in a cross-subject design. The results
showed that, as expected, incongruent picture-verb combinations elicited
an increased centro-medial N400 modulated by verb appropriateness. Congruent picture-verb combinations also elicited an N400 when objects were
placed in non-canonical positions (e.g. laying a glass on its side), suggesting that native placement event processing may depend on an interaction
between actual and canonical event properties and language. A follow
up study presenting auditory sentences simultaneously with images will
explore this hypothesis further.

B94
A PIECE OF CKAE: NEUROCOGNITIVE INDICES OF PREDICTION
AND SENTENTIAL CONSTRAINT DURING VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION Nyssa Z. Bulkes1, Darren Tanner1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Visual word recognition in context requires rapid extraction of

information from multiple sources. During reading, top-down information
(e.g. semantic context) can facilitate bottom-up (e.g. visual input) processing (e.g., Balota, et al., 1985). Processing is impeded, however, when the
expectations of bottom-up information conflicts with top-down expectations. Previous ERP research has found the visual system to be sensitive to
top-down semantic information, as semantically-supported pseudowords
(“ceke”, expected “cake”) elicit a different pattern of early visual ERPs
than semantically-unsupported pseudowords (“tont”: Kim & Lai, 2012).
Using ERPs, we investigated whether sentential constraint can mitigate an
impoverished visual input and more heavily weight top-down information when resolving unexpected input. We additionally investigated how
the nature of the visual impoverishment impacts early cortical potentials
associated with visual word recognition by contrasting semantically supported pseudowords (“ceke”) with words containing letter transpositions
(“ckae”). Behavioral work on lexical access has shown that letter transpositions are less disruptive than misspellings or letter substitutions during
reading; however, no work has yet contrasted early visual ERPs elicited

2016 Annual Meeting	
by transposed letters versus semantically-supported pseudowords in sentence context. ERPs were recorded while participants read either high- or
low-constraint sentences, where target words were either correct (“cake”),
contained a letter transposition (“ckae”), or a semantically-supported
pseudoword (“ceke”). Results expand on earlier work to further demonstrate how predictive processes are modulated by the level of sentential
constraint and, in turn, how interactions between top-down and bottom-up
information while reading affect linguistic prediction. Results are discussed
with respect to current models of visual word recognition.

B95
SCALING UP TO A SENTENCE: THE TEMPORAL UNFOLDING
OF CONCEPTUAL SPECIFICITY AND SENTENTIAL POLARITY
EFFECTS IN LEFT ANTERIOR TEMPORAL AND MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX Linmin Zhang1, Liina Pylkkänen1,2; 1New York University, 2NYUAD
Institute (NYU Abu Dhabi) — Research on both single words and minimal two-

word phrases has implicated the left anterior temporal lobe (LATL) as a site
of conceptual integration with robust sensitivity to conceptual specificity.
However, this research has not yet been scaled up to a sentence and thus
the impact of conceptual specificity on natural sentence comprehension is
unclear. Here we embedded phrases varying in featural specificity into the
subject position of full sentences, and additionally, modulated determiner
polarity (a vs. no), with the aim of introducing a more grammatical source
of variation in the information specificity of the expression. In all, the design
contained three factors, determiner polarity (a vs. no), adjectival modification (with vs. without) and noun specificity (specific vs. general), leading to
following types of sentences: a/no-(green)-reptile/lizard-is-resting. MEG
analyses covered each word and based on prior literature, targeted the
LATL and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC). The results showed
that (i) both the LATL and the vmPFC were sensitive to determiner polarity
at the determiner, (ii) adding an adjectival modifier caused more activity
during the presentation of the noun in both the LATL and the vmPFC and
(iii) in the LATL, adjectivally modified sentences elicited increased activation not only at the noun, but also at the auxiliary and the verb. In all, our
results suggest that the LATL’s role in semantic processing is not limited to
conceptual features (given effects of determiner polarity) and that effects of
semantic composition within a noun phrase can still be seen several words
after the noun.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
B96
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF EVERYDAY THINGS: HOW PERCEPTUAL
AND CONCEPTUAL FEATURES INFLUENCE MEMORY FOR
OBJECTS. Simon Davis1, Benjamin Geib1, Rosalie Cichinelli1, Marty Woldorff1,
Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke University — The explosion of fMRI-based represen-

tational similarity analyses (RSA) have helped to elucidate the functional
correlates of object representation at both coarse and fine-grained levels.
What is less clear is the role of these complex representational structures
in forming lasting episodic memories. Here we show for the first time how
complex feature similarity predicts distinct forms of episodic memory performance. Subjects named everyday objects during fMRI and returned a
day later to make old/new judgments on either conceptual (old/new
words) or perceptual information (same/exemplar images). RSA analyses using representational dissimilarity matrices (RDMs) representing the
overlap of visual features, category membership, and conceptual features
were compared with brain RDMs representing neural similarity in regions
along the ventral stream. Replicating previous visual object recognition
studies, visual feature RDMs showed the strongest overlap with brain
RDMs in early visual cortices, while semantic feature RDMs showed strong
relationships with brain RDMs in anterior temporal regions (perirhinal,
anterior temporal pole). As expected, the hippocampus showed greater
pattern similarity for subsequently remembered than subsequently forgotten trials regardless of memory type. However, we observed that while
perceptually remembered trials showed greater pattern similarity earlier in
the ventral stream, conceptually remembered trials demonstrated greater
pattern similarity in perirhinal cortex. These results help to link perceptual

Poster Session B
and conceptual accounts of object encoding, and describe the importance
of characterizing the representation of everyday things in predicting how
these objects will later be remembered.

B97
THE NEURAL MECHANISM SUPPORTING POST-RETRIEVAL
MONITORING IS SENSITIVE TO THE PRECISION OF RECOLLECTION Jamie Murray1, David Donaldson1; 1University of Stirling — Episodic

memory (i.e., memory for events) is supported by post-retrieval processing that operates on the contents of retrieval in service of specific retrieval
goals. Although post-retrieval processing has been a useful construct for
understanding memory related deficits following brain lesions, the functional significance of the neural mechanisms associated with these processes remains unclear. One possibility is that post-retrieval processing
reflects the monitoring and evaluation of information, with greater monitoring required when the quality of information is low. To date, however,
studies of retrieval monitoring have not separated the rate of retrieval (i.e.,
the probability that one will remember) from the quality of retrieval (i.e.,
the precision of successfully remembered information). Here, we aimed to
directly assess whether post-retrieval processes were sensitive to the quality of retrieved information. A continuous source task was used, requiring
participants to remember words paired with a location marked around a
circle, allowing trials to be subsequently separated according to the level
of source precision (i.e., the radial distance between the target location and
the remembered location) rather than just subjective confidence or old/new
discrimination. By measuring the Right Frontal Old/New Effect (a commonly reported electrophysiological correlate of post-retrieval processing)
we found that only information retrieved with the highest precision elicited
a significant effect. We discuss the theoretical implications of the current
findings, which clearly contradict the prediction that monitoring processes
should be engaged when retrieval provides low quality information – suggesting instead that post-retrieval processing is sensitive to the retrieval of
high quality information.

B98
PREDICTING EPISODIC AND SPATIAL MEMORY FROM RESTING-STATE CONNECTIVITY: A FUNCTIONAL DISSOCIATION
BETWEEN THE ANTERIOR AND POSTERIOR HIPPOCAMPUS Jonas

Persson1, Eva Stening1, Kristin Nordin1, Hedvig Söderlund1; 1Uppsala University
— While the anterior (aHPC) and posterior (pHPC) hippocampus have

been found to differ in their resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC),
whether they reflect functionally distinct networks is still largely unknown.
Converging evidence from lesion studies and task-related fMRI suggest
that pHPC enables spatial memory and navigation while aHPC is central
to non-spatial episodic memory. To investigate potential relationships
between hippocampal RSFC and hippocampus dependent memory, we
used Relevance Vector Regression (RVR), a machine learning approach to
predicting continuous outcome measures from patterns of neuroimaging
data, with the hypothesis that patterns of whole-brain RSFC associated
with aHPC predict episodic memory performance, while patterns of wholebrain RSFC associated with pHPC predict spatial memory performance.
Spatial memory was assessed with a virtual Water Maze task and episodic
memory was measured with a two-dimensional object-location task, using
item and location memory as outcome measures. Memory assessment and
magnetic resonance imaging took place at two separate occasions. The
anterior and posterior RSFC largely corresponded with previous findings,
and showed no effect of laterality. Supporting the hypothesis, RVR produced accurate predictions of episodic performance from RSFC associated
with aHPC, but not pHPC, and accurate predictions of spatial performance
from pHPC, but not aHPC, RSFC. This pattern was confirmed with an
ANOVA, showing a significant interaction between hippocampal axis and
memory type. The results lend support to a functional dissociation between
the anterior and posterior hippocampus, and suggest a connection between
intrinsic functional networks and cognitive performance within specific
domains, that is relatively stable over time.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

95

Poster Session B	

B99
INTERACTIONS OF CONCEPTUAL FLUENCY AND EPISODIC
FAMILIARITY AS REFLECTED IN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS
Regine Bader1, Axel Mecklinger1; 1Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany —

Event-related potential (ERP) old/new effects have been associated with
different sub-processes of episodic recognition. While the link between recollection and the left-parietal old/new effect seems to be uncontroversial,
the relationship between familiarity and the mid-frontal old/new effect has
been debated. It has been argued that the mid-frontal effect reflects differences in conceptual fluency between old and new items and is related
to episodic familiarity only when conceptual fluency co-varies with familiarity – a tempting notion as the N400, which is reduced when conceptual
processing is facilitated, occurs in the same time window. However, a third
possibility is that the mid-frontal effect under most circumstances reflects
the interaction of familiarity and conceptual processing. To test this, we
manipulated conceptual fluency and episodic familiarity orthogonally in
an incidental recognition test: visually presented old and new words were
preceded by either conceptually related or unrelated auditory prime words.
If ERP old/new differences are functionally indistinguishable from conceptual priming effects, the ERP contrast reflecting only priming (new words
in the related vs. unrelated condition) and the contrast reflecting priming
plus familiarity (old words in the related vs. new words in the unrelated
condition) should differ in magnitude but not in scalp distribution. Contrary to this prediction, the priming contrast had a typical N400 distribution with a right-parietal maximum whereas the priming plus familiarity
contrast was significantly more frontally accentuated. This implicates that
old/new effects in this time window not merely reflect differences in conceptual processing but an interaction of episodic familiarity and conceptual
processing.

B100
AN ERP STUDY OF ADULT AGE DIFFERENCES IN THE USE OF
SELF-DIRECTED CONCEPTUAL COMBINATION TO CONSTRUCT
UNITIZED MEMORY REPRESENTATIONS Heather D. Lucas1, Resh S.
Gupta1,2, Ryan J. Hubbard3, Kara D. Federmeier4; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Vanderbilt University — When meaningful stimuli such as

words are encountered together (e.g., “elephant-ferry), they can be processed either separately or as a combined concept ( “an elephant ferry”).
Prior research suggests that associations subject to conceptual combination
are represented in a more unitized or holistic manner relative to separately-processed associations, and may show less susceptibility to age-related
associative memory decline. However, little is known about how aging
can influence the conceptual combination process itself, which may affect
its utility as a memorization strategy. We recorded ERPs while older and
younger adults studied pairs of sequentially-presented, unrelated nouns
using a strategy that either did or did not involve attempting to generate
plausible definitions. To examine the role of imagery in conceptual combination, we included both concrete-concrete (“blanket-clay”) and abstract-concrete pairs (“irony-shield”). We found that during the conceptual combination task, younger adults showed evidence of compositional imagery,
or differences in imagery-related ERPs evoked by second nouns according
to the concreteness of the preceding first nouns. By contrast, older adults
only showed item-level concreteness effects, suggesting reduced compositional language processing. Although both groups showed similar benefits
of conceptual combination on subsequent associative recognition memory,
older adults showed reduced evidence of unitization following the conceptual combination task when memory was tested via free recall. Together,
these findings raise the possibility that age-related decreases in the use of
compositional imagery may limit older adults’ ability to employ conceptual
combination as a unitization strategy.

B101
HYPOTHALAMIC-PITUITARY-ADRENAL AXIS ACTIVATION IS NECESSARY FOR THE PREFERENTIAL CONSOLIDATION OF EMOTIONAL MEMORY TRACES Tony Cunningham1, Michelle M. Wirth1, Jessica
D. Payne1; 1University of Notre Dame — Stress activates the Hypothalamic-Pi-

tuitary-Adrenal (HPA) Axis, leading to the release of the stress hormone
cortisol. Emotional experiences produce robust memory traces in the

96

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
brain, and increased cortisol concentration has been linked to enhanced
memory for emotional content, but impaired consolidation for neutral
information. The Trier Social Stress Test (TSST) is a psychosocial stressor
that has been shown to generate increased cortisol in a large proportion
of participants. Here, participants encoded scenes consisting of negative
or neutral objects on neutral backgrounds, followed by the TSST (n=39) or
a control condition (n=26). The next day, recognition memory was tested
for objects and backgrounds separately. The stress group was divided into
high (n=20) and low (n=19) responders to explore how increased cortisol
would affect the selective consolidation of emotional content. For high
responders, mixed ANOVA analysis revealed a three-way interaction
among Condition (stress/control), Scene Component (object/background),
and Valence (negative/neutral) [F1,44=4.2,p=0.047], driven by an increase
in memory for negative objects [t(44)=2.1,p=0.043]. Thus, there was a significantly larger emotional memory “tradeoff effect” in the high responder
group than in the control group [t(44)=2.3,p=0.025]. Stress low responders,
however, performed identically to the control group [F1,43=0.063,p=0.8].
This suggests that a physiological stress response leading to an increased
concentration of cortisol is necessary to produce these memory effects. We
theorize that HPA axis activation “tags” emotional objects as especially
important, enabling mechanisms active during consolidation to selectively
enhance emotional memory processing while continuing to suppress neutral information.

B102
PSYCHOLOGICAL STRESS DISRUPTS THE NEURAL CORRELATES
OF ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY RETRIEVAL Stephanie A. Gagnon1, Michael
L. Waskom1, Anthony D. Wagner; 1Stanford University — We continually retrieve

information about prior experiences to guide decisions and actions in the
present. The process of recollecting specific, associative details about past
events involves engagement of the hippocampus and, in part, frontoparietal control mechanisms. However, when faced with a stressful situation,
hippocampal processing can be disrupted. Further, acute stress may impair
function in frontoparietal networks critical for controlled processing. Here,
we examined whether acute anticipatory stress, operationalized by threat
of unpredictable shock, disrupts memory retrieval processes. To the extent
that associative retrieval requires engagement of the medial temporal lobe
(MTL) and controlled processes, we hypothesized that performance will
be vulnerable to interference under conditions of stress relative to safety.
During encoding, words were paired with either indoor or outdoor scene
associates while participants were in a neutral state. At retrieval 24 hours
later, participants were placed into a stress group or control group, and
viewed old and new word cues while we measured salivary cortisol and
recorded neural activity with functional MRI. If participants recognized the
word as old, they were asked to recollect the paired associate. Stress during
retrieval impaired hippocampal-dependent memory performance. Further,
stress disrupted MTL and frontoparietal activity, and interfered with cortical reinstatement of associated information.

B103
NEURAL RECAPITULATION DURING RETRIEVAL OF EMOTIONAL
FACES AND SCENES Holly Bowen1, Elizabeth Kensinger1; 1Boston College —

Memory is best when the processes engaged during encoding overlap with
those engaged at retrieval. One marker of such overlap is neural recapitulation. Previous work has revealed content specific reactivation of fusiform
and parahippocampal cortex during retrieval of previously encoded faces
and scenes, respectively. No studies have examined how this reactivation
might be influenced by the valence of the content. The current fMRI study
examines neural recapitulation during retrieval of neutral memoranda
previously encoded in an emotional context. Participants intentionally
encoded neutral words paired with a positive, negative or neutral face or
scene. They then completed a recognition judgment for the words; the emotional face and scene context was not re-presented at retrieval. Conjunction analyses replicated previous evidence of encoding-retrieval overlap
for content specific regions associated with processing faces and scenes.
Furthermore, recapitulation of emotional context was stronger for remembered negative scenes compared to negative faces.

2016 Annual Meeting	

B104
STABILITY ENHANCES RELATIONAL BUT NOT ITEM INFORMATION AND INFLUENCES MEMORY ORGANIZATION AS INDEXED
BY EYE MOVEMENTS Yi-Chieh Chiu1, Michael Dulas1, Patrick Watson1,
Rachel Gonzalez1, Neal Cohen1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign —

Remembering daily events involves integrating items, locations, and the
relationships between them. Some item-location relationships are stable
across experiences (e.g. rooms in a building) while others are more frequently changing (e.g. people in the building). We hypothesized that the
presence of stable relationships could aid in the organization of memory,
thereby improving memory performance. Participants studied pairs of
object images in various positions on the screen. Some of the item-position relationships were constant (stable) across trials while other item-position relationships were trial-specific (non-stable). At test, participants
reconstructed the study configurations by selecting individual items from
an array and placing them in the appropriate positions, thus recreating
studied pairings. Eye movement data were also collected to provide an
additional measure of memory and to capture implicit organization in the
reconstruction. Results showed a dissociation between item and relational
memory performance. Stability did not affect item memory performance,
however, relational reconstruction accuracy was enhanced by stability.
Furthermore, eye movements revealed that spatial positions that were part
of stable relationships received more fixations over positions that were not.
In contrast, fixations did not differ between items, regardless of whether or
not they were part of a stable item-position relationship. This experiment
provides evidence that stable information enhances memory, specifically
for relations, and suggests a tendency for information in memory to be
anchored around positional relationships.

B105
REAL-WORLD SPATIAL CONTEXTUAL CUES ELICIT SPONTANEOUS RETRIEVAL OF AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL AND SEMANTIC
MEMORIES DEPENDING ON FAMILIARITY Jessica Robin1,2, Luisa
Garzon1, Sara Pishdadian1, Morris Moscovitch1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman
Research Institute, Baycrest — Previous studies of involuntary autobiograph-

ical memory retrieval are mostly naturalistic diary studies or laboratory-memory studies based on learned associations between simple stimuli
(Berntsen, 2009). One such study revealed that cues with fewer associations
are more likely to prompt involuntary memories than cues with several
associations (Berntsen, Staugaard, & Sorenson, 2012). In this study we
developed a novel paradigm for eliciting spontaneous autobiographical
memory retrieval based on real-world locations varying in familiarity, to
test ideas derived from theories of memory representation in hippocampal
or extra-hippocampal structures. Participants viewed scenes of real-world
locations under the guise of a visual memory task, and indicated if they
experienced spontaneous thoughts. These were classified by content, and
their rate of incidence was compared based on the location’s familiarity.
Familiar locations were more likely to lead to spontaneous thoughts than
unfamiliar locations. Consistent with predictions, we found that the incidence of spontaneous autobiographical episodic memories was highest for
locations only visited once or twice. In contrast, for locations visited the
highest number of times, participants were more likely to report retrieving
a combination of semantic information and more general autobiographical
memory. This study demonstrates that real-world spatial context serves as
an effective cue for spontaneousmemories. Furthermore, it suggests that
contexts with fewer associations may be more likely to trigger spontaneous
retrieval of a specific autobiographical episode, while cues with more associations lead to the retrieval of more general autobiographical and semantic
memory, consistent with theories related to their representation in hippocampal or extra-hippocampal structures.

B106
NEURAL SPATIOTEMPORAL DYNAMICS UNDERLYING EMOTIONAL INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN PEOPLE WITH AND WITHOUT POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER Shana Hall1, Kaitlyn

Brodar1, Dorthe Berntsen2, David Rubin1,2; 1Duke University, 2Aarhus University
— One of the hallmark symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is

intrusive memories about the traumatic experience. In the context of PTSD,

Poster Session B
these memories are highly emotionally distressing. Here, we compare the
neural substrates of emotional involuntary memories to non-emotional
involuntary memories in people with and without PTSD. To do this, during
encoding sounds are presented with pictures that range from emotionally
neutral to negative. This pairing is presented five times to create a strong
sound-picture link. During retrieval, in the scanner, participants hear the
sounds and do a sound localization task unrelated to memory. After the
scan, participants hear the sounds again and report whether they had a
memory of the picture when the sound was presented in the scanner and
how hard they tried to remember the picture. Neural activity was separated into early (occurred while the sound was playing), and late, (occurred
immediately after the sound was played). We found that both groups
showed activity in regions typically associated with memory retrieval but
that this occurred early for the control group and late for the PTSD group.
Conversely, when comparing high emotion trials to low emotion trials,
both groups showed activity in regions associated with emotion and emotion regulation but this occurred early in the PTSD group and late in the
control group. This suggests that people with PTSD have a delayed neural
response to involuntary memory cues but an early emotional response to
highly emotional involuntary memories.

B107
EXAMINING THE ROLE OF SCHEMAS IN RETRIEVAL SUCCESS
Christina E. Webb1, Nancy A. Dennis1; 1The Pennsylvania State University — Sche-

mas act as memory mechanisms that allow one to build frameworks in
order to support memory through the use of gist information. The current
study sought to use naturalistic scenes in order to investigate changes in
the neural basis of veridical memories for information that was inherently
tied to the scene’s schema (schematic) compared to that which was not
directly related to the schema (non-schematic). During encoding, participants viewed schematic scenes (e.g., Christmas, bathroom, camping) and
were tested on their memory for the content of the scene, including targets
that were related (e.g., toilet) and unrelated to, but not inconsistent with its
theme (e.g., vase). Behavioral results showed that schematic items elicited
higher recollection rates than non-schematic items, suggestive of greater
attention to and memory for the gist of items. Successful recollection of
both schematic and non-schematic items was associated with increases
in neural activity in the core recollection network, including visual and
fronto-parietal regions. Compared to non-schematic retrieval, schematic
retrieval showed greater activity in bilateral occipitotemporal regions,
including left hippocampus, indicating conscious, detailed retrieval of
items in the scene along with their surrounding schematic contexts. In contrast, non-schematic retrieval was mediated by greater activation in medial
prefrontal cortex and inferior parietal regions associated with increased
decision-making, evaluation and attentional mechanisms required for this
more difficult retrieval process. Additionally, schematic retrieval exhibited
greater connectivity between parietal and semantic processing regions in
left inferior prefrontal cortex, whereas non-schematic retrieval exhibited
greater parietal-occipitotemporal connectivity, indicating differences in
engagement of retrieval support.

B108
DETAILED VISUAL SPATIAL MEMORY PRODUCES RETINOTOPIC
ACTIVITY IN EARLY VISUAL REGIONS Jessica Karanian1, Brittany Jeye1,
Scott Slotnick1; 1Boston College — Previous work has demonstrated that

encoding-related sensory activity is reinstated during explicit long-term
memory retrieval. This has been shown for all the sensory modalities
and, within the visual modality, for specific features (i.e., spatial location,
motion, color, and shape). For instance, memory for items previously presented in the left visual field reactivated the right early visual regions,
while memory for items previously presented in the right visual field reactivated the left early visual regions. In the present fMRI investigation, we
assessed whether encoding-related retinotopic activity would be reinstated
during memory for items presented in different quadrants of the visual
field. During encoding, participants viewed abstract shapes presented
in one of four visual field quadrants (upper-left, lower-left, upper-right,
lower-right). During retrieval, old shapes were presented at fixation and
participants indicated whether each shape was previously presented in the
“upper-left”, “lower-left”, “upper-right”, or “lower-right” quadrant. Data
were acquired at 3T with a 32-channel head coil. A preliminary random-effect general linear model analysis revealed that memory for items in each

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

97

Poster Session B	
quadrant of the visual field reinstated encoding-related retinotopic activity.
Specifically, memory for the upper-left quadrant preferentially activated
the ventral right early visual regions, memory for the lower-left quadrant preferentially activated dorsal right early visual regions, memory for
the upper-right quadrant preferentially activated ventral left early visual
regions, and memory for the lower-right quadrant preferentially activated dorsal left early visual regions. The present results provide the most
detailed evidence to date that memory for spatial information can activate
the corresponding retinotopic early visual regions.

B109
ASSOCIATIVE MEMORIES BENEFIT FROM DISTINCTIVENESS AT
ENCODING, WHILE FEATURE-BASED INTEGRATION EMERGES
OVER TIME Alexa Tompary1, Lila Davachi1; 1New York University — Theories of

systems-level consolidation propose that the neural traces of episodic memories are gradually distributed across cortical regions. While it has been
suggested that pattern separation benefits episodic memory, the extraction
and later representation of regularities across episodes is critical for semantic knowledge. We developed an fMRI study to investigate how representations of memories change with time, from encoding to long-term retrieval.
In the first scan session, subjects encoded object-scene pairs, where each
object was paired with one of four repeating scenes and presented three
times. Encoding was followed by memory tests for half of the pairs. In a
second scan a week later, subjects completed the same memory tests on
the other half of the pairs. We focused on the hippocampus and a region in
vmPFC known to be increasingly involved in memory retrieval over time
(Takashima et al 2006). We found that during cued recall, the similarity
of overlapping memories increased relative to non-overlapping memories
in the right hippocampus and vmPFC. Critically, this relationship only
emerged after one week of consolidation. During encoding, however, all
memories grew more distinct with repeated presentations. Furthermore,
in right hippocampus, we found greater subsequent memory for pairs that
became more distinct from other pairs across the repeated presentations
at encoding. Together this suggests that with consolidation, the representation of a memory might reflect stronger associations with other relevant
memories, despite increased separation of successfully encoded items.
Future analyses will aim to understand the relationship between encoding
processes and consolidation-dependent integration.

B110
CA3 SUBFIELD VOLUME PREDICTS ANTEROGRADE AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY LOSS IN ORGANIC AMNESIA Thomas

D. Miller1,2, Penny A. Gowland3, Trevor T.-J. Chong4, Tammy W.C. Ng5, Anne M.
Aimola Davies1, Michael R. Johnson6, Sarosh R. Irani1, Angela Vincent1, Masud
Husain1, Chris Kennard1, Clive R. Rosenthal1; 1University of Oxford, 2Royal Free
Hospital, London, 3University of Nottingham, 4Macquarie University, 5University
College Hospital, London, 6Imperial College London — Advances in ultra-high

field anatomical MRI have renewed interest in the structure and function
of human hippocampal subfields, but these methods are seldom applied
to lesion studies of chronic amnesia due to challenges in defining anatomical borders within the hippocampus. Here we segmented and quantified
five principal hippocampal subfields (subiculum, cornu ammonis 1, 2, 3,
and dentate gyrus) at 7.0-Tesla MRI in 14 healthy adults and in 12 participants with chronic amnesia following limbic encephalitis. Hippocampal
volumes were acquired using three-dimensional fast-spin echo imaging, at
an in-plane resolution of 0.39 x 0.39 mm2 and a slice thickness of 1.0 mm.
Behavioural sequelae associated with hippocampal pathology were examined by assessing the link between the five subfield volumes on a test of
anterograde episodic memory, the Autobiographical Interview (AI). The
results revealed that the amnesic group had significantly impaired anterograde autobiographical memory (internal details) – as operationalized by
point score on the AI relative to controls – but not for the personal semantic component (external details). Bilateral CA3 volumes were significantly
reduced in the amnesic group relative to the age-matched control group.
Critically, CA3 volumes in both groups significantly predicted performance on the anterograde internal detail point score of the AI. No other
subfield volumes predicted performance on either the AI. We discuss the

98

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
implications of these results in terms of computational neuroanatomical
accounts that identify CA3 with a role in binding elements from episodes
or associations.

B111
EPISODIC MEMORY AND AGING: THE EFFECT OF PERCEPTUAL
PROCESSING FLUENCY ON RECOGNITION MEMORY PROCESSES Christine Bastin1, Sylvie Willems2; 1Cyclotron Research Center, Uni-

versity of Liège, Belgium, 2Psychology and Speech Therapy University Clinic,
University of Liège, Belgium — Normal aging is characterized by decreased
recollection, but better preserved familiarity. Memory tasks that facilitate
the use of familiarity should allow attenuating age-related differences in
memory. The study tested two hypotheses: (1) can the reliance on familiarity during recognition memory be promoted by increasing the difference in perceptual processing fluency between old and new items; (2) can
this manipulation reduce age-related difficulties in episodic memory?
Twenty-four young and 24 older adults performed two verbal recognition memory tasks. In the No-Overlap task, target words and new words
did not share any letter. Prior exposition to the target words thus induced
increased processing fluency of the words and letters, so that fluency difference was a salient and reliable cue to discriminate between old and new
words. In the Overlap task, target and new words had letters in common,
so fluency cues were less useful. Recollection and familiarity was assessed
with the Remember/Know/Guess paradigm. The results showed an age
effect on recollection but intact familiarity. Moreover, (1) memory performance was better in the No Overlap than the Overlap task, with a greater
hit rate and a smaller false alarm rate associated with familiarity. And, (2)
age-related differences in recognition accuracy (hits – false alarms) were
significantly attenuated in the No Overlap task compared to the Overlap
task. These findings suggest that minimizing the perceptual similarity
between targets and distractors, and thus increasing processing fluency
differences, allowed to reduce the effect of age on recognition memory performance by facilitating the use of familiarity.

B112
STRATEGICALLY ORIENTING RETRIEVAL ATTEMPTS TOWARD
THE AGE OF A MEMORY: AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY
DISSOCIATING DIFFICULTY Emily K. Leiker1, Anna K. McGhee1, Jeffrey D.

Johnson1; 1University of Missouri — It is well-established that the probability

of successful episodic retrieval is affected by the ‘age’ (the duration of the
encoding-retrieval interval) of the targeted memory. Although this finding
is traditionally interpreted in terms of decay or interference of the memory
trace, recent evidence suggests that retrieval success may also depend in
part on how participants strategically orient search attempts to memory
age. One challenge to investigating strategic orienting to memory age is
the increased difficulty associated with retrieving remote compared to
recent memories. By concurrently manipulating difficulty and memory
age, the present study aimed to further dissociate their respective effects
on retrieval orientation. Participants (N = 15) encoded lists of pictures
during two laboratory visits separated by one week. Items within each
encoding session were presented either one or four times to manipulate
the associated difficulty of retrieval. Participants then completed a series
of memory tests based on an exclusion procedure in which pictures from
only one week-repetition condition at a time were targeted, while new pictures and those from the other conditions were rejected. Consistent with
previous results, event-related potentials (ERPs) elicited by new items were
more positive over posterior scalp when items from the recent compared
to remote encoding session were targeted. Additionally, these differences
were evident even when comparing remote items presented four times to
recent items presented once, which gave rise to matched behavioral performance. The findings provide further evidence indicating that the age of a
memory leads to differential adoption of retrieval orienting strategies.

2016 Annual Meeting	

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Semantic
B113
DO THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBES PLAY THE SAME ROLE IN
EPISODIC AND SEMANTIC MEMORY? UNIVARIATE AND GRAPH
THEORY ANALYSES OF FMRI DATA Wei-Chun Wang1, Matthew L Stanley1, Benjamin R Geib1, Nadia M Brashier1, Elizabeth J Marsh1, Roberto Cabeza1;
1
Duke University — The question of whether medial temporal lobe (MTL)

regions make similar or different contributions to episodic and semantic
memory has persistently remained a fundamental issue in cognitive neuroscience of memory. To shed new light on this issue, we fMRI-scanned
participants while they were retrieving factual statements from episodic
or semantic memory. We computed not only local MTL activity using
standard univariate analyses but also MTL connectivity with the rest of
the brain using multivariate graph theory measures. Univariate analyses
showed that episodic and semantic retrieval activated similar MTL regions,
with additional activity for episodic retrieval. In contrast, graph theory
analyses showed clear laterality differences in MTL connectivity between
episodic and semantic retrieval conditions. MTL regions in the left hemisphere exhibited higher global efficiency for semantic compared to episodic
retrieval, and this change in global integration was partly facilitated by a
dramatic re-organization of immediate connections. In summary, whereas
univariate results showed greater activity in MTL and surrounding regions
for episodic compared with semantic retrieval, graph theory analyses
revealed greater capacity for global integration of information for MTL and
surrounding regions for semantic compared with episodic retrieval.

B114
FEATURE-BASED INTEGRATION OF CONCEPTUAL AND PERCEPTUAL OBJECT INFORMATION IN VENTRAL TEMPORAL CORTEX
Chris Martin1, Louisa Man1, Rachel Newsome1,2, Danielle Douglas1, Morgan
Barense1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute — Neuropsycho-

logical and fMRI research has firmly established a link between aspects
of the anterior temporal lobes, including perirhinal cortex (PrC), and the
abstraction of conceptual information pertaining to objects. For example,
representational similarity reflected in patterns of PrC BOLD activity is
predicted by conceptual similarity between objects. However, these results
remain challenging to interpret as most studies confound conceptual and
perceptual similarity; conceptually similar objects tend to be perceptually
similar (e.g., lion and tiger) and conceptually dissimilar objects are typically perceptually dissimilar (e.g., lion and apple). Interpretation is further
complicated by the fact that a substantial body of research also points to a
role for PrC in support of perceptually-based discriminations of semantically meaningless complex objects. In the current study, we used representational similarity analyses of fMRI data to examine the extent to which the
processing of conceptual and perceptual object properties is related in different aspects of ventral temporal cortex (VTC), including PrC. Participants
completed a property verification task that encouraged either conceptual
or perceptual processing of objects. Importantly, we independently manipulated perceptual and conceptual overlap across items. Preliminary results
suggest that conceptual and perceptual object properties were represented
similarly in anterior aspects of VTC, even after controlling for stimulus
similarity along these dimensions. By contrast, corresponding conceptual
and perceptual information in more posterior regions was represented in
a more independent manner. These results suggest that conceptual and
perceptual object properties become integrated as information progresses
rostrally through VTC.

B115
BECOMING A MARTIAN ARCHEOLOGIST: A TOOL TRAINING
STUDY INVESTIGATING EMBODIED REPRESENTATIONS Heath

Matheson1, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill1; 1University of Pennsylvania — GOALS:

Theories of embodied cognition propose that we recognize tools by reactivating sensorimotor representations of tool use. It is thought that these
activations underlie the potentiation effect, the finding that people are
faster to respond, in a number of cognitive tasks, with the hand that is compatible with the location of an object’s handle. However, recent research
suggests that the potentiation effect could be due to visual attention and

Poster Session B
not motor representations. We sought to test the hypothesis that the potentiation effect is due to embodied motor representations by directly manipulating the embodied experience of participants who are learning a set of
novel tools. METHODS: We trained one group to use a set of novel, 3-D
printed tools under the pretense that they were preparing for an archeological expedition to Mars; we trained a second group to report declarative
information about how the tools are stored. With this design, familiarity
and visual attention to different object parts was similar for both groups,
though their qualitative interactions differed. After learning, participants
made semantic and perceptual judgments of visually presented tools and
reported via button press. RESULTS: We showed that regardless of specific experience, attention to the visual shape of an object potentiates motor
responses; potentiation only weakly depends on embodied representations.
CONCLUSION: These results are the first to directly show that embodied
experience only weakly shapes the potentiation effect. Future research will
explore the effects of embodied vs. declarative experience with other tasks
aimed at testing embodied hypotheses.

B116
DECODING CONTRIBUTIONS OF PREFRONTAL AND SENSORY-SPECIFIC CORTICES TO THE RETRIEVAL OF PERCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE Samuel A. Nastase1, Adam E. Green2, Emily S. Cross3,4, Yune S.
Lee5, Yaroslav O. Halchenko1, James V. Haxby1,6, David J. M. Kraemer1; 1Dartmouth
College, 2Georgetown University, 3Bangor University, 4Radboud University Nijmegen, 5University of Pennsylvania, 6University of Trento — Semantic memory relies

on highly-distributed neural machinery mediating both retrieval operations and perceptual knowledge. The current study leverages multivariate
pattern analysis to decode retrieval states under varying task demands.
Neural response patterns were recorded with fMRI while 24 participants
performed real-world size and sound comparisons for various object pairs.
A factorial design crossed visual and auditory retrieval modalities with
easy and hard selection difficulty. Univariate contrasts demonstrated an
effect of selection difficulty in left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC)
and posterior perceptual areas. Auditory retrieval recruited left-lateralized
association cortices, while visual retrieval recruited right-lateralized parietal and lateral occipitotemporal cortices. Using a linear SVM classifier,
retrieval states were decoded across subjects from distributed whole-brain
activity patterns with accuracies exceeding 80%. Significant cross-classification accuracies for retrieval modality and difficulty suggest both factors
are encoded partially independently. Both whole-brain sensitivity analysis
and searchlight classification were used to localize cortical contributions to
task decoding. Several classification analyses were also performed within
anatomically-defined ROIs. Selection difficulty impacted response patterns
in the precuneus and ventral temporal cortex independently of retrieval
modality. Late-stage perceptual areas were modulated by difficulty in both
modalities, whereas early sensory cortices were impacted primarily within
their preferred modality. Overall, these results indicate that semantic
retrieval states can be robustly decoded across participants. Findings also
reveal that response patterns in vlPFC encode both modality and difficulty
during retrieval, and that selection difficulty impacts processing in both
early and late perceptual areas.

B117
OLDER AND RICHER: HIPPOCAMPAL SUPPORT FOR UPDATING
AND ENRICHING SEMANTIC REPRESENTATIONS OVER TIME

Nathaniel B. Klooster1, Melissa C. Duff1; 1University of Iowa — In recent work,

we showed that remote semantic memory is impoverished in patients with
bilateral hippocampal damage and amnesia (Klooster & Duff, 2015). Specifically, hippocampal patients performed significantly worse on productive and receptive measures of semantic richness and depth of vocabulary
knowledge than current-age matched healthy comparison participants.
These results challenge the traditional view that remote semantic memory
is fully intact in amnesia. Here, we test a possible mechanism for the
observed deficits. Impoverished semantic memory in the amnesic group
may be a result of failing to update their semantic representations with new
information since the onset of their amnesia. Current-aged matched healthy
participants have lived with an intact hippocampus for 20 years longer than
the patients, and their knowledge may have gotten richer during this time.
To test this hypothesis, healthy comparison participants matched to the
patients’ age of onset were tested on feature and senses-listing tasks and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

99

Poster Session B	
on the Word Associates Test. While both healthy groups performed significantly better than patients, the healthy participants with a mean age in
their 30s, performed significantly lower than current-age matched healthy
participants with a mean age in their 50s, across all tasks. This suggests
that in the healthy brain, semantic memory becomes richer with age as
additional features, senses, and associates of concepts are integrated with
existing representations. The hippocampus, through reconsolidation and
relational binding, likely supports these processes, and a lack of updating
in the group of hippocampal patients may explain (at least some of) the
previously observed deficit.

B118
COMMON AND DIFFERENTIAL ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING SEMANTIC OBJECT MEMORY RETRIEVAL
CUED BY FEATURES PRESENTED IN DIFFERENT STIMULUS
TYPES Hsueh-Sheng Chiang1, Justin Eroh1, Jeffrey Spence1, Michael Motes1,
Jihyeon Choi1, John Hart1, Michael Kraut2; 1The University of Texas at Dallas,
2
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — How the brain combines

the neural representations of features that comprise an object in order to
activate a coherent object memory is poorly understood, especially when
the features are presented in different modalities (visual vs. auditory) and
domains (verbal vs. nonverbal). We examined this question using three versions of a modified Semantic Object Retrieval Test, where object memory
was cued by a feature presented as a visual word (VW), an auditory word
(AW), or a picture (Pic), followed by a second feature always presented
as a visual word. Participants indicated whether each feature pair elicited
retrieval of the memory of a particular object. Sixteen subjects completed
one of the three versions (N = 48 in total) while their EEG was recorded
simultaneously. Power spectrum analysis of EEG data showed a late left
fronto-temporal alpha desynchronization (8-12 Hz) that was significantly
larger when object memory was retrieved in the auditory (AW) compared
to visual (VW) version. Effects common to all three versions included
increases in earlier delta synchronization (1-4 Hz), later alpha desynchronization (8-12 Hz) and later beta desynchronization (13-19 Hz) associated
with object memory retrieval, indicating selective inhibition of irrelevant
information, attentional enhancement, and semantic integration, respectively. A relative increase in later theta synchronization (4-7 Hz) occurred
when no object was retrieved, indicating a prolonged search process. Our
data shows common neural mechanisms involved in retrieving an object
memory and provides evidence for separate semantic subsystems that support object memory retrieval.

B119
SEMANTIC OBJECT MEMORY RETRIEVAL IN TRAUMATIC BRAIN
INJURY AS MEASURED BY EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Julie
Fratantoni1, Bambi DeLaRosa1, John Hart Jr.1,2; 1The University of Texas at Dallas,
2
The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas — Semantic

memory retrieval deficits are often found in individuals who have suffered
a traumatic brain injury (TBI); however the underlying neural mechanisms
of such deficits are yet to be clarified. Previous studies of healthy populations have shown that during a semantic memory retrieval word task there
is a 750 ms event-related potential (ERP) divergence, detected at the left
fronto-temporal region, between semantically related features compared to
unrelated feature word pairs (Brier et al., 2008; Hart et al., 2013; Chiang et
al., 2014). In this study, we investigated the neurophysiological correlates of
semantic memory retrieval networks in individuals with TBI by recording
electroencephalography (EEG) activity while, 20 retried professional athletes with TBI and 19 healthy controls (HC) performed a semantic object
retrieval task (SORT). The SORT task included word pairs as stimuli and
the participants indicated whether the word pair facilitated the retrieval of
an object name or not (non-retrieval). Behavioral results showed that there
were no significant differences in accuracy or reaction time between the
two groups. EEG analysis on electrode F7, over the left-fronto-temporal
region, revealed a significant group by condition interaction, replicating
previous findings. The HC group mean amplitudes were significantly different between conditions whereas the TBI group did not show this task
related differentiation, suggesting neurophysiological effects of injury.

100

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
These findings suggest that attenuated ERP amplitudes may be used as a
marker of TBI and is a first step toward establishing a biomarker of semantic memory deficit.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Skill learning
B120
PROBABILISTIC CLASSIFICATION LEARNING WITH AND WITHOUT CORRECTIVE FEEDBACK IS IMPROVED BY INHIBITION OF
DLPFC Leonora Wilkinson1; 1Wassermann lab, NINDS — Non-declarative

probabilistic classification learning on the Weather Prediction Task (WPT)
with feedback (i.e. rewards and punishments) involves the cortico-striatal circuits. During learning, activity increases an in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and caudate nucleus and decreases in the medial
temporal lobe (MTL). This decrease shows that learning on the task does
not ordinarily require engagement of the MTL. In contrast, when the WPT
is learned in a “paired associate” manner without feedback, emphasizing
declarative memory, MTL activity increases. Inhibitory repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) can be used to create a so called ‘virtual
TMS lesion’ of cortical targets in healthy controls to determine their role
during cognitive processes. The aim of the current study was to use the
virtual lesion method to study the role of the DLPFC during WPT learning with (FB) and without (PA) feedback. In a parallel, sham-controlled
design, we used inhibitory, continuous theta burst (cTBS) rTMS to inhibit
the DLPFC iduring WPT learning with and without FB. Participants were
assigned to one of two conditions that required completion of 150 trials of
the WPT under FB or PA conditions, immediately after real cTBS over the
DLPFC or sham cTBS. Real cTBS improved WPT learning under FB and PA
conditions, relative to sham. It’s possible DLPFC inhibition, allows greater
activation of the episodic memory system than normal during both FB and
PA learning.

B121
LONG-TERM RETENTION OF IMPLICIT STATISTICAL LEARNING EVIDENCE FOR ONE-YEAR CONSOLIDATION Dezso Nemeth1,2, Andrea

Kóbor1, Ádám Takács2, Karolina Janacsek1,2; 1Hungarian Academy of Sciences,
2
Eötvös Loránd University — Probabilistic sequence learning (PSL) underlies

the efficient processing of statistical patterns in our environment and it
is therefore crucial in many day-to-day activities. However, only limited
information is available about how PSL contributes to long-term memory
formation. The aim of the present study was to investigate whether PSL is
resistant to forgetting and to retroactive interference over a longer stretch
of time. Healthy young adults (N = 29) performed the Alternating Serial
Reaction Time (ASRT) task, which separately measures the sequence-specific and general skill learning component of PSL. Three sessions were
administered in the experiment: a learning phase, a testing phase after 24
hours, and a retesting phase after one year. We found evidence for retained
PSL and resistance to interference after 24-hour delay. Moreover, results
showed retention of sequence-specific knowledge even after the one-year
period, indicated by similar performance during the testing and retesting
phases. Resistance to interference was also similar in both phases. In contrast, general skills partially decreased after one year. In sum, these results
highlight the long-term persistence of probabilistic sequential memories
even without further practice, which could be a key mechanism in understanding the computational underpinnings of long-term memory.

B122
SEQUENCE STRUCTURES INFLUENCE THE LEARNING BENEFIT
OF INTERLEAVED PRACTICE IN OLDER ADULTS Chien-Ho Lin12, Barbara Knowlton3, Allan Wu3, Ho-Ching Yang1, Tan Lee1, Fang-Ru Fu1, Ming-Chang
Chiang1; 1National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, 2Yeong-An Orthopedic and
Rehabilitation Clinic, Taiwan, 3UCLA — Practicing motor sequences arranged in

an interleaved manner generally leads to better learning than practicing in
a repetitive manner, a phenomenon known as contextual interference (CI)
effect. We have previously found that older adults can also benefit from
CI learning. Here we investigated whether such CI benefits in older adults
would be influenced by the complexity of motor sequences quantified by
the sum of repetitions (successive movement of the same finger) and rever-

2016 Annual Meeting	
sals (an “A-B-A” movement pattern for two adjacent fingers A and B). 33
older adults practiced two sets of three sequences arranged in a Repetitive
or an Interleaved order over 2 days, followed by a retention test on Day 5
to evaluate learning. Participants were divided into two groups: during the
Interleaved practice, 19 participants practiced high-complexity sequences
(High, 2 repetitions + 20 reversals), while the other 14 participants practiced
low-complexity sequences (Low, 0 repetitions + 10 reversals). Sequence
complexity during Repetitive practice was the same between groups.
Although performance during practice and retention of the Repetitive practice condition did not differ between the two groups, the CI benefit, defined
by the difference in response time (RT) for Repetitive over Interleaved practice conditions, was significantly greater in Low than High groups during
retention (Low group: 29.4±43 ms, High group: 7.4±30.5 ms, p= .008). These
findings suggest that too-difficult motor tasks (interleaved + high complexity) would compromise CI benefits for older adults, so that motor sequence
structures should be carefully designed to achieve desirable difficulty.

B123
CATHODAL TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION
(TDCS) DELIVERED TO THE CEREBELLUM SLOWS THE RATE OF
FINE MOTOR SEQUENCE LEARNING Renee E. Shimizu1, Allan D. Wu1,
Jasmine K. Samra1, Barbara J. Knowlton1; 1UCLA — The aim of the current study

was to determine whether cerebellar transcranial direct current stimulation
(tDCS) would affect fine motor skill learning or performance. In a version
of the serial reaction time task, participants first practiced three keypress
sequences in a pseudorandom order. During the practice session, sham,
anodal, or cathodal stimulation was delivered to the cerebellum. After
the practice session and concurrent tDCS were finished, participants then
performed three novel sequences to test for generalization of learning. All
response times (RTs) were normalized to the first practice block average RT.
An interaction was found, such that the cathodal group learned at a slower
rate during practice than the sham and anodal groups (p = .018). Only the
anodal group showed a significant decrease in RT over practice (p = .007)
as well as significant sequence-specific learning (p = .033). These results
agree with previous work (Ferrucci et al., 2013), suggesting that anodal cerebellar tDCS may be a promising way to improve procedural learning. The
addition of a cathodal stimulation group demonstrates a polarity-specific
decrease of the rate of motor sequence learning.

B124
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN THE RETENTION OF IMPLICIT
SEQUENCE KNOWLEDGE ACROSS HUMAN LIFE SPAN Karolina

Janacsek1,2, Dóra Juhász3, Dezso Nemeth1,2; 1Hungarian Academy of Sciences,
2
Eötvös Loránd University, 3University of Szeged — Recognizing sequential

regularities of the environment underlies motor, cognitive and social skill
acquisition, and is essential for predictive behavior and decision making in
day-to-day activities. Therefore it is crucial to understand how sequence
learning occurs and how the acquired information consolidates and stabilizes over time. The ontogenetic changes of these processes, however, are
still poorly understood. Here we aimed to characterize age-related differences in the consolidation of sequential memories between 7 and 85 years
of age. Participants were clustered into nine age groups. The Alternating
Serial Reaction Time (ASRT) task was used to measure implicit sequence
learning. Participants were retested 24 hours after the learning phase. Two
aspects of learning were analyzed, namely general skill and sequence-specific learning. We found greater variability in the consolidation of both
general skill and sequence-specific knowledge after the 24-hr delay period
in childhood between 7 and 13 years of age and in the elderly population
(60–85 years of age). These results remained stable even after controlling
for age-related differences in overall accuracy and reaction time. Our findings suggest that the fronto-striatal circuits mediating sequential memory
formation and consolidation undergo marked changes in childhood and
in late adulthood, while seem to be well-established in adolescence and
adulthood.

Poster Session B

B125
POST-LEARNING LOAD IMPAIRS MEMORY CONSOLIDATION Neil
Albert1, Douglas Johnson1, Chiara Martignetti1, Laynie Dratch1, Brandon Henry1;
Colgate University — The consolidation of newly learned information is

1

shaped by events that follow said learning. For example, consolidation
of recent learning of a motor sequence can be impaired when that motor
learning task is closely followed by a word-list learning task. Some have
suggested that a primary source of this interference is memory system
competition. An alternative model of these findings is that early memory
consolidation processes are dependent upon the availability of higher-level
cognitive resources. In the current between-subjects study, we independently vary the difficulty (low v. high) and learning demands (learning
v. non-learning) of tasks that follow training on an uncued 12-item second
order conditional sequence. Participants (n=80) completed training on a
visually-cued motor sequence using the serial reaction time task, and one
of four potential post-learning tasks. Participants returned after a 12-hour
period of wakefulness to test the extent to which the learned sequence was
retained. Though sequence learning was comparable across all four groups
at the end of training, differences emerged in the data collected when participants returned for a second session, with an effect of load that was greater
than the effect of learning. Our findings support the resource competition
model and fail to support the learning completion model, indicating that
prior findings may have been the result of differences in the difficulty of the
learning and non-learning tasks used.

B126
THE ROLE OF NETWORK FLEXIBILITY IN REINFORCEMENT
LEARNING Raphael Gerraty1, Juliet Davidow2, Karin Foerde3, Adriana Galvan4,

Danielle Bassett5, Daphna Shohamy1; 1Columbia University, 2Harvard University,
3
New York University, 4University of California, Los Angeles, 5University of Pennsylvania — Learning involves the adaptive reconfiguration of brain circuits

based on experience. But understanding the changes in brain networks
underlying learning and their relation to behavior has been challenging.
One substantial roadblock to fully characterizing the role of networks in
learning has been the lack of available tools to assess dynamic changes
in brain networks and the ability to directly link such changes to specific
aspects of behavior. Recent advances in dynamic network neuroscience
have begun to allow for time-resolved descriptions of large-scale network
coordination. Here we applied such an approach to data from functional
magnetic resonance imaging in humans to explore the role of dynamic
connectivity in learning from experience during a probabilistic reinforcement task. We found that learning was related to dynamic coupling of
the striatum with different networks over time, which we measure with
a statistic called network flexibility. Flexibility on each learning block was
significantly predictive of optimal choice on the next. Moreover, this flexibility in network dynamics was related to individual differences in participants’ learning rates as derived from standard reinforcement learning
models. These results suggest that network dynamics play an important
role in reinforcement learning. Further, these findings are consistent with
the idea that flexible network communication provides a mechanism for
information integration during reinforcement learning.

B127
REACTIVATION OF MEMORY-RELATED GAMMA ACTIVITY IN
HUMAN SLEEP Jean-Baptiste Eichenlaub1, Nicole Rivilis1, Siddharth Biswal1,

Brandon Westover1, Eric Halgren2, Sydney S. Cash1; 1Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 2Kavli Institute for Brain and Mind, UCSD —

Models of memory consolidation posit a central role for reactivation of
cortical activity patterns during sleep. Such ‘replay’ has been well-demonstrated in rodents, where it is orchestrated by the hippocampus. However,
direct electrophysiological evidence of reactivation in human is still largely
lacking. By using intracranial electroencephalogram recordings from
patients with epilepsy and by employing a neural decoding approach, we
tested the reactivation, in human sleep, of patterns of cortical activation
specifically evoked by earlier motor learning. Six participants implanted
with electrode arrays for long-term epilepsy monitoring learned a sequential finger tapping task which was followed by sleep. Neuronal firing in
widespread cortical areas was estimated from high gamma-band [70120Hz] power. Decoders were first trained to classify between finger-move-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

101

Poster Session B	

2016 Annual Meeting

ment and control periods on wake data before being applied during sleep.
The trained models classified samples from post-learning sleep as well as
from a baseline pre-learning sleep (before the task) as motor- versus restclasses. For each participant, the proportion of time-period classified as
motor-class was higher during post-learning sleep, demonstrating that
the gamma-band patterns underlying finger movements were reactivated
during sleep following motor learning. In addition, this increase in putative
replay during the post-training sleep was highly correlated with performance improvement assessed after sleep. The results were consistent across
three different classifiers. These data show the reactivation, in human sleep,
of gamma-band patterns linked to task execution in wake and tightly correlated with behavioral evidence of learning, and thus confirm that a basic
tenet of the replay theory does occur in humans.

B128
NOVICE AND EXPERT PILOTS DIFFER IN FUNCTIONAL NEURONAL ACTIVITY Jaehoon Choe1, Brain A. Coffman1,2,3, Dylan Bergstedt1,
Matthew E. Phillips1; 1HRL Laboratories LLC, Malibu, CA, USA, 2Department of
Psychiatry, The University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 3Psychology Clinical Neuroscience Center, The University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM,
USA — The development of expert skills requires training and distributed

practice in order to consolidate experiences into learned abilities. Though
electrophysiological and neuroimaging studies have revealed mechanistic
underpinning of skill learning (e.g. working memory), our understanding of the neuronal mechanisms underlying the consolidation of complex
procedural skills is lacking. Here, we report functional neuronal activity
indicators of novice and expert pilots using a combination of Continuous
electroencephalography and functional near infrared spectroscopy. Novice
(N=7) and Expert (N=6) subjects consented to participate in single session
of flight simulation, working memory, and situational awareness tasks. We
found that Novice and Expert pilots showed strikingly different neuronal
activation patterns during flight simulator tasks. In the Expert group, we
observed increased occipital theta power during flight compared to baseline (0.5 µV2), while in the Novice group, we observed increased midline
frontal theta power during flight over baseline (0.3 µV2). The alpha and
low-frequency gamma bands in Experts showed increased power in the
occipital-parietal region, with lateralization to the right side (0.5 µV2). In
Novices, this increase in low-frequency gamma power was seen in a more
distributed fashion, with increases of ~3 µV2 in both left and right parietal areas extending to the right lateral prefrontal cortex. Taken together,
these results demonstrate distinct neurophysiological signatures of Novice
and Expert pilots. These results suggest that major changes in task-evoked
activity occur as complex, real-world skills are acquired providing mechanistic insights into skill acquisition and pilot training.

METHODS: Neuroimaging
B129
22Q11.2 DELETION SYNDROME: NOVEL SUBCORTICAL SHAPE
ANALYSIS REVEALS SUBTLE VARIATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH
IQ AND PSYCHIATRIC DIAGNOSIS Christopher R. K. Ching1,2, Boris A.
2

2

3

1,3

Gutman , Artemis Zavaliangos-Petropulu , Daqiang Sun , Rachel K. Jonas ,
Leila Kushan3, Paul M. Thompson2,4, Carrie E. Bearden3; 1Graduate Interdepartmental Program in Neuroscience, UCLA School of Medicine, CA, USA, 2Imaging
Genetics Center, University of Southern California, CA, USA, 3Semel Institute for
Neuroscience and Human Behavior and Department of Psychiatry University of
California-Los Angeles, CA, USA, 4Departments of Neurology, Psychiatry, Radiology, Engineering, Pediatrics and Ophthalmology, University of Southern California, CA, USA — 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q) is a neurogenetic disorder

caused by a microdeletion within chromosome 22 resulting in a wide range
of physical and neurodevelopmental abnormalities. Sixty percent of 22q
patients meet diagnostic criteria for a neuropsychiatric disorder such as
attention-deficit/hyperactivity (ADHD), anxiety (ANX), psychosis (PSY)
and autism spectrum disorders (ASD). 22q is the strongest known risk
factor for schizophrenia, with roughly 30% of patients developing schizophrenia in their lifetime. Here we applied a novel subcortical shape analysis technique to a large cohort of 22q patients (N=70) and demograph-

102

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

ically matched healthy controls (CN) (N=57) to investigate variations in
brain structure that might be associated with IQ and psychiatric diagnosis. T1-weighted brain MRI data were used to derive two shape metrics of
local thickness and surface area across thousands of homologous points for
bilateral nucleus accumbens, amygdala, caudate, hippocampus, putamen,
pallidum, and thalamus structures. We assessed the relationship between
IQ, psychiatric diagnosis (ADHD, ASD, ANX and PSY) and subcortical
shape metrics using multiple linear regression, adjusting for age, sex and
intracranial volume. For 22q patients, ASD diagnosis was associated with
regions of both increased and decreased thickness of the left hippocampus. PSY diagnosis was associated with higher thickness values in the left
pallidum for 22q. In CN subjects, higher IQ was associated with increased
surface area in subregions of the left pallidum. Our shape analysis technique revealed significant associations between subcortical shape metrics
and both IQ and psychiatric diagnosis and may represent a powerful new
technique to track 22q-related brain development.

B130
COUNTERING SEX ESSENTIALISM IN NEUROIMAGING STUDIES
OF HUMAN SEX/GENDER DIFFERENCES Vanessa Bentley1; 1University

of Cincinnati — Sex/gender differences in the brain remains a popular topic

despite suffering a lack of replicability. I assessed the underlying theory
and methodology of neuroimaging studies of sex/gender differences in
the corpus callosum and in the activation associated with mental rotation
processing. I uncovered a number of problems throughout the research
methodology that stem from the assumption of sex essentialism. Sex essentialism, a form of biological essentialism, is the view that men and women
have different biological essences as a result of their sex. In order to counter
sex essentialism’s limiting effect, I suggest a new research approach based
in feminist philosophy of science. Feminist standpoint empiricism initiates
inquiry from the standpoint of the oppressed, neglected, or underrepresented and reveals ignorance gaps. Using feminist standpoint empiricism
results in changes all along the research pathway, from the question asked,
to the experimental set-up, to data collection and analysis, to the interpretation of results. These changes involve: 1) understanding the difference
between sex and gender and clearly identifying what is being studied; 2)
identifying how sex/gender of individuals was determined; 3) identifying
possible social explanations for purported sex/gender differences; 4) comparing results cross-culturally rather than assuming findings are universal;
5) analyzing groups blind to sex/gender to avoid using sex/gender stereotypes to interpret results; and 6) stop ignoring results that don’t fit with
the standard view (confirmation bias). This new research approach will be
better grounded epistemologically as well as being more socially and morally responsible rather than sex-essentialist and oppressive to women.

B131
NEURAL CORRELATES OF LOSS AVERSION AND LOSS INSENSITIVITY IN BINGE DRINKERS Laurel Morris1, Nick Dowell2, Mara Cercignani2,

Neil Harrison2, Valerie Voon1; 1Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge UK, 2Department of Psychiatry, Brighton and
Sussex Medical School, Brighton, UK — Binge drinking is a common pattern

of alcohol intake amongst college-aged adults, however a subset of these
individuals is at subsequent risk of developing more severe alcohol use disorders. Determining early cognitive markers of harmful behavioural patterns is important for the development of accurate and appropriate intervention strategies. We examine loss aversion and loss sensitivity along with
their neural correlates in 24 college-aged binge-drinkers and 27 matched
healthy controls. Binge drinkers appear insensitive to monetary losses, a
behavioural aberrancy that is associated with a computational account of
loss aversion. We further use neurite orientation dispersion density imaging (NODDI), a novel diffusion MRI analysis with greater specificity for
fine-grained microstructural features such as neurite density and complexity. Sensitivity to loss across groups was associated with neurite complexity
in anterior insula. We highlight links between loss sensitivity and a computational neuroeconomical account of loss aversion in binge-drinkers and
further detail microstructural correlates of such tendencies across a young
population.

2016 Annual Meeting	

B132
DECODING THE INFANT MIND: MULTICHANNEL PATTERN ANALYSIS (MCPA) USING FNIRS Benjamin Zinszer1, Lauren Emberson1,2, Rajeev
Raizada1, Richard Aslin1; 1University of Rochester, 2Princeton University — We

present a multichannel pattern analysis (MCPA) for functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), analogous to multivariate analyses used in fMRI.
fNIRS is a silent, non-invasive, and relatively motion-insensitive neuroimaging tool, allowing research with populations that cannot be imaged in the
MR environment (e.g., infants). Despite these advantages, fNIRS research
has often lagged behind fMRI in analytic sophistication, limiting the application of this technology. MCPA uses correlation-based decoding to classify observed neural responses using a group model of response patterns
from a training set of infants. These patterns are used to decode the activation patterns associated with a condition or single trial in a new infant.
This MCPA method mitigates the common challenge of having few trials
per infant by using between-subject regularities to decode individuals. In
Experiment 1, 19 infants observed visual or auditory stimuli in an event-related design. For each infant, condition and single-trial data were decoded
by leave-one-infant-out cross-validation, using a group model based on the
remaining 18 infants. Condition decoding accuracy was 89% (p<0.001), and
trial-level decoding accuracy was 68% for visual and 66% for auditory (both
p<0.01). In the Experiment 2, 18 infants experienced two types of audiovisual stimuli (face+music or fireworks+word). For this more challenging
discrimination, condition accuracy was 78% (p<0.05). Trial-level accuracies
were 60% (p=0.11) and 57% (p=0.20). We find that MCPA provides a promising resource for enhancing fNIRS research. The code for implementing
these analyses will be available online to facilitate adoption of MCPA and
improve the methodological tools available to fNIRS researchers.

B133
WHITE MATTER MODULATED CHANGES IN EXECUTIVE PROCESSES IN MILD-TO-MODERATE TBI David Martinez1, Daniel Kraw-

czyk1,2, Sandra Chapman1; 1University of Texas at Dallas, 2University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center — Mild-to-moderate chronic TBI is a highly

prevalent condition that can affect cognitive performance, particularly
those relating to executive processes. Underlying mechanisms of performance deficits in TBI include white matter damage, which can be imaged
using diffusion tensor MRI. Previous research has shown that training can
alter cognitive performance and white matter microstructure. The following study examined participants enrolled in a cognitive training program
called Strategic Memory Advanced Reasoning Training (SMART). This
training was developed to improve cognitive performance in individuals with mild-to-moderate TBI. The experimental program included an
emphasis on attention and inhibition, working memory, and executive
functioning. Participants in the experimental program were compared to
participants in an active control program. Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI)
and neuropsychological testing were completed at three time points: before
training, after training, and at a three month follow-up assessment. Regions
of interest (ROI) were selected based on relevance to cognitive processes
and included bilateral inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus, uncinate fasciculus, and cingulum. Assessments included D-KEFS Color-Word Inhibition,
D-KEFS Trails B, and WAIS Digit Span. Results demonstrated improvements in the SMART condition in cognitive performance, primarily in
attention, and changes in white matter, primarily axial diffusivity in the
cingulum, over the course of the study. Results suggest training modulated
both cognitive ability and influenced white matter plasticity in individuals
at the chronic stage of TBI.

B134
EFFECTS OF DISRUPTION IN WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY SHOWN
CHRONICALLY IN PEDIATRIC TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Faisal

Rashid1, Emily L. Dennis1, Monica U. Ellis2,3, Sarah D. Marion2, Talin Babikian2,
Claudia Kernan2, Richard Mink4, Christopher Babbit5, Jeffery Johnson6, Christopher C. Giza7, Paul M. Thompson1, Robert Asarnow2; 1University of Southern
California, 2University of California, Los Angeles, 3Fuller Graduate School of Psychology, 4Harbor-UCLA Medical Center & Los Angeles BioMedical Research Institute, 5Miller Children’s Hospital, 6LAC+USC Medical Center, 7Mattel Children’s
Hospital — Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) allows us to non-invasively

Poster Session B
examine white matter (WM) alterations in the brain. Here we investigate
the chronic effects of traumatic brain injury (TBI) in pediatric patients.
Patients underwent high angular resolution diffusion imaging (HARDI)
post-acutely (1-5 months post-injury) and again at a later time point averaging 15 months post injury. Their data was processed using Automated
Multi-Atlas Tract Extraction (autoMATE), a method developed in our lab
that we have shown performs well in TBI analysis (Dennis et al., 2015a,b).
AutoMATE provided us with measures of fiber integrity densely sampled
across multiple tracts. We used visual event related potentials (ERPs) to
record interhemispheric transfer time (IHTT), allowing us to measure the
functional integrity of the WM. There was a bimodal distribution of IHTTs
within the TBI group: some patients had normal IHTT but others had slow
IHTT (group cut-off = 18 msec min). We have previously shown that the
functional and structural integrity of the WM are correlated post-acutely.
Here we tested for differences between these groups at the follow-up
assessment. We found lower FA and higher MD values in IHTT-slow vs.
control across large areas of several white matter structures in the brain
including the corpus callosum. IHTT was also correlated with neurocognitive outcome; with the IHTT-slow group performing more poorly than
the healthy control participants. Our study suggests that a subset of TBI
patients continue to have significant alterations in WM integrity for an
extended period post-injury.

B135
RELIABILITY AND HERITABILITY OF CHILDREN’S HEAD MOTION
DURING FMRI TASKS Laura E. Engelhardt1, K. Paige Harden1, Elliot M. Tucker-Drob1, Jessica A. Church1; 1The University of Texas at Austin — Head motion

confounds fMRI results, and this problem is especially pronounced in pediatric samples. Traditionally, movement data are incorporated into analyses
as exclusionary criteria or regressors. Recently, researchers have proposed
that head movement constitutes a reliable, meaningful trait among adults.
To examine this hypothesis with regard to children’s head movement, we
analyzed automated data from the functional runs of 61 twins (29 pairs,
3 unpaired individuals; 9 monozygotic pairs; 31 males) ages 7-12 years.
Movement was operationalized as framewise displacement (FD) in millimeters. Mean FD varied by age (b=-.27, p<.001) but not sex (b=-.03, p=.84).
FD didn’t increase significantly across runs within the session (F=1.98,
p=.07). Within-person FD was highly reliable across runs (alpha=.86).
Mean FD was more highly correlated within monozygotic pairs (r=.75)
than dizygotic pairs (r=.41); genetic factors explained 68% of the variance
in head movement. Assessing FD separately for each half of the fMRI session revealed moderate co-twin correlations both within and across session
halves (mean r=.35). This result varied by zygosity: monozygotic twins
exhibited greater similarity than dizygotic twins in movement across and
within session halves. These results provide evidence that FD is a reliable
and heritable developmental marker of fMRI movement. That magnitude
of children’s head motion is heritable and consistent across runs suggests
that scanner movement represents an individual difference that may correlate with important neurobiological and psychological outcomes. As
head movement cannot be assumed to represent unsystematic noise, new
methods are needed to control for confounds between fMRI data quality
and such outcomes.

B136
EFFECTS OF INCOME AND PARENTAL EDUCATION IN BRAIN
STRUCTURE AMONG DIFFERENT AGE GROUPS Luciane R. Piccolo1,

Natalie H. Brito1, Kimberly G. Noble1; 1Columbia University — Family income

and parental education are commonly used indices of socioeconomic status
(SES) and are associated with brain development across the lifespan. Past
studies have focused on SES associations with cortical volume, a composite of cortical surface area (SA) and cortical thickness (CT). Recently, we
reported that family income was associated with differences in children’s
SA, with the strongest associations among the most disadvantaged children. In a follow-up analysis, this study aims to investigate the relation
between SES and brain structure among different age groups. High-resolution structural MRI of 1099 typically developing children (3-21 years old)
from the multi-site Pediatric Imaging, Neurocognition and Genetics (PING)
study (http://ping.chd.ucsd.edu/) were analyzed. Adjusting for scanner,
sex and genetic ancestry, parental education and family income were associated with SA in early childhood (3-6 years old) (education: β = 0.19, p =

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

103

Poster Session B	
0.027; income: β = 0.185, p = 0.021). Income was also associated with CT in
early adolescence (9-12 years old) (income: β = 0.137, p = 0.05) and SA in
adolescence (15-18 years old) (β = 0.22, p = 0.003). These results provide evidence that different aspects of children’s environments may have specific
contributions to structural brain development at particular developmental
stages. Funding: NIH Grant RC2DA029475

OTHER
B137
STRONG POSITIVE AND STRONG NEGATIVE RESTING-STATE
CORRELATIONS BEST PREDICT AN INDIVIDUAL’S MATURITY
IN TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT. Ashley Nielsen1, Deanna Greene1, Steve
Petersen1, Brad Schlaggar1; 1Washington University School of Medicine — Rest-

ing-state functional connectivity (RSFC), the intrinsic correlation of fMRI
activity between regions in the brain, is thought to reflect a history of co-activation across the lifespan. While the field has primarily focused on the
strongest positive relationships, some have suggested that the weakest
inter-regional relationships may also provide relevant information about
brain organization (Basset et al 2011; Santarnecchi et al. 2014). Weak relationships are thought to act as “local bridges” that serve as critical links
between separated functional modules. We aimed to test explicitly the relevance of changes in the weakest resting-state correlations to brain maturity in typical development. Using a developmental resting-state fMRI data
set (N = 129; ages 7-31, 69/60 male/female), we divided each individual’s
set of RSFC correlations into ten separate windows from extreme negative
to extreme positive. We used multivariate machine learning to test how
well individual RSFC in each of the ten correlation windows predicted an
individual’s chronological age. To minimize the effects of head motion on
resting-state correlations, we used global signal regression and motion censoring to remove artifactual differences in RSFC (Power et al. 2014). We
found that patterns of the strongest positive and the strongest negative
resting-state correlations, rather than weak correlations, accounted for the
most variance related to single subject age prediction (strongest positive,
R^2=0.53; strongest negative, R^2=0.35; weak, R^2=0.09). While the role
of negative relationships in network organization is not well understood,
it appears that strong, negative resting-state correlations contribute to the
development of mature functional brain organization.

METHODS: Neuroimaging
B138
CEREBELLAR CONTRIBUTIONS TO LANGUAGE AND WHOLEBRAIN LANGUAGE NETWORKS: A COMBINED TDCS-FMRI STUDY
Anila M. D’Mello1,4, Peter E. Turkeltaub2,3, Catherine J. Stoodley1,4; 1American
University, Washington DC, 2Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington DC, 3MedStar Rehabilitation Hospital, Research Division, Washington, DC,
4
Center for Behavioral Neuroscience, American University, Washington DC — The

right posterolateral cerebellum is functionally and anatomically connected
to contralateral language regions of the cerebral cortex. Right Crus I/II is
consistently activated during language tasks, and damage to this region
can result in language deficits. However, the mechanisms underlying the
role of the cerebellum in language are not known. It has been proposed that
the cerebellum acquires internal models of mental processes that enable
prediction, allowing for the optimization of behavior. Consistent with this,
cerebellar disruption impairs performance on predictive language tasks.
We hypothesized that transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) over
the right posterolateral cerebellum would modulate activation both within
the cerebellum and in whole-brain language networks during a language
task. We anticipated cerebellar activation and behavioral effects of tDCS
would be particularly robust during trials requiring predictive processing.
We combined 20min of 1.5 mA anodal or sham tDCS over the right posterolateral cerebellum with functional MRI (fMRI) in healthy adults (n=20;
µ=24.9 years). Scans were acquired during task and rest, both before and
after tDCS. Participants performed a sentence completion task: they viewed
a series of four words and then chose a fifth, target word in a forced-choice
paradigm. In some sentences the preceding context predicted the target
word, while other sentences were non-predictive. Compared to sham tDCS,

104

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
anodal tDCS altered activation in right posterolateral cerebellum during
predictive conditions, and modulated resting-state and task-based functional connectivity in cerebro-cerebellar language networks. These results
are consistent with a role for the right posterolateral cerebellum in predictive language processing.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
B139
TRY NOT TO THINK ABOUT WHAT YOU’RE DOING: EVENT-RELATED
DESYNCHRONIZATION (ERD) IN THE SMA AND EVENT-RELATED
SYNCHRONIZATION (ERS) IN THE FRONTAL LOBE REVEALS A
DISSOCIATION OF HIERARCHICALLY CONTROLLED OUTER AND
INNER LOOP PROCESSES DURING TYPING Lawrence P Behmer Jr.1,
Matthew J C Crump1; 1Brooklyn College of CUNY — Attention to the details of

actions disrupts performance. For example, forcing people to type letters
of a word assigned to one hand compared to all letters leads to slower RTs
(Logan & Crump, 2009). Given that people are generally fast at normal
typing, this suggests that there may be a two-loop control system for skilled
actions in which an outer loop is involved in planning, and an inner loop
executes kinematic actions, independent of outer loop oversight. Previous
EEG studies have focused only on measuring parallel response ordering
by the inner loop during normal typing (Logan, Miller, & Strayer, 2011;
Pinet et al., 2015). Here, we present behavioral and EEG evidence dissociating outer and inner loop processes. Participants typed four letter words
under conditions that varied whether the outer loop closely monitored
the details of action execution. Explicit monitoring required that participants type only the letters exclusively assigned to the left or right hand.
Normal typing required considerably less monitoring; participants typed
all of the letters of the word with both hands. RTs were significantly faster
for normal versus monitored typing. Also, alpha-ERD in bilateral clusters
of the SMA at about 500 ms prior to the first keystroke was significantly
greater during normal versus monitored typing. Finally, during the typing
interval, alpha-ERS in the frontal cluster was greater during monitored
typing. This suggests outer loop monitoring of the output of the inner loop
leads to deficits in performance and an increase in premotor and higher
cognitive processing.

B140
INVESTIGATING THE EFFECTS OF COGNITIVE AND ENVIRONMENTAL LOAD ON DYNAMIC POSTURAL CONTROL AND GAIT
WITH MOBILE BRAIN/BODY IMAGING (MOBI) Brenda R. Malcolm1,2,

John J. Foxe1,2,3,4, John S. Butler1,4, Sophie Molholm1,2, Pierfilippo De Sanctis1,2,5;
1
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 2The Graduate Center of the City University
of New York, 3University of Rochester Medical Center, 4Trinity College Dublin,
5
Zucker Hillside Hospital, Northshore-LIJ — To maintain postural stability

during locomotion, the brain must flexibly adjust to ongoing cognitive
and environmental demands. However much remains unknown about the
cortical sensorimotor mechanisms associated with increased load during
walking. We employed a Mobile Brain/Body Imaging (MoBI) system,
which synchronously records EEG and continuous body tracking, to assess
the effects of cognitive and environmental demands on walking. Ten participants (mean age = 24 years) walked on a treadmill in front of a full field
optical flow display while foot-force sensors and motion capture recorded
3D positions of the head and feet. The effects of cognitive load were gauged
by having participants either perform a Go/No-Go task while walking or
walk with no additional task. Sensory load was manipulated by presenting
three optical flow conditions: moving in accordance with walking speed,
moving with periodic mediolateral perturbations, and a static star-field
(control condition). Cognitive load affected gait and posture in that participants made shorter but more variable strides when engaged in the task,
and reduced head sway in the mediolateral and anterior-posterior directions was also observed. Visual perturbations primarily affected gait in that
average step width increased with increasing disruptions to the visual field.
Ongoing EEG analysis is investigating heel-strike related spectral perturbations with a focus on intra-stride power changes in the theta (4-7Hz) and
beta (15-25Hz) bands previously implicated in dynamic stability. Prelimi-

2016 Annual Meeting	
nary results provide insight into the cortical control of gait, and may be relevant to fall-prone older adults who have difficulty adapting to increased
load during locomotion.

B141
THE INTERACTION OF REWARD FEEDBACK AND TRAINING
SCHEDULE DURING MOTOR SKILL LEARNING Michael Freedberg1,
Sara Hussain1, Eliot Hazeltine1; 1The University of Iowa — Both reward and a

training schedule are beneficial for motor learning (Abe et al. 2011; Shea
and Morgan 1979), but how these two phenomena interact in terms of motor
learning has not been investigated. To test whether the effects of reward
and a varied training schedule would induce an additive benefit to learners, we designed a maze-drawing task where participants learned to move
their way through different virtual mazes using a computer mouse. All
participants practiced three mazes during training, but one half of the participants performed them in a random order and the other half performed
them in a blocked fashion. Within each practice schedule, we rewarded
half of the participants for successful performance, while the other half performed the task without rewards. Thus, we compared the performance of
four different groups: reward+variability, reward+blocked, no_reward+variability, no_reward+blocked. Preliminary results show that reward significantly improves motor skill retention when training under a blocked
schedule (p < 0.05, d’ = 1.19), but not under a variable training schedule
(t<1). These results demonstrate an interactive (rather than additive) relationship between the effects of reward and training schedule and suggest
that repetition may be required in order to reap the benefits of reward with
respect to motor learning. This suggests that the brain integrates information from reward systems and training context when learning to produce
movements.

B142
STUTTERING AND SYNCHRONISED SPEECH Sophie Meekings1, Kyle
Jasmin1, Cesar Lima1, Sophie Scott1; 1University College London — Speaking in

synchrony with another person is usually central to activities that emphasise group cohesion- for example, praying or oath-taking. However, in
many people who stutter, the most important consequence of synchronised
or ‘choral’ speech is an immediate and often dramatic improvement in fluency. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to investigate how
synchronous speech is processed in fluent speakers and people who stutter
(classified using Riley’s Stuttering Severity Instrument, 4th ed). Participants
heard either a live speaker or a pre-recorded voice. They either listened
without speaking, read the same sentence aloud (synchronous speech), or
read a different sentence aloud (asynchronous speech). In these conditions,
questioning determined that participants were not able to distinguish the
live speaker from the pre-recorded voice. There was an additional control
condition in which subjects spoke on their own with no second speaker.
The stammering group were compared to the controls, in whom synchronous speech resulted in bilateral activation in superior temporal gyrus.
The auditory suppression response associated with speech in quiet did not
occur when typical speakers synchronised with a live speaker. We discuss
the implications for various models of stuttering, such as the EXPLAN
model and the theory that stuttering may result from an over-reliance on
auditory feedback.

B143
SEX DIFFERENCES IN THE INHIBITION OF AUTOMATIC IMITATION Emily E Butler1, Richard Ramsey1; 1School of Psychology, Bangor University
— Sex differences are apparent in a variety of cognitive control tasks requir-

ing inhibition. For instance, greater interference to performance has been
shown for women than men in social as well as non-social tasks requiring inhibition. The aim of the current study was to investigate whether
common or distinct neural circuits subserve sex differences in social and
non-social inhibitory control. Two brain circuits were identified as potential
candidates for supporting such sex biases: 1) a dorsal frontoparietal circuit,
which has been identified across a number of different inhibitory control
tasks and; 2) a medial prefrontal cortex and right temporoparietal junction
circuit, which has been shown to respond more specifically during the inhibition of imitation. In a behavioural study (n=165), we replicate the prior
sex difference in the inhibition of automatic imitation, such that females
show more interference than males. Subsequently, in an fMRI study (n=28),

Poster Session B
we demonstrate that regions in dorsal posterior frontal cortices support
the sex difference in automatic imitation more than during a non-social
flanker task. Therefore, we show sex- and task-specific responses in what
is typically considered a domain-general neural architecture. These findings break from the idea of a neat division of labour between general and
specific systems and instead add to evidence for higher complexity within
domain-general and domain-specific systems.

B144
A NOVEL PLATFORM FOR AUDIOMOTOR MAP LEARNING AND
THE PRODUCTION OF SPEECH AND NON-SPEECH SOUNDS
WITHOUT VOCAL TRACT FEEDBACK Megan Thompson1,2, Alexander
Herman1, Dameon Harrell1, John Houde1, Srikantan Nagarajan1; 1University of
California at San Francisco, 2University of California at Berkeley — Functional

imaging studies of sensory feedback in speech production have revealed
much about the neural mechanisms mediating the role of feedback in
the learning and maintenance of speaking. To study whether such findings generalize beyond control of the actual vocal tract, we developed a
novel platform for investigating the role of auditory feedback in learning
to generate speech. During magnetoencephalographic (MEG) imaging,
subjects learned a novel audiomotor map by listening to a target sound
and attempting to reproduce it by touching a touchpad, receiving auditory feedback corresponding to the position of their touch. In two separate
experiments, healthy adults stably learned either a map of pure tones (initial mean accuracy amongst learners 24%, final 38%, chance 8.3%) or a map
of vowel sounds (initial mean accuracy 5.7%, final 12.8%; chance 8.3%). In
the tone-mapping experiment, subjects showed post-training beta/alpha
suppression in the auditory cortex for correct responses relative to incorrect
responses, analogous to suppression seen in self-produced speech compared to passive listening. This implies an auditory feedback comparison
with a developed sensory prediction. In the vowel mapping experiment,
subjects showed beta/theta suppression in frontoparietal areas and posterior portions of Wernicke’s area in the last training block relative to the
first training block. This acquired suppression over the course of learning
also implies the development of an internal model for speech sounds not
produced by the vocal tract. These results provide evidence for a novel
experimental model for investigating auditory-motor map learning and the
nature of sensory feedback predictions.

B146
ACQUIRING AND UPDATING IMPLICIT PRIORS IN AUTISM Owen
Parsons1, Simon Baron-Cohen1; 1Autism Research Centre, Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge — Background: The capacity to process

statistical regularities implicitly in one’s environment is a core aspect of
perception and cognition. There have been suggestions that individuals
with autism may atypically extract such regularities. Despite this, studies
looking at implicit learning (IL) have failed to find significant differences
between people with or without autism. However, these studies typically
focus on IL under deterministic and stable conditions. Aims: We assessed i)
whether differences in IL occur in individuals with autism when underlying regularities are probabilistic; ii) whether individuals with autism show
differences in their ability to update priors when underlying regularities
change; and iii) whether task performance predicts number of autistic
traits in a typical population. Methods: Participants (autism N=20, controls
N=20) completed a primary phase of 8 blocks of a probabilistic serial reaction time task. Trial outcomes were predicted by a sequence in 85% of all
trials. Participants then completed a secondary phase of 8 blocks in which a
novel sequence was introduced. Results: While there were minimal group
differences between the two groups in the primary phase, the autism group
showed less difficulty adjusting to the novel sequence in comparison to
controls. Additionally, task performance was negatively correlated with
self-report measures of autistic traits in controls. Conclusions: While IL
may be linked to autistic-traits, heterogeneity in the condition may mask
these differences from being detected in basic IL paradigms. By looking
at IL in non-deterministic and unstable conditions these differences may
become more pronounced.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

105

Poster Session B	

B147
PROACTIVE CONTROL IN A RESPONSE INHIBITION PARADIGM
IS MEDIATED BY ATTENTION-RELATED OSCILLATORY ACTIVITY
Matthias Liebrand1, Inga Pein1, Elinor Tzvi1, Ulrike M. Krämer1; 1University of
Lübeck — Proactive motor control is a preparatory mechanism facilitating

upcoming action inhibition. We investigated the oscillatory mechanisms
of proactive motor control using electroencephalography (EEG) in a cued
go/nogo task. It has been shown that reactive inhibition (inhibitory control
in reaction to an external signal) is accompanied by increased oscillatory
activity in the alpha and beta frequency band over frontocentral regions.
Here, we asked whether similar mechanisms are implicated in proactive
and reactive inhibitory control. Participants performed a cued go/nogo
paradigm with cues indicating that the motor response might or might not
have to be inhibited. Proactive control was associated with attentional-related mechanisms, namely a decrease of alpha power over occipital regions,
a higher amplitude of the contingent negative variation (CNV) over central
regions and a larger visual N1. Reactive inhibition was reflected in a modulation of frontocentral beta oscillations. Based on our findings we propose
that proactive motor control strongly relies on attentional processes rather
than on specific motor dependent proactive inhibitory network nodes.

B148
PERCEPTUAL DECISION-MAKING IN PATIENTS WITH PARKINSON’S DISEASE AND IMPULSE CONTROL DISORDERS Yu-Ting
Huang1, Dejan Georgiev1, Dilan Athauda1, Tom Foltynie1, Partricia Limousin1,
Maarten Speekenbrink1, Marjan Jahanshahi1; 1University College London — In a

previous study of perceptual decision-making (Huang et al, 2015), patients
with Parkinson’s disease (PD) had an impaired ability to accumulate sensory information when tested on dopaminergic medication and made more
errors compared to off medication. The aim of this study was to further
investigate the contributions of dopamine to perceptual decision-making
by A) assessing PD patients with impulse control disorders (ICDs) induced
by dopaminergic medication and B) evaluating the acute effects of withdrawal of dopaminergic medication in these patients. We tested 11 PD
patients with clinical history of ICDs, both ON and OFF medication and
14 age-matched healthy controls (HC) on a motion discrimination task performed under speed versus accuracy instructions. PD patients with ICDs
had significantly slower reaction times on error trials when tested ON than
OFF medication. The ‘fast diffusion’ model was fitted to the behavioural
data. PD patients with ICDs did not adjust their ‘response thresholds’
according to task instructions. The patients with ICDs had lower ‘drift
rates’, suggesting a poorer ability to extract sensory information from the
stimuli compared to HCs. In conclusion, for patients with ICDs, acute
manipulation of dopaminergic medication (testing on vs off medication)
had little effect and did not induce impulsive ‘fast and errorful’ behaviour
on the task when acting under speed pressure. However, the inability of the
PD patients with ICDs to adjust response thresholds according to speed vs
accuracy instructions indicates that the chronically aberrant dopaminergic
state influences modulation of decision criteria.

B149
NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF MOTOR SEQUENCE LEARNING BY OBSERVATION Dace Apšvalka1, Emily S. Cross1, Richard Ramsey1;
1

Bangor University — Learning by observation is a fundamental way in which
humans acquire new skills. A large body of research suggests that physical and observational training share a similar neural basis. In a physical
training (PT) study, Wiestler and Diedrichsen (2013) demonstrated that
execution of physically trained keypress sequences is associated with distinguishable, sequence-specific activity patterns in the brain. Here we investigate whether similar results emerge if the same sequences are trained by
watching others perform them. During pre- and post-training functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) sessions, sixteen participants watched
videos of four observationally trained (OT) and four untrained keypress
sequences. The sequence observation engaged precentral and parietal
brain regions, known as the action observation network. In the post-training fMRI session, brain activity decreased in these regions when watching
the trained sequences, but did not change when watching the untrained
sequences, thus replicating the majority of related OT studies and the above
mentioned PT study. Multivariate pattern analysis revealed post-training

106

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
formation of distinguishable, sequence-specific activity patterns in primary
somatosensory cortex and in areas that also showed a post-training increase
of brain activity – left pars orbitalis, right superior temporal gyrus, and left
middle cingulate gyrus. Compared to the PT study, OT resulted in less
distinct sequence-specific representations located in different brain areas.
Nevertheless, our results suggest that OT leads to changes in neural representations that may contribute to later physical performance improvement.

B150
TASK AND PARTNER SWITCHING MODULATE REPRESENTATIONS OF OTHERS’ ACTIONS DURING JOINT ACTION PLANNING:
AN EEG STUDY Dimitrios Kourtis1, Günther Knoblich1, Natalie Sebanz1; 1Cen-

tral European University, Budapest, Hungary — We investigated the effects of

task and partner switching on the representation of a co-actor’s task during
the planning phase of a joint action. The experiment consisted of three
persons planning and performing joint actions (i.e. passing an object) and
solo actions (i.e. lifting an object), following the display of visual cues. EEG
(electroencephalography) was recorded by one person. The experiment
was divided into two halves. In the first half, the EEG participant interacted
only with one of the confederates, either “giving” or “receiving” the object.
In the second half, the EEG participant switched tasks (e.g. from “giving” to
“receiving”) and partners (i.e. interacting with the other confederate). The
behavioural analysis showed that the ‘giver” behaved in a similar way as
in the solo action condition, whereas the “receiver” was the one driving the
interpersonal coordination. The EEG analysis showed that in the first half of
the experiment, the parietal P3 component was larger when the participant
was planning to engage in joint action compared to solo action, indicating that the participant represented his/her partner’s action irrespective of
the particular task. Interestingly in the second half , that was the case only
when the partner was the person receiving the object. These results show
that representation of a co-actor’s action may take place during joint action
planning irrespective of task distribution. However, after switching partners and tasks, one represents in advance the co-actor’s action only when
the co-actor is the person who is driving the interpersonal coordination.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other
B151
PERSISTENCE OF BELIEF MODULATES THE MAGNITUDE OF THE
NOCEBO RESPONSE: THE ROLE OF PERSONALITY TRAITS Mirta
Fiorio1, Nicole Corsi1,2, Mehran Emadi Andani1,3, Michele Tinazzi1; 1University of
Verona, Italy, 2University of Maryland, USA, 3University of Isfahan, Iran — Believ-

ing in the detrimental effects of a treatment leads to a worse motor performance (nocebo effect). The aim of this study was to investigate whether
persistence of belief in the treatment and personality traits could account
for individual differences in the magnitude of the nocebo response. Twenty-seven healthy volunteers performed force pressures with the index
finger while receiving a visual feedback on their force level. Participants
underwent a nocebo procedure, in which a treatment (inert) was applied
to the hand together with verbal instructions about its negative effects on
force. In a conditioning session, subjects were exposed to the (fake) effects
of the treatment, by means of a surreptitious reduction of the visual feedback. Finally, in a test session, subjects received the same treatment and
performed the motor task, but without the surreptitious reduction of the
feedback. Crucially, when asked to report about the efficacy of the treatment, two different groups emerged: high-responders, (N=15) gave higher
scores of treatment efficacy in the test compared to the conditioning session, whereas low-responders (N=12) did the opposite. Results showed that
high-responders had a stronger nocebo effect compared to low-responders,
as shown by lower force levels, more weakness and sense of effort. Personality questionnaires revealed that high-responders had lower levels of
optimism and self-directedness, and higher anxiety trait, harm avoidance
and physiological reactivity than low-responders. These findings show that
the magnitude of the nocebo response can be modulated by the persistence
of subject’s belief about the efficacy of the treatment and personality traits.

2016 Annual Meeting	

B152
LOOSING YOUR HEAD … BUT GRADUALLY Boris Suchan1, Denise Soria

Bauser1; 1Ruhr University Bochum, Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Clinical
Neuropsychology — It has been shown in the literature, that the head plays
a special role in body processing. Data from EEG experiments suggest that
the presence of the head is responsible for the so called inversion effect.
Brandmann and Yovel (2010) could show, that this inversion effect is processed by face sensitive areas as measured by fMRI. The present experiment aimed at looking at the modulating brain structures on this effect. The
visibility of the head has been varied in steps of 10 percent from absent to
fully visible. Subjects had to work on a delayed matching to sample task
where they had to decide whether two presented bodies are equal or not.
Results suggest a linear increase of activation in face sensitive areas due to
the increase in head visibility. Results support findings by Brandmann and
Yovel and extend them showing a direct effect of the head visibility.

B153
WHERE DOES 23 GO? REPRESENTING A NUMBER’S POSITION
IN SPACE ENGAGES SPATIOTOPIC MAPS IN CORTEX Frank J.

Kanayet1, Andrew Mattarella-Micke1, Peter J. Kohler1, Anthony M. Norcia1, Brace
D. McCandliss1, James L. McClelland1; 1Stanford University — Mapping num-

bers onto space is foundational to mathematical cognition. Parietal systems
have recently been implicated in a task that requires overt marking of a
number line (Vogel et al., 2013), but cognitive neuroscience of number cognition has yet to take advantage of the precise spatiotopic mapping of parietal and occipital cortex (Silver & Kastner, 2009) to examine the relationship
between spatial and numerical cognition. We carried out anatomy-based
spatiotopic mapping on each subject (Wang et al., 2014), then investigated
how these maps were activated in a number line marking task that separated a number encoding phase from a subsequent line-marking phase. We
tested both a standard positive number line (0 to 100), and a zero-centered
number line (-100 to 100), allowing us to track the mapping of negative
numbers onto space. Within regions selected for known spatiotopic organization, the encoding phase – and not the line-marking phase – revealed
number-specific activation, consistent with the idea that representations of
the spatial positions of numbers are topographically organized in the brain.
Behavioral measurements revealed that accuracy and linearity in placing
numbers on the standard positive number line correlated with scores on
a mathematics test. Finally, we discovered a frame of reference effect: participants tend to ‘shrink’ their estimates away from the boundaries of the
0-centered line but not the standard positive number line.

B154
MAPPING NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF HEADING DIRECTION
AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONTEXT DURING IMAGINED NAVIGATION OF LEARNED VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENTS Nicco Reggente1, Joey
Ka-Yee Essoe1, Ivana Jevtic1, Jesse Rissman1; 1UCLA — Constructing a rich

egocentric representation of one’s movement about an environment is a
multi-faceted effort requiring a vast interplay across cortical areas responsible for visual processing, heading direction, and spatial coding. While
electrophysiological recordings in rodents have identified robust neural
correlates related to distinct aspects of navigation, experimental work
with human subjects offers the unique potential to elucidate the mechanisms of navigational mental imagery, a process we frequently engage
in when planning a route or giving directions. In the present study, we
first familiarized participants with navigational paths about three highly
distinctive virtual environments. The next day, while undergoing fMRI
scanning, participants viewed a series of first-person videos that indicated
either clockwise or counter-clockwise movement around the perimeter of
each environment. After several rounds of video viewing, participants performed a new task in which they were covertly cued to imagine themselves
walking along each of these same routes. We leveraged support vector
machines within a searchlight-mapping approach to identify brain regions
whose BOLD patterns coded for information pertaining to the participants’
heading direction or environmental context. As anticipated, many visual
association regions with significant accuracy for decoding the contents of
perceived navigation were also capable of decoding imagined navigation,
although imagery classification performance was generally less robust.
Interestingly, several frontal and temporal lobe regions showed decoding

Poster Session B
effects that were specific to mental imagery, and the distribution of these
areas differed as a function of gender, potentially indicative of a qualitatively different mental representation of navigational information across
males and females.

B155
DEGENERATION OF LOCUS COERULEUS IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE COVARIES WITH SUBJECTIVE FATIGUE SCORE Alexandre

Zénon1, Oleg Solopchuk1, Moustapha Sebti1, Céline Bouvy1, Etienne Olivier1;
1
Institute of neuroscience, UCL, Brussels, Belgium — Fatigue is one of the most

disabling symptoms in Parkinson’s disease (PD) but bears little relation to
the disruption of the dopaminergic system: it evolves independently from
the motor symptoms and is poorly treated by dopaminergic replacement
therapy. Besides the Substantia Nigra, the Locus Coeruleus (LC), the main
source of cortical noradrenaline, is also affected by the disease. We hypothesized that rather than the nigrostriate pathway, LC degeneration and
the consequential disruption of the autonomic system would be directly
responsible for PD fatigue. PD patients were asked to perform a psychomotor vigilance task (PVT) while different autonomic markers were measured
(heart rate, respiratory rate, pupil size). Their level of fatigue, the quality of their sleep, and their degree of depression were evaluated through
questionnaires (PFS, PDSS-2, BDI). Finally, we evaluated the degree of LC
degeneration with a novel, automated method allowing to isolate the LC
from neuromelanin MR imaging. Preliminary results (n=20) showed that
LC degeneration correlated with the fatigue scores (r=-0.51, p=0.02) but
not with the degree of depression or the quality of sleep. Surprisingly, we
found that LC degeneration failed to correlate with any of the autonomic
responses during the PVT. These findings suggest that LC degeneration
may be responsible for fatigue in PD. They also suggest that the increase
in heart rate, respiratory rate and changes in pupil size induced by target
detection during the PVT may not depend primarily on the LC.

B156
CRITICAL SUBSTRATES OF BIOLOGICAL AND NON-BIOLOGICAL
ACTION PREDICTION Matthieu M. de Wit1, Laurel J. Buxbaum1; 1Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute, Philadelphia, PA, USA — The ability to predict how

actions will unfold permits rapid and accurate interactions with a changing
environment. Previous research suggests that action prediction depends on
action knowledge and action production ability, and on the premotor and
parietal cortices. Using a cognitive neuropsychological approach, this study
assessed the cognitive substrates and brain regions critical for prediction of
both biological and non-biological actions. We studied 27 left-hemisphere
stroke patients with a range of impairments in motor strength (hemiparesis), pantomimed tool use (praxis), and action knowledge, together with 13
neurologically-intact controls. A visual occlusion paradigm was employed
with videos of pantomimed and real tool use actions, in addition to non-biological actions of comparable complexity. Subjects indicated whether stimulus continuation post-occlusion was congruent with the stimulus pre-occlusion, which required prediction of how the action would unfold during
occlusion. Damage to premotor cortex, inferior frontal gyrus, putamen,
and intraparietal sulcus, as well as hemiparesis and action knowledge deficits were associated with prediction impairments for both biological and
non-biological stimuli. Lesions in inferior frontal gyrus were more strongly
associated with prediction of non-biological than biological actions. Overall, the data indicate that a left-hemisphere sensorimotor action network is
critical for prediction of movement trajectories in space, largely independent of the biological or non-biological nature of the predicted entities.

B157
BIASING BEHAVIORAL DECISIONS AND BRAIN RESPONSES
TO FOOD WITH TRAFFIC LIGHT LABELING Marie-Laure Bielser1,

Jean-François Knebel2,3, Micah M. Murray1,2,3,4, Ulrike Toepel1,2; 1Laboratory for
Investigative Neurophysiology, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University
Hospital Center and University of Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Laboratory for Investigative Neurophysiology, Radiology Department, University Hospital Center and
University of Lausanne, Switzerland, 3EEG Brain Mapping Core, Center for Biomedical Imaging of Lausanne and Geneva, Switzerland, 4Department of Ophthalmology, University of Lausanne, Jules-Gonin Eye Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

107

Poster Session B	
— Obesity has reached dramatic proportions over the last decades, nota-

bly due to the abundance of tempting foods partially leading to overeating and weight gain. Since the evaluation of hedonic properties of food
tend to exceed homeostatic energy needs, new means to attain healthier
food choices and resistance to food temptations are needed. Our study
investigated the impact of traffic light cues (as used for nutritional value
labelling on food packages) on behavioral and brain responses to food
images. We recorded visual evoked potentials (VEPs) to color images of
foods (high-fat and low-fat) and non-foods from 16 healthy, non-dieting,
and normal-weight participants. Images were preceded by either ‘green’,
‘red’ or ‘off’ traffic light cues during a food/non-food categorization task.
Additionally, the liking of food items was rated using a 5-point Likert scale.
Categorization accuracy was decreased when high-fat foods were preceded
by ‘green’ as compared to ‘off’ cues. Traffic light cues affected early stages
of sensory processing of food images (i.e. 115-160ms), presumably prior to
decision-related activity. Estimations of neural source activity and its modulation by traffic light labelling, as well as analyses of correlation between
behavioral and brain responses will further delineate the influence of color
cues on food perception and appreciation. The results will thus serve to
elaborate the utility of traffic light labeling as means to guide food choices,
not only in experimental settings, but, in extension, being a potential means
to interfere with everyday food choices for the benefit of body weight management.

THINKING: Decision making
B158
ARE METACOGNITIVE JUDGMENTS DOMAIN-SPECIFIC OR
DOMAIN-GENERAL? Lisa Fitzgerald1, Paul Dockree1, Mahnaz Arvaneh2;
1

School of Psychology & Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Trinity College
Dublin Ireland, 2University of Sheffield — Metacognition and awareness are

commonly assumed to operate as global capacities supported by frontal
lobe function. However, there have been few attempts to test the robustness of this assumption across multiple cognitive domains. To address this
question, we assessed the covariance between “on-line” metacognitive processes, as measured by confidence judgments in the domains of perception
and memory, and error-awareness in the domain of attention-to-action,
by assessing the correspondence between objective performance and subjective ratings of performance. Task differences have limited the ability of
previous research to measure metacognition across domains. We directly
compared metacognitive accuracy in perceptual and memorial tasks that
were closely matched for stimulus characteristics. A signal detection theory
analysis confirmed a behavioral dissociation in metacognitive accuracy of
perceptual decisions and memorial decisions. Moreover, metacognitive
judgments were independent of objective accuracy, which was controlled
using a staircase procedure. We found intra-individual variability across
specific types of online metacognitive processes, the ability to make judgments of confidence and the ability to monitor errors. Online perceptual
metacognitive accuracy was predictive of informant reports of participants
daily functioning and the degree of discrepancy between the self and their
significant other ratings of everyday functioning. Overall self-metacognitive knowledge and online metacognition were behaviorally dissociated.
Together these results suggest that metacognition and awareness while
often considered global and domain-general, are supported by domain
specific components in the domains of perception, memory and attention-to-action. The clinical implications of these findings will be considered.

B159
SWEET PREFERENCE IS ASSOCIATED WITH ALTERED BRAIN
STRUCTURE AND SLOWER PROCESSING SPEED DURING DECISION-MAKING IN ADOLESCENTS Maysa Jawdat1, Valerie L. Darcey1,
Emma J. Rose2, John W. VanMeter1, Diana H. Fishbein2; 1Georgetown University,
2
Pennsylvania State University — Alcoholic adults have a greater sweet pref-

erence (SP) than their non-alcoholic counterparts, but it is unclear whether
SP in adolescence is related to factors that precede alcohol use, such as
risk-taking. Neurodevelopmental changes during adolescence can increase
the propensity for risk-taking and novelty-seeking, which may increase
substance use vulnerability. We considered SP, risk-taking and brain structure in drug- and alcohol- naïve male adolescents. Using a food frequency

108

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
questionnaire, percent of calories from added sugar was used to approximate sweet preference. Participants’ SP scores were ranked and split into
tertiles and analyses focused on differences between the extremes, i.e., high
SP (HSP: n=13,12.6 ± 0.6 years, 19.1 ± 8.4% kcal added sugar) and low SP
(LSP: n=13, 12.6 ± 0.8 years, 7.9 ± 1.5% kcal added sugar) groups. A voxel
based morphometry analysis of grey matter volume (GMV) was conducted
using high-resolution T1-MPRAGE structural brain images, (8 HSP; 11 LSP
meeting quality standards). Risk-taking tendency was determined using
the “Wheel of Fortune” task. High-risk choice frequency did not differ
between groups, yet HSP took longer to deliberate between high- and lowrisk options, suggesting slower processing speed during decision-making.
Compared to LSP, the HSP group also had greater GMV (puncorr < 0.001)
in the superior parietal lobe (520 mm3) and the precuneus (119 mm3),
regions associated with information integration during decision-making.
These data suggest that youths with high sweet preference may have a propensity towards abnormalities in decision-making and suboptimal neurodevelopment in related cortical regions.

B160
DISSOCIATING EXPLICIT FROM IMPLICIT STRATEGIES IN
TWO-DIMENSIONAL CATEGORY LEARNING. Ben Reuveni1, Paul
Reber1; 1Northwestern University — Human category learning is driven by

at least two qualitatively distinct mechanisms. One is based on pre-decisional stimulus-response mappings which integrate information (II) across
stimulus dimensions, are learned gradually through reinforcement, and
are associated with implicit learning. This is contrasted by rule-based (RB)
category learning that is tied to declarative memory. Category structures
elicit II mechanisms by requiring integrating two stimulus dimensions,
however, little research has carefully examined participant reports to verify
that learning has occurred outside of awareness. Using a novel post-learning interview based on techniques from studies of implicit learning, we
present a verbalizability measure for category knowledge that assesses
conscious expression of this knowledge. Participants are asked about their
strategic approach and indirectly probed for reportable heuristics used to
judge category membership. They are then asked to annotate a diagram of
the two-dimensional category space to probe for conscious, non-verbal rule
knowledge. These reports suggest that a notable subset of participants in
II category learning conditions actually explicitly discover a rule for using
both stimulus dimensions to predict category membership. These participants exhibit performance that matches simple computational models (e.g.,
decision-bound theory; DBT) of II choice behavior even though performance is likely driven by conscious rules and MTL-dependent memory.
Thus, prior dissociations between category systems underestimates category learning differences because a subset of putatively II learners may be
utilizing rule-based strategies. By incorporating assessments of conscious
knowledge, future work can more accurately identify specific characteristics of implicit visual category learning by excluding these explicitly-driven
participants.

B161
DIFFERENCES IN CONTINGENT NEGATIVE VARIATION (CNV)
WHEN USING SOCIAL DILEMMA STRATEGIES Justin Michael Campbell1, Alexis Porter1, Bradley Robinson1, Allison Hancock1, Nicholas John Alexander Wan1, Kerry Jordan1; 1Utah State University — The Prisoner’s Dilemma

(PD) is a commonly used social dilemma game that when played multiple
consecutive times can begin to generate patterns of choice. These patterns
of choice can be referred to as a strategy, in which your choice depends
on a previous outcome. Two strategies, “tit-for-tat” (TFT) and “win-stay/
lose-switch” (WSLS), have been most studied within PD. The differences
between the two strategies are very slight but have larger social implications. The connotation of TFT is that it is the most “fair” strategy, as you are
only choosing what your partner is choosing, whereas WSLS is a cost-benefit strategy meant to maximize your own score without the consideration
of your opponent. We analyze both of these strategies within PD using
ERP (specifically contingent negative variation (CNV)) under the hypothesis that WSLS will show a larger negative variation in prefrontal areas as
a process of greater reward-expectation than TFT, in which smaller CNV
may reflect less cost-benefit analysis and greater social cognitive analysis.
Current results indicate a larger CNV during WSLS when compared to TFT
for defection choices only. Defection choices during PD contain the safest

2016 Annual Meeting	
choice with the largest possible reward, but with also the largest negative
social consequences. It is feasible players choosing WSLS have larger CNV
during defect choices as a reflection of expectation of a safe outcome.

B162
PATTERNS OF FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY DURING PREPARATION PERIODS CAN PREDICT THE TENDENCY TO GIVE UP IN
FOLLOWING DECISION-MAKING Jeesung Ahn1, Yoonjin Nah1, Sanghoon
Han1; 1Yonsei University — Task difficulty expectation engages in different

behavioral strategies and also neural patterns across individuals. We conducted an fMRI study to investigate whether cortical functional connectivity during the period of expecting problem difficulty could discriminate
whether participants would give up solving it or not. In each trial with limited time, participants estimated whether the number of overlapped circles
was odd or even and could use ‘Pass’ option if the answer was uncertain.
Cue (either ‘Easy’ or ‘Hard’ indicating the level of difficulty) appeared and
was followed by preparation period, the circles and feedback. Although the
cues were randomized regardless of actual problem difficulty, behavioral
results showed that participants pressed ‘Pass’ more often in the ostensibly
‘Hard’ trials. 27 regions were identified as regions of interest during the
presentation of cues from which time-series during preparation periods
were extracted. Functional connectivity multivariate pattern analyses using
linear support vector machine algorithm was conducted to discriminate
high-Pass versus low-Pass groups. The results showed that approximately
10 features (pair-wise correlations) including connectivity patterns between
the right superior frontal gyrus, mid-cingulate cortex, and other regions
discriminated high and low-Pass groups with 88% accuracy in the ‘Hard’
trials. Likewise, approximately 20 features including patterns between the
left medial superior frontal gyrus, amygdala, pre/postcentral, and other
regions classified two groups with 92% accuracy in the ‘Easy’ trials. These
findings suggest that functional connectivity patterns of brain regions can
be used to classify persons who are sensitive to expected problem difficulty
and impulsively give up according to the expectation.

B163
THE SUBTHALAMIC NUCLEUS (STN) AND INTEGRATION OF
PROBABILISTIC INFORMATION DURING DECISION-MAKING:
EVIDENCE FROM THE EFFECT OF STN DBS IN PD Friederike Leimbach1, Vladimir Litvak1, Dejan Georgiev1, Patricia Limousin1, Tom Foltynie1,
Marjan Jahanshahi1, Rafal Bogacz2; 1University College London, 2Oxford University — Theoretical works (Mink, 1996; Frank, 2006; Bogacz and Gurney 2007)

propose that the subthalamic nucleus (STN) mediates competition between
alternative motor programmes, and ensures that once one programme is
being selected, others are inhibited. From this it is predicted that decisions
that are based on probabilistic information should be ordinarily made on
the basis of relative evidence for the two options; and that interruption of
STN activity should lead to reliance on just the absolute evidence for the
chosen option. Our aim was to test this prediction by using Deep Brain
Stimulation of the STN (STN DBS) to manipulate STN activity. We assessed
13 PD patients with bilateral STN-DBS 6 or more months after the surgery,
13 aged-matched controls and 12 young healthy controls. All participants
completed a computer-based probabilistic decision-making task twice, the
patients with the STN-DBS ON or OFF (order counterbalanced). A short
neuropsychological battery was used to screen and exclude dementia,
apathy and depression and to assess working memory, executive function,
and processing speed. Preliminary results suggest that patients with STNDBS OFF and healthy controls used diverse strategies, including deciding
on the basis of relative or absolute evidence or after a certain amount of
time irrespective of evidence. By contrast when STN-DBS was ON patients
made decisions primarily on the basis of absolute evidence. These results
support the prediction that the STN is critical for mediating competition
between alternative choices during decision-making.

B164
RECONSIDERING THE DESCRIPTION-EXPERIENCE GAP: OVERWEIGHTING OF RARE EVENTS IN EXPERIENCED-BASED DECISION UNDER RISK Shu-Ching Lee1,2, Shih-Wei Wu1,3; 1Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Taiwan International
Graduate Program in Interdisciplinary Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming Univer-

Poster Session B
sity and Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Brain Research Center, National YangMing University, Taipei, Taiwan — Considerable evidence suggests that when

people make risky decisions, their choices do not conform to the standard
economic models. When information is explicitly described, people tend
to overweight small-probability outcomes. In contrast, when probability is
learned through sampling experience, underweighting of small-probability
outcomes has been found. Such difference, referred to as the description-experience gap (D-E gap), highlights a context-dependent effect on probability distortion that critically depends on how information is acquired.
However, a central feature in most experience-based tasks is that information about probabilities and outcomes in lotteries are not learned independently. In this study, we investigated how this feature contributes to the
D-E gap. Two experiments were conducted. In the first experiment, subjects
learned probabilities associated with non-monetary events before associating the events with monetary outcomes to make decisions. In the second
experiment, subjects learned specific pairings of probability and monetary
outcome through experience. We found that irrespective of whether probability was learned independently of outcome, subjects in both experiments
(n=75 in Experiment 1, n=15 in Experiment 2) consistently overweight small
probabilities. Such pattern persisted even when the actual frequencies of
reward experienced by the subjects were taken into account to modeling
probability distortion. In addition, subjects exhibited overweighting, albeit
to a lesser degree, as they sampled more from the lotteries. The results were
in sharp contrast to the underweighting of rare events reported in previous
studies and challenge the description-experience gap in decision making.

B165
THE ROLE OF THE ERROR POSITIVITY IN CONFIDENCE-BASED
DECISION-MAKING Kobe Desender1, Annika Boldt2, Nick Yeung3; 1Free University Brussels, 2Cambridge University, 3Oxford University — A rapidly increas-

ing number of studies are examining the neural correlates of subjective
confidence. Using human electrophysiology, it has been shown that the
amplitude of the error positivity (Pe), which has previously been linked to
error awareness, increases monotonically with our degree of confidence.
However, whether this neural correlate of confidence is predictive of actual
changes in behavior remains unexposed so far. Mainly, this results from the
close association between first-order performance and confidence, which
prevents a clear delineation of both variables’ contribution. Here, we were
able to create conditions that were matched in accuracy but differed in the
subjective evaluation of accuracy. In a perceptual decision-making task,
human observers could choose to sample more information before making
their decision. The data showed that low Pe amplitude, indicating low
levels of confidence, was associated with sampling additional information
from the environment before making a decision. Crucially, this was found
while controlling for differences in accuracy. In sum, our data show that the
error positivity, reflectin subjective confidence, serves as a cue that influences subsequent decision-making.

B166
SPONTANEOUS EYEBLINK RATE PREDICTS RECRUITMENT OF
MODEL-BASED VERSUS MODEL-FREE LEARNING STRATEGY

Tracey C. Shi1, Lindsay E. Hunter1, Johannes H. Decker1, Catherine A. Hartley1;
1
Weill Cornell Medicine — Reinforcement learning theories distinguish two

strategies individuals can use to make everyday decisions. A “model-based”
strategy creates and recruits a mental model of possible decisions and outcomes to flexibly select actions, whereas a “model-free” strategy simply
increments the probability of repeating previously successful actions.
Over-reliance on model-free learning, proposed to underlie the formation
of habits, is thought to increase susceptibility to disorders of compulsivity (Voon et al., 2015). However, determinants of individual variability in
the recruitment of these two strategies are not well understood. Previous
studies using PET imaging (Deserno et al., 2015) and pharmacological
manipulations (Wunderlich et al., 2012) have shown a link between higher
central dopamine levels and model-based choice. Based on previously
reported associations between central dopamine levels and spontaneous
eyeblink rate (SEBR), we hypothesized that individuals exhibiting higher
SEBR would show more model-based choice. To test this hypothesis, we
recorded resting SEBR in healthy adults who then completed a two-stage
sequential reinforcement learning task designed to dissociate model-free
and model-based choice behavior (Daw et al., 2011). We fit a generalized

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

109

Poster Session B	
linear mixed-effects regression model to quantify the degree to which participants’ choices reflected model-based and model-free computations. We
observed a significant positive correlation between SEBR and model-based
choice and a significant negative correlation between SEBR and model-free
choice. Our findings corroborate previous evidence that dopamine modulates the recruitment of model-based and model-free learning, and further
suggest that resting SEBR may represent a valid measure for examining the
relationship between central dopaminergic function and choice behavior.

B167
WEIGHTING THE PAST AND THE PRESENT: ASYMMETRIC INFLUENCES OF PAST AND PRESENT INFORMATION RELIABILITY ON
SUBOPTIMAL PROBABILISTIC INFERENCE Yun-Yen Yang1, Shih-Wei
Wu1,2; 1Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan,
2
Brain Research Center, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan — Making

decisions under uncertainty often requires the estimation of probabilities
associated with possible outcomes. Information about probabilities can
come from different sources, making source integration a key computational problem. In this study, we investigated how humans combine prior
experience and current information to estimate reward probabilities. In
particular, we asked how the reliability of these two sources of information affect the weights subjects assign to them. In a probabilistic inference
task, on each trial, subjects were presented with two visual stimuli – one
associated with past experience on rewards (prior knowledge) obtained
in a previous session and the other a new and independent piece of sensory evidence for reward probability (likelihood information). In order to
maximize rewards, subjects should integrate both sources of information
by taking into account the reliability of each source so as to compute the
optimal estimates of probability. We found that subjects (n=25) adjusted
the weights assigned to prior knowledge and likelihood as their relative
reliability changed in a direction consistent with optimal integration. However, subjects were more sensitive to changes in the reliability of likelihood
than prior. Such tendency contributed to a unique pattern of suboptimal
performance: When prior knowledge was highly reliable, subjects instead
weighted this information significantly less than they should. This is in
sharp contrast to near-optimal integration when prior information was
less reliable. Together, these results indicated an asymmetry in treating the
reliability of past and present information and provided insights into the
limitations in human probabilistic inference.

THINKING: Reasoning
B168
THINKING CAP PLUS THINKING ZAP: TDCS OF FRONTOPOLAR
CORTEX IMPROVES CREATIVE ANALOGICAL REASONING AND
FACILITATES CONSCIOUS AUGMENTATION OF STATE CREATIVITY Adam Green1, Adam Weinberger1, Evan Giangrande1, Katherine Spiegel2,

Natalie Gallagher1, Peter Turkeltaub2; 1Georgetown University, 2Georgetown
University Medical Center — Recent evidence points to neural mechanisms

that support acute improvements in creative performance (i.e., augmented
state creativity). Neuroimaging of cognitive interventions (e.g., creativity
cues) indicates mechanisms by which individuals succeed at consciously
augmenting state creativity. Neural interventions via transcranial direct
current stimulation (tDCS) indicate encouraging potential for modulating
neuronal function during creative performance. Extant evidence leads to
new questions. If cognitive and neural interventions are separately effective, can they be used in combination? Does state creativity augmentation
represent “real” creativity, or do interventions simply yield divergence
by diminishing constraints on meaningfulness/appropriateness? A key
question is whether state creativity interventions can bolster creative intelligence, including creative reasoning by analogy that is frequently the basis
for innovation. Here, we used tDCS in combination with a creativity cue.
tDCS was targeted to potentiate activity in a frontopolar region where
activity has recently been shown to predict improvement in creative performance during cued augmentation of creative state. In a novel Analogy
Finding Task, participants sought valid analogical connections in a matrix
of word-pairs. tDCS elicited formation of substantially more creative analogical connections (creativity was measured quantitatively via latent

110

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
semantic analysis). Critically, increased analogical creativity was not due
to diminished accuracy in discerning valid analogies, indicating “real” creativity rather than inappropriate divergence. A simpler relational creativity paradigm (modified verb-generation) revealed an interaction whereby
tDCS facilitated the effect of cuing on creative production. The data support
augmentation of creative reasoning via neurostimulation and suggest that
tDCS can make it easier to make one’s self more creative.

B169
THE SIMILAR SITUATIONS TASK: AN ASSESSMENT OF ANALOGICAL REASONING IN HEALTHY AND CLINICAL POPULATIONS Mat-

thew J. Kmiecik1, Guido F. Schauer1, David Martinez1, Daniel C. Krawczyk1,2; 1The
University of Texas at Dallas, 2University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas — Analogical reasoning—the ability to understand and utilize rela-

tional similarities between entities despite surface-level differences—helps
individuals solve problems and navigate through novel situations. This
ability varies across healthy and clinical populations, yet current analogical
reasoning tasks often fail to capture subtle performance variations across
different populations. To address this problem, we developed the Similar
Situations Task (SST), in which participants are presented 48 line-art scene
analogy problems, with source and target scenes presented separately.
In each source, two sets of items (humans, animals, or objects) interact
in distinct areas within the scene. One or two arrows direct participants
to encode and remember specific items and their relational roles. In each
target, two matching items interact analogously to one set of items in the
source, while two distractor items interact in a superficially similar manner
to the alignable items. Participants are tasked with determining which item,
if any, is in a similar situation as one of those pointed to in the source. SST
problems were found to be reliable measures of performance and presented
a range of challenges for both college students and chronic-phase traumatic
brain injury patients. Moreover, SST performance correlated with neuropsychological cognitive measures, but notably did not correlate with measures of verbal working memory or intelligence. The SST appears to be a
sensitive, reliable, and realistic test of analogical reasoning that captures the
ability to discern analogous relations and roles across different situations.
Importantly, SST results suggest this ability may be independent of other
cognitive capacities.

B170
HEMISPHERIC ASYMMETRY IN REASONING: A REVIEW AND
META-ANALYSIS Nicole Marinsek1, Benjamin O. Turner1, Evan Layher1,

Michael B. Miller1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara — We recently pro-

posed that neural networks in the left and right hemispheres have different
reasoning biases. We suggest that networks in the left hemisphere strive to
reduce uncertainty, and are therefore prone to create inferences and explanations, whereas networks in the right hemisphere strive to resolve conflict,
and are therefore prone to monitor, evaluate, and inhibit hypotheses that
conflict with evidence. This theory is strongly supported by patient studies, but only weakly supported by neuroimaging studies. The goal of this
project was to survey a broad cross-section of the neuroimaging literature
on reasoning in order to investigate hemispheric asymmetry in reasoning.
To do so, we found 125 reasoning studies that used functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), created labels for the contrasts in each study,
pooled contrasts with similar labels, and conducted a meta-analysis of each
label using Activation Likelihood Estimation (GingerALE). Based on our
theory of hemispheric asymmetry in reasoning, we predicted that the labels
“building a model” and “rule finding” would be largely left-lateralized and
the labels “evaluating a model,” “rule checking,” and “conflict” would be
largely right-lateralized. Our predictions were supported for the “building
a model” and “conflict” labels, but the remaining labels were associated
with bilateral activations. There are two opposing interpretations of our
bilateral results: first, reasoning may be truly symmetrical or second, reasoning may be truly asymmetrical but either neuroimaging cannot detect
asymmetric processing or inappropriate control conditions mask true laterality. This research was supported by the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies under grant W911NF-09-D-0001.

2016 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session B

B171
NO EVIDENCE OF IMPROVED INTELLIGENCE WITH MINDFULNESS MEDITATION OR BRAIN-TRAINING GAMES-TRAINING
COMBINED WITH TDCS Seth Elkin-Frankston1, Sean Guarino1, Victoria

Romero1, G Lieberman2, MA Hunter2, K Witkiewitz2, VP Clark2, E Schumacher3,
M Bezdek3, N Martin3; 1Charles River Analytics, Cambridge, MA, 2The University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, 3Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
GA — Measures of fluid intelligence are highly predictive of performance

across a wide range of contexts, including academic performance and
career success (Nisbett et al., 2012) and therefore strengthening fluid intelligence through brief intervention training would be of significant benefit.
Despite evidence demonstrating a transfer effect from cognitive training to
measures of fluid intelligence (Jaeggi, et al., 2008; Klingberg, 2010), a clear
consensus to the benefits of cognitive training has yet to be reached. The
aim of this study was to investigate the impact of cognitive training in conjunction with transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) on improvements in generalized intelligence. This question was investigated in four
labs using multiple intervention strategies, in four experimental conditions,
including brain-training games with tDCS, mindfulness meditation with
tDCS, an active control condition with tDCS, and an active control with
sham tDCS. In all conditions anodal tDCS was applied to the right inferior frontal cortex. Training in conjunction with tDCS has been shown to
magnify effects of cognitive training in a number of domains (Fregni et al,
2005; Clark et al, 2012). Mindfulness training teaches sustained attention
and has been associated with improved selective attention (Jha et al., 2007),
and working memory (Jha et al., 2010). Cognitive brain-training games
have similarly been shown to target working memory, cognitive flexibility,
and executive functioning (Jaeggi et al., 2008; Brehmer et al., 2012). Analysis showed no significant changes (p<0.01) in performance on measures of
generalized intelligence following four weeks of intervention training in
among four experimental conditions (n=204).

B172
NEURAL BASIS OF THE ENCODING AND EVALUATION OF LOGICAL CONNECTIVES: A TMS STUDY Paolo Cherubini1,2, Elisa Di Rosa3,
Stefano Cardullo3, Fabio Masina3, Daniela Mapelli3, Carlo Reverberi1,2; 1Department of Psychology, University of Milan-Bicocca, 2NEUROMI - Milan Center for
Neuroscince, 3Department of General Psuchology, University of Padua — Logi-

cal connectives constitute fundamental components of human cognition:
they play a crucial role in a wide range of cognitive processes as language
and executive functions, or in symbolic functions as logic or mathematics
(Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2008). Recently, several studies have investigated the neuroanatomy of reasoning with propositional logic. In a fMRI
study, Baggio and colleagues (in press) showed that two main regions are
involved in the encoding and in the evaluation of logical connectives as
“and”, “or” and “if”: the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA44), and the
inferior parietal lobule (BA40). Interestingly, a differences between subjects
with a classical interpretation of the logical connective “if” and those with
a conjunctive interpretation emerged in the activity of BA 40. However,
causal structure-function relationships are hard to evaluate from neuroimaging techniques as fMRI. For this reason, the aim of the present study was
to assess using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) the contribution
of BA44 and BA40 on reasoning with propositional logic. A low-frequency
rTMS off-line paradigm has been employed: BA40 and BA44 have been
stimulated in two groups of participants, before the execution of a reasoning task in which they had to evaluate different statements composed
using the propositional connectives “and”, “or” and “if”. Results indicate
a crucial role of the left parietal cortex in the evaluation of statements composed using the connective “if”. Importantly, the effect of BA40 stimulation
is greater in subjects with the conjunctive interpretation, respect to those
with the classical one.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

111

Poster Session C
ATTENTION: Auditory
C1
TEMPORAL EVOLUTION OF ENTRAINED NEURAL DELTA OSCILLATIONS DETERMINES AUDITORY TASK PERFORMANCE Anna-Katha-

rina R. Bauer1, Manuela Jaeger1,2, Jeremy D. Thorne1, Stefan Debener1,2,3; 1Neuropsychology Lab, European Medical School, University of Oldenburg, Germany,
2
Research Center Neurosensory Science, University of Oldenburg, Germany,
3
Cluster of Excellence Hearing4all, University of Oldenburg, Germany — The

synchronization of neural oscillations to environmental rhythms, such as
speech or music, is called phase entrainment. Recently, the detection probability of near-threshold auditory targets has been shown to co-vary with the
phase of neural δ-oscillations. In a human electroencephalography (EEG)
study, we investigated the temporal evolution of entrainment to a 3 Hz
frequency-modulated (FM) tone and assessed the psychoacoustic and neurophysiological benefits using a gap-detection task. Gaps were equally distributed with respect to the phase angle of the 3 Hz FM tone. Two stimulus
durations were compared, an early (3.67s, 11 cycles) and a late condition
(7.67s, 23 cycles), the latter containing a four seconds time period of uninterrupted stimulation prior to gap occurrence. Gap detection performance
and reaction times were modulated by the phase angle of the stimulus. Performance was higher and reaction times were faster for the late condition,
suggesting stronger phase entrainment over time. The phase angle corresponding to peak performance was correlated between early and late conditions, indicating stable phase preferences over several seconds. Fourier
analysis of the EEG showed spectral peaks at 3 Hz and the 6 Hz harmonic.
Subsequent analysis of inter-trial phase coherence revealed a single peak in
the 3 Hz frequency band. This study demonstrates that long versus short
periodic stimulation leads to enhanced behavioral performance and stronger phase entrainment. We suggest that entrainment evolves over time and
thereby optimizes perceptual processing.

C2
ATTENTION IN HEALTHY FULL TERM AND PRETERM INFANTS
WITH PERIVENTRICULAR LEUKOMALACIA (PVL). Thalia Harmony1,
Claudia Calipso Gutiérrez1; 1Instituto de Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México —  Diagnosis and subsequent intervention in chil-

dren that develop attention impairment (including those affected by PVL)
often begin late. There is not any sensitive and specific method for the early
detection of attention deficits. As premature newborns may present attention deficits during development, we develop instruments for the early
detection and treatment of attention deficits in babies. The “Infant Scale of
Selective Attention” was designed to diagnose deficiencies in visual and
auditory attention in infants. It was standardized in 200 infants from 1 to
8 months and validated with another 221 infants of the same age. Treatment was developed for the enhancement of the behavior that the infant
should develop at his/her age and taught to the parents. Two sessions with
the therapist of 20 minutes each per week were also programmed. Thirty
preterm infants were studied, 10 in each group: no attention problems, 10
with attention problems and a specific treatment and 10 with attention
problems without the specific treatment. Behavioral performance and ERPs
in an oddball paradigm were compared before (3 months) and after the end
of treatment (8 months). More infants with normal behavioral evaluations
in the treated than in the non-treated group (p<0.01) and clear P3a and
Nc responses to the deviant stimuli were observed in the treated group
that were not observed in the non-treated group. These results suggest
that the treatment produced favorable behavioral and electrophysiological changes. This project was partially supported by CONACyT 218556,
166772, and PAPIIT IN220110.

112

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
C3
COMPUTERIZED COGNITIVE REMEDIATION OF CHEMOTHERAPY INDUCED COGNITIVE DEFICITS IN BREAST CANCER SURVIVORS: PRELIMINARY CASE STUDY Giulia Mercuri1, Hannah Lindsey1,

Julia Smith2, Sylvia Adams2, Gerald Voelbel1; 1New York University, 2New York
University Langone Medical Center — Adjuvant chemotherapy is a common

technique utilized in treating breast cancer. The cognitive domains that
are most affected in individuals that have undergone chemotherapy are in
the areas of attention, executive function, verbal memory, and processing
speed (Schagen & Wefel, 2013). Research by Kesler et al. (2014) suggests
that these cognitive deficits can be remediated in breast cancer survivors
with computerized cognitive training. Thus, the purpose of this study was
to investigate if an auditory computerized cognitive training program
could improve cognitive deficits in breast cancer survivors over time. Four
adults ranging from 40-61 years of age (M= 50.00, SD= 9.06) were assigned
to either the experimental (N= 3) or control (N= 1) groups depending on a
quasi-random selection. Participants in the experimental group completed
a neurocognitive evaluation before and after the training. The control participant underwent cognitive evaluations 12 weeks apart. Preliminary analyses indicated that participants in the experimental group improved after
undergoing the computerized training at their follow-up evaluation compared to their baseline performance on the WAIS-III Digit Span test and
several CNS-VS domains including executive function, working memory,
and sustained attention. The control participant demonstrated a decrease
on the WAIS-III Digit Span test, an increase in executive function, and no
change in sustained attention and working memory scores. The preliminary results of this study indicate that participation in an auditory computerized cognitive training program following chemotherapy could be helpful in remediating cognitive deficits that result from this kind of treatment.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition
C4
HORMONAL CORRELATES OF P50 SUPPRESSION IN SOCIALLY
ANXIOUS YOUNG ADULTS Andrea M Tountas1, Connie Lamm1, Elliott A

Beaton1; 1University of New Orleans — Ten to 15% of the population is tem-

peramentally shy and have elevated physiological stress responses to
novel social situations. Yet, the neural mechanisms underlying this personality trait are not fully understood. Efficiently attending to, acting on,
and remembering relevant stimuli and filtering out less relevant stimuli
is critical given the volume of sensory information the brain must process.
Relevant stimuli that garner attention are remembered and consolidated
with existing memories. Stimuli that do not warrant extended attention are
ignored or habituated to in a process underpinned by cortical and subcortical inhibitory brain networks, reducing processing load on finite attentional
resources. Inefficient filtering of irrelevant stimuli could underpin anxiety
seen in those with temperamental shyness and social anxiety as the lack of
filtering leads to overstimulation. One measure of filtering efficiency utilizes the P50 event-related potential (ERP) component and examines the
difference in response to sound one (S1) versus sound two (S2) using an
auditory paired click paradigm. Using this paradigm, we measured the P50
auditory ERP, as well as self-reported social anxiety and salivary cortisol
in two groups of healthy young adults prescreened for level of social anxiety. As predicted, we found increased P50 ratio scores (S2 divided by S1;
68.06%) for the high versus low social anxiety groups, which is indicative
of reduced sensory gating efficiency. Furthermore, higher salivary cortisol
was associated with larger P50 ratios, suggesting that an elevated physiological stress response was associated with less efficient auditory gating in
the brain.

2016 Annual Meeting	

ATTENTION: Auditory
C5
THE EFFECTS OF SLEEP DEPRIVATION ON SELECTIVE ATTENTION: AN EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIAL STUDY Eve Wiggins1,
Seth Eggleston1, Malayka Mottarella1, Shelbie Wolfe1, Rachel Green1, Courtney
Stevens1; 1Willamette University — Converging evidence from behavioral

and neuroimaging studies suggests that sleep deprivation impairs selective attention by inducing a specific deficit in distractor suppression, as
opposed to signal enhancement (Anderson, 2006; Blagrove, 1995; Drummond, 2012; Kong, 2012; Zerouali, 2010). However, to date no studies have
examined whether the effects of total sleep deprivation can be traced to
the earliest stages of processing affected by selective attention. In the present study, event related brain potentials (ERPs) were used to examine the
effects of 24-hour sleep deprivation on early stages of neural processing
during a selective auditory attention task. Adult participants were randomly assigned to either a sleep-as-usual or 24-hour sleep deprivation condition. Following either sleep deprivation or sleep-as-usual, participants
completed an ERP selective auditory attention task. In the task, participants
attended selectively to one of two auditory stories, played simultaneously,
to different ears and varying in narrator gender and content. ERPs were
timelocked to 100 msec probe stimuli superimposed upon the ‘attended’
and ‘unattended’ stories. While the sleep-as-usual group showed a robust
effect of selective attention on the N1, the 24-hour sleep deprivation group
showed no effects of selective attention on early neural processing. However, contrary to predictions, group differences could not be localized to
either signal enhancement or distractor suppression. These data suggest
that sleep deprivation impairs the earliest stages of processing affected by
selective attention but fail to provide evidence for a specific deficit in distractor suppression at this early stage of neural processing.

C6
TEMPORAL PROBABILITIES IN THE BETA-BAND Alessandro

Tavano1,2, Erich Schröger2, Sonja Kotz3,4; 1Max Planck Institute for Empirical
Aesthetics, Frankfurt am Main (Germany)., 2Institute of Psychology, University
of Leipzig (Germany)., 3Maastricht University, Maastricht (The Netherlands),
4
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive Brain Sciences, Leipzig (Germany) —

How does the human brain encode event probability estimates? Animal
evidence suggests that post-stimulus synchronization in the beta-band
(13-30 Hz) reflects the internal evaluation of stimulus relevance for motor
output (Leventhal et al., 2012). In a hazard rate paradigm, where a button is
pressed to a target appearing at different points in time, stimulus relevance
is fully defined by internal onset probability estimates. We hypothesized
that event-related synchronisation (ERS) in the beta-band would encode
temporal probability estimates. We analyzed human electrophysiological
responses to rare target deviant tones appearing randomly but equiprobably at either of three successive positions in a repeating tone sequence of
five tones. Stimulus rate was held constant. ERS in the beta-band reflected
the discrete hazard rate of response times, i.e. linearly increasing with waiting time. Crucially, when participants were informed about the uniform
distribution of targets, response time as well as beta-band ERS were constant across positions. Hence, beta-band power tracks contextual changes in
subjectively attributed stimulus probabilities. Disinhibition of cortico-striato-cortical pathways leads to a generalized beta power increase in Parkinson Disease (PD). We thus investigated whether hazard rate processes
are impaired in participants with PD. We found that the hazard rate is preserved in healthy older adults but substantially attenuated or cancelled in
participants with PD, suggesting an impairment in tracking elapsed time.
Beta-band ERS predicted response times in both groups. We propose that
ERS in the beta-band reflects the rapid verification of stimulus-specific temporal probabilities. This neurophysiological mechanism may be dysfunctional in PD.

C7
ATTENTIONAL CAPTURE BY ACOUSTIC PATTERNS Rosy Southwell1,
Anna Baumann1, Cécile Gal1, Nicolas Barascud1, Karl Friston1, Maria Chait1;
1
University College London — In this series of behavioural and EEG experiments we investigate the extent to which acoustic regularities, consisting of

Poster Session C
repeating patterns of sounds, capture attention. Previous work in the visual
modality revealed attentional capture by statistically structured stimulus
streams (Zhao et al, 2013). Indeed, predictive coding accounts suggest that
attention arises from brain mechanisms which infer the predictability of
sensory signals, and encode this though optimising post-synaptic gain.
Here, signals were rapid sequences of successive tone pips, arranged in
regular or random patterns. REG sequences were generated by randomly
selecting a number of frequencies from the pool, and then iterating them to
create a repeating pattern (different for each trial). RAND sequences consisted of a sequence of tones of random frequencies. EEG data (naïve, distracted listeners) demonstrate that the brain rapidly acquires the patterns,
shown by a rapid increase in brain response amplitude to REG relative to
RAND sequences. The difference between REG and RAND is revealed as
an increase in power, similar to the gain increase often seen in attentional
manipulation experiments. This is consistent with the hypothesis that predictable sound sequences spontaneously draw attention. To study potential
attentional capture by auditory regularities, we used the above sequences
embedded into four different behavioural tasks designed to reveal effects
of attentional capture by regularity. Overall, the pattern of results suggests
that regular auditory patterns do not capture attention more than random
patterns. This indicates that the increased brain response to regularity is not
manifest as salience at the perceptual level.

C8
AUDITORY SPATIAL ATTENTION CONTROL IN THE AGING BRAIN

Jeffrey Mock1, Danielle Charney1, John Holmes1, Edward Golob1; 1Tulane University — Normal aging is accompanied by slower processing speed and defi-

cits in aspects of selective attention. Our previous study identified cortical
sources associated with auditory spatial attention gradients. Here we investigated whether these neuronal sources differ in younger (n=34) vs. older
(n=23) participants. We measured EEG during an auditory spatial attention
task. Subjects attended and responded to infrequent targets at one location
(-90° or +90°, separate blocks) while distractors were delivered in 45° intervals up to 180° away from the target. Attentional gradients were quantified
by regressing independent component analysis ERP and ERSP responses
to distractors against their location relative to the target. Fronto-centrally,
an ERP gradient (~300 ms) was found in both groups that was prolonged
in the older participants (~360-500). In fronto-lateral components, younger
participants showed a contralateral ERP gradient for both target locations
while older participants showed a contralateral ERSP gradient only in the
left fronto-lateral component. The right posterior component ERP gradient had an earlier onset in the older participants when attending to the
left (older: 240-440 ms, younger: 440-600 ms) and right (older: 240-340 ms,
younger: 340-440 ms). The right posterior ERSP measure showed a gradient
in the young when attending to the left while the older participants showed
a gradient when attending to either side. Overall, the auditory spatial attention gradient was found in both groups but differed by the type of evoked
response that showed the gradient, the onset/offset of the gradient, and
which target location a specific component encoded.

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
C9
EVALUATION OF MISMATCH NEGATIVITY AS BIOMARKER FOR
LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER

Heather Green1, Lauren Goodwin1, Karen Froud1; 1Teachers College, Columbia
University — Finding an early and objective way to identify language impair-

ment (LI) in ASD has the potential to lead to earlier speech and language
intervention for affected children. Previous magnetoencephalography
studies utilizing the mismatch field component (MMF) component have
shown that increased MMF latency is a predictor of LI in children with
ASD.  We attempted to replicate these results using the mismatch negativity (MMN), the electroencephalography (EEG) equivalent of MMF. EEG
was recorded in children ages 5-10 with ASD+LI, ASD-LI and typically
developing controls (TD) during a passive auditory oddball experiment
presenting speech sounds. Contrary to previous MMF findings, individuals with ASD+LI demonstrated decreased MMN latency in the left hemisphere in response to novel vowel sounds compared to individuals with
ASD-LI and TD controls. A positive correlation between left hemisphere
MMN latency and language scores on the Clinical Evaluation of Language

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

113

Poster Session C	
Fundamentals was found when combining both ASD groups. Parent report
revealed that all individuals with ASD who participated in the study were
hypersensitive to sounds. Our results lend support to the theory that some
children with ASD+LI have increased connectivity in primary sensory
cortices at the expense of computational connectivity between association
areas of the brain. This may account for faster sound processing despite
low language scores in these children. Further research needs to be done in
order to determine if grouping children by hyper– versus hyposensitivity
to auditory stimuli could explain conflicting results between studies and
elucidate a neurophysiological biomarker of LI in subgroups of children
with ASD.

ATTENTION: Auditory
C10
VARIATIONS IN IMPLICIT TEMPORAL PREDICTABILITY ARE
ENCODED IN THE ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAM Sophie Herbst1,

Lorenz Fiedler1, Jonas Obleser1,2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and
Brain Sciences, 2Department of Psychology, University of Lübeck, Germany — The

human brain automatically extracts temporal contingencies from the environment – but are these used to form temporal predictions even in strictly
implicit timing scenarios? Using electroencephalography (EEG), we here
studied the neural mechanisms of temporally predictive processing in an
auditory foreperiod paradigm combined with a forward encoding model
of temporal hazard. Unbeknownst to participants (N=22), we induced a
probabilistic variation of foreperiods in a pitch-discrimination task on a
noise-embedded tone. Foreperiods were block-wise either drawn from a
uniform distribution, yielding a monotonically increasing hazard of tone
occurrence (nonpredictive), or from a normal distribution, yielding a mixture of increasing hazard with a peak in occurrence probability (predictive).
Although predictability manipulations were not detected, unpredictably
short foreperiods yielded slower response times in the predictive condition. In EEG, predictability resulted in enhanced delta (0.5--2 Hz) phase
coherence over posterior channels prior to tone onset. We then constructed
a forward encoding model, using as trial-wise regressors the two different
hypothesized hazard functions. The fit between modeled and measured
time-domain EEG signals allowed us to quantify representation of temporal hazard in the EEG. The nonpredictive monotonically increasing hazard
function was reflected in the EEG signal in all conditions, while the predictive-condition hazard function was encoded relatively best in the predictive-condition EEG signals. This is the first attempt to quantify implicit
temporal predictability from EEG data using a forward encoding model.
Our data show that even if participants are unaware of temporal contingencies in their environment, these are used to form temporal predictions.

ATTENTION: Development & aging
C12
VALIDATING A CHILD-ADAPTED MIND WANDERING TASK Sarah
Elke1, Katherine Maki1, Sandra A Wiebe1; 1University of Alberta — Mind wan-

dering (MW), endogenous thoughts directed away from the current task
and external environment, constitutes up to half of our waking hours. MW
has been studied minimally in children and few child-appropriate tasks to
probe attentional states are available. This study aimed to validate a childadapted Sustained Attention to Response Task (SART) in young adults by
replicating established changes in behavioural measures and decreases in
amplitude of the P3 event-related potential (ERP). SARTs require frequently
(89%) responding to one stimulus type and occasionally (11%) withholding
responses to the other stimulus type. Most SARTs used in the MW literature use single digits as stimuli, but we chose to use simple line-drawings
of animals (frequent stimuli) and household objects (infrequent stimuli) to
appeal to children. Interspersed within these trials are probes about the
participant’s focus of attention. Relatable drawings of a child were used
to probe participants for on-task, externally distracted, and MW states
rather than the written probe questions usually used in SARTs. We found
blocks ending in MW or distracted thought probes were performed less
accurately than blocks ending in on-task probes. At a midline parietal electrode cluster, we found depressed P3 amplitudes in trials preceding MW
probes relative to both distracted and on-task probes, comparable to other

114

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
studies using SART tasks with ERPs. Studying MW in childhood provides
an opportunity to examine the relationship between MW and executive
control at a time when cognitive control is limited and has important implications for education.

C13
AGE-RELATED EFFECTS IN IMPLICIT MOTOR SEQUENCE LEARNING Rebecca J. Campbell1, Nina Farah1, Jin Bo1; 1Eastern Michigan University —

Motor learning can occur both with and without awareness. That is, it can
be acquired explicitly or implicitly. It has been hypothesized that implicit
sequence learning develops early in life and is invariant thereafter (Reber,
1993). Research examining the effect of age on implicit sequence learning
has been both supportive (e.g. Meulemans et al., 1998) and controversial
(e.g. Maybery et al., 1995) to this claim. This discrepancy could be attributed
to variant task difficulties and explicit awareness. Thus, the current study
examined age-related effects on implicit learning of a motor sequence. Ten
typically developing children were recruited, aged 6 and 14 years. A serial
response time task was employed with nine blocks, each containing 10 repetitions of a 12-element sequence. Blocks 1, 2, and 8 contained a baseline
sequence. Blocks 3 to 7, and 9 contained the learning sequence, which had a
different predictive structure than the baseline. Learning was measured as
the response time (RT) differences between Block 7&8 and Block 8&9. One
sample t-tests revealed positive learning on RT difference between Block
7&8 (t = 3.62, p < 0.01) and Block 8&9 (t = 1.91, p < 0.05). Age effects were
found on RT differences in Block 7&8 (r = -.10, p < 0.01). However, age
effect on the RT difference on Block 8&9 was not significant (r = .01, p =
0.06). The preliminary analysis offers mixed support of invariant learning.
Future research will include a larger sample and children with motor difficulties such as autism.

C14
CEREBRAL BLOOD FLOW VELOCITY REVEALS DEFICITS IN SUSTAINED ATTENTION IN OLDER ADULTS Amanda Harwood1, Pamela
Greenwood1, Tyler Shaw1; 1George Mason University — Are older operators

well-suited for high-risk vigilance assignments? People generally have
trouble maintaining sustained attention – or vigilance – for infrequent
events over a long vigil, but the nature of the deficits is not well understood.
A better understanding can be obtained by a consideration of individual
differences in vigilance; the current investigation focuses on healthy aging
in adulthood. While some research suggests no effect of aging on vigilance,
other research has found age-related decline in vigilance performance. That
is important in light of the rising number of older people in the workforce.
Our approach to this question is to examine the effects of healthy aging on
the underpinnings of vigilance performance using a relatively new neurophysiological measure of resource allocation, functional Transcranial Doppler Sonography (fTCD). A sample of young (aged 18-35) and healthy older
(aged 65-80) adults underwent fTCD recording during a one-hour vigilance
task. The older participants were not as adept in vigilance performance as
their younger counterparts. Older adults had higher cerebral blood flow
velocity (CBFV) in both hemispheres, decreased hit rates, increased false
alarm rates, and slower reaction times during the one-hour vigilance task
compared to young adults. We conclude that older adults exert more effort
in vigilance – as measured by changes in CBFV – while underperforming
when compared to their young counterparts. Results are interpreted in
terms of the cognitive resource account of vigilance and theories of cognitive decline in older adults.

C15
DIFFERENTIAL PREFRONTAL INVOLVEMENT IN ENDOGENOUS
CONTROL OF VISUAL ATTENTION: A NEAR-INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY STUDY Jaeah Kim1, Ted J. Huppert2, Erik D. Thiessen1, Anna V.

Fisher1; 1Carnegie Mellon University, 2University of Pittsburgh — Selective sustained attention (SSA) depends on both exogenous factors (e.g., stimulus
salience) and endogenous factors (e.g., internal goals). The Track-It paradigm, in which children track an object moving among a set of distracters,
was developed to study the relative contributions of these factors to attention in a developmental population (Fisher et al., 2013). In the developmental literature, the increasing contribution of endogenous factors to SSA has
been linked to the development of prefrontal areas. However, this connection has not been extensively explored during task performance, largely due

2016 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session C

to a paucity of children-appropriate behavioral methods (which Track-It
addresses) and neuroimaging methods. Near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS)
offers an attractive neuroimaging option for developmental researchers.
Establishing a link between prefrontal activity and endogenous control of
attention, using Track-It and NIRS, will provide a framework for future
work investigating the development of endogenous attentional control and
prefrontal maturation. Towards this goal, we used NIRS to record prefrontal cortex (PFC) activity in 20 adult participants engaged in the Track-It
task. We compared the relative activation of the PFC between two conditions, where one of the conditions required more endogenous control of
attention, predicting that PFC activation would be greater in the condition
requiring more endogenous control. Consistent with this prediction, NIRS
data showed significantly greater oxygenated hemoglobin (HbO) concentrations in the left PFC in the condition that required more endogenous
control. This result is consistent with the theory that the development of
PFC is involved in development of endogenous attentional control.

with inter-individual variation in scale scores, we applied a Multivariate
Distance Matrix Regression (MDMR) approach to multiband resting-state
fMRI data. Consistent with the relatively high correlations between SWAN
and Conners in this sample (inattention: r=0.71; hyperactivity: 0.62), the
results obtained with each of the two scales overlapped in several areas
(e.g., bilateral frontoparietal operculum for inattention and hyperactivity
symptoms). However, regions identified with the SWAN tended to have
greater spatial extent; additionally, the SWAN identified more regions with
associations, including subcortical regions (e.g., pallidum for inattention;
thalamus for hyperactivity) commonly implicated in ADHD. Our results
indicate greater capability of SWAN in representing neural correlates of
inter-individual variation in attentional regulation.

C16
INVESTIGATING THE EFFECTS OF BRAIN STIMULATION ON
VISUAL ATTENTION IN OLDER ADULTS Giorgia Demaria1,2, Méadhbh

Mehdi Abouzari1, Scott Oberg1, Matthew Tata1; 1The University of Lethbridge,
Canada — Problem gambling is thought to be comorbid with attention-defi-

Brosnan1, Anders Petersen3, Paul Dockree1, Iris Wiegand3, Ian Robertson1,
Pascal W. M. Van Gerven2; 1Trinity College Dublin, Ireland, 2Maastricht University,
The Netherlands, 3University of Copenhagen, Denmark — Aging is associated

with a progressive reduction in fundamental processing resources following structural changes in the fronto-parietal areas of the brain. Functional
neuroimaging has shown that cortical reorganisations in aging brains could
support compensatory mechanisms to counteract these losses. In our study,
we used transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to induce neuroplasticity and tested whether this would improve two core processing capacity
functions of the visual system: visual processing speed and visual shortterm memory storage capacity. Based on Bundesen’s theory of visual attention (TVA), which provides a computational model that allows to quantify
subcomponents of visual attention processing, these two functions can be
estimated as independent parameters based on individual’s performance
in a whole report task. Twenty-nine healthy older adults (65-85 years) were
administered sham, right prefrontal cortex (PFC) and right posterior parietal cortex (PPC) stimulation (1 mA) in three sessions, while performing a
lateral TVA whole report task with stimuli being presented either in the
left or right hemifield. We found that right PFC stimulation significantly
improved the processing speed, suggesting that tDCS increased availability
of frontal control functions to support fast information uptake. Concerning
storage capacity, we observed a trend that stimulation improved capacity
for stimuli presented in the left hemifield, but lowered capacity for stimuli presented in the right hemifield. These results support that tDCS can
induce plasticity in older individuals’ fronto-parietal attention network,
and that stimulation effects are specific with regard to the distinct capacity
parameters formalized in the TVA framework.

C17
CAPTURING THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF TRAIT DIFFERENCES
IN ATTENTIONAL REGULATION: THE IMPACT OF QUESTIONNAIRE
DESIGN Lindsay M. Alexander1,2, Maki S. Koyama1,2, David O’Connor1,2, Erica
J. Ho1,2, Michael P. Milham1,2; 1Center for the Developing Brain, Child Mind Institute, New York, NY, 2Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY — Focused on the characterization of symptom severity in Atten-

tion-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), a number of standardized
rating scales have emerged for quantifying domains of attentional dysregulation (i.e., inattention and hyperactivity). Unfortunately, the majority of
these assessments, such as Conners Rating Scale, are based on problem
behaviors. These problem-based scales potentially fail to capture meaningful dimensional variation among non-clinical populations, thereby
skewing the distribution. In contrast, the Strengths and Weaknesses of
ADHD-Symptoms and Normal-Behaviors (SWAN) is designed to capture
the full range of behavior, yielding a normal distribution. The present study
examined commonalities and distinctions in the neural correlates of trait
differences in attentional regulation identified using the SWAN and Conners – two widely used questionnaires in clinical practice. Parents of 69
child participants (ages: 5-17) in the NKI-Rockland Sample completed both
scales. To identify regions for which full-brain connectivity patterns varied

C18
ATTENTION-DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER AND GAMBLING
DO NOT SHARE A COMMON REWARD-LEARNING DYSFUNCTION
cit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). A series of brain electrical responses can
be observed in the electroencephalogram (EEG) and the stimulus-locked
event-related potentials (ERP), when participants in a gambling task are
given feedback regardless of winning or losing the previous bet. Here, we
used a simplified computerized version of the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT)
to assess differences in reinforcement-driven choice adaptation between
unmedicated ADHD patients with or without problem gambling. EEG
was recorded from the participants while they were engaged in the task
which contained two choice options with different net payouts over the
session; a low-risk (50-point) bet with 0.6/0.4 win/loss probability and a
high-risk (100-point) bet with 0.4/0.6 win/loss probability. Learning trend
which shows the ability to acquire and use knowledge of the reward outcomes to obtain a positive financial outcome was not observed in ADHD
gamblers versus nongamblers. Induced theta-band (4-8 Hz) power over
frontal cortex was significantly higher in gamblers versus nongamblers in
all different high-risk/low-risk win/lose conditions. Whereas induced low
alpha (9-11 Hz) power at frontal electrodes could only differentiate highrisk lose between gamblers and nongamblers but not the other three conditions between the two groups. The results indicate that ADHD impairs
attention-induced theta for feedback stimuli in nongamblers compared
with those with problem gambling. These pilot data highlight the need for
studies of ADHD in gambling to elucidate how motivational states are represented during feedback processing.

C19
SUPERIOR LONGITUDINAL FASCICULUS STRUCTURE PREDICTS
ATTENTION SKILLS IN EARLY CHILDHOOD Kari Parsons1, Chris-

tiane Rohr1, Ivy Cho1, Sarah Vinette1, Dennis Dimond1, Tahireh Shams1, Elodie
Boudes1, Siena Achal1, Deborah Dewey1, Signe Bray1; 1University of Calgary
— Visuospatial attention undergoes rapid maturation during early child-

hood, and these changes are accompanied by profound changes in brain
structure. The superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF) is an association fiber
bundle comprised of three branches (I-III; medial to lateral) and is thought
to play a key role in visuospatial attention. In this study, we assessed relationships between SLF fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity
(MD), and attention skills in preschool-age girls. We collected diffusion
tensor images (DTI) and measures of selective, sustained, and executive
attention from 39 typically developing girls aged 4 – 7 years (mean±SD,
age=5.3±0.91; FSIQ=110±11). Probabilistic tractography (ProbtrackX, FSL)
was used to delineate individual SLF branches in each hemisphere. Mean
FA/MD values were extracted and entered into partial correlation analyses, controlling for whole brain FA or MD. We found a positive association
between visual sustained attention and FA in SLF-III. No significant associations were found between FA/MD values and selective attention scores.
Scores on a preschool measure of cognitive flexibility positively correlated
with right SLF, left SLF, and left SLF-III FA values. Although cross-sectional
in nature, this study suggests that in the context of typical early childhood
development, specific attention skills are predicted by higher FA in distinct
branches of the SLF. These findings add to our understanding of the brain
correlates underlying maturation of attentional abilities.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

115

Poster Session C	

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
C20
SOCIAL INFLUENCE SHAPES NEURAL AND BEHAVIORAL REACTIONS TO EMOTIONAL SCENES Rebecca Martin1, Jochen Weber1, Kevin
Ochsner1; 1Columbia University — Emotions, though generated individually,

are strongly influenced by other people. The goal of this study was to examine how other people shape our emotions. We scanned participants while
they viewed and rated how pictures of negative and neutral social scenes
made them feel. Following each rating participants were shown what they
believed to be a group rating from a sample of approximately 100 peers.
After a rest period, participants then rerated the same scenes a second time,
this time without seeing peer ratings. We found a strong main effect of
social influence such that participants changed their second ratings of the
scenes to conform to those of their peers. At the neural level, our findings
replicated previous studies (e.g., Klucharev et al., 2009; Izuma & Adolphs,
2013) demonstrating activation of the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex during
peer conflict (when peers rated items higher or lower than participants),
and this activation increased with the magnitude of conflict. We also found
activity in lateral prefrontal regions commonly associated with emotion
regulation while participants viewed peer ratings. Additionally, we found
that amygdala activation increased during the second rating period when
peers rated those scenes as more negative. Taken together these findings
suggest that social influence modulates neural circuitry associated with
emotional responding.

C21
EXAMINING FEAR GENERALIZATION WITH STEADY-STATE VISUALLY EVOKED POTENTIALS Lea Ahrens1, Andreas Reif2, Paul Pauli1,

Matthias Wieser1; 1University of Würzburg, Germany, 2University of Frankfurt,
Germany — Although many studies suggest that anomalies in fear general-

ization contribute to the etiology of anxiety disorders, little is known about
their underlying mechanisms. As learning experiences have an impact on
the activity of the brain’s sensory neurons, the present study examines fear
generalization in the visual cortex. 67 subjects were conditioned to two
different faces (conditioned stimulus [CS]; CS+: reinforced; CS-: non-reinforced) flickering at a frequency of 12 Hz, which were paired with a fearful face and a shrill scream (unconditioned stimulus [US]). To investigate
fear generalization, four generalization stimuli (GS) were presented, which
were created by morphing the two original faces into each other in 20%
steps. The conditioned response was measured via steady-state visually
evoked potentials (ssVEPs), valence, arousal and US expectancy ratings.
Analyses revealed significant generalization gradients in all ratings with
highest fear responses to the CS+ and a progressive decline of these reactions with increasing similarity to the CS-. In contrast, in the ssVEP signal
the generalization gradient was marginally significant with highest amplitude for the CS+ and lowest for the GS most similar to the CS+, which
might be interpreted as lateral inhibition. The observed dissociation among
explicit and implicit measures points to different functions of behavioral
and sensory cortical processes during fear generalization: While the ratings might reflect an individual’s consciously increased readiness to react
to threat, the lateral inhibition pattern in the occipital cortex might serve to
maximize the contrast among stimuli with and without affective value and
thereby improve adaptive behavior.

C22
POTENTIAL REWARD MODULATES FEEDBACK PROCESSING: AN
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Matthew Miller1, Caroline Meadows1, Philip Gable2, Keith Lohse1; 1Auburn University, 2University of Alabama —

Evaluating feedback is crucial for adaptive behavior. Thus, shedding light
upon how the brain evaluates feedback is of interest. The event-related
potential (ERP) technique has been commonly employed to address this
interest. Specifically, feedback indicating failure may be subtracted from
feedback indicating success (i.e., a difference wave may be created) to
reveal the reward positivity (RewP) ERP component. The RewP is a positive-going component that peaks 250 – 350 ms after feedback delivery, and
it is believed to reflect a phasic increase in dopaminergic signaling from

116

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
the basal ganglia. From both a neurobiological and motivational perspective, RewP amplitude should increase as a function of reward magnitude
(the reward associated with the feedback). This follows because the size of
potential reward should scale with motivation and degree of dopaminergic
signaling. However, evidence in support of this theory is sparse. To address
this shortcoming, we recorded participants’ electroencephalograms while
presenting them with potential monetary rewards ($0.00 - $4.96) pre-trial
for each trial of a reaction time task and then presenting them with valence
feedback post-trial. ERPs time-locked to valence feedback were extracted,
and results revealed RewP amplitude was greater on trials with low or high
magnitude potential reward than zero magnitude potential reward. Moreover, we observed a reliable correlation between potential reward magnitude and RewP amplitude derived from single trial ERPs. Thus, results
indicate RewP amplitude is sensitive to reward magnitude and provide
modest support for the hypothesis that RewP amplitude scales with magnitude.

C23
THREAT-INDUCED AROUSAL AMPLIFIES THE GAIN ON COMPETITION BETWEEN GOAL-RELEVANT AND DISTRACTER-RELATED
MEMORY TRACES David Clewett1, Ringo Huang1, Rico Velasco1, Tae-Ho Lee2,
Mara Mather1; 1University of Southern California, 2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — According to the arousal-biased competition (ABC) model

(Mather & Sutherland, 2011), an increase in arousal, such as during threat,
enhances processing goal-relevant stimuli at the expense of processing distracters. Thus, arousal optimizes cognitive selectivity when it matters most.
Past work demonstrates that arousal differentially modulates brain activity as a function of stimulus priority during perception; however, whether
such arousal-related selectivity relates to differential memory outcomes is
unclear. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we tested
ABC using a monetary incentive encoding task in which participants explicitly prioritized a background scene in attention and memory while ignoring
a transparent foreground object. On some trials, arousal was induced by
threatening to deduct 50 cents from a preset account if participants forgot
loss-cued scenes during a subsequent memory test. A functional localizer
was used to identify category-selective visual regions-of-interest (ROIs)
specialized to process the high priority scenes (parahippocampal place
area; PPA) and lower priority objects (lateral occipital cortex; LOC). Consistent with ABC, threat of monetary punishment enhanced memory of
scenes, while impairing memory of objects. Arousal also intensified competition on trial-by-trial basis, such that participants were even more likely to
remember a scene and forget its corresponding object. As predicted, threat
yielded brain activity patterns consistent with increased neuronal gain,
with arousal strengthening successful scene memory traces in the PPA. In
contrast, lower priority object memory traces were associated with weakened activity in the LOC under arousal. Together these results demonstrate
that threat-induced arousal optimizes memory selectivity via priority-specific effects in sensory cortex.

C24
CONTEXT-DEPENDENT VALENCE CODING Jingwen Jin1, Aprajita
Mohanty1, Christina Zelano2, Jay Gottfried2; 1Stony Brook University, Department
of Psychology, 2Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine — It is well

established that the perception of a stimulus varies with the context within
which it is presented. This contextual modulation holds true not only for
stimulus quality, but also for stimulus valence. For example, an odorant
is perceived as more pleasant or unpleasant depending on the associated
verbal label (e.g., “vomit” vs. “parmesan cheese”). Using high-resolution
olfactory functional imaging and sensory psychophysical approaches, we
examined the contextual modulation of valence coding in olfaction by presenting a nominally neutral odor (isobornyl acetate, IBA) in two different
contexts, once with a pleasant odor (limonene) and once with an unpleasant odor (isovaleric acid). Perceptual valence ratings for the neutral odor
varied with context, IBA was rated as relatively unpleasant (IBA-) when it
was presented with limonene and as relatively pleasant (IBA+) when it is
presented with isovaleric acid (p<.05). Analyses of imaging data revealed
greater activation for IBA- vs. IBA+ in caudolateral orbitofrontal cortex
(OFC) and lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC), regions that have been shown
to index change in stimulus valence from pleasant to unpleasant. In contrast, fMRI activity in the amygdala did not show differences between IBA-

2016 Annual Meeting	
and IBA+. These results will help clarify the contributions of amygdala and
OFC to valence coding in the human brain and provide greater insight into
how relative changes in stimulus pleasantness are indexed by the OFC.

C25
THE NEURAL MECHANISM OF INVOLUNTARY SMILING AFFECTING STROOP TASK PERFORMANCE SukHee Yun1, Soo Young Park1,

Na-Young Shin2, Seung-Koo Lee3, Sanghoon Han1; 1Yonsei University, 2Ewha
Womans University School of Medicine, 3Yonsei University College of Medicine
— A social being occasionally needs to show the opposite of one’s genuine

emotion. This research aims to investigate neural underpinnings of smiling
when it is against the agent’s inner state. The influence of human volition
during affective experience on the subsequent cognitive process would
be discussed. Fifteen participants underwent three steps in fMRI scanner;
emotion arousing period (Negative/ Positive/ Neutral), facial expression
period (Smiling/ Neutral) and Stroop task period. Voluntary smiling was
operationally defined as smiling after a positive stimuli and involuntary
smiling was defined as smiling after a negative stimuli. Reaction time for
Stroop task was faster after voluntary smiling than after involuntary smiling. In the fMRI data, brain regions including bilateral precuneus, PCC and
caudate were activated more by voluntary smiling and involuntary smiling recruited no dominant activation during facial expression. However
bilateral insula, ACC and left HC showed more activation during Stroop
task after involuntary smiling. Machine learning distinguished activation
patterns of two types of smiling within the structural ROIs inspired by
results of GLM analysis. We also investigated the regions showing functional interactivity in response to involuntary smiling. Results suggest that
smiling congruent to one’s inner state evokes brain activities related to the
reward process and self-referential process and benefits subsequent cognitive control. During cognitive control, involuntary smiling resulted in
dominant activities related to the conflict process and negative emotion.
Interactivities across these regions and the results of pattern classifications
within the regions also demonstrate the importance of human volition, in
terms of emotional expression.

C26
THE POSITIVE SIDE OF PAST FAILURES: EXPRESSIVE WRITING
REDUCES CORTISOL LEVELS AND IMPROVES ATTENTIONAL
PERFORMANCE Brynne DiMenichi1, Elizabeth Tricomi1; 1Rutgers University,
Newark — Writing about stressful events has been shown to improve phys-

ical health, decrease anxiety, depression, and rumination, and improve
cognitive functioning. Psychological stress has been found to increase
activation in brain regions associated with self-referential thought, so one
hypothesis is that expressive writing may help to clear negative or intrusive
self-referential thoughts, thereby reducing psychosocial stress. Previously,
our lab found that performance is negatively correlated with activation in
brain areas associated with task-unrelated thoughts, such as the posterior
cingulate and precuneus. However, it remains unknown whether findings
such as these relate to the effect that stress can have on attention. In this
experiment, we studied the effects of psychosocial stress produced by the
Trier Social Stress Test on attentional performance and salivary cortisol;
additionally, we investigated whether an expressive writing task could
reduce the detrimental effects of stress on performance and subsequent
increases to salivary cortisol. We found that asking individuals to write
about a difficult time in their life in which they did not succeed significantly
reduced the response of cortisol and significantly improved performance
on a task requiring persistent sustained attention. Our results suggest
that disclosing about past failures may attenuate one’s cortisol response
to stress, though individual differences may exist. Broadly speaking, our
results also suggest that stress may contribute to task-unrelated thoughts,
which may help to explain previous findings of increases in activation in
attention-related brain regions accompanying decreases in performance.

C27
FEAR EXTINCTION IN VIRTUAL REALITY: THE RETURN OF ANXIETY AFTER REINSTATEMENT Hannah Genheimer1, Marta Andreatta1,

Esther Asan1, Paul Pauli1; 1University of Wuerzburg — Extinction is a process

in which learned associations are reduced by multiple repetition without
the anticipated reinforcement. An animal study demonstrated the facilita-

Poster Session C
tion of fear extinction through vagus nerve stimulation (VNS). In humans,
exposure therapy is frequently used to treat pathological anxiety and
reduce the return of anxiety. We investigated the influence of transcutaneous VNS on the reinstatement in humans after contextual fear conditioning and extinction. Seventy-five healthy participants underwent a 3-Day
paradigm. During acquisition (Day1), participants perceived unpredictable
electric shocks (unconditioned stimuli, US) when guided through one virtual office (anxiety context, CTX+) but never when guided through another
office (safety context, CTX-). During extinction (Day2), no US was delivered and both CTX+ and CTX- were visited again. During reinstatement
(on Day3), participants received three US and then the test phase started.
Participants showed successful context conditioning in startle potentiation
in CTX+ and lower valence and higher arousal and anxiety ratings in CTX+
compared to CTX-. Successful physiological extinction was indicated by
similar startle responses in CTX+ and CTX- at the end of Day2 and weak
extinction in the ratings. On Day3, all participants showed reinstatement in
terms of enhanced startle responses in both offices compared to the neutral
corridor. Reinstatement seemed to activate not only the anxiety memory
trace in CTX+, but also in CTX-, which in terms of evolution, is the safer
mechanism for survival. Additionally, we tried to accelerate extinction and
decrease reinstatement by transcutaneous VNS, but did not find any benefit
in humans.

C28
HIGH GAMMA PREDICTS ENGAGEMENT RATINGS BUT NOT
MENTAL EFFORT RATINGS Bridgid Finn1, Laura Halderman2, Nicole Long3,

J.R. Lockwood4, Michael Kahana5; 1Educational Testing Service, 2Educational
Testing Service, 3University of Oregon, 4Educational Testing Service, 5University of
Pennsylvania — In educational assessment, low engagement is problematic

when tests are low-stakes for students but have significant consequences
for teachers or schools. The current study sought to establish EEG correlates of engagement and to distinguish engagement from mental effort.
Forty university students participated in a simulated GRE session while
EEG was recorded from 128 channels. Participants completed two verbal
and two quantitative GRE test blocks for a total of 40 items each and after
each item, rated either their engagement or mental effort on a scale of 1-6.
Power in 7 frequency bands (delta, theta, alpha, beta, low, medium and
high gamma) was computed for 6 ROIs on the scalp (left/right frontal, left/
right temporal and left/right parietal). Preliminary results suggested that
power in gamma frequency bands indexed differences between high and
low engagement ratings. This pattern was similar but weaker for mental
effort. A cumulative logit model with cross-classified random effects determined that high gamma over left temporal cortex predicted engagement
ratings, while controlling for reaction time and accuracy. However, for
effort ratings, reaction time was the sole significant predictor. These results
suggest high gamma may be a correlate of engagement during complex
cognitive tasks, but not effort. These findings could be used in future studies to objectively measure levels of engagement across different assessment
designs.

C29
COGNITIVE APPRAISAL OF THREAT INFLUENCES STRIATAL
RESPONSE TO NEGATIVE FEEDBACK Christina Bejjani1, Samantha
DePasque2, Elizabeth Tricomi1; 1Rutgers University, Newark, 2University of California, Los Angeles — How individuals appraise the cognitive demands of

their environment may influence their ability to learn from performance
feedback. In our previous study, we found that manipulating the predictability of feedback receipt altered the subjective value and neural processing of negative feedback (Lempert and Tricomi, 2015). A predictable feedback context (“blocked feedback”) evoked a punishment response in the
striatum to negative feedback, whereas an unpredictable feedback context
(“mixed feedback”), which biased participants toward viewing negative
feedback as carrying informational rather than evaluative weight, elicited
greater striatal activity. Using the same paired-associate learning task, this
neuroimaging experiment tested the effects of a competence threat on the
striatal response to negative feedback. Prior to performing the task, participants took a 15-item timed computerized test, ostensibly related to
verbal and reasoning abilities, and received either no score or a false, but
believable, score of the 47th percentile. Regardless of whether participants
received a score, there were individual differences in their appraisal of

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

117

Poster Session C	
the test. Participants who appraised the test as less “demanding” showed
responses replicating our work: negative feedback elicited the typical punishment response in the striatum only for blocked feedback, whereas this
response was attenuated in the mixed feedback condition. However, participants who appraised the test as more “demanding” showed the typical
punishment response in the striatum to negative feedback in both feedback
conditions. These results suggest that individual differences in ability to
cope with a cognitive stressor, as well as contextual influences, may alter
the neural processing of negative feedback.

C30
THE INFLUENCE OF ACUTE PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL STRESS ON
APPETITIVE CONDITIONING Mana Ehlers1, Rebecca Todd1; 1University of
British Columbia — Appetitive conditioning is a form of associative learn-

ing during which neutral stimuli/events become motivationally salient
through pairing with rewards. As an underlying mechanism of habit formation, appetitive learning is adaptive. However, enhanced learning of
stimulus-outcome relations has been related to higher susceptibility for
addictive behaviors. Despite its relevance for human psychopathology,
little is known about effects of environmental factors such as stress on appetitive conditioning. In the present study healthy undergraduates performed
conditioning tasks under stress or control conditions. Stress was induced
using the socially-evaluated cold pressor test. Participants were asked to
put their hand in ice water while their behavior was video recorded and
evaluated; the physiological response was assessed by means of heart rate
and cortisol measurements. In an operant conditioning task participants
learned to squeeze a handgrip in order to gain a reward, while a Pavlovian
paradigm aimed to learn associations of compound stimuli with rewards.
Results revealed that, whereas participants in both stress and control conditions readily learned to squeeze the handgrip to gain a reward, under
stress participants showed reduced grip frequency after the first few trials.
Likewise, preliminary results suggest that acute stress also impairs Pavlovian conditioning. The present study supports the hypothesis that different
forms of appetitive conditioning are altered under acute stress. In particular, operant conditioning may be reduced in the sense that under stress
participants are less willing to work for a reward. The findings may help to
understand how stress influences associative learning related to dysfunctional behaviors such as addiction.

C31
THE ROLE OF THE ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX IN REGULATION OF
INTERPERSONAL SPACE: EVIDENCE FROM FRONTAL LESION
AND FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA PATIENTS Anat Perry1, Sandy
J. Lwi1, Alice Verstaen1, Callum Dewar1, Robert W. Levenson1, Robert T. Knight1;
University of California, Berkeley — Interpersonal distance is central to com-

1

munication and complex social behaviors but the neural correlates of interpersonal distance preferences are not defined. Previous studies suggest that
damage to the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) is associated with impaired interpersonal behavior. To examine whether the OFC is critical for maintaining
appropriate interpersonal distance, we tested two groups of patients with
OFC damage: Patients with OFC lesions and patients with behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia. These two groups were compared to healthy
controls and to patients with lesions restricted to the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex. Only patients with OFC damage showed abnormal interpersonal
distance preferences. The comfortable distances these patients chose with
strangers were significantly closer than controls and resembled distances
normally used with close others. These results shed light on the role of the
OFC in regulating social behavior and may serve as a simple diagnostic tool
for dementia or lesion patients.

2016 Annual Meeting

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding
C32
NEURAL CORRELATES OF THREAT ANTICIPATION IN BLOOD-INJECTION-INJURY PHOBIA Leonie Brinkmann1, Hendrik Poller2, Martin
Herrmann3, Wolfgang Miltner2, Thomas Straube1; 1University of Muenster, 2Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, 3University Hospital Wuerzburg — Blood-injec-

tion-injury (BII) phobia is associated with elevated disgust-sensitivity as
well as specific autonomic and brain responses during processing of phobia-relevant stimuli. In how far these features play a role during anticipation of threat is unclear. In the current fMRI experiment, 16 BII phobics
and 16 non-phobic controls anticipated the presentation of phobia-specific
and neutral pictures. Behavioral data showed that anxiety dominated the
anticipatory period in BII phobics as compared to controls, while both anxiety and disgust were increased during picture presentation. By applying
two different models for the analysis of brain responses to anticipation
of phobia-specific versus neutral stimuli, we found initial and sustained
activation increases in anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), insula, lateral and
medial prefrontal cortex (PFC), thalamus and visual areas, as well as initial
hyperactivation of the amygdala for BII phobics in comparison to healthy
controls. Correlation analysis revealed a relationship between sustained
activation in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) and increased
symptom severity of BII phobics. Results suggest that BII phobics recruit a
typical neural defense network during threat anticipation, with anxiety as
the predominant emotion.

C33
EMOTIONAL PROCESSING AFTER UNILATERAL INSULAR
DAMAGE Olga Schröder1, Julia Kürten1, Nico Melzer1, Wolfgang H.R. Miltner2,
Thomas Straube1; 1University of Muenster, 2Friedrich Schiller University Jena — In

neuroimaging research, the insular cortex (IC) has been assigned a crucial
role in emotional experience, in particular with respect to processing of
disgust-related signals. Specific deficits in disgust recognition have been
found after isolated left or bilateral insular damage in a few single case
studies. Other groups reported selective hypersensitivity to disgust in a
patient with a right IC stroke or more general impairments of emotion recognition after both left- and right-sided insular resections. We addressed
this debate of (lateralized) insular specificity regarding disgust processing
by investigating a group of seven patients with left- (n = 4) or right-hemispheric (n = 3) insular injury in relation to 17 matched healthy controls. All
subjects underwent affective screening questionnaires, a facial expression
recognition task and an emotion-inducing task. Specific emotion analyses
were premised on the computation of composite scores for each emotion
across all methods, with higher values indicating hyper- and lower values
representing hyposensitivity to an emotion. Patients with left-hemispheric
lesions showed lower disgust-related scores than the controls, with significant impairments of disgust processing given in three patients. By contrast, patients with right-hemispheric insular damage tended to higher disgust-related scores than the controls; significant hypersensitivity to disgust
was found in one patient, thus confirming the possible occurrence of this
phenomenon after right-sided insular injury. This pattern of findings was
not ascertained in other basic emotions. Our results suggest specific insular
involvement in disgust processing, with lateralized processes contributing
to the recognition and experience of disgust.

C34
MODULATING EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE WITH TRANSCRANIAL
DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION AND MEDITATION TRAINING: A
PILOT STUDY Charles Robinson1, Mikaela Armenta1, Angela Combs1, Melanie
Lamphere1, Gabrielle Garza1, James Neary1, Janet Wolfe1, Aaron Jones1, Mike
Trumbo1, Michael Hunter1, Katie Witkiewitz1, Vince Clark1; 1University of New
Mexico — The literature on emotional perspective-taking (empathy) sug-

gests possible targets for enhancement via neurostimulation including the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC; Weng et al., 2013) and right temporoparietal junction (rTPJ; Santiesteban et al., 2012). However, it is unclear
which electrode placement is beneficial for enhancing empathy-building

118

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting	
meditation. In this study, we investigated using loving-kindness meditation training (LKM) with transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)
to alter the emotional perception of images from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS; Bradley, 2014). Eighty-eight undergraduates
received anodal stimulation to the rTPJ or left dlPFC using an extracephalic
cathode at 0.1 or 2.0 milliamps(mA) and in tandem with an LKM-instructional recording or control recording for 30mins. Participants completed an
IAPS task pre-post, rating 60 images on a 1-9 scale measuring affect (negative-vs.-positive). Although there was no omnibus main-effect between
the 0.1mA and 2.0mA conditions (p=0.824; d=0.10), the interaction of
meditation type*electrode placement was significant (p=0.004) with subjects practicing LKM and receiving rTPJ stimulation rating images more
positively, post-training. The contrast of electrode placements among LKM
participants was also significant (p=0.001; d=0.98) suggesting rTPJ stimulation produced more positive changes in affect than dlPFC stimulation.
Contrasting LKM and control reached significance (rTPJ>dlPFC; p=0.001;
d=1.04) among rTPJ-stimulated but not dlPFC-stimulated participants,
suggesting LKM was effective specifically for rTPJ-treated meditators.
Marginal trends were also observed for those receiving 2.0mA of current:
(LKM>Control; p=0.07;d=0.53 & rTPJ>dlPFC; p=0.096;d=0.47). These findings show an effect of meditation and suggests a differential impact of electrode placement however further research should include neuroimaging to
better-characterize these results.

C35
GREATER VISUAL ATTENTION TO SUFFERING IN COMPASSION
IS ASSOCIATED WITH GREATER CENTROMEDIAL AMYGDALA
ACTIVATION AND PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR Helen Weng1,2, Regina
Lapate2, Diane Stodola2, Richard Davidson2; 1University of California, San Francisco, 2University of Wisconsin-Madison — Compassion meditation training is

hypothesized to increase attention to suffering in order to motivate prosocial behavior. It is currently unknown how compassion training impacts
visual attention to suffering and the neural mechanisms associated with
eye-tracking patterns. Participants were randomized to compassion (N=28)
or reappraisal training (N=28), and practiced for 2 weeks via the Internet.
Brain activation was measured with fMRI both pre and post-training while
participants implemented their assigned regulation strategies to images of
social suffering or non-suffering. Eye-tracking was collected in the scanner,
and percentage looking time was computed for emotional areas of interest in a subset of participants with high quality data (Compassion N=12,
Reappraisal N=12). Prosocial behavior was measured post-training using
the Redistribution Game, where personal funds could be spent to redistribute money after witnessing an unfair interaction. The Compassion group
increased their visual attention to suffering, such that they looked longer
at suffering vs. non-suffering compared to the Reappraisal group (F1,22 =
8.47, p < 0.01). Across the entire sample, visual preference for suffering was
associated with greater activation in the right centromedial complex of the
amygdala (CeA; r22 = 0.45, p < 0.05). In addition, visual behavior revealed
prosocial motives where individuals who looked longer at suffering vs.
non-suffering spent more in the Redistribution Game (r15 = 0.41, p = 0.05,
1-tailed). These results suggest that compassion increases visual attention
to suffering and prosocial behavior through engagement of the CeA, which
is involved in allocation of attention to stimuli of high significance.

C36
THE TIME COURSE OF BEAUTY: COMPARING PERCEPTUAL AND
PHYSIOLOGICAL MEASURES OF AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE Lauren
Vale1, Gernot Gerger2, Helmut Leder2, Denis G. Pelli1; 1New York University, New
York, NY USA, 2University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria — When we experience

beauty, do our facial muscles mirror perceived pleasure? How quickly
do these responses decay? Facial muscle activity displays our emotions
and has been used to categorize valence, arousal, and aesthetic responses.
However, little is known of the time course of these responses and how
they relate to perceived pleasure. So we recorded pleasure using our smartphone app (emotiontracker.com) and facial muscle activity using facial
electromyography (fEMG) of corrugator supercilii (frown) and zygomaticus major (smile) muscles continuously while people looked at images for 8
s and a further 30 s after the image disappeared. At the end of each trial, we
asked participants if they felt beauty (definitely yes, perhaps yes, perhaps
no, or definitely no). We fit an exponential function with two parameters,

Poster Session C
α(amplitude) and τ(time constant of decay) to the data after stimulus offset.
When participants reported definitely feeling beauty, they reported feeling
prolonged pleasure (τ= 378±14 s) and showed a brief zygomaticus response
(τ= 8 ±2 s). When participants reported definitely not feeling beauty, they
showed a prolonged corrugator response (τ= 360±134 s). Overall, we find
felt beauty correlates +92% with pleasure, +11% with zygomaticus activity,
and —25% with corrugator activity. After an image disappears, the time
course of decay for pleasure and corrugator activity is very long, about 350
s, and merely 8 s for zygomaticus activity. Thus, experienced beauty lingers
perceptually and physiologically, but only in the frown and not the smile.

C37
NEURAL CORRELATES OF POST TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER
IN MILD TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Mark Varvaris1, Theresa Teslovich1,

Priya Santhanam1, Jennifer Pacheco1, Terry R. Oakes1, Gerard R. Reidy1,2, Lindell
K. Weaver3,4; 1National Intrepid Center of Excellence (NICoE) Bethesda, MD, 2Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Bethesda, MD, 3Intermountain
LDS Hospital and Intermountain Medical Center Salt Lake City, UT, 4University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT — Post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a major

concern for military personnel. Current studies suggest 12%-18% of service members will experience PTSD symptoms; a traumatic brain injury
(TBI) may increase this probability. To investigate the relationship between
mild TBI and PTSD among military personnel a group of TBI patients
with PTSD (n=23) was compared to a group of TBI patients without PTSD
(n=20) using functional and structural magnetic resonance imaging. All
participants were males and in all analyses age was used as a covariate.
To identify the default-mode network, an independent component analysis was conducted using FSL’s MELODIC. Measures of cortical surface
area and fractional anisotropy (FA) were extracted from within the network in T1-structural and diffusion weighted imaging, respectively. An
independent sample t-test showed an effect of PTSD on network synchrony
[t(41)=2.909, p=0.006] with greater synchrony in the TBI group without
PTSD. The MANCOVA comparing cortical surface area in regions of the
default-mode network showed a significant effect of PTSD [F(1,41)= 12.112,
p=0.001], with the non-PTSD group showing relatively greater surface area.
Additionally, there was a significant difference in FA values [F(1,41)=48.494
p<0.001], with greater FA observed in the non-PTSD group. Lower FA
values have been shown to reflect microstructural changes in white matter,
while gyral complexity and surface area increase in response to neural
stress as a mechanism for retaining functional connectivity. A decrease in
FA following TBI may prevent these key structural interactions leading to
decreased function and susceptibility to or enhanced symptoms of PTSD.

C38
EFFECTS OF EMOTIONAL INTENSITY ON INVOLUNTARY
FACE-PROCESSING: A SIMULTANEOUS EEG-FMRI STUDY Miriam
Müller-Bardorff1, Maximilian Bruchmann1, Leonardo Tozzi2, Martin Mothes-Lasch1, Wolfgang Miltner3, Thomas Straube1; 1University of Münster, 2University of Dublin, 3University of Jena — An increasing number of EEG-informed

fMRI studies investigates the neural basis of face-specific processing in the
brain. The present simultaneous EEG-fMRI study aimed at identifying neuronal networks involved in load-dependent processing of faces varying in
emotional expression and emotional intensity. To this end, we simultaneously measured EEG and fMRI responses elicited by task-irrelevant neutral, happy (low, high), and angry (low, high) facial expressions, while participants judged the length of two horizontal bars presented superimposed
on the facial expressions. The focal bars task implemented two difficulty
levels (low vs. high load) to test for load-dependent intensity-processing.
We found intensity-driven modulations of the N170 component (EEG analysis) as well as intensity-driven modulations of BOLD responses in the fusiform gyrus (fMRI analysis). These modulations by emotional intensity did
not depend on perceptual load. Trial-by-trial variations in the face-specific
N170 component correlated with face-specific BOLD responses, especially
in the fusiform gyrus. Our study adds new evidence to the assumed association between N170 responses and activation in face-specific brain regions.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

119

Poster Session C	

C39
BODILY REACTIONS WHILE READING EMOTIONAL WORDS CAN
SIGNIFY VALENCE AND PERSONAL REFERENCE: EVIDENCE
FROM FACIAL MUSCLE ACTIVITY, HEART RATE, AND SKIN CONDUCTANCE Patrick Weis1,3,4, Cornelia Herbert2,3,5; 1George Mason University,
2

Ulm University, Germany, 3University of Tuebingen, Germany, 4International Max
Planck Research School Tuebingen, Germany, 5University Hospital Tuebingen,
Germany — Findings in social, cognitive and affective neuroscience sug-

gest that emotion and language are closely related. The nature of the link
between cognitive functions and bodily responses is subject to controversy.
Here, a multimodal paradigm to investigate emotional word processing
from a whole-body perspective is presented. The paradigm uses word
phrases that are related to own or other people‘s emotions. Subjects had
to intuitively judge emotional valence of the word phrases while bodily
responses were recorded. The word phrases consisted of a pronoun and a
noun and were presented on a computer screen. Nouns varied in valence
(positive/neutral/negative), pronouns in self-reference (self/other/negation), resulting in a 3*3 design. Physiological recording included skin
conductance (EDA), facial expression (fEMG), and heart rate (HR). It was
found that pronoun-noun-phrases with positive or negative nouns were
evaluated faster than pronoun-noun-phrases with neutral nouns. Self-related positive pronoun-noun phrases (e.g. my happiness) were judged and
responded to the quickest. Physiologically, emotional pronoun-noun pairs
elicited an increase in phasic heart rate compared to phrases of neutral
meaning. The same pattern seemed to emerge for electrodermal activity
while fEMG varied as a function of both, stimulus valence and self-reference. Facial responses were most pronounced for other-related word
phrases. Reaction time data is interpreted to be in accordance with the
self-serving attributional bias present in Western culture. Physiological
data supports the embodied nature of emotions in language. However,
fEMG data indicates facial musculature not only to embody emotion but
furthermore to be sensitive for personal reference.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Other
C40
GENDER DIFFERENCES IN RESPONSE TO NATURALISTIC
VERSUS ARTIFICIAL NOISE STRESS: BEHAVIORAL AND NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FROM A SPATIAL N-BACK TASK
Martin Paczynski1, Raja Parasuraman1; 1George Mason University — The current

study sought to answer the question whether more naturalistic auditory
stressors (e.g. jackhammer) elicit similar behavioral and neural changes as
more commonly used artificial auditory stressors (e.g. white noise). Participants completed four blocks of a spatial 2-back task, two in silence, two
with noise presented through headphones. Three to nine second bursts
of noise (~82dB) were randomly presented throughout each sound block.
Two types of noises were used: artificial or naturalistic. Order of blocks
was counterbalanced across participants though silent and noise blocks
always alternated. Noise blocks lead to significantly higher arousal than
silent blocks. For male, but not female, participants, both types of noise
led to a significant increase in reaction time. Overall, both types of noise
led to a decrease in performance accuracy. Importantly, for female, but not
male, participants, state anxiety correlated with accuracy (higher anxiety,
higher accuracy) but only for the silent and naturalistic noise conditions.
Both male and female participants showed similar bilateral increases in
blood oxygenation over the course of silent blocks as well as similar initial decreases in blood oxygenation for white noise blocks. However, only
male participants showed a similar decrease in oxygenation for naturalistic noise. A similar pattern was observed for total blood volume. These
findings may help explain the inconsistent literature on gender differences
in response to stress. In the current study, gender based differences were
observed for naturalistic noise stress but not white noise. Implications for
past and future research on effects of stress are discussed.

120

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

C41
NEUROANATOMICAL INDICATORS OF ALTRUISTIC CONCERN

Jason Hubbard1, Ulrich Mayr1, William Harbaugh1; 1University of Oregon — Pre-

vious work has established candidate neural mechanisms that describe
differences in altruistic motivation. We sought to extend this work by
leveraging a moderately large sample size (N = 80) and establishing finegrained indicators of individual differences in altruism. In a first step, we
used structural equation modeling to establish a common latent factor
reflecting genuine altruistic concern for others, across measures from personality psychology, behavioral economics, and neuroscience. Using this
latent factor, we attempted to further characterize individual differences
in altruism based on variation in brain structure. Based on previous work
linking small amygdala volume with psychopathic traits, and conversely,
large amygdala volume with “extreme altruism”, we focused on amygdala
volume as a potential predictor of altruism. Consistent with this work, right
amygdala volume was positively predictive of altruistic concern as captured by our latent factor (t = 2.6, p < .05). Individual comparisons found it
was predictive of individual self-reported empathic traits (t = 2.3, p < .05)
and of brain responses to observing monetary transfers to charities (t = 2.6,
p < .05). Further, activation within the left amygdala was also predictive of
charitable donations in a laboratory task (t = 3.5, p < .001). These findings
support previous work highlighting the amygdala’s involvement in altruistic motivation, and importantly extend this work by showing a continuous
relationship within a single sample. Together, findings are consistent with
the notion of a common, general factor related to altruistic concern that, at
least in part, can be attributed to neuroanatomical differences.

C42
OLFACTORY AVERSIVE LEARNING ENHANCES SHORT-TERM AND
LONG-TERM PERCEPTUAL DISCRIMINATION Yuqi You1, Lucas Novak1,
Wen Li1; 1Florida State University — Recent evidence indicates that aversive

associative learning improves perceptual and sensory cortical discrimination of the conditioned stimuli (CS), but the long-term perceptual and
memory effects are poorly understood. By pairing neutral olfactory CS with
either highly disgusting or neutral stimuli (pictures and sounds combined),
we measured learning-related changes in behavioral and fMRI data across
three phases: before, immediately after, and one-week after conditioning.
Aversive conditioning was evidenced by elevated risk ratings towards CS+
relative to CS- both immediately and one-week after learning (F(1,31)=9.14,
p=.005). A Phase-by-CS interaction on olfactory discrimination (between
the CS+/CS- odor and its similar morph mixture; F(1,36)=3.25, p=.08) further indicated enhanced discriminability of CS+ odor from before to immediately after learning (t(36)=2.02, p=.05), rising from at-chance (p=.22) to
above-chance (p<.001) levels; however, no such perceptual change was
observed in CS- (p=.55). Moreover, this effect was paralleled by a Phaseby-CS interaction on response time (RT; F(1,36)=3.95, p=.06), demonstrating faster RTs towards CS+ from before to immediately after learning
(t(36)=2.01, p=.05) and no effect on CS- (p=.69). Critically, these learning
effects persisted one-week later, evinced by similar Phase-by-CS interactions mentioned above (Discrimination accuracy: F(1,32)=5.84, p=.02) and
RT:F(1,32)=3.57, p=.07). Replicating recent findings of enhanced perceptual
discrimination of CS+ immediately after aversive learning, these results
further demonstrated long-term olfactory aversive associative memory and
its lasting impacts on perception. Multivariate fMRI analysis is underway
to confer additional insights into learning-induced changes in ensemble
neural activity in the sensory cortex over time.

C43
INCREASES IN INTRINSIC NETWORK CONNECTIVITY FOLLOWING ANTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBE RESECTION: A PRE-TO-POSTOPERATIVE LONGITUDINAL STUDY Matthew Sutterer1, Joel Bruss1,

Michelle Voss1, Daniel Tranel1, Matthew Howard1; 1The University of Iowa —

Despite intense study, our understanding of how the brain recovers in
the face of neurological injury, and proceeds through phases of recovery,
remains limited. Using a within-subjects approach, we characterized functional networks and behavior before, shortly after, and months after surgical resection of the medial and anterior temporal lobe. Resting-state fMRI
data were collected in 14 patients undergoing surgery for medically intractable epilepsy at three time points: one month prior to surgery, 2-8 weeks

2016 Annual Meeting	
following resection of the anterior temporal lobe, and 6 months or more
after surgery. Functional connectivity analyses were employed to assess
preoperative to postoperative changes in the salience, fronto-executive,
default mode networks, as well as control areas in primary sensory areas.
We hypothesized that focal resection of the anterior temporal lobe would
selectively affect the salience and default mode networks, as these networks
include resected areas in the amygdala, temporal pole, and hippocampus.
The fronto-executive network does not involve medial temporal lobe areas,
and was predicted to be unaffected by focal damage. We observed significant increases in the connectivity of nodes in the salience network from
preoperative baseline to acute postoperative assessments, and a significant
increase in connectivity from acute postoperative to chronic postoperative
assessment. Our results suggest early increased recruitment of non-resected salience network regions following focal damage to the medial temporal lobe that continues into the chronic epoch of recovery. This pattern of
network changes might reflect a release of function following surgery and
could shed light on spontaneous recovery and reorganization processes.

C44
SOCIAL PROBLEM SOLVING IN ADULTS WITH ATTENTION DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER Patrizia Thoma1, Nathalie Marcinkowski1,
Stephanie Sonnenburg1, Marc-Andreas Edel2, Boris Suchan1; 1Ruhr University
Bochum, 2LWL University Hospital, Ruhr University Bochum — Patients with

attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) show impaired social cognition, particularly in terms of deficient theory of mind. However, little is
known about how this translates into potential behavioural impairments
in social situations. In particular, the ability to handle difficult interpersonal situations and its relationship with trait empathy and higher order
cognitive functions have not been investigated in adults with the disorder. In the current study, we examined 17 adult patients diagnosed with
ADHD and 19 matched healthy controls with a battery of scenario-based
tests assessing the ability to solve interpersonal problems in an ecologically
valid manner. Furthermore, patients were assessed on standard measures
of trait empathy, social anxiety and executive functions. In the social problem solving task, patients generated significantly fewer optimal solutions
that were both socially sensitive and practically effective than healthy controls. However, they did not differ with regard to the number of solutions
that were only socially sensitive, only practically effective or irrelevant.
Furthermore, ADHD patients showed increased trait personal distress on a
standard empathy questionnaire as well as increased social anxiety scores
relative to healthy controls. In the patients, increased social anxiety was
related to a diminished capacity to generated optimal solutions for social
problems. There were no significant associations with executive function or
trait empathy. The result pattern points towards impaired social problem
abilities in patients with ADHD which should be addressed in treatment.

C45
MODULATING SOCIAL ATTENTION THROUGH NONINVASIVE
BRAIN STIMULATION TO THE ANTERIOR PARACINGULATE
CORTEX Eva Wiese1, Raja Parasuraman1, Amanda Hanelli1, Eric J. Blumberg1;
1

George Mason University — Attending to where others look (i.e., gaze-following) is a fundamental mechanism of social cognition and is modulated
by adopting the intentional stance to the gazing agent; in particular, attentional orienting to gaze direction is enhanced when agents are believed to
be intentional (e.g., human) versus mechanistic (e.g., robot). Adopting the
intentional versus the mechanistic stance is associated with stronger activation in the anterior paracingulate cortex (aPCC), a structure that is part of the
brain’s mentalizing network. In one experiment, we investigated whether
stimulating aPCC with transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)
increases the degree to which an agent’s gaze is followed and whether this
effect is different for human versus robot agents. Electrodes were placed on
EEG scalp locations FZ and F9 following current modeling predictions of
optimal current flow through the aPCC. Participants performed a gaze-following task with a human and a robot agent at two different time-points:
once at pre-stimulation (as baseline measure) and again while either being
stimulated or under sham. Data showed that stimulating aPCC increases
gaze-following for the human agent, but decreases gaze-following for the
robot agent. Interestingly, this effect was only observed for participants,
who showed stronger gaze-following for the human agent at pre-stimulation, but not for those who showed stronger gaze-following for the robot

Poster Session C
agent. The findings suggest that participants who show top-down control
of gaze-following at baseline benefit from stimulation of aPCC, while those
who do not recruit medial-prefrontal areas at baseline do not seem to be
affected by stimulation.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring &
inhibitory control
C46
NEURAL CIRCUITRIES OF RESPONSE SELECTION REVEALED
BY A FLANKER TASK WITH AVERTED EYE-GAZES SERVING AS
RESPONSE CUES Hsin-Ju Lee1, Wen-Jui Kuo1; 1National Yang-Ming University — The Eriksen flanker task is an experimental task often used to inves-

tigate cognitive control such as response selection. It can reveal one of our
essential, central abilities, i.e., the ability to select among possible responses
to a given stimulus or situation which were learned through S-R associations. Neuroimaging evidence indicates that, during the task, the parietal cortex was activated to maintain representations of possible responses/S-R associations. Lateral prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices were
engaged by the need of selection among competing response alternatives.
Since humans are developmentally socialized, we are sensitive to others’
eye-gaze status and often interpret others’ intention or attention focus by
their eye-gaze direction. We were interested in if there is influence when
we constructed the task by using human eye-gaze, i.e., the left-averted and
right averted eye-gazes for the left and right response cues and straight
eye-gaze for the neutral condition. The behavioral data indicated that congruency effect from either the eye-gaze version or the traditional version
flanker task was significant. However, BOLD activation patterns of the two
versions differed. In the comparison of incongruent vs. congruent condition, while the traditional version activated brain regions similar to previous studies’ findings, i.e. the fronto-parietal areas, the eye-gaze version perturb different brain networks including the prefrontal cortex, the superior
temporal sulcus, and the left anterior superior temporal gyrus. Brain areas
associated with social cognition seemed to be more engaged to support
response selection in a flanker task with social stimuli, i.e., the eye-gaze.

C47
EVALUATING THE EFFECTS OF MINDFULNESS PRACTICES IN
YOUNG CHILDREN USING ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MEASURES
OF ATTENTION AND SALIVARY MEASURES OF STRESS Trey Avery1,2,
Meriah DeJoseph1, Karen Froud1; 1Teachers College, Columbia University,
2
Haskins Laboratories — Attention and executive functions are critical for

school success and can be improved with intervention. Exposure to chronic
stress is often associated with deficits that without intervention will negatively affect school performance. Mindfulness-based interventions have
been shown to improve attention and reduce stress in adults, but there is
little empirical data on the effects of these practices and programs on young
children. While most studies using surveys and behavioral measures show
positive effects associated with school-based mindfulness programs, the
underlying mechanisms that produce changes in behavior are largely
inferred from research on adults, leaving open countless questions about
age of initiation and the format, dosage and emphasis of programs. Using
event-related potential responses to the Attention Network Test for Children (ANT-C), multiple samples and markers of stress found in saliva and
behavioral measures, we examine the effects of mindfulness-based interventions on children ages five to seven. We found significant group differences in executive attention measured by the amplitude and topography
of the P3 event-related potential associated with target congruency evaluation in the ANT-C. Saliva measures indicate differences in stress responses
between groups, with the mindfulness group having consistently lower
cortisol levels but increasing levels of alpha amylase, possibly a result of
more task related engagement. Together, these data suggest multiple positive effects associated with mindfulness practices in young children.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

121

Poster Session C	

C48
BALANCE BETWEEN THE FRONTOPARIETAL AND THE REWARD
SYSTEM REGULATES SEXUAL BEHAVIOR Pin-Hao Chen1, Dylan
Wagner2, William Kelley1, Todd Heatherton1; 1Dartmouth College, 2Ohio State
University — Based on the balance model, the imbalance between the execu-

tive control and the reward system leads to self-regulatory failures (Heatherton & Wagner, 2011). Self-regulatory failures are a key cause in several
contemporary societal problems, such as obesity, drug abuse, and risky
sexual behavior. In this study, we examined whether individual differences
in sexual activity can be predicted based on the balance between the two
systems. Twenty-five male heterosexual participants first watched a series
of brief erotic films and then performed an attractive/unattractive go-nogo
task that required them to withhold responses to images of nude female
pictures. We computed the balance score for each participant based on the
difference between the mean z-score extracted from hubs within the frontoparietal network and the mean z-score from hubs within the reward network for those trials when participants made disinhibition errors to attractive targets. We found that individuals with the highest balance scores
(indicating greater frontoparietal compared to reward) made the fewest
disinhibiton errors when viewing attractive targets. These participants also
reported the lowest scores on the SOI-R scale, indicating that they have
the highest tendency to regulate sexual desire and behavior. These findings
suggest that the balance between the frontoparietal and the reward system
may play a role in successfully regulating sexual behavior.

C49
SEX-SPECIFIC DIFFERENCES IN BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL
CORRELATES OF FORETHOUGHT IN YOUTH WITH ADHD Helene
Poissant1, Lucile Rapin2, Stéphanie Chenail3, Adrianna Mendrek3; 1Universite
du Quebec a Montreal, 2Douglas Hospital, 3Bishops University, 4Bishops University — Introduction: Most studies investigating neurocognition in attention

deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) has been conducted on male participants. Very few studies examined sex differences in ADHD. Deficit in
forethought seems particularly important as children with ADHD often fail
to adequately use previous information in order to prepare for upcoming
responses. Our main goal was to assess sex-specific differences in behavioral and neural correlates of forethought in youth with ADHD. Methods:
21 TD youth:23 youth with ADHD were asked to judge whether two pictures told a congruent or an incongruent story. Reaction time, performance
accuracy, and cerebral activations were recorded during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Results: Although no differences in performance of the forethought task were found between boys and girls when
controlling for age, significant sex-specific differences were apparent in the
patterns of cerebral activations. Relative to the same-sex TD participants,
boys with ADHD had extensive bilateral frontal and parietal hypo-activations, while girls with ADHD demonstrated more scattered and circumscribed hypo-activations in the right temporal, parietal, frontal and cerebellar regions. Discussion: Present results revealed that both boys and girls
with ADHD exhibit diminished cerebral activations during a forethought
task. Most regions of under-activations observed in the present study were
consistent with previous reports in individuals with ADHD during performance of executive tasks. Nevertheless, the pattern of deficits was different
in boys and girls, suggesting a different neurocognitive strategy utilized by
the two sexes. This emphasizes the importance of including both males and
females in the cognitive and neuroimaging investigations of ADHD.

C50
CONGRUENCY SEQUENCE EFFECTS: WHAT GOOD ARE THEY?
Kenneth Paap1, Oliver Sawi2, Hunter Myuz3; 1San Francisco State University, 2University of Connecticut, 3New Mexico State University — Congruency sequence

effects (CSEs) are robust context effects observed in many choice RT tasks
that include both congruent and incongruent trials. The defining pattern is
that interference effects are smaller when the previous trial is incongruent
compared to when the previous trial is congruent. Grundy and Bialystok
(2015), reported smaller CSEs for bilinguals compared to monolinguals in
a flanker task and concluded that bilinguals are better than monolinguals
at disengaging attention. Reanalyses of nine different datasets from two
different laboratories and with much larger sample sizes show that these
language-group differences do not replicate in either flanker or Simon

122

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
tasks. Furthermore CSEs in standard interference tasks likely result from
bottom-up learning and memory effects and not from top-down cognitive-control effects. The present results are also consistent with many previous reports indicating that typical CSEs have comparable costs (slower
responses when an incongruent trial is followed by a congruent one) and
benefits (faster responses when an incongruent trial is followed by another
incongruent trial). Thus, from a system perspective that is concerned with
improving overall performance, small versus large CSEs are usually neither advantageous nor disadvantageous. Rather than being the paragon of
cognitive control CSEs may have little to do with inhibitory-control ability,
but something to do with making micro-adjustments in temporal preparation for the next trial.

C51
AN FMRI COMPARISON OF BILINGUALS AND MONOLINGUALS
DURING THE SIMON TASK: EVIDENCE FOR DIFFERENT CONTROL
PROCESSES Kelly A. Vaughn1, Brandin Munson1, Maya R. Greene1, Aurora I.

Ramos-Nuñez1, Arturo E. Hernandez1; 1University of Houston — Current models

of bilingual language production suggest that inhibition plays an important role. Experience with inhibition during daily language use may train
the brain for other inhibition tasks; some studies have found that bilingual
children and older adults show enhanced inhibition over monolinguals on
the Simon task. Although behaviorally this advantage in young adults is
not supported, neuroimaging studies suggest that bilinguals and monolinguals at this age may still be processing these types of tasks differently.
The current study is the first to compare bilingual and monolingual performance and fMRI activity during the Simon task. Behavioral and fMRI data
from 26 Spanish-English bilinguals and 23 English monolinguals matched
on gender, age, and socioeconomic status were analyzed in this study. Both
groups performed with high accuracy, though the monolinguals demonstrated significantly faster response times. The groups did not differ on the
Simon effect, a measure of difference in response time for trials that do
and do not require inhibition (congruent and incongruent, respectively).
The fMRI results suggest that bilinguals activate control areas including
the cingulate gyrus and inferior parietal lobule more than the monolinguals during the congruent condition, but monolinguals activate control
areas including the supplementary motor area and cingulate more than
bilinguals during the incongruent condition. These results suggest that
the behavioral data alone do not tell the whole story; bilingual and monolingual adults complete inhibition tasks using different neural processes.
Future studies should seek to connect these differences directly to bilingual
and monolingual language experiences.

C52
DYNAMIC NETWORK CONNECTIVITY AND COGNITIVE CONTROL

Derek M. Smith1, Christine A. Godwin1, Joshua K. Grooms1,2, Shella D. Keilholz1,2,
Eric H. Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2Emory University — Both

the connectivity between functional brain networks and prestimulus activity have been associated with enhanced performance on cognitive control
tasks (Kelly et al., 2008: Weissman et al., 2006). Research has shown that
the dynamics of the interaction between the default mode network (DMN)
and the task positive network (TPN) is related to performance on a sustained attention task (Thompson et al., 2013). Analysis of the connectivity
dynamics demonstrated that faster reaction times were associated with
greater anticorrelation between these networks before detected targets. To
better understand the role of dynamic connectivity in control processing
subjects completed the flanker and the global/local tasks during two fMRI
sessions. Both tasks had long intertrial intervals (averaging 18.8 s & 18.2 s).
Images were captured using a multiband sequence with a 700 millisecond
repetition time. A sliding window correlation analysis was used. Changes
in functional connectivity were charted by calculating network correlations
for 12 second sliding time windows centered at each instance of the stimulus. It was predicted that faster performance especially for incongruent
trials would be associated with more anticorrelation between the DMN
and the TPN. Results support this prediction with a seed based network
method. In addition, to the observation of conflict related effects in the
anterior cingulate cortex the sliding window method was applied to ICA
defined networks and was compared to the seed based results. These findings show that dynamic connectivity analysis has the potential to open a
new dimension of control research.

2016 Annual Meeting	

C53
IMPACT OF STRENUOUS EXERCISE ON COGNITIVE CONTROL,
AN EMG STUDY ON CYCLE ERGOMETER Celine Ramdani1, Emmanuel

Sagui2, Karen Davranche3, Franck Vidal3, Thierry Hasbroucq3; 1Institut de recherche biomédicale des armées, Brétigny sur Orge, 2Hôpital d’Instruction des Armées
Laveran, Marseille, 3Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, Marseille — In strenuous

exercises, optimal performance depends on the subject’s ability to simultaneously deal with cognitive and physical demands. The present study
aimed to evaluate the impact of a strenuous exercise on cognitive control
and more specifically on error monitoring. To this aim, 16 healthy volunteers performed a conflict reaction time task on a cycle ergometer: on the
control condition, the resistance was set up at a 15W constant output. The
resistance was automatically regulated to ensure constant power output
independent of pedal frequency. On the exercise condition, the intensity
was setup above the first ventilatory threshold (VT1 +5%) for about 25
minutes. Classical mental chronometric measures were augmented with an
analysis of the electromyographic activity of the response effectors. Electromyography allows one to detect covert activations undetectable with
only behavioral measures and reveals the participants’ ability to quickly
suppress covert activations before they result in an overt movement. Correction rate was then calculated by dividing the number of partial errors
(incorrect activations suppress before they result in an overt error) by the
number of incorrect activations (partial errors plus errors). Exercise diminished the occurrence of incorrect activations for congruent associations
(control: 28% ; exercise: 27%) and decreased the correction rate for both congruent and incongruent associations (control: 70% ; exercise: 62%). These
results suggest that strenuous exercise (i) impairs the ability to detect and
correct incorrect activations and (ii) reduces the occurrence of fast-guesses,
the net behavioral result being reflected in an increase in error commission
for incongruent associations.

C54
EVALUATION OF ERRORS IS NOT ALL AUTOMATIC: EFFECTS OF
WORKING MEMORY LOAD ON ERROR-RELATED NEGATIVITIES
OF DIFFERENT ERROR TYPES. Martin E. Maier1, Marco Steinhauser1;
1

Catholic University of Eichstaett-Ingolstadt, Eichstaett, Germany — The ability
to detect and evaluate one’s own errors is crucial for the optimization of
performance. Early error monitoring mechanisms are thought to be rather
automatic because otherwise they would interfere with task-related processing. To test this hypothesis, we investigated whether early error monitoring is affected by working memory load. In previous studies, we have
shown that the error-related negativity, an electrophysiological marker of
early error monitoring, differentiates between error types of different significance, and thus, is a consequence of an evaluation process. In the present study, we combine a flanker task with a Sternberg working memory
paradigm to investigate whether this evaluation process deteriorates under
high working memory load. On each trial of the experiment, participants
received a small or a large memory set, followed by a flanker task. After
providing the flanker task response, participants had to indicate whether
a memory probe was part of the memory set. Because it required holding
the memory set in working memory during the flanker task, this design
allowed investigating effects of working memory load on error monitoring
in the flanker task. The results showed that the error-related negativity was
larger for more significant than for less significant errors only with low, but
not with high working memory load. This shows that working memory
load impairs the evaluation of error significance, and thus that early error
monitoring is not truly automatic.

C55
ERROR-INDUCED ATTENTIONAL ADJUSTMENTS COMMENCE
PRIOR TO CONSCIOUS ERROR DETECTION Marco Steinhauser1,
Søren K. Andersen2; 1Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt, 2University of
Aberdeen — Learning from errors is crucial for optimizing performance.

Theories of performance monitoring assume that detecting errors leads to
adaptive behavioral and attentional adjustments that serve to prevent these
errors in the future. However, although numerous studies have identified
stages of error processing in error-related brain activity, it is still unclear
how these stages are related to adaptive adjustments. Whereas some stud-

Poster Session C
ies suggest that adjustments are elicited by early error processing that
occurs immediately after an error response, others concluded that adjustments are initiated by conscious error detection emerging around 300 ms
later. We investigated the time course of attentional adjustments elicited
by errors. Participants attended to one of two superimposed red and blue
random-dot kinematograms (RDKs) in order to discriminate the direction (horizontal vs. vertical) of brief motion intervals of the target RDK,
while ignoring concurrent compatible or incompatible motions of the distractor RDK. The RDKs flickered at different rates, thereby eliciting distinguishable steady-state visual evoked potentials (SSVEPs), allowing us
to concurrently measure the time-course of attentional allocation to both
RDKs. Attentional selectivity of SSVEPs was increased almost immediately
after the error response. Moreover, this selectivity increase was driven by
enhanced processing of the target. These data suggest that error-induced
attentional adjustments start prior to conscious error detection, and hence,
are most likely related to the earliest stage of error processing.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Other
C56
RELATING CATECHOL-O-METHYLTRANSFERASE GENETIC VARIATION TO NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL TEST PERFORMANCE Daniel
A. Rinker1, Neda Jahanshad1, Derrek P. Hibar1, The Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, Paul M. Thompson1; 1University of Southern California — The

Trail Making Test (TMT) is a commonly used neuropsychological test
that estimates processing speed, cognitive flexibility, scanning and executive function. The TMT is sensitive to various neurocognitive impairments and has been used to predict physical impairment and health status.
Catechol-O-Methyltransferase (COMT) is a highly studied gene that has
sometimes been associated with brain function in: schizophrenia, ADHD,
personality, addiction and pain response. There is also some evidence linking COMT variation to differences in dopamine levels. There is no clear
consensus on the putative mechanism for these associations, as evidence
is mixed. Here we used multiple regression to test the effect of several
COMT variants, and other variants associated with lower white-matter
integrity on performance in TMT parts A and B in 124 participants (72.8
± 7.3 years, 42 female) as part of the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging
Initiviative (ADNI). One COMT single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP),
rs4680, was significantly associated with time to completion on TMT-A in
participants with mild-cognitive impairment (MCI) and healthy controls
(p < 0.05), controlling for age and sex. Another sample of 394 participants,
which included AD patients, showed similar significant results, in the same
direction. These findings support the use of the TMT in neuropsychological batteries as a measure of biological substrates and add to the literature
relating COMT status to neurocognitive health.

OTHER
C57
THE ROLE OF FEEDBACK CONTINGENCY IN PERCEPTUAL CATEGORY LEARNING Lauren E. Vucovich1, F. Gregory Ashby1; 1University of Cal-

ifornia, Santa Barbara — Recent research suggests that the effects of reward

prediction error (RPE) on dopamine neuron firing may be modulated by
reward contingency – that is, by the correlation between response confidence and reward valence. For example, when rewards are not contingent
on behavior there is nothing to learn, and dopamine fluctuations carry no
adaptive value. Two studies indirectly tested this hypothesis by examining
effects of feedback contingency on perceptual category learning. In Experiment 1, participants learned either rule-based or information-integration
category structures under conditions of either high or low feedback contingency. Rule-based categories can be learned via declarative memory,
whereas information-integration categories require procedural memory.
In both feedback conditions, the optimal Bayesian classifier would receive
positive feedback on 80% of the trials. In high contingency conditions,
probability of positive feedback decreased with categorization difficulty,
whereas in low contingency conditions, probability of positive feedback
was independent of categorization difficulty. Overall, results showed that
learning was good for both types of category structures when feedback contingency was high. However, when feedback contingency was low, learn-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

123

Poster Session C	
ing was poor or nonexistent with both category structures. Experiment 2
employed the same design, but included a “no-man’s-land” so that no stimuli were near the optimal categorization bound in either condition. Results
were consistent with Experiment 1, with significantly less learning in both
low contingency conditions. Standard RPE models predict roughly equal
performance with the two feedback types, so these results support a model
in which the effects of RPE on dopamine fluctuations are modulated by
feedback contingency.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Other
C58
SIMULTANEOUS LEARNING OF HIERARCHICAL REWARD STRUCTURES AND CATEGORIES IN PROCEDURAL AND DECLARATIVE
SYSTEMS Stella S. von Meer1, Vivian V. Valentin1, F. Gregory Ashby1; 1University

of California, Santa Barbara — An armamentarium of studies support multiple

systems in human category learning. A clear dissociation between procedural (stimulus-response association) and declarative (hypothesis testing)
systems exists. Optimal performance in difficult real-world classification
tasks often requires learning about task and reward structure, as well as
category structure. In many cases, optimal performance requires learners to
forsake small immediate rewards to subsequently achieve greater rewards.
Are hierarchical reward structures (HRSs) of this type learned differently
during procedural and declarative category-learning tasks? The behavioral
experiments presented here compared learning of information-integration
(procedural) and rule-based (declarative) categories (which were exactly
matched on all category-separation statistics) when an embedded HRS
required participants to make categorization errors on odd numbered trials
(and therefore to suffer a small loss) to maximize overall reward. Almost all
participants in the rule-based task learned this HRS (21/22), in contrast to
only 2 of 22 participants in the information-integration task. Interestingly,
when given explicit instructions regarding the HRS, participants frequently
displayed optimal responding in the information-integration (11/13) task.
In a follow-up experiment with a more difficult rule-based task, half the
participants successfully learned the HRS. Therefore, learning HRSs
appears more compatible with declarative learning systems than with the
more phylogenetically conserved procedural system. These results are
consistent with the hypothesis that HRSs are learned and managed within
explicit structures that may share greater overlap with structures supporting the declarative than procedural category-learning system.

C59
ALPHA POWER CHANGES IN AMNESTIC MILD COGNITIVE
IMPAIRMENT IN GO/NOGO TASKS INVOLVING SEMANTIC CATEGORIZATION Lydia T. Nguyen1, Hsueh-Sheng Chiang2, Justin Eroh2, Mandy
J. Maguire2, Michael A. Kraut3, John Hart Jr.2, Raksha A. Mudar1,2; 1University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2The University of Texas at Dallas, 3The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — We examined behavioral (response times

and error rates) and EEG (alpha power) measures of cognitive control using
a visual Go/NoGo paradigm during semantic categorization in individuals
with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI). Twenty-two aMCI (14
F; 68.8 ± 7.69 years) and 22 age-, education- and gender-matched healthy
aging controls (16 F; 65.32 ± 6.84 years) performed two Go/NoGo tasks. The
single car task (SiC) involved basic categorization and used single exemplars of a car (Go) and a dog (NoGo). The object animal task (ObA) involved
superordinate categorization and used multiple exemplars of objects (Go)
and animals (NoGo) across trials. The ObA task had longer response times
than the SiC task for both groups. The aMCI group showed a larger difference between the commission and omission errors compared to the control
group. EEG data revealed that in the -50-200 ms time period, frontal upper
alpha band (10-12 Hz) power for the ObA task was lower compared to the
SiC task in the aMCI group, whereas no such differences were found in the
control group. Additionally, in the 250-750 ms time period, frontal lower
alpha band (8-10 Hz) power for the NoGo trials was diminished in aMCI
individuals compared to controls, but no such differences were observed
during the Go trials. These findings suggest that distinct changes in frontal
alpha power in relation to cognitive control during semantic categorization
are noted in individuals with aMCI. These alpha power changes may serve
as useful neural markers in early identification of cognitive deterioration.

124

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

C60
NMDA-RECEPTOR BLOCKADE ENHANCES CONTEXTUAL EXTINCTION LEARNING AND MODULATES ACTIVATION OF EXTINCTION-RELATED BRAIN REGIONS Anne Golisch1, Silke Lissek1, Martin

Tegenthoff1; 1Department of Neurology, BG University Hospital Bergmannsheil,
Bochum, Germany — The extinction learning process occurs in a distributed

network of prefrontal, hippocampal and amygdalar regions, of which
a subset participates in the phenomenon of the renewal effect. Renewal
describes the recovery of an extinguished response in extinction recall if
the context of extinction differs from the context of recall. The high density
of N-Methyl-D-Aspartate (NMDA) receptors in these involved brain areas
may be a modulator of extinction learning and renewal. Animal studies
demonstrated that NMDA-receptor antagonism in prefrontal regions disrupted both extinction learning and processing of task context. In contrast,
no deficits in retrieval of contextual fear memory were observed using
NMDA-receptor blockades in the hippocampus. In this functional magnetic
resonance imaging study, we investigated the role of the NMDA system for
behavioral and brain activation correlates of extinction and renewal with
a specific focus on extinction-related regions. Healthy human volunteers
received the NMDA-receptor antagonist Memantine (30mg single dose)
prior to extinction learning of previous acquired stimuli associations presented in either an identical or a novel context. The following recall phase
was identical to the acquisition. We observed a better extinction learning
performance in the NMDA group compared to the placebo group. However, NMDA did not affect renewal. In general, the NMDA group showed
a deactivation in extinction-related brain regions particularly in the prefrontal cortex. In summary, preliminary results indicate that the NMDA
system appears to be involved in extinction learning. We assume that the
apparently contradictory results of the pharmacological intervention may
be modulated by the body weight.

C61
DECISION MAKING BEHIND VEIL OF IGNORANCE IN MONKEY

Wei-hiang Hwang1, Yi-Ta Lu1, Tsung-Yu Ho1, Yi-Tsung Hsieh1, Jen-Te Wang1, TsungYang Ho1, Chun-I Yeh1, Chen-Ying Huang1; 1National Taiwan University — The veil

of ignorance (VOI), behind which people allocate resource prior to learning their social positions, was introduced by John Rawls (1971). In a world
of two, a prince and a beggar, an equal distribution yields an even share
of resource to them, whereas an unequal distribution gives the prince the
majority and leaves little for the beggar, preference over distributions may
depend on a decision maker’s roles as a prince or a beggar. Decisions made
before learning his roles are immune from being affected by his respective social position, and hence reflect what truly constitutes a just distribution. These are termed as preferences behind VOI, and they are therefore
divided into two parts: the decision maker’s inequity aversion and their
risk preference. In other words, when making decisions behind VOI, they
balance between the desired distribution and the risk of not obtaining the
desired role. We study the behavior of non-human primate, Formosan
Rock Macaque (Macaca cyclopis), in the face of food decision problems.
We conduct a class of modified dictator games in which a proposer chooses
between two food allocations, and measure subjects’ preferences, including
risk preference, inequity aversion, and preference behind VOI. Our data
shows that subjects are strongly risk-loving and exhibit no inequity aversion. Also, social context did affect choice in hierarchy system.

C62
THE DEFAULT MODE NETWORK AND HOT EXECUTIVE FUNCTION IN A MIXED-CLINICAL ADOLESCENT POPULATION Audreyana
Jagger1, Gregory Rose1; 1Southern Illinois University-Carbondale — Hot Execu-

tive Function, or Hot EF, is an emotionally driven cognitive process (Zelazo
& Carlson, 2012) that is often disturbed in mental disorders. The Default
Mode Network (DMN) is a brain network, including the precuneus and
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), which is active when an individual is
relaxing at rest without any external demands. We wanted to determine
if DMN connectivity “strength” was related scores in Hot EF. This study
included 30 adolescents from a mixed clinical and control population. Each
participant completed a 30 minute session in a 3T Siemens MRI scanner and
3 hours of neuropsychological testing. A scatter plot revealed a non-linear relationship between these two variables: both the lowest and highest

2016 Annual Meeting	
scores on a Hot EF scale (emotional control) were related to higher correlations between the precuneus and mPFC. Hierarchical regression was
used to examine the significance of the non-linear effects. The first model,
testing the linear relationship, was not significant F(1, 28) = .13, p = .73, and
explained only .04 % of the variance. The second model, testing the nonlinear relationship, was significant F(2, 27) = 8.07 , p = .001 and explained 39
% of the variance. This suggests that DMN connectivity strength is related
in a complex way to the capacity to demonstrate Hot EF. Consequences for
behavioral regulation and future directions will be discussed.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
C63
MOTOR ENCODING DURING VISUAL WORKING MEMORY OF
SENSORIMOTOR INFORMATION: EVIDENCE USING LATERALIZED READINESS POTENTIAL Alejandro Galvez-Pol1, Beatriz Calvo-Merino1, Bettina Forster1; 1City University London — New perspectives in working

memory suggest similar neural processes underlying memory encoding
and perception mechanisms. This provides sensory cortices with a determinant role in memory storage and cognition. In a previous study we
showed that visual working memory of sensorimotor information (e.g.
encoding hand postures) recruited cortical sensory regions functionally engaged with processing this sensorimotor information, beyond the
already described visual cortices. Here, we test the involvement of motor
cortices during visual encoding of sensorimotor information using a novel
paradigm that combines lateralized readiness potentials (LRP) evoked with
a task-irrelevant motor task, during a visual working memory task of hand
postures and control condition (shapes). Visual evoked potentials (VEPs)
showed a significant contralateral enhancement of mean amplitudes when
memorizing increasing number stimuli over occipital electrodes, suggesting the presence of mnemonic activity over visual regions similar to what
has been previously shown. Importantly, analysis of the LRPs locked to
the motor response at the end of the encoding phase shows a lateralized
enhancement of neural activity depending on the amount of information to
be held in visual memory (load) only for the hand condition, and not for the
control condition over frontal electrodes. These results provide evidence
for a double dissociation between type of stimuli encoded, memory load,
and neural location of the corresponding elicited response. Such activity
suggests a functional specific underlying motor contribution to maintain in
visual working memory sensorimotor information.

C64
COMBINING EXPLICIT COGNITIVE AND FUNCTIONAL ADAPTIVE
EXERCISE TRAINING ENHANCES COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE IN
AN UNPRACTICED COGNITIVE TEST Teresa Hawkes1, Adam Strang1,
Ed Downs2, Mark Derisso1, Erica Johnson1, Major Steven Rau1, Molly Fischer1,
Edward Eveland1; 1Air Force Research Laboratory, 2ProTerf — Exercise training

enhances cognitive performance. Would exercise combined with explicit
cognitive training better enhance cognitive performance compared to
exercise training alone? A recent study at the Air Force Research Laboratory combined functional agility exercise training with explicit working
memory and decision-making training, and evaluated its effect on performance in the unpracticed cognitive portion of a simulated battlefield obstacle course compared to traditional Air Force physical training (AFPT). We
predicted the experimental group’s cognitive performance would be significantly better than AFPT controls. Forty active duty Airmen (19 – 40 y)
were tested in a pilot simulated battlefield obstacle course (training, n=27,
controls, n=13). Prior to this test, experimental group participants underwent 8 weeks of agility-based physical training. Explicit cognitive training
was included in every exercise session. The control group was instructed to
complete their normal Air Force PT and report on their training activities
every week for eight weeks. A battery of physiological and anthropometric
tests administered pre-training indicated the two groups were statistically
similar in physiological capacity. The experimental group out-performed
controls on VO2max post-training. Performance in the battlefield obstacle course indicated both groups performed similarly on the physiological components, but the experimental group significantly outperformed

Poster Session C
AFPT participants on unpracticed cognitive tasks. Critically, unpracticed
cognitive tests were performed at physical exhaustion. This suggests exercise training which includes explicit cognitive training may better enhance
cognitive performance post-training compared to exercise training alone.
This cognitive training may transfer to similar, unpracticed cognitive tasks,
even at exhaustion.

C65
DELAY-PERIOD STIMULATION OF OCCIPITAL CORTEX IMPAIRS
WORKING MEMORY MAINTENANCE Amanda E. van Lamsweerde1,

Jeffrey S. Johnson1; 1North Dakota State University — Recent evidence demon-

strates that simple features of remembered stimuli can be decoded from
patterns of activity in the occipital cortex during working memory (WM)
maintenance and that classifier sensitivity is correlated with the precision
of representations, but not capacity (Emrich et al., 2013). This suggests that
visual cortex activity during maintenance may determine the precision of
WM representations. In an earlier experiment, we tested this hypothesis by
administering trains of 20 Hz rTMS to phosphene-localized visual cortex
during working memory encoding or maintenance. Participants remembered three colors in the hemifield contralateral or ipsilateral to stimulation;
TMS-related declines in performance were found at encoding (0ms after
stimulus offset) and maintenance (500ms after stimulus offset). Contrary
to our expectations, however, the decrease in performance was specific to
the probability of guessing and not the precision of WM representations.
However, it is possible that this task failed to capture changes in precision;
between-subject performance was highly variable and effects on guess rate
may be more likely when capacity limits are exceeded. To address this concern, in a second experiment, participants remembered the orientation of
a single gabor patch over a two-second delay; rTMS was administered to
occipital cortex either at low (45% of phosphene threshold) or high (100%
of phosphene threshold) stimulation intensity, either 50 or 900ms after
memory display offset. Results indicate that high-intensity TMS disrupted
the precision of WM maintenance. Thus, these data are consistent with the
prediction that visual cortex activity during maintenance affects the precision of WM representations.

C66
ECHOES OF CONCUSSION: CHRONIC EFFECTS ON VISUAL
WORKING MEMORY. Hector Arciniega1, Dwight Peterson2, Marian Berryhill1;
1

University of Nevada, Reno, 2University of Missouri — Visual working memory
(VWM) is essential for maintaining a coherent visual experience across
interruptions such as eye movements. Importantly, VWM can be damaged
by unforeseen circumstances such as neurodegenerative disorders, cerebrovascular accident, and traumatic brain injury (TBI). The most common
form is mild TBI (mTBI), or concussion, is typically associated with a
brief recovery period of several weeks to normal physical and cognitive
function. However, this is largely an assumption. Here, we investigated
the consequences of having a history of mTBI (3 months – 20 years prior)
on VWM performance. In two different populations we found the same
pattern of behavioral and EEG results. Behaviorally, in both a community
sample (N = 43, mean age: 37.95) and in current undergraduates (N = 20,
mean age: 21.05), those with a history of mTBI were significantly impaired
at maintaining even a single item over a 1-second delay compared to agematched controls. We calculated the contralateral delay activity (CDA),
a slow potential showing increased amplitude with set size, to measure
neural correlates associated with VWM maintenance and found the mTBI
group had higher CDA amplitudes at set size 3 compared to controls. One
interpretation is that the mTBI group expends greater effort in VWM maintenance compared to controls. These data point towards lasting cognitive
consequences following mTBI and the importance of cognitive assessment
in this population.

C67
WORKING MEMORY-BASED ACTION CONTROL: AN INTERFERENCE PARADIGM FOR NEUROIMAGING Sabrina Bhangal1, Andrew

C. Garcia2, Anthony G. Velasquez1, Mark W. Geisler1, Ezequiel Morsella1,3; 1San
Francisco State University, 2University of Delaware, 3University of California, San
Francisco — Representations held in working memory can result in interference resembling that of distractors in response interference paradigms

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

125

Poster Session C	
such as the classic flanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974; Hubbard et al.,
2013). We developed a paradigm in which participants (n = 16) pressed
certain buttons in response to certain visual stimuli (letters). At the beginning of each trial, participants were presented with a letter pair (the memoranda), with one letter presented over the other and with the two letters
separated by a horizontal bar. Participants held the letter pair in mind over
a delay (4 s). Afterward, participants were presented with only one of the
two letters (the Letter Cueing condition). In the Congruent condition, participants responded to this letter; in the Incongruent condition, participants
responded to the other letter of the pair, which was not presented visually
but held in memory. In a separate, Spatial Cueing condition, a non-letter cue
(a dot) replaced the letter stimuli and was presented either above or below
the horizontal bar, indicating the correct response. In the Congruent condition, participants responded to the corresponding letter; in the Incongruent
condition, participants responded to the other (un-cued) letter. Response
latencies were longer for Spatial Cueing than Letter Cueing F(1,15) = 10.95,
p < .01. In the Spatial Cueing condition, latencies in the Incongruent condition were longer than in the Congruent condition t(15) = 3.52, p < .01. This
paradigm is amenable to neuroimaging techniques that can elucidate the
neural aspects of working memory-based action control.

C68
A NEURAL INVESTIGATION OF TEMPORAL DURATION COMPRESSION ACROSS BOUNDARIES Brynn Sherman1, Sarah DuBrow1, Lila Davachi1; 1New York University — The continuous stream of cognitive and percep-

tual inputs can be parsed into discrete events at boundaries or contextual
changes between events (Zacks et al., 2007). Boundaries have been shown
to decrease access to representations occurring just before the boundary,
and, in the memory literature, this results in the expansion of perceived
time across boundaries (Poynter, 1983; Ezzyat & Davachi, 2014). However,
at a shorter time scale, perceived time has been shown to be compressed
across segmented, as opposed to continuous, events (Liverence & Scholl,
2012). To investigate what neural processes underlie this opposite behavioral effect in perceptual temporal estimation, we developed a simplified
task for fMRI scanning in which subjects view a colored square for a duration between 2 and 8 seconds and judge its duration after a variable short
delay (2-6s). Critically, on ‘boundary’ trials, the square changed colors halfway through the interval. Participants were instructed to estimate the total
time the square appeared on the screen regardless of color. In an initial
behavioral study (N = 18), we found that participants rated boundary trials
as significantly shorter than non-boundary trials. In a preliminary fMRI
data set (N = 5), we replicated this boundary compression effect and found
a network of regions including precuneus and lateral PFC that were more
active during boundary compared to nonboundary trials. Furthermore,
retrieval of longer versus shorter duration trials engaged lateral and medial
PFC. Future analyses will examine neural activity related to temporal compression both during the encoding interval and specifically at boundaries.

C69
HIGHWAY TO (VERBAL) MEMORY: NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL
CONSEQUENCES OF SPECIFICALLY HUMAN CONNECTIVITY IN
PERISYLVIAN CORTEX Malte R Schomers1,2, Max Garagnani1,3, Friedemann

Pulvermüller1,2; 1Brain Language Laboratory, Freie Universität Berlin, Germany,
2
Berlin School of Mind and Brain, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany,
3
Centre for Robotics and Neural Systems, University of Plymouth, UK — Rich

long-distance connectivity in the fronto-temporal perisylvian language
areas by way of the dorsal arcuate fasciculus (AF) sets apart humans from
other primates and appears to be crucial for verbal memory and thus word
learning abilities in humans. But how come that a stronger AF entails better
working memory and word learning? To investigate this, we used a neurophysiologically plausible computational model implementing Hebbian
learning mechanisms (cf. Garagnani et al. 2008) to simulate major regions
and relevant neuroanatomical connections of superior-temporal and
inferior-frontal cortex. We compared models with links documented in
macaques (monkey model, MM) vs. those plus additional ones of the AF
recently reported in humans specifically (human model, HM). The models
were presented with spoken ‘words’ coded as concurrent neural activity
patterns in auditory and motor cortex. 24 randomly initiated networks (12
of each type), were trained with 14 ‘words’ each and evaluated. Compared
with the MM, HM models developed larger circuits with especially high

126

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
circuit cell densities in the higher-association areas. Crucially, long-lasting
memory activity was only seen in the HM circuits, whereas MM circuits
lost their activation rapidly, thus giving little evidence of verbal memory
processes. These functional differences did not depend on the amount of
learning or other potentially relevant parameters. In summary, we show
that the specific anatomical features of human cortex, especially the stronger connectivity within central perisylvian areas implicated by the human
AF, contribute to better learning of spoken word forms and may explain the
specifically human ability of verbal working memory.

C70
NEURAL MECHANISMS FOR THE BENEFITS OF STIMULUS-DRIVEN ATTENTION Katelyn Wills1, Jingtai Liu1, Jonathan Hakun2,
David Zhu1, Eliot Hazeltine3, Susan Ravizza1; 1Michigan State University, 2Pennsylvania State University, 3University of Iowa — It is well established that top-

down control of attention benefits working memory. However, the role
of bottom-up or stimulus-driven control of attention is less established.
Oftentimes, the control of attention involves both top-down and bottom-up
factors. For example, in contingent capture, top-down attention determines
what is behaviorally relevant, and stimuli sharing those features can guide
attention automatically. While this effect is typically disruptive to working memory (i.e. when peripheral distractors share features with a target),
recent evidence suggests that stimulus-driven attention may benefit working memory when it is drawn to relevant information. Using a modified
contingent capture paradigm developed by Ravizza and Hazeltine (2013),
we replicated the behavioral finding that letters sharing a feature with a
target in a secondary detection task were remembered better than letters
of other colors. Regions in the right SPL and the left parietal operculum
showed increased activity and suppression, respectively, for target versus
control colored letters. A trial-by-error regression revealed that increased
activity in the parietal operculum at retrieval predicted behavioral errors
only in the salient letter condition, and a beta series correlation analysis
revealed increased functional connectivity between our ROIs and dorsal
frontoparietal regions during the encoding of salient relative to control colored letters. We conclude based on these results that the benefits to working memory from the addition of stimulus-driven attention factors to relevant information results from an enhancement of top-down rather than
bottom-up aspects of the contingent capture paradigm.

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
C71
CEREBELLAR CONNECTIVITY AND GLUTAMATERGIC METABOLITE CONCENTRATION IN ASD AS ASSESSED BY FCMRI/MRS
David Beversdorf1, Dylan Weber1, John Hegarty II1,2; 1University of Missouri,
2
Stanford University — Cerebellar pathology is observed in ASD, and atypical

cortico-cerebellar functional connectivity is also seen, as well as an atypical
excitatory-to-inhibitory (E/I) balance, with an imbalance between glutamate and GABA observed in brain regions including the cerebellum. We
examined the relationship between E/I balance using magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (MRS) and functional integrity of cerebrocerebellar connections in ASD for language-associated cerebellar regions and their cortical
projections. Twelve adults with ASD and 12 individually matched controls
participated. Social communication (SRS), maladaptive behaviors (ABC),
and language competence (TLC) were assessed. MRI was performed at
3T and BOLD sequences were collected at rest. Functional connectivity
(FC) analyses were performed with conservative motion correction. Single
voxel spectroscopy spin-echo sequences were used to detect glutamate,
and J-coupling edited sequences were used to detect GABA. Voxels were
localized in each participant in the right postereolateral cerebellar hemisphere junction of crus I&II (RCere) and the left dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (LDLPFC). Metabolite levels were quantified with LCModel. ASD
participants were impaired on the SRS, ABC, and TLC. Within the ASD
group, LDLPFC-RCere connectivity was associated with listening comprehension (r=0.588, p=0.027). RCere-LFLPFC FC was significantly associated
with RCere E/I, regardless of diagnosis. Literature varies regarding FC and
MRS of glutamate and GABA in ASD. Our data suggests connectivity and
pharmacopathology may be interrelated in ASD. Furthermore, this may

2016 Annual Meeting	
relate to behavior. Future studies will need to explore whether these might
serve as markers for or predictors of response to pharmacological agents
targeting E/I balance in ASD.

C72
NEURAL RESPONSES TO VOWEL STIMULI IN MONOLINGUAL
AND BILINGUAL 3-TO 46-MONTH-OLD CHILDREN Valerie Shafer1,
Yan Yu2, Monica Wagner2; 1The Graduate Center, CUNY, 2St. John’s University —

Evidence has shown that language experience influences speech sound
processing early in life at a behavioral level and at the neural level reflecting
discrimination (influencing infant event-related potential (ERP), mismatch
responses, MMRs). It is less clear how language experience modifies neural
encoding; speech experience may influence early stages of encoding at the
cortical level. Alternatively, cortical encoding may reflect acoustic properties of the signal. The current study used ERPs to examine whether there
was evidence that experience with English vowels influenced temporal site
measures (Na, Ta, Tb) in three- to 46- month old children with monolingual
or bilingual Spanish-English experience. We had predicted that encoding,
unlike discrimination, would be similar for the two groups. Data from 50
bilingual children and 49 monolingual children were analyzed. The results
revealed a different pattern of maturation for bilingual compared to monolingual children. Latencies of the most prominent peak (Na) were delayed
for bilingual compared to monolingual participants for the children under
12 months of age. However, the amplitude of the Na peak was also more
negative, particularly at the left temporal site (T7). The older groups were
more similar, but the bilingual children showed less asymmetry, again due
to increased amplitude of the Na at the left site. Ta and Tb were identifiable
in less than 2/3 of the children. These findings may indicate differences in
encoding speech information or they may be related to differences in how
bilingual and monolingual children attend to the stimuli.

C73
HIGH GAMMA POWER IN LEFT AUDITORY CORTEX AT 12
MONTHS-OF-AGE REFLECTS MAPPING OF NATIVE PHONEMES
VARYING IN VOICE ONSET TIME (VOT) Silvia Ortiz-Mantilla1, Jarmo A.

Hämäläinen1,2, Teresa Realpe-Bonilla1, Sree Rajendran1, April A. Benasich1;
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, USA, 2University of Jyväskylä, Finland
— Across development, infants gradually move from an acoustic mode of
1

processing incoming speech, to automatized processing of their native language as specific phonemic representations are constructed within acoustic
cortex. Intracranial recordings in human postero-lateral Superior Temporal
Gyrus indicate that VOT is tracked by high gamma power. Over development, perceptual narrowing promotes increasingly language-specific
neural mapping, thus favoring native over non-native language processing. To explore oscillatory mechanisms underlying phonemic mapping,
children born into English monolingual families, followed longitudinally at
6-, 12-, and 24-months, were presented with native and non-native syllables
differing in VOT. Dense-array EEG/ERPs were mapped into age-appropriate brain templates; source modeling placed dipoles in auditory and frontal cortices. Temporal-spectral analyses were conducted in source space
using 2-90Hz range over -300 to 930ms. Changes in frequency amplitude
(power), and consistency of phase alignment were evaluated using temporal spectral evolution and inter-trial phase locking. Larger theta power and
phase coherence were found at younger compared to older ages with larger
power in left compared to right auditory sources. Native syllables elicited
a high gamma response in frontal and left auditory sources at 12-months
but not at 6-months-of-age. Our results suggest that as phonemic mapping
progresses across age, processing of native information becomes faster and
more efficient. Increases in processing speed are reflected in the shorter,
more precise phase coherence seen in the theta range. The higher gamma
power seen in left auditory cortex may signal representation of VOT,
whereas frontal areas might be capturing attentional responses triggered
by increasing native specialization.

C74
DEVELOPMENT OF NEURAL PROCESSES UNDERLYING LANGUAGE SUBSYSTEMS IN YOUNG CHILDREN FROM HIGHER AND
LOWER SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS ENVIRONMENTS Amanda Hampton Wray1, Eric Pakulak2, Yoshiko Yamada2, Christine Weber3, Helen Neville2;

Poster Session C
1

Michigan State University, 2University of Oregon, 3Purdue University — Throughout preschool years, rapid development of language skills is accompanied by significant changes in neurodevelopment. Language input during
development varies as a function of socioeconomic status (SES) in numerous ways, including the amount and type of language and the amount of
child-directed speech (e.g., Hoff, 2013; Fernald et al., 2013). These differences, along with other factors, have been shown to contribute to reduced
language abilities in children from lower SES environments. The present
study extends the existing literature by evaluating longitudinal changes
in neural processes underlying specific language subsystems in preschool-aged children as a function of SES. Typically developing children
from higher and lower SES environments completed testing at age four and
again at age five. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were acquired using an
ecologically valid narrative cartoon overlaid with auditory sentences containing semantic and phrase-structure constraints. Results suggested more
rapid maturation of neural processes underlying semantics and syntax in
children from higher compared to lower SES backgrounds. While semantic
anomalies elicited an N400 in both groups at age four, at age five, only children from higher SES households exhibited a biphasic N400/late positive
component (LPC) pattern. Phrase structure violations elicited a negativity
for both groups at age four, though at age five the higher SES group exhibited a P600, while the lower SES group continued to exhibit a broad negativity. These findings reveal differentiated developmental time courses
for language processing in children from higher versus lower SES environments, which may inform interventions aimed at improving language
abilities in at-risk children.

C75
LONGITUDINAL STUDY OF THE EMERGING LATERALIZATION OF
THE LANGUAGE NETWORK DURING INFANCY Robert Emerson1, Wei

Gao2, Weili Lin1; 1University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA — Strong left hemispheric asymmetry is a striking

characteristic of the cerebral regions involved in the adult language network. Studies with adults have shown that stronger lateralization is associated with higher scores on tests of verbal ability; however, it is currently
unclear how lateralization develops. In this study, we leverage a large
sample of normally developing infants with multiple longitudinal rsfMRI
scans to delineate the trajectory of language area lateralization in the first
two years of life. We compared the trajectory of functional symmetry of the
two hemispheres between language-related regions to regions that show
high symmetry in adulthood, namely, sensory and visual cortices. Longitudinal models revealed a best fit with quadratic age terms and showed
significant estimated coefficients of determination for both Wernicke’s
(R-squared=.261, p<.001) and Broca’s (R-squared=.142, p<.001) regions.
These inverse-U shaped functions peaked at approximately 11.5 months of
age, indicating that the transition toward lateralization began in the second
year. The shift toward lateralization was accompanied by an increase in
the functional connectivity of these regions within the left hemisphere.
Finally, we detected a significant association between the lateralization
process of the Broca’s area and language outcomes at 4 years of age (chisquared=10.986, p=.011). Our results capture the developmental timeline
of the language system’s lateralization during infancy. More generally, our
findings suggest that increasing functional symmetry in the first year might
be a fundamental principal of the developing brain, governing different
functional systems, including those that will eventually become lateralized
in adulthood.

C76
EEG EVIDENCE FOR THE ABSENCE OF AUDIOVISUAL INTEGRATION IN APRAXIA OF SPEECH Melissa Randazzo1, Karen Froud1; 1Teachers College, Columbia University — Speech perception is a unique audiovi-

sual experience in part because timing of the speech signal is influenced
by simultaneous overlapping gestures in coarticulation. Apraxia of speech
(AOS) is a motor-planning disorder that impairs coarticulation. Imaging
studies show that brain regions damaged in AOS are critical to audiovisual speech perception. Although AOS is a motor-planning disorder,
individuals with AOS may have a disruption to the perceptual system for
coarticulatory gestures. To evaluate this hypothesis we investigated audiovisual MMN responses in adults with damage to Broca’s area (mild-moderate AOS, borderline-mild aphasia) compared to healthy age-matched

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

127

Poster Session C	
controls. We utilized the McGurk effect, in which incongruent auditory
and visual information alters perception. Participants viewed videos of a
speaker articulating the syllable /ba/ (standard) for 80% trials and /ga/
(deviant) 20% of the trials while the auditory stimulus /ba/ was consistent
throughout. Responses to the audiovisual condition were compared to an
identical visual-only condition without sound to control for evoked activity
from change in visual stimulus. MMN was derived from high-density EEG
recordings by averaging and subtraction of standard responses from deviant responses. The control group demonstrated MMNs to McGurk deviants
in the audiovisual condition, indicating integration of audiovisual speech
input, while the AOS group did not. Neither group showed an MMN to the
visual-only condition, indicating that for controls, MMN activity was due
to integration, not visual perceptual processes. We propose that these preliminary findings are consistent with a view that AOS is a disorder beyond
motor planning, impacting higher-level cognitive and linguistic skills.

C77
DECONSTRUCTING THE LEXICALITY EFFECT ON N400 TO
INVESTIGATE THE ACQUISITION OF ORTHOGRAPHIC RULES IN
NORMAL DEVELOPING CHILDREN Yu-Lin Tzeng1, Chun-Hsien Hsu2, ChiaYing Lee2; 1Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan,
2
Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taiwan — The lexicality effect on

N400 has been used to index readers’ ability of retrieving lexical representation. By using real character (RC), pseudo-character (PS) and non-character (NC), previous studies have found that reading ability shapes the
pattern and topographic distribution of lexicality effects on N400. Adult
and high reading ability children showed lexicality effects (PS>RC>NC) on
central-posterior sites, while low reading ability children showed reversed
lexicality effects (NC>PS>RC) in frontal-to-central sites. To investigate
individual differences in reading development, this study examines lexicality effects on N400 of 53 Chinese children aged 8-12 years. Correlation
analyses were performed based on scores of the Chinese Character Recognition Test (CCRT) and Digit Span Test and N400, which was decomposed
into two frequency bands (1-3 Hz & 3–6 Hz). The data revealed significant
positive correlations for the CCRT with lexicality effect (NC-RC) on both
higher (max r=.42 at FZ) and lower frequency bands (Max r=.46 at C3).
Children with high reading ability tend to reveal greater N400 to RC than
to NC in the central-posterior sites. For the digit span, significant positive
correlations were only found in frontal sites for high frequency band (Max r
=.34 at FC3). Children with low digit span score tend to show greater N400
to NC than to PS. These findings support that N400 reflects two mechanisms, including directly accessing the stored lexical representation in the
posterior regions, and effortful functions of selection and integration in the
frontal regions.

C78
DISTINCT NEURAL ALTERATIONS OF HETEROGENEOUS DYSLEXIA RISK PROFILES Ola Ozernov-Palchik1,2, Meaghan Mauer1, Elizabeth
S Norton3, Georgios Sideridis1,5, Sara Beach4,5, Maryanne Wolf2, John D. E. Gabrieli5, Nadine Gaab1,5; 1Boston Children’s Hospital, 2Tufts University, 3Northwestern University, 4Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 5Harvard University — The

strongest pre-literacy predictors of dyslexia are rapid automatized naming
(RAN), phonological awareness (PA), letter-sound knowledge (LSK),
and working memory (WM). Studies in adults and school-age children
demonstrated distinct cognitive and neural profiles of dyslexia subtypes.
It remains unclear whether these subtypes emerge prior to reading instruction and whether they are associated with subtype-specific structural brain
differences. A latent profile analysis was used to identify distinct patterns
of performance on PA, RAN, WM, LSK, and IQ in 1,215 kindergarten and
pre-kindergarten students from diverse backgrounds in New England.
Six distinct profiles of performance emerged: average, high, LSK risk, PA
risk, RAN risk, and multiple-risks. Alterations in gray matter volume were
investigated in the four risk groups as compared to the average performers in a subset of participants (N=102). Compared to the average group,
risk was associated with significantly reduced grey matter volume indices
in the LSK group in the bilateral temporal-parietal regions, in the multiple-risks group in the right inferior temporal/hippocampal regions and
precuneus, in the RAN group in the right middle-temporal regions, and in
the PA group in the right inferior temporal/fusiform region and posterior

128

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
parietal regions. These findings suggest that different subtypes of dyslexia
risk profiles are associated with distinct neuroanatomical regions of the
reading network in early kindergarten and highlight the heterogeneity of
cognitive and neuroanatomical etiology of dyslexia.

LANGUAGE: Other
C79
THE EFFECTS OF GESTURE FREQUENCY ON DISCOURSE PRODUCTION IN ANOMIC APHASIA Theodore Jenkins1, Marie Coppola1, Carl

Coelho1; 1University of Connecticut — Hand gestures are an ancillary and com-

municative modality that frequently adds visual information to a spoken
utterance. Additionally, gesture has been shown to facilitative cognitive
and linguistic processing, for example, in lexical retrieval. Individuals with
aphasia often demonstrate increased gesture frequency, which has been
characterized as a response to difficulties with lexical retrieval. However,
if active hand gestures can facilitate lexical retrieval, could this indirectly
affect the amount of cognitive resources available for sentential complexity and discourse organization? In a preliminary study of individuals with
anomic aphasia, we examined whether gesture frequency had any affect on
discourse production and organization. Using video data from an online
database (AphasiaBank), we coded 41 anomic narratives for hand gestures,
sentential complexity (i.e. number of subordinated clauses), and discourse
organization (i.e. story grammar). Separating the participants into gesture
frequency groups (Low, n=14; Mid, n=13; and High n=14), we conducted
a one-way ANOVA on the discourse scores across gesture groups. Results
indicated significant differences for increased story length (p=.000), complexity (p=.014), and organization (p=.001) in the high gesture group compared to the low gesture group. These findings suggest that frequent gesture in anomic aphasia may serve as a heuristic for language planning for
discourse production.

C80
ENTRAINMENT OF LOW-FREQUENCY BRAIN OSCILLATIONS TO
SPEAKING LIPS DURING CONTINUOUS AUDIOVISUAL SPEECH
Hyojin Park1, Christoph Kayser1, Gregor Thut1, Joachim Gross1; 1University of
Glasgow — During continuous audiovisual speech, mouth movements con-

tain rhythmic components that facilitate auditory speech processing. Here
we investigated for the first time directly how these rhythms interact with
neuronal oscillations in the brain. We recorded magnetoencephalography
(MEG) signals from 44 participants while attending to movies of audiovisual speech. Auditory and visual stimuli were manipulated to be congruent
or incongruent. We extracted time series characterizing mouth movements
from the video and looked for common rhythmic modulations in mouth
movements and recorded brain activity using coherence. Further, we identified its attentional modulation and effects on the speech comprehension.
First, we report that the rhythms of mouth movements in natural speech
entrain brain activity in speech processing areas, both sensory and higher-order regions. Second, attentional lip-reading showed left-lateralized
visual and right-lateralized auditory entrainment. Third, considering the
coherent nature of lip-sound speech signals, we partialled out the effect
of sound speech signal in the observation of lip entrainment to examine the main effect of speaking lips. This revealed that left motor cortex
is important for the tracking of lip movements suggesting the functional
role of visual speech in top-down predictive timing. Finally, we revealed
that tracking of speaking lips in motor cortex is critical for the high level
of speech comprehension. Our results provide the first direct evidence that
speaking lips entrain low-frequency brain oscillations in speech processing
areas with a prominent engagement of left motor cortex. This likely represents an important mechanism for the optimal sampling and integration
of sensory information across sensory modalities.

C81
N400 EVIDENCE FOR MUSICAL FACILITATION OF WORD
BOUNDARY IDENTIFICATION IN SECOND LANGUAGE EXPOSURE

Dayna Moya Sepulveda1, Josephine Ancelle2, Karen Froud3; 1Teachers College Columbia University, 2Teachers College - Columbia University, 3Teachers College
- Columbia University — Second language acquisition requires the ability to

2016 Annual Meeting	
identify word boundaries in a continuous auditory speech stream. This
task is made more complex when incorporating a new phonemic system.
Previous studies have shown that word boundary identification can be
enhanced by pairing musical notes with native language phonemes. The
objective of this study is to investigate whether musical tones also have
this effect in a new pseudo-language, using non-native speech sounds. The
N400, which has been reported to index familiarity and statistical regularities in pseudowords, provides an outcome measure in response to a lexical decision task. We presented typically developed English monolingual
adults with language-like stimuli incorporating French phonemes. Participants were exposed to one of two conditions for 14 minutes: monotone
presentation of the concatenated language-like stimuli; or the same speech
stream with a musical tone associated with each syllable. The training protocol was based on Schön (2008), with an extended exposure time. Training
was followed by a lexical decision task, requiring participants to distinguish “words” (heard during the training in a concatenated speech stream)
from “part words” (end of one word and the beginning of another, crossing
word boundaries). High density EEG was recorded during lexical decision.
N400 responses suggest that both groups were able to distinguish words
from part words, but the group who heard musical tones associated with
the training syllables elicited a larger negativity in response to part words.
These results suggest that musical tones might facilitate the identification
of word boundaries in second language learning.

C82
DEVELOPMENT OF TRACT-SPECIFIC WHITE MATTER PATHWAYS DURING EARLY READING DEVELOPMENT IN CHILDREN
AT FAMILIAL RISK FOR DYSLEXIA Yingying Wang1,2, Meaghan Mauer1,

Talia Raney1, Barbara Peysakhovich1, Bryce Becker1, Danielle Sliva1, Nadine
Gaab1,2,3; 1Division of Developmental Medicine, Boston Children’s Hospital,
Boston, MA 02115, 2Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, 3Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, MA 02138 — Developmental dyslexia

is a neurodevelopmental disorder with a strong genetic basis. Previous
studies observed white matter alterations in left posterior brain regions
in adults and school-age children with dyslexia. However, no study has
examined the development of tract-specific white matter pathways from
the pre-reading to the fluent reading stage in children at familial risk for
dyslexia (FHD+) versus controls (FHD-). This study examined white matter
integrity at three reading stages (pre-reading, beginning, and fluent reading) cross-sectionally (n=78) and longitudinally (n=45) using an automated
fiber-tract quantification method. Our findings depicted white matter
alterations and atypical lateralization of the arcuate fasciculus at the prereading stage in FHD+ versus FHD- children. Moreover, we demonstrated
faster white matter development in subsequent good versus poor readers
and a positive association between white matter maturation and reading
development using a longitudinal design. Additionally, the combination
of white matter maturation, familial risk and psychometric measures best
predicted later reading abilities. Furthermore, within FHD+ children, subsequent good readers exhibited faster white matter development in the
right superior longitudinal fasciculus compared to subsequent poor readers, suggesting a compensatory mechanism. Overall, our findings highlight
the importance of white matter pathway maturation in the development of
typical and atypical reading skills.

C83
HOW SWITCHING DIRECTION AND FOREIGN ACCENTED SPEECH
AFFECT LISTENING TO CODE-SWITCHED SENTENCES: AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY Carla Fernandez1, Janet G. van Hell1; 1Penn-

sylvania State University — Code-switching, the interchangeable use of two

languages within an utterance, is a hallmark of bilingualism. Although
natural code-switching occurs more frequently in spoken than written
communication, most studies on the comprehension of code-switched
utterances presented sentences visually. In two Event-Related Potentials
(ERP) studies, we investigated the auditory processing of code-switched
sentences to examine the extent to which visual and auditory processing
differ from one another and to identify the effects of accented speech on
processing costs. In Experiment 1, Spanish-English bilinguals listened to
code-switched sentences (switching from their dominant (L1) to weaker
language (L2 ) or vice-versa) or non-switched sentences. We observed

Poster Session C
an LPC effect when switching from L1 to L2, while switching from L2 to
L1 yielded a N400 effect, suggesting that switching into L2 impacts sentence-level restructuring and integration, and switching into L1 affects lexical-semantic integration processes. In Experiment 2, the code-switched sentences were spoken by Spanish-English bilinguals with a Spanish accent, to
examine how foreign accented speech modulates switching costs. Overall,
code-switched sentences elicited an enlarged N400 effect in the presence
of an accent. Spanish dominant participants showed an increased N400 in
both switching directions whereas English dominant participants showed
an attenuated N400 when switching from L2 to L1 and an attenuated LPC
effect when switching from L1 to L2. These findings indicate that listening
to code-switched sentences in an accented condition entail different cognitive mechanisms than in a non-accented condition. The effects of accented
speech on switching costs are dependent on switching direction and language dominance.

C84
THE NEURAL BASIS OF PERCEIVING SPEECH WITH A NON-NATIVE RHYTHM. Kyle Jasmin1, Sadao Hiroya2, Samuel Evans1, Saloni Krishnan3,
Cesar Lima1, Marcus Ostarek1, Dana Boebinger4, Sophie K. Scott1; 1UCL, 2NTT,
Oxford, 4Harvard — Rhythm is a natural part of speech. We normally under-

3

stand spoken sentences in our native language’s rhythm without effort.
Speech perception studies have typically taken rhythm for granted, and we
therefore know little about how rhythmic information affects activity in the
speech perception network. We developed a novel method for decomposing speech signals in order to separate phonetic information from rhythmic structure. Audio recordings of English sentences spoken by a Japanese
native speaker were manipulated such that their rhythm was stress timed
(like English), mora timed (like Japanese) or had phonemes with equal
durations. Noise-vocoding was used to minimize contributions of F0 and
to control intelligibility across conditions. Spectral rotation was also used to
create unintelligible control conditions. Twenty-one healthy right-handed
participants underwent behavioural testing and fMRI scans. In behavioural
testing, native English participants judged the naturalness of speaking
rhythm of the sentences. Results confirmed subjects judged English sentences as being most natural. FMRI was used to image the brains of participants while they listened to the sentences. Result showed that supplementary motor area (SMA), a region involved in speech production, was
sensitive to rhythm naturalness. This suggests that integrating non-native
speech rhythm with native language speech may rely on increased auditory-motor processing.

OTHER
C85
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY PREDICTS “VISUAL” CORTEX PLASTICITY IN CONGENITAL BLINDNESS Shipra Kanjlia1, Connor Lane1, Lisa
Feigenson1, Marina Bedny1; 1Johns Hopkins University — How does input as

opposed to intrinsic physiology determine cortical function? In blindness,
“visual” cortices are recruited for non-visual functions, including language
and numerical processing (e.g. Bedny et al., 2011, PNAS; Lane et al., 2015,
JoN; Kanjlia et al., in-prep). We asked whether functional connectivity of
visual cortex to non-occipital networks predicts functional plasticity within
visual cortex. While undergoing fMRI, congenitally blind (n=17) and
sighted adults (n=19) performed a math task and a language comprehension task. In the math task, participants judged whether the value of an
unknown variable was the same across two equations (e.g. 7-2=x, 8-3=x).
In the language task, participants answered yes/no questions about sentences. A subset of these blind (n=13) and sighted (n=9) adults completed
a resting state scan. In blind individuals, separate regions of visual cortex
responded to math and language tasks (Lane et al., 2015, JoN; Kanjlia et
al, in-prep). Crucially, we find that this functional dissociation is predicted
by functional connectivity. Activity in math-responsive visual cortex was
more correlated with activity in math-responsive prefrontal cortex (PFC)
than language-responsive PFC. The reverse was true for language-responsive visual cortex (seed-by-ROI interaction: F(1,12)=25.22, p<0.001). This
dissociation was specific to the blind group (seed-by-ROI-by-group interaction: F(1,20)=4.80, p=0.04). Math- and language-responsive sub-regions
within primary visual cortex, V1, exhibited the same dissociation pattern

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

129

Poster Session C	
(seed-by-ROI interaction: F(1,12)=13.90, p=0.003, seed-by-ROI-by-group
interaction: F(1,20)=3.98, p=0.06). Thus, functional reorganization of deaffrented visual cortex is predicted by functional connectivity. These results
suggest that input plays a key role in determining cortical function.

LANGUAGE: Other
C86
A BEHAVIORAL AND FMRI EXAMINATION OF RHYTHMIC PRIMING ON SPEECH PRODUCTION Layla Gould1, Marla Mickleborough1,
Chelsea Ekstrand1, Eric Lorentz1, Ron Borowsky1; 1University of Saskatchewan —

Both speech and music perception/production involve sequences of rhythmic events that unfold over time. The presence of rhythm in both processes
has motivated researchers to consider whether musical and speech rhythm
engage shared neural regions (Patel, 2008), and whether musical rhythm
can influence speech processing (Cason & Schön, 2012). The aim of these
experiments was to explore the connection between rhythm and reading by
examining whether reading aloud is affected by the presentation of a rhythmic prime that was either congruent or incongruent with the syllabic stress
of the target letter string. We employed a new paradigm (Gould et al., 2015)
in which target words have stress on the first syllable for nouns, and on the
second syllable for verbs. Thus, our design used identical noun-verb word
pairs (CONflict vs. conFLICT), as well as their corresponding pseudohomophones (KONflikt vs. konFLIKT). The results demonstrated that reaction
times were faster when the rhythmic prime was congruent with the syllabic
stress, and slower when the rhythmic prime was incongruent. The functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiment aimed to identify the
brain networks that underlie the priming effect of rhythm on speech, and
particularly the putamen’s involvement given recent research suggesting
its role in phonetic decoding. We conclude that a rhythmic prime matched
to the syllabic stress of a letterstring aids reading processes, and that a network involving the putamen and other regions is involved. These findings
have implications for developing neurobiological models of reading, and
may have clinical applications (e.g., Parkinson’s disease).

C87
EXAMINING NARRATIVE DISCOURSE DEFICITS IN TBI USING
COH-METRIX Andre Lindsey1, Carl Coelho1, Frank Krueger2, Jordan Grafman3;
1

The University of Connecticut, 2George Mason University, 3The Rehabilitation
Institute of Chicago — Narrative discourse is a multifaceted process requir-

ing active retrieval of stored information paired with coordinated linguistic output in which the speaker is actively accounting for the knowledge
of the listener. Macrolinguistic discourse deficits are common sequela of
traumatic brain injury (TBI) and are associated with memory and executive function impairments. Individuals with TBIs often produce narratives
that lack critical story components and have reduced episode structure.
Changes to language output following TBI reflect alterations to the neural
system’s ability to organize and efficiently produce pertinent content. 171
veterans of the Vietnam War (126 TBI) participated in a battery of neuropsychological testing and discourse analyses. Participants were asked to
retell a wordless picture story immediately after viewing it and then again
30-minutes later. Utilizing Coh-Metrix, narratives were analyzed for referential cohesion, lexical diversity, and syntactic complexity. Significant
within group and between group differences were observed for TBI and
non-brain injured control (NBI) groups. TBI participants displayed difficulty retrieving and organizing information when immediately retelling
the narrative. Following the 30-minute time delay, narratives produced by
the TBI group resembled the NBI group. Discriminant function analyses
(DFA) were employed to determine the accuracy of the selected measures
in classifying the participants into their respective groups. Using Coh-Metrix measures of description, referential cohesion, and syntactic complexity,
the DFA accurately identified 66.7% of TBI participants and 68.9% of NBI
participants. These findings indicate that microlinguistic Coh-Metrix measures were not able to discriminate TBI and NBI groups as accurately as
measures of story grammar and content.

2016 Annual Meeting

C88
PHONEMIC RESTORATION IN ADULTS WITH SPECIFIC LANGUAGE
IMPAIRMENT F. Sayako Earle1, Stephanie Del Tufo1,2, Megan Speed1, Emily B.
Myers1,2; 1University of Connecticut, 2Haskins Laboratories — Individuals with

developmental dyslexia and specific language impairment (SLI) have both
been observed with deficits in identifying speech in noise (Ziegler et al.,
2009; Ziegler et al., 2005). A prior investigation by Del Tufo and Myers
(2014) demonstrated that adults with developmental dyslexia are less
susceptible to the illusory effects of phonemic restoration (Warren, 1970)
when compared to good readers. The salience of phonemic restoration is
determined by the degree to which lexical information influences perception (Samuel, 1981); therefore, adults with dyslexia may be more reliant on
low-level acoustic information in processing spoken language (which may
account for difficulties in identifying speech in noise). In order to determine if speech perception deficits in SLI arise from similar over-reliance on
bottom-up information, we extended the phonemic restoration paradigm
from Del Tufo and Myers (2014) to adults with SLI and typical adults (TD).
We performed a 2x3 Mixed ANOVA on performance measures (d’ scores)
by Group (TD and SLI) and restoration Condition (words, pseudowords,
segments). Preliminary results indicate a main effect of condition (a greater
illusory effect for words than isolated segments) but no main effect of
Group nor interaction between Condition*Group. Therefore, those with
SLI appear to restore phonemic information guided by lexical information
similarly to TD adults. This may suggest that the speech perception deficits
observed in SLI arise from a fundamentally different mechanism from the
perceptual deficits observed in those with dyslexia.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
C89
THE EFFECTS OF DISTRACTING INFORMATION ON LANGUAGE
PRODUCTION: THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF SEMANTIC INFERENCE, PHONOLOGICAL FACILITATION, AND TARGET PICTURE
FREQUENCY Avery Rizio1, Michele Diaz1; 1The Pennsylvania State University
— Behavioral research indicates that naming is slowed when pictures are

presented with unrelated words. This interference is exacerbated when the
target and distractor are semantically related, but alleviated when they are
phonologically related. Past research has explored the neural correlates of
picture naming as a function of distractor type, but has yet to investigate
how target characteristics may influence patterns of activation. The current
study used fMRI and behavioral measures to investigate whether target
frequency modulated brain activity as a function of distractor type in 20
healthy young adults. Successful picture naming with phonological distractors elicited greater activation in bilateral angular gyrus, left supramarginal
gyrus, and left superior parietal lobe, compared to naming with unrelated
distractors. Picture naming with semantic distractors elicited greater activation in bilateral angular gyrus and right superior and middle frontal gyri,
compared to naming with unrelated distractors. Naming with phonological
distractors, compared to semantic distractors, was associated with greater
activation in right supramarginal gyrus, right insula, and left postcentral
gyrus. Target frequency modulated activation in left paraphippocampal
gyrus and middle and inferior temporal gyri, such that greater activation
was associated with higher frequency targets only when semantic distractors were presented. Frequency also modulated activation in left superior
temporal gyrus and orbitofrontal cortex such that greater activation was
associated with lower frequency targets that appeared with a nonword distractor. All results were cluster corrected (FDR, p<.05). Results suggest that
while higher frequency targets are associated with greater semantic interference, frequency does not affect phonological facilitation.

C90
WHEN LANGUAGE MEETS MEMORY: LANGUAGE USE MODULATES RELATIONAL SEMANTIC PROCESSING IN BILINGUALS

Eugenia Marin-Garcia1, Pedro M. Paz-Alonso1; 1Basque Center on Cognition,
Brain and Language (BCBL) — Understanding the effects of the active use of a
language in our everyday life on how we remember is a relevant goal in our
growing bilingual world. Research evidence suggests that second language
use changes the ability to access semantic representations in the native

130

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting	
language. However, the consequences of this effect on relational semantic
processing and on episodic memory are unknown. Here, we examined the
influence of language use on relational semantic processing utilizing the
Deese-Roediger-McDermott (DRM) paradigm with highly proficient Spanish–Basque early bilinguals. Participants were divided in two groups based
on their language use: balance bilinguals (BB), if they use both languages
to the same extent; and unbalance bilinguals (UB), if they use more one of
their languages. Participants studied DRM word lists that converge on a
semantic theme captured in a critical word never presented in the list. The
strength of semantic association among list items was manipulated (low,
high). After encoding, participants performed an old/new recognition test
that included studied words, critical lures, and unrelated lures. Participant
underwent two experimental sessions in consecutive days that followed the
same procedure, but encountering different language (Spanish or Basque)
each day. BB exhibited more false memories to critical lures for high vs.
low strength association lists across both languages. UB showed more false
memories to critical lures only for the high strength association lists, in their
less vs. more use language. These results may reflect a more active engagement in relational semantic processing for the less use language in UB.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other
C91
GENERALIZATION EFFECTS FOLLOWING A BRIEF TRAINING
SESSION IN A VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENT Justin Eroh1, Omid Dehzangi2,

Nikki Shah1, Roozbeh Jafari1, Michael A. Kraut3, John Hart Jr.1; 1The University
of Texas at Dallas, TX, 2The University of Michigan at Dearborn, MI, 3The Johns
Hopkins Hospital, MD — Virtual environments (VE) provide multisensory

interactions that mimic real-life situations and are effectively used for skill
acquisition and rehabilitation. The degree to which the skills learned in
VE generalize to untrained behaviors remains unknown. Our goal was to
investigate whether one session of a VE task (sequentially pushing colored
cubes), that provided visual and vibrotactile feedback related to performance, could promote behavioral and neurophysiological changes on an
untrained behavior (response inhibition). Young adults completed either
an easy, repetitive version of the VE task (N=12, mean age = 26, 3 males)
or an adaptive version of the same task that forced participants to increase
their performance to meet changing task demands (N=12, mean age = 23.5,
4 males). Immediately before the VE task (pre) and one day after (post), participants’ EEG was recorded while completing two visual Go/Nogo tasks,
which were unrelated to the VE task and required different levels of semantic processing (simple or superordinate). The simple version required distinction between a car (Go) and dog (Nogo), while the superordinate version required categorization of 200 objects to guide either execution or or
inhibition of response. Both groups were significantly faster in the post-session superordinate Go/Nogo task, but the adaptive VE training group had
significantly earlier and larger P300 for inhibition trials, indicating that VE
training regimen we implemented affects neural circuits that are used to
execute other complex tasks, with consequent generalization of improved
performance in other cognitive domains.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
C92
RECALCULATING...PROCESSING WORDS, SCHEMAS, AND
IMAGES OF SPATIAL DIRECTIONS Steven Weisberg1, Sam Trinh1, Anjan
Chatterjee1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Describing spatial directions in lan-

guage is difficult in part because words parse continuous angles into discrete categories. Schemas, simplified visual depictions of concepts (arrows
in the case of spatial directions), provide a middle ground between words
and images, maintaining the categorical nature of words, despite having a
visuospatial format. Neuroimaging research on actions and prepositions
has revealed distinct brain regions are engaged in processing schemas more
than words and images (Amorapanth et al, 2012; Watson et al, 2014). In the
present study, we investigated how images, schemas, and words are processed for spatial directions. We created 21 exemplars of seven spatial directions for words and schemas, by varying the color, font/style, and size, and
images by collecting satellite images of roads. We presented stimuli serially

Poster Session C
in a continuous carryover sequence where each format (image, schema, or
word) and spatial direction combination followed every other. Participants
responded whether the spatial direction in the preceding trial matched the
current trial. Eliminating incorrect responses (5.35%), we found an advantage for processing schemas over images t(16) = 5.97, p < .001, and words
over images, t(16) = 2.14, p = .048. Additionally, the distance between the
angle of the preceding trial and the angle of the current trial correlated negatively with reaction time for images, one-sample t(16) = 3.29, p = .005, but
not for words or schemas (p’s > .41). These data suggest that schemas of
spatial directions are processed as quickly as words, and display response
patterns consistent with categorical processing.

C93
PACE YOURSELF: INTRAINDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY IN CONTEXT
USE REVEALED BY SELF-PACED EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIALS Brennan Payne1, Kara Federmeier1; 1University of Illinois — Event-related

potentials (ERPs) have revealed multiple mechanisms by which contextual
constraints impact language processing, but little work has examined the
trial-to-trial dynamics of context use. Recent reading time (RT) studies have
revealed substantial intra-individual variability, suggesting that a reader
may utilize multiple different sentence-processing strategies that wax and
wane over the course of an experiment and may be obscured in averages.
Such variability is overlooked in ERP studies that do not afford control over
the rate of input. To assess intra-individual variability in context use, we
utilized a concurrent self-paced reading and ERP paradigm. Participants
read sentences that were strongly or weakly constraining and completed
with an expected or unexpected word. Our findings revealed both quantitative and qualitative changes in the ERP as a function of target word
RTs. Slower RTs were associated with a slightly smaller N400s. Additionally, prediction-related costs varied as a function of RTs. For faster RTs, a
frontal positivity was seen to unexpected endings in strongly constraining
sentences, replicating prior rapid-serial presentation results. Importantly,
an anterior N200 was found among unexpected items that generated the
slowest RTs, reflecting the cognitive control of motor execution. Collectively, our findings suggest that effects of context vary across trials within
a single individual during the construction of message-level semantic representations. Co-registering behavioral and neural effects of context offers
a window into these single-item dynamics.

C94
A BRAIN-BASED ACCOUNT OF “BASIC-LEVEL” CONCEPTS Andrew

J. Bauer1, Marcel A. Just1; 1Carnegie Mellon University — This study provides

a brain-based account of how object concepts at an intermediate (“basic”)
level of specificity are represented, offering an enriched view of what it
means for a concept to be a “basic-level” concept, a research topic pioneered by Rosch and others. Applying machine learning techniques to
fMRI data, it was possible to determine the semantic content encoded in
neural concept representations at different levels of abstraction. Rosch et al.
(1976) proposed that a basic-level concept (e.g. “bird”) summarizes its subordinates in terms of general properties (the fact that birds have feathers)
and also in terms of more specific properties that frequently occur among
its subordinates (a bird’s sharp beak), whereas a subordinate-level concept (e.g. “robin”) is defined primarily by specific properties (a robin’s red
breast). Both basic- and subordinate-level concepts were neurally represented in temporal and occipital cortex, which likely encode specific visual
properties of the objects. Basic-level concepts additionally contained representational elements in frontal language and parietal association areas,
indicating additional abstract or supramodal content. Furthermore, basiclevel concepts (e.g. “fish”) were representative of their category in that they
were neurally similar to their typical but not atypical subordinate concepts
(i.e. similar to “bass” but not “minnow”). These results provide a brainbased account of the advantage that basic-level concepts enjoy in everyday
life over subordinate-level concepts: the basic level is a broad representation that encompasses both concrete and abstract semantic content.

C95
ACTIVATION IN SEMANTIC PROCESSING NETWORKS AND LANGUAGE SKILL IN BENIGN EPILEPSY WITH CENTROTEMPORAL
SPIKES Thomas Maloney1, Jeffrey Tenney1, Tracy Glauser1, Diego Morita1, Jennifer Vannest1; 1Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center — Children with
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

131

Poster Session C	
Benign Epilepsy with Centrotemporal Spikes (BECTS), a common pediatric
epilepsy, have few seizures but frequent electrophysiologic abnormalities
that may be associated with difficulties in language and other cognitive
skills. We used functional MRI and a semantic decision – tone decision
task to examine the effect of BECTS on activation in semantic processing
networks. Language and cognitive skills were assessed using standardized
measures. 27 children with BECTS (age 5-12, 12F) and 41 typically-developing children (age 5-12, 20F) participated. Groups did not differ in full-scale
IQ (p>.40); but differed in language skill (Clinical Evaluation of Language
Fundamentals, CELF; BECTS mean=96.1, control mean=102.6 [t(66)=2.08,
p<.05]). Typical fMRI preprocessing (skull-stripping, slice timing correction, motion correction, normalization) was performed using FSL (FMRIB’s
Software Library). A GLM analysis was used to examine group composite activation in BECTS patients and typically-developing children for
semantic>tones. Regions of significant activation (z>3.71, p<.05 corrected)
included bilateral, but strongly left-lateralized inferior frontal gyrus, inferior/middle temporal gyri, frontal pole/anterior cingulate and subcortical regions. Regions more active for tones>semantic were bilateral auditory processing regions in planum temporale/planum polare. We also
used regression analysis to examine the relationship between activation
during the semantic task and CELF scores. No significant relationship was
observed in typically-developing children. However, in BECTS patients,
activation in left superior temporal and parietal regions, left pre/postcentral gyrus, anterior cingulate, and subcortical regions was associated with
higher CELF scores (z>2.3, p<.05 corrected). This suggests that changes in
networks supporting semantic processing underlie variability in language
skill in BECTS.

C96
EFFECTS OF SENTENTIAL CONSTRAINT AND EXPECTANCY ON
SUBSEQUENT MEMORY IN OLDER ADULTS Joost Rommers1, Ryan J.
Hubbard1, Kara D. Federmeier1; 1University of Illinois — Research on sentence

processing has revealed multiple strategies for using contextual information, which are differentially available to younger and older adults. Here,
we used ERPs to investigate the impact of using these strategies on later
memory. In a previous study, younger adults read expected or unexpected
words in strongly constraining sentences (“The children went outside to
play/look”) or weakly constraining sentences (“Joyce was too frightened
to move/look”). When their memory for words was tested, they false
alarmed to lures that they had not seen but that fit in the context (“play”
after reading “The children went outside to look”). In the present study,
older adults also exhibited this behavior, but the brain activity at test was
strikingly different. In young adults, distinguishing lures from old words
was reflected in the N400, suggesting familiarity-based processing. In the
older adults, distinguishing lures from old words was reflected in the LPC,
suggesting recollective processing, which seemed to help overcome initial
luring at the N400 stage. Responses to lures could also be traced back to
sentence processing, where more positive-going frontal ERPs to unexpected sentence endings were associated with subsequent correct rejections
of lures. Inconsistent with a prediction explanation, this effect did not differ
by constraint. Taken together, the two age groups’ different mechanisms
for rejecting words that fit the context but were not experienced were evident during both reading and memory. Thus, older adults’ different use of
context affects not only their online processing of text, but also their later
memory for it.

C97
REPEATED METAPHORICAL USE OF VERBS RESULTS IN
ABSTRACTION OF MEANING Anja Jamrozik1, Andrew Bock1, Lorna
Quandt1,2, Anjan Chatterjee1; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2Gallaudet University —

Embodied cognition accounts posit that language comprehension relies on
simulation of sensory and motor experiences. For example, to understand
the sentence ‘The crow flew into the nest’, we would simulate experiences
associated with flying. The same should be the case for metaphorical uses,
such as ‘The banker crawled through the contract’. Previous results are
mixed. Some studies found equivalent activation in sensorimotor areas for
both metaphorical and literal uses, while others found greater activation
for literal compared to metaphorical uses. We hypothesize that metaphor
familiarity may explain these differences: repeated metaphor exposure
results in abstraction of word meaning and reduced sensorimotor simula-

132

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
tion. To test this hypothesis, we familiarized participants to metaphorical
and literal verb uses during an fMRI scan. Verbs had either a strong motion
association (e.g., crawling) or auditory association (e.g., rattling). Each verb
use was repeated five times. Functional localizers were used to identify
cortical areas related to motor movement and visual-motion processing
(for the motion verbs), and auditory processing (for the auditory verbs).
We compared activation for metaphorical vs. literal sentences within these
regions of interest for the first and fifth sentence exposures. Preliminary
results support our hypothesis that repeated metaphor exposure results
in abstraction and reduced sensorimotor simulation. Activation of sensorimotor areas was comparable for metaphorical vs. literal sentences during
the first exposure. By the fifth exposure, however, sensorimotor areas were
generally less active for metaphorical than literal sentences, suggesting
decreased need for simulation.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Development &
aging
C98
FACTORS PREDICTING SUCCESSFUL VERBAL LEARNING IN OLD
AGE Jorge Yanar1, Mark Albert1, Carolyn Martsberger1, Robert G Morrison1;
1

Loyola University Chicago — The ability to learn new information is critical
for successful aging, and deficits in this ability is diagnostic for Alzheimer’s
disease and its precursor Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment. Research
has suggested that executive function may be a critical factor affecting
memory function particularly in the face of age-related of pathologic degeneration in the medial temporal lobe. To investigate the factors important for
successful verbal learning in old age we recruited 54 older adults (65 - 91
YO) from the Northwestern University Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer’s Disease Center Clinical Core. In addition to completing the UDS neuropsychological battery (Weintraub et al., 2009) participants also learned
visual categories via trial-by-trial feedback and performed a visual Go - No
Go task. Verbal learning ability was assessed using the delay score from
the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT). In order to determine
which variables contributed strongly to the prediction of RAVLT, stratified
K-folds cross validation with k = 6 (N = 54) was performed, and an optimal
regularization parameter with which to do regularized linear regression
(Lasso) was extracted. Category learning accuracy and No-Go accuracy
were the best predictors of RAVLT score. Of the neuropsychological tests
in the UDS, only the Boston Naming Task, a measure of verbal language
functioning, survived as a strong predictor. The resulting model explained
approximately 30% of the variance in RAVLT score. These results provide
additional evidence that executive functions are likely critical for providing
resilience to age related changes in the long-term memory system.

C99
RECOLLECTION-RELATED CHANGES IN CONNECTIVITY ACROSS
THE ADULT LIFESPAN Danielle King1, Marianne de Chastelaine1, Michael
Rugg1; 1University of Texas at Dallas — Healthy aging is marked by a decline

in episodic memory, but the neural mechanisms underlying age-related
differences are unclear. We previously demonstrated that young adults
exhibit recollection-related increases in connectivity between a broadly distributed set of brain regions. Importantly, the magnitude of these effects
correlated across individuals with recollection performance. Here, we
investigated recollection-related changes in connectivity and their relationship with performance across three age groups. Young, middle-aged,
and older adults were scanned while making associative recognition judgments about previously encoded word pairs. We parcellated the brain
into 271 regions and used psychophysiological interactions (PPI) analysis to estimate the magnitude of recollection-related connectivity change
between each pair of regions. For each pair of regions, a separate regression
model tested the fraction of variance in connectivity change that could be
explained by age group, recollection performance, and the age by performance interaction. The results revealed a significant age by performance
interaction for a number of pairs of regions. In the vast majority of cases this
was due to a weakening in the relationship between connectivity change
and performance with increasing age. Other pairs of regions exhibited a
main effect of age, most of which reflected increased connectivity change
with increasing age. These findings demonstrate that when performance is

2016 Annual Meeting	
held constant, older adults show greater recollection-related connectivity
change than younger adults, suggesting a possible age-related compensatory mechanism. The weaker relationship between performance and connectivity change in older individuals might reflect age-related decline in
neuromodulatory input to the cortex.

C100
HEALTHY AGING INFLUENCES THE RELATION BETWEEN SUBJECTIVE VIVIDNESS AND NEURAL RECRUITMENT DURING EMOTIONAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL Jaclyn Ford1, Elizabeth Kensinger1; 1Boston

College — Age is associated with a behavioral shift toward more positive

memory retrieval. Recent findings from our lab suggest that age-related
increases in prefrontal activity and decreases in prefrontal-medial temporal
lobe connectivity may support this effect during retrieval. In the current
study, a parametric modulation analysis was conducted to examine the
relation between neural activity and vividness ratings. Participants (ages
18-85) encoded visual images paired with verbal titles. During a scanned
retrieval session, they were presented with titles and asked whether each
had been seen with an image during encoding. Participants provided
vividness ratings following retrieval of each image. Age was associated
with greater decreases in vividness ratings for negative than for positive events, suggesting a selective weakening of subjective vividness for
negative events. Neurally, age was linked with greater vividness-related
recruitment of medial prefrontal cortex during retrieval of negative events.
In other words, older adults were more likely to recruit medial prefrontal regions during retrieval of negative events that they later rated as less
vivid compared to those that they later rated as more vivid, but this same
relation did not exist in young adults. It is likely that these trial-by-trial
changes ultimately contribute to decreases in negative event vividness in
older relative to young adults. These findings are consistent with studies
that reveal age-related enhancements in emotion regulation, and suggest
that older adults may be engaging in these processes during retrieval of
negative events.

C101
RELATIONAL MEMORY IN INFANTS: 9-MONTH-OLD INFANTS
CAN ACTIVATE ASSOCIATED PROCESSING AREAS TO ONCE PRESENTED STIMULI John Walker1, Kathy Low1, Neal Cohen1, Monica Fabiani1,
Gabriele Gratton1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — The point at

which infants can start to create and utilize relational memories from single
episodes has yet to be established. Some studies have been able to show
that associations can be created as early as three months (e.g. Rovee-Collier
et al., 1980), but it typically takes multiple trials for infants to learn these
associations. Memory for associations formed after a single trial is normally
attributed to well after the first year but there is eye tracking evidence that
infants may demonstrate this type of memory (Nelson & Richmond, 2009).
Here we tested the ability for 9-month-old infants to demonstrate relational
memory using the Event-Related Optical Signal (EROS) technique. This
optical imaging technique allows us to get cm precision on a ms timescale
to examine whether infants can show the same type of relational activation
to the presentation of one item in a episodically learned pair as is present in
young adults (Walker et al., 2014). We had infants listen to nonsense sounds
two times with the first presentation either by themselves or with a short
video clip. We found that those sounds that were previously paired with
movies activated visual cortices whereas the sounds that were not paired
with movies showed no such activity demonstrating the first finding of single-trial relational memory in the brain in infants this young. Furthermore
we found that infants look at the screen more for those sounds that were
paired with movies, demonstrating that this brain activity also manifests in
behavior at this age.

C102
THE EFFECT OF GENERATING ASSOCIATIONS ON FUNCTIONAL
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING ACTIVATION IN MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT Chris Foster1, Shaina Garrison1, Daniel Kaufer1, Kath-

leen Welsh-Bohmer2, Kelly Giovanello1; 1University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, 2Duke University — Prior research has shown that relational encoding
is supported by two mechanisms, binding and generation. Binding processes, supported by the hippocampus, degrade in both cognitively normal

Poster Session C
(CN) older adults and patients with mild cognitive impairment due to
Alzheimer’s disease (MCI-AD). Patients with MCI-AD also tend to show
hyperactivation of the hippocampus during relational encoding. Generation processes are supported by frontal regions; however, substantially less
work has been conducted on how the generation of associations are altered
by MCI-AD. In the current study, we used functional magnetic resonance
imaging to scan both MCI-AD and CN older adults during intentional
encoding of word pairs. Participants either read a sentence or generated
a sentence that associated the two words. We hypothesized that frontal
activation would increase when participants generated their own sentences
and that MCI-AD participants would show hyperactivity in frontal regions.
Behaviorally, both MCI-AD and CN participants showed greater memory
for word pairs in the sentence generation condition. Task based activation
results were analyzed with an analysis of variance using group and encoding task as factors. Preliminary results showed a main effect of encoding
task, where the generation of sentences showed greater recruitment of the
left inferior frontal gyrus. The analysis also revealed a main effect of group,
where MCI-AD participants exhibited hyperactivity in the bilateral hippocampus and several frontal regions including the bilateral inferior frontal
gyrus. These results extend prior research by showing that both CN and
MCI-AD older adults recruit frontal regions to support generation processes.

C103
THE DEVELOPMENTAL TRAJECTORY OF EMOTION EFFECTS ON
SUBSEQUENT MEMORY: EVIDENCE FROM BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR Anais Stenson1, Jacqueline Leventon2, Patricia Bauer1; 1Emory University,
2

California State University, San Bernardino — Adults remember emotional
events better than neutral events. This emotional memory enhancement
(EME) effect appears in behavioral and neural measures. Children as
young as 5 respond to emotion during encoding, yet EME effects on subsequent memory might emerge only later in childhood (Leventon, Stevens,
& Bauer, 2014). To map emotion effects on memory across development,
we examined EME effects in 8-10, 11-13, and 14-16-year-olds by recording event-related potentials (ERPs) and behavioral responses while participants viewed positive, negative, and neutral photographs. Two weeks
later, we tested old/new recognition. The ERPs recorded during encoding were back-sorted according to subsequent memory performance. Corrected recognition performance (proportion of hits minus false alarms)
differed significantly between emotions (F(2,176)=79.6, p<.001) but not age
groups (F(2,88)=.15, p=.86). For correctly remembered pictures, ERPs in an
early post-stimulus window (150-350 ms) differed significantly between
age groups (F(2,71)=3.56, p=.03), but not emotions (F(2,142)=.406, p=.67). In
contrast, late ERPs (1000-1500ms) differed significantly between emotions
(F(2,142)=7.01, p=.001), but not age groups (F(2, 71)=.892, p=.414). Together,
behavioral performance and the late ERP data suggest that the EME effect
is largely consistent from childhood through the teenage years. However,
age differences in the early ERPs indicate that the temporal dynamics of
emotion processing continue to develop throughout this period. Forthcoming analyses will investigate how neural responses differ according
to memory performance, emotion, age, time window, and recording site.
Together, these data will provide insight into the developmental trajectory
of emotional effects on memory.

C104
SEX-DEPENDENT AGE EFFECTS ON ANTERIOR HIPPOCAMPAL VOLUME AND AGE-DEPENDENT SEX EFFECTS ON SPATIAL MEMORY: COMPARING YOUNG, MIDDLE-AGED AND OLD
ADULTS. Kristin Nordin1, Agneta Herlitz2, Elna-Marie Larsson1, Hedvig Söder-

lund1; 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Karolinska Institutet, Solna,
Sweden — Age-related decreases are often observed in memory performance
and hippocampal volume, although most studies compare only young and
old groups, not including middle-aged adults. Here, 176 healthy men and
women in three age-groups (young 20-35; middle-aged 40-50; old 60-70)
underwent structural MRI and testing on spatial and episodic memory
to establish a possible link between memory function and hippocampal volume in healthy aging. As it is unclear if the anterior and posterior
regions of the hippocampus are affected differently by aging, and if these
regions are differentially involved in spatial and episodic memory, they
were here analyzed separately. Both spatial and episodic memory declined

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

133

Poster Session C	
with age, and this decline did not differ between men and women. Men
outperformed women on spatial memory, but only in the young and middle-aged groups, indicating a possible age-related effect of sex in spatial
memory. Episodic memory performance was equal in men and women.
Unlike the effects in memory performance, voxel-based morphometry
(VBM) analyses suggested sex-dependent effects of age on hippocampal
volume; only men showed a reduction in volume, in bilateral anterior hippocampus. Although reductions in volume and a decline in memory performance were observed, there was no correlation between performance
and hippocampal volume. We conclude that sex is important to consider
when studying effects of age on hippocampal volume and that sex-differences in spatial memory might be age-related.

C105
CROSS-CULTURAL DIFFERENCES IN THE NEURAL CORRELATES
OF SPECIFIC AND GENERAL RECOGNITION Laura E. Paige1, John
C. Ksander1, Hunter A. Johndro1, Angela H. Gutchess1; 1Brandeis University —

Research suggests culture influences how people perceive the world. Western cultures exhibit analytical processing, focusing on central or objectbased information, whereas Eastern cultures exhibit holistic processing,
focusing on contextual information. Extant work has shown that cultural
differences extend to memory specificity, such as how much perceptual
detail is remembered. The present study investigated cross-cultural differences (Americans vs. East Asians) in the neural correlates of general versus
specific memory. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
participants encoded pictures of everyday items in the scanner and 48 hours
later completed a surprise recognition test. The recognition test consisted of
same items (i.e., previously seen in scanner), similar items (i.e., same object
name, different features), or new items (i.e., items not previously seen in
scanner). Activation at encoding was analyzed as a function of recognition performance. We predicted greater activation in the right fusiform for
Americans compared to East Asians, as this region was implicated previously in encoding perceptual details. In contrast, the left fusiform should
be similarly engaged across both cultures, as this region contributes to general memory. Surprisingly, results revealed that East Asians activated the
left fusiform more than Americans for correct “same” responses compared
to correct “similar” responses. Interestingly, the observed left hippocampus activity differed between the two groups. East Asians engaged the left
hippocampus more for correct “same” versus correct “similar” responses,
whereas Americans engaged the hippocampus more for correct “similar”
versus correct “same” responses. Taken together, this suggests that perceptual and memory systems differ by culture.

C106
SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE SUPPORTS RELATIONAL INFERENCE IN
AGING BUT NOT IN AMNESIA Maria C. D’Angelo1, R. Shayna Rosenbaum1,2,

Jennifer D. Ryan1,3; 1Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, 2York University, 3University of Toronto — Amnesia and aging are both associated with impairments

in relational memory, which is critically supported by the hippocampus
and its connections. By adapting the transitivity paradigm, we show that
age-related impairments in inference are mitigated when judgments can
be predicated on known pairwise relations. However, such advantages are
not observed in amnesia. We report findings from an adult-onset amnesic
case (D.A.), as well as findings from a developmental amnesic case (N.C.).
Despite their differences in etiology and affected structures, N.C. and D.A.
perform similarly on the task – both show impaired relational learning and
transitive expression. Similar to other cases of developmental amnesia,
N.C. shows intact access to semantic information. Although N.C. is able
to use existing semantic information to support performance on known
pairwise relations, his semantic knowledge was insufficient to support
transitive expression. The present results suggest that the medial temporal
lobe and its connections play a critical role in inference beyond learning of
pairwise relations, and that inferential behaviour involves flexible probing
of memory space as well as the establishment of new relations.

134

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

C107
OLD SCENES BIAS RECOGNITION OF NEW FACES DURING
SOURCE MEMORY JUDGEMENTS: EVIDENCE FROM OLDER
ADULTS AT-RISK FOR MCI Celia Fidalgo1, Iva Brunec1,2, Lok-kin Yeung1,
Andy Lee1,2, Morgan Barense1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute — Associative memory deficits occurring with age are commonly

attributed to decline of hippocampal integrity. This region supports recollection of episodic contextual details and scene recognition. Older adults
with early mild cognitive impairment (MCI) additionally show decline in
perirhinal cortex integrity, a region supporting stimulus familiarity and
facial recognition. The current study examined the contributions of recollection and familiarity for scenes and faces in healthy older adults and
older adults at risk for MCI, and examined whether memory judgments
correlated with medial temporal lobe volumes. Participants completed a
source memory experiment. During the study phase, participants encoded
a series of face-scene pairs. At test, they made remember-know judgements
(Yonelinas, et al., 1998) towards a single face or scene. Immediately following, participants viewed a face and scene side-by-side and answered
“Were these images paired together at study?” We found that older adults
had impaired recollection for scenes relative to young adults, and that the
at-risk group had impaired familiarity for faces relative to their healthy
counterparts. Perirhinal cortex volume correlated with familiarity judgments for faces, but not for scenes. Lastly, the at-risk group false alarmed
more than the healthy group towards a face-scene pair when the scene was
old and the face was new. This suggests that impoverished face representations allow intact scene memory to inappropriately bias at-risk older adults
to falsely recognize novel faces.

C108
NETWORK ANALYSIS OF MEMORY DECLINE AND MAINTENANCE
IN AGING Matthew Stanley1, Simon Davis1, Ben Geib1, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke
University — The billions of neurons in the human brain are organized into a

complex system of local circuits and long range fiber pathways that can be
conceptualized as a network. This complex network forms the fundamental
infrastructure for distributed interactions among specialized brain systems
thought to give rise to all cognitive processes. Using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to construct large-scale white matter networks, we used graph
theory measures of degree and page rank centrality to investigate the relationship between age-related changes in nodal network properties and
episodic memory performance. Results indicated that the frontal superior
medial gyrus and right supplementary motor cortex had fewer connections
to disparate brain regions among older adults compared to young adults,
a pattern indicative of age-related decline irrespective of memory performance. However, page rank centrality tracked memory maintenance with
age in the right anterior parahippocampal gyrus and the right temporal
fusiform. There were no significance differences in page rank centrality for
these nodes between high performing older adults and young adults; however, there was a significant difference in page rank centrality between low
performing older adults and both high performing older adults as well as
young adults. Sustained and high magnitude page rank centrality for the
anterior division of the right parahippocampal gyrus and right temporal
fusiform supports episodic memory maintenance in older adults. We utilize a valuable, new framework for investigating brain structure as a largescale complex network with graph theory measures, which has the potential to expand upon our understanding of aging and memory.

C109
DEDIFFERENTIATION AND AGE-RELATED DECLINE IN ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY: A MULTIVARIATE FMRI INVESTIGATION Alexandra

Trelle1, Richard Henson2, Jon Simons1; 1University of Cambridge, 2MRC Cognition
and Brain Sciences Unit — Aging is thought to reduce the specificity of neural

representations across multiple cognitive domains. The present study
explored the potential contribution of such dedifferentiation to age-related
decline in memory for word-picture associations. Participants studied
eight pictures from two categories (4 objects, 4 scenes) multiple times, on
each occasion paired with a different word. Accordingly, some pairs were
closely related in content (e.g., sharing the same picture), whereas others
contained dissimilar content (e.g., an object versus a scene). At test, participants were presented a studied word together with a label corresponding to

2016 Annual Meeting	
one of the eight pictures, and decided whether they were previously paired
together, or a novel combination. During study, we found evidence for
reduced distinctiveness of neural representations with age across medial
temporal and fronto-parietal regions for both closely related and dissimilar pairs, whereas analogous declines in occipito-temporal regions were
evident only when pairs contained pictures from within the same category.
During test, patterns of neural activity associated with endorsing studied
pairs and rejecting rearranged pairs were less distinct in older adults across
many brain regions, suggesting a failure to adaptively engage strategic
retrieval processes, such as reinstatement and monitoring of retrieved content. Greater neural specificity with respect to both perceptual representations at study, and successful retrieval processes at test, was associated
with better memory performance in older adults. Together, the results lend
support to the proposal that dedifferentiation of neural responses contributes to age-related decline in associative memory.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
C110
IMPAIRED EPISODIC PROSPECTION DOES NOT IMPEDE THE
FLEXIBLE CONSTRUAL OF EVENTS ACROSS FUTURE TIME R.

Shayna Rosenbaum1,2, Donna Kwan1, Elisa Ciaramelli3, Carl F. Craver4; 1York University, Toronto, Canada, 2Rotman Research Institute, Toronto, Canada, 3Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Washington University, St. Louis, USA — Research

shows that damage to the hippocampus and its connections can affect both
the ability to remember past events and the ability to imagine or “pre-experience” future events. To what extent does impaired episodic prospection affect other types of future-oriented judgments and decisions? We
examined whether people with impaired episodic memory and prospection retain normal effects of temporal construal on prospective judgements
about the self – specifically, the tendency to construe the near future in concrete, detailed terms and the distant future in abstract, general terms. To
do so, patients and controls were administered two measures known to
be sensitive to manipulations of imagined temporal distance: prospective
agency and prospective confidence. Results indicated that despite episodic
amnesia, patients retained flexible construal of events as a function of temporal distance. Similar to controls, patients gave higher ratings of personal
agency and prospective confidence for events and activities framed in the
distant future than for those framed in the near future. These results suggest that at least some effects of temporal construal are independent of the
role of episodic prospection in imagining the future.

C111
HUMAN HIPPOCAMPAL THETA DURING FEEDBACK ON A SPATIAL
LEARNING TASK Jessica Creery1, David Brang1,2, Vernon Towle2, James Tao2,
Sasha Wu2, Ken Paller1; 1Northwestern University, 2University of Chicago — Feed-

back provided during the course of learning provides an opportunity to
modify incorrect associations. However, much remains to be learned about
the neural mechanisms of feedback-based memory modification. Accordingly, we used intracranial recording methods to examine oscillatory activity in the human hippocampus following feedback on a spatial learning
task. We recorded electrocorticographic (ECoG) responses from chronically
implanted hippocampal depth electrodes in four patients with epilepsy as
they learned object locations on a screen. First, objects were studied once,
sequentially, with each object in a unique location. Patients then saw each
object in the middle of the screen and used a mouse to attempt to place the
object in the correct location. The objects were then shown in the correct
location as feedback. This procedure continued until each object was placed
in the correct location two times. We compared oscillatory activity in the
hippocampus when each object was shown in the middle of the screen
(during retrieval) and when each object was shown in the correct location
(during feedback). Across patients, we consistently found that theta power
(3-8 Hz) was greater during feedback than during retrieval. In contrast,
during both feedback and retrieval there was an increase in high-frequency
activity (70-200 Hz). Further analyses relate these findings to responses
during initial encoding and to subsequent memory performance. Overall
the results suggest that hippocampal theta activity during feedback is associated with the memory modification engendered by the delivery of new
information.

Poster Session C

C112
HIPPOCAMPAL ACTIVITY ASSOCIATED WITH EYE MOVEMENT
MEASURES OF CUED RECALL Alexandra M. Gaynor1, Lisa A. Solinger2,

Elizabeth F. Chua1,3; 1The Graduate Center, The City University of New York,
2
Washington University in St. Louis, 3Brooklyn College, The City University of New
York — Relatively few fMRI studies have investigated cued recall because

of difficulties associated with collecting verbal responses during scanning.
We used eye movements to index recall while participants completed a
memory task in the scanner. Participants studied pairs of objects during an
associative memory paradigm that resembles the board game “Memory”.
Participants were presented with a grid of face-down “cards”. During each
study trial, two unique, nonmatching cards were upturned. Like the game,
participants were instructed to remember where matching cards were
located and, in addition, to remember which cards were presented at the
same time. Each test trial included a cued-recall phase—wherein a single
card was upturned and participants were asked to look to the location of
the card that appeared at the same time—followed by a 3-alternative forced
choice recognition phase. In our analyses, an eye movement to the correct
location indexed recall, whereas a lack of eye movements to the correct
location indicated a failure to recall. Of all the trials that were correctly
recognized, there was, surprisingly, less hippocampal activity during correctly recalled trials compared to non-recalled trials (p<0.05, corrected at
the cluster level), with deactivation below baseline during recalled trials.
Although recollection has often been associated with greater hippocampal activity at retrieval, our findings are consistent with a small number
of studies that propose hippocampal deactivation may facilitate accurate
retrieval of associative spatial memory, perhaps reflecting a suppression of
the default mode network.

C113
AGE EFFECTS ON ENCODING-RELATED MODULATION OF HIPPOCAMPO-MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CONNECTIVITY Erin Horne1,2,
Marianne de Chastelaine1,2, Danielle King1,2, Jonathan Siegel1,2, Michael Rugg1,2;
1
University of Texas at Dallas, 2Center for Vital Longevity — Successful epi-

sodic encoding has been associated with enhanced functional connectivity between the hippocampus (HC) and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC).
Here, we examined whether this subsequent memory effect for HC-mPFC
connectivity differs across the lifespan. Samples of young (N=36), middle-aged, (N=36) and older (N=64) adults underwent fMRI scanning
while they undertook a study task involving semantically unrelated word
pairs. In a subsequent memory test, they discriminated between ‘intact’
and ‘rearranged’ pairs of studied items. The crucial fMRI contrasts were
between study pairs that went on to be correctly judged intact or incorrectly endorsed as rearranged. Univariate subsequent memory (SM) effects
(greater activity during successful relative to unsuccessful encoding) were
identified in the left HC in all age groups. The effects did not differ according to age, and correlated positively across participants with later memory
performance in an age-invariant manner. Using the left HC as a seed, psychophysiological interactions analysis (PPI) across all participants identified the mPFC as the principal region where connectivity was greater for
successfully than for unsuccessfully encoded study items. This effect did
not differ across age groups. The relationship across individuals between
the effect and a diffusion tensor imaging measure of white-matter integrity
(fractional anisotropy; FA) did differ significantly across groups however.
There was a reliable positive relationship between hippocampal-mPFC
connectivity change and FA of the anterior corpus callosum in young individuals only. By contrast, a positive relationship between FA of the left cingulum bundle and connectivity change was evident only in middle-aged
and older participants.

C114
DISTRIBUTED CORTICAL REPRESENTATIONS OF VISUAL FEATURES AND ITEMS IN PERCEPTION AND MEMORY Serra E. Favila1,
Rosalie Samide2, Brice A. Kuhl2; 1New York University, 2University of Oregon —

Neural activity patterns that reflect stimulus features during perception
are reactivated when that stimulus is retrieved from memory. For example, reactivation of high-level visual category information has frequently
been observed in ventral temporal cortex. However, recent evidence also
indicates that reactivation of event-specific information may occur in lateral

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

135

Poster Session C	

2016 Annual Meeting

parietal cortex. At present, there remains ambiguity regarding the nature of
reactivated representations in lateral parietal cortex and how these representations relate to those in visual cortical areas. To address this question
we had human subjects learn word-image associations for 32 unique object
stimuli that varied in color and object category membership. We scanned
subjects while they performed two different tasks involving these object
stimuli: perception and cued retrieval. During perception runs, subjects
viewed the objects while performing an orthogonal visual target detection
task. During retrieval runs, subjects were presented with word cues and
recalled the associated objects. We then analyzed fMRI activity patterns in
occipital and lateral parietal areas estimated from each task. We found that
color and object category information were represented in distinct occipital areas during both perception and retrieval. Additionally, comparison of
neural activity patterns across perception and retrieval revealed item-specific reinstatement within lateral inferior parietal cortex. Finally, we show
that reinstated item-level patterns in parietal cortex can be predicted from
reinstated feature-level patterns in visual cortex. These findings suggest a
role for parietal cortex in reading out and combining visual feature information during memory retrieval.

C115
SCANNING ALONG A LOGARITHMICALLY-COMPRESSED
MEMORY REPRESENTATION Inder Singh1, Aude Oliva2, Marc Howard1;
1

2

Boston University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology — Why does it take
longer to retrieve memories from further in the past? Distributed memory
models assume that memory is a composite store containing a noisy record
of features from all the studied items. In contrast, another class of models
proposes that features are stored along an ordered representation of experience. Both these frameworks can support the increase in response time
(RT) for older memories but make different predictions about the retrieval
characteristics. More specifically, this manifests in a change in the shape
of the RT distributions. We present the results from a continuous recognition experiment with the lag of a repeated stimulus ranged over more
than two orders of magnitude from lag 1 up to lag 128. Highly memorable
pictures were used to mitigate changes in accuracy and enable a detailed
examination of the effect of recency on retrieval dynamics. Analysis of the
RT distributions showed that the time at which memories became accessible changed with the log of the recency of the probe item (the distributions
started from 0 at different times and varied as a function of recency). Additional analyses revealed that this effect was not attributable to an effect of
immediate repetitions nor to increased processing fluency of the probe.
These results suggest that visual memories can be accessed by sequentially
scanning along a logarithmically-compressed representation of the past.

C116
RETRIEVING THE RIGHT MEMORY IN A REVERSAL LEARNING
TASK IS PREDICTED BY STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN
THE ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX AND MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE
Kylie H. Alm1, Ashley Unger1, Tehila Nugiel1, Hyden R. Zhang1, Ingrid R. Olson1;
1
Temple University — Reversal learning (RL) tasks exemplify the close rela-

tionship between decision-making and memory given the repeated pairings of a stimulus choice with a rewarding or punishing outcome. Over
time, participants learn to choose the stimulus that leads to more frequent
rewards. After initial acquisition of learned pairings, the reward contingencies are reversed. The ability to readily adapt to reversals is believed to
rely on a limbic circuit - the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), amygdala, and hippocampus – because damage to these regions harms RL performance. We
recently found that individual variation in a white matter tract connecting
these regions – the uncinate fasciculus (UF) – predicted RL performance
(Alm et al., 2015). However, UF variability did not predict acquisition performance, consistent with prior research demonstrating that damage to
the OFC, amygdala, and hippocampus does not affect learning of simple
stimulus-outcome contingencies. We hypothesized that the computational
demands of different types of retrieval may call on different neural systems. Retrieval demands after reversal are unique, since interference from
prior associations is high. To test this, we developed an RL task with multiple reversals in which retrieval competition was high during both acquisition and after reversal. Young adults learned to associate fractal patterns
with asterisks in particular spatial locations through trial and error. Using
diffusion imaging, we found that individual variation in UF microstructure

136

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

significantly predicted performance during both the acquisition and reversal phases. We, therefore, argue that learning and memory tasks with high
levels of retrieval competition call on the UF for resolution.

C118
JUDGMENT OF ENCODING SUCCESS ELICITS DIFFERENTIAL
FUNCTIONAL RESPONSE IN POSTEROMEDIAL CORTICES AND
HIPPOCAMPUS TO STIMULUS REPETITION Patrizia Vannini1,2, Donald

McLaren1,3,5, Kathryn Papp2, Sarah Agjayan2, Victoria Jonas1, Molly LaPoint1,
Courtney Martin1, Catherine Munro1, Alvaro Pascual-Leone4, Reisa Sperling1,2,3;
1
Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging and the Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown,
MA 02114, USA, 2Center for Alzheimer Research and Treatment, Department of
Neurology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA, 3Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA, 4Berenson-Allen Center for Noninvasive Brain Stimulation and Cognitive Neurology Unit, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA, 5Biospective,
Inc., Montreal, Quebec H4P 2R2, Canada — Judgment-of-learning (JOL) is an

aspect of metamemory whereby an individual evaluates whether he/she
has successfully learned information. Successful episodic memory consolidation has been associated with repetition suppression in the hippocampus
[e.g. Gonsalves et al., 2005], and repetition enhancement of the posteromedial cortex [e.g. Vannini et al., 2012] during encoding. It is unknown
whether an individuals’ judgment of encoding success elicits a comparable
reciprocal pattern of functional response as successful encoding repetition.
Here, we investigate the repetition-related changes for predicted encoding
success using an fMRI experiment involving repetitive encoding of face–
name pairs followed by a JOL task where the subject indicated if he/she
learned the name well, not so well or not at all. During the first encoding
trial, significant hippocampal activation was observed. The second encoding trial demonstrated a repetition suppression effect in the hippocampus,
for “learned well” stimuli (pFDR<0.001). No repetition suppression was
observed for “not learned well” or “not learned at all” stimuli. Furthermore, the posteromedial cortex demonstrated significant deactivation
during the initial encoding trial. The second encoding trial demonstrated
repetition enhancement for “learnt well” stimuli (pFDR<0.001). No repetition enhancement was observed in “not learnt well” or “not learnt at all”
stimuli. These findings demonstrate the underlying encoding processes
leading to a feeling that the information has been successfully learnt, which
is similar to the reciprocal pattern of repetition suppression and repetition
enhancement previously reported for successful episodic encoding. This
information will be useful for understanding late-life amnestic disorders,
when insight of memory performance might be compromised.

C119
AN EPISODIC SPECIFICITY INDUCTION IMPACTS ACTIVITY IN
A CORE BRAIN NETWORK DURING THE CONSTRUCTION OF
IMAGINED FUTURE EXPERIENCES Kevin P. Madore1, Karl K. Szpunar2,

Donna Rose Addis3, Daniel L. Schacter1; 1Harvard University, 2The University of
Illinois-Chicago, 3The University of Auckland — People produce more episodic

details about remembered past experiences and imagined future experiences after receiving an episodic specificity induction – brief training in recollecting the details of a recent experience – compared with control inductions not focused on episodic retrieval. Recent neuroimaging work also
suggests broad overlap in a core network of regions recruited for remembering and imagining. In the current study, we examined the neural signature of the specificity induction effect for imagined future experiences and
hypothesized that the induction would affect core network activity specifically. Using a within-subjects fMRI approach, 32 young adults received the
specificity induction or a control induction before imagining future experiences and completing semantic object definitions during scanning. After
receiving the specificity induction compared with the control, participants
exhibited significantly increased activity in several core network regions
for imagined experiences over object definitions, including the left anterior hippocampus, right inferior parietal lobule, right posterior cingulate
cortex, and right precuneus. Functional connectivity analyses with hippocampal and inferior parietal lobule seed regions and the rest of the brain

2016 Annual Meeting	
revealed stronger core network coupling following the specificity induction
compared with the control. In a post-scan interview, participants generated
more episodic but not semantic details related to their imagined experiences from the specificity induction, and did not differ in details generated
for object definitions as a function of induction, consistent with previous
work. These findings provide novel evidence that an episodic specificity
induction selectively targets episodic processes that are commonly linked
to core network regions, including the hippocampus.

C120
EVIDENCE FOR THE STRATEGIC ORIENTING OF EPISODIC
RETRIEVAL PROCESSES FROM PRE-STIMULUS NEURAL OSCILLATIONS Mason Price1, Emmitt Wright1, Jason lackey1, Elizabeth Griffiths2, Jef-

frey Johnson1; 1University of Missouri, 2University of Surrey — Several EEG and

fMRI studies have demonstrated that neural activity differs according to the
type of memory trace (e.g., word or picture) sought in an episodic retrieval
task. These ‘retrieval orientation’ (RO) effects have been shown with EEG
to onset relatively early (by about 300 ms) and to be evident for new test
items, suggesting that they effect reflect differential processing intended
to maximize the overlap between cues and potential memory traces. If
RO effects are indicative of preparatory processes that support retrieval,
they should also be evident prior to cue onset. However, EEG studies have
thus far focused on amplitude-based RO effects, thereby eliminating any
pre-stimulus differences due to baseline correction. In the present study,
we examined neural oscillations, which are relatively immune to amplitude
differences, to determine whether RO takes the form of preparatory activity. Subjects encoded a series of intermixed words and pictures and then
undertook exclusion memory tasks in which only one stimulus type was
targeted at a time, while new stimuli and the other type had to be rejected.
Oscillatory power in the theta and alpha ranges (4-12 Hz) differed over the
posterior scalp according to the targeted stimulus type. Moreover, these
differences were evident as early as 500 ms prior to stimulus onset, providing novel evidence that preparatory processing is differentially oriented
according to retrieval demands. The findings are discussed in the context
of determining the consequences of RO on successful memory retrieval and
assessing the effectiveness of trained retrieval strategies.

C121
THE RETROSPLENIAL CORTEX: WHAT DOES IT DO? Elizabeth

Chrastil1, Sean Tobyne1, Rachel Nauer1, Allen Chang1, Chantal Stern1; 1Boston
University — Interest in the retrosplenial cortex (RSC) has undergone a

renaissance in recent years. The role of RSC in episodic memory, spatial
navigation, visual imagery, and scene perception has sparked intense interest and debate regarding its contributions to cognition and behavior. The
lack of consensus in anatomical boundaries for localizing RSC complicates
research into its function. Previously reported anatomical and functional
definitions of retrosplenial cortex encompass a large area, suggesting
potential gradations of function along medial-lateral or anterior-posterior
axes, similar to those observed in the spatial scaling of hippocampal function, may be observed. We tested this hypothesis using fMRI meta-analysis and resting state functional connectivity (rsFC) methods. First, we used
NeuroSynth to derive domain-specific regions where 101 previous studies
consistently reported RSC activation; we linked those studies to the terms
episodic memory, navigation, scenes, imagery, or pain and emotion. Next,
we conducted meta-analyses using those domain-classified studies to
localize areas within RSC that were associated with one or more domains.
Results showed that left hemisphere medial RSC was closely tied to episodic memory. In contrast, posterior and lateral retrosplenial RSC was associated with both viewing scenes and navigation, although navigation was
spread more diffusely. Finally, we used these meta-analysis derived subregions to conduct whole brain rsFC analyses using data from the Human
Connectome Project. This analysis resulted in distinct connectivity patterns
for the retrosplenial subregions that differed along functional and anatomical lines. These findings support the conclusion that the RSC can be subdivided along anatomical and functional boundaries.

Poster Session C

C122
ASSOCIATIVE LEARNING, ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY, AND THE
ROLE OF PRIOR KNOWLEDGE Oded Bein1, Niv Reggev2, Anat Maril2; 1New

York University, 2The Hebrew University of Jerusalem — What are the neural

mechanisms that support learning and memory of new information? How
does prior knowledge influence these mechanisms? Here, we utilized representational similarity (RS) analysis combined with a prior knowledge
manipulation to track the learning of new associations. Participants learned
repeating pairs of either two novel faces, or a famous face and a novel face.
Behaviorally, learning was assessed by reaction times (RTs) during learning,
and by a final associative memory test. The RS between faces was assessed
before and after learning. We were interested in tracking two processes: A)
learning of the mere association, measured by increased RS between faces
that appeared together during encoding, versus pairs of faces that did not
appear together. B) Mediation of explicit-memory, which was measured
by a difference in RS between subsequently associative-hits and misses. It
was found that a host of cortical regions, previously implicated in prior
knowledge paradigms, exhibited learning-related increased RS, regardless
of subsequent explicit memory. Additionally, in the hippocampus, pairs
comprising subsequently associative-hits demonstrated higher similarity
compared to misses, which in turn did not differ in their RS from items that
were not studied together. Importantly, these effects were modulated by
prior knowledge. These results nicely dissociate mechanisms that govern
learning (cortex) and those that mediate explicit subsequent memory (hippocampus). Furthermore, they reveal a distinction between the processes
that underlie forming a thoroughly new association vs. adding new information to an already-existing knowledge structure.

C123
DOES THE FN400 REFLECT MORE THAN FAMILIARITY? ERP EVIDENCE FROM VIEWING PRE-EXPERIMENTALLY FAMILIAR AND
UNFAMILIAR PRODUCT IMAGES. Heather Bruett1, Jenna Krizan1, Brittany
Mok1, Danielle Stepien1, Ana Veloso1, P. Andrew Leynes1; 1The College of New
Jersey — A prior study provided evidence that pre-experimental familiarity

can influence later recognition memory judgments because pre-experimentally familiar products (i.e., name-brand) elicited a greater FN400 than offbrand, novel products (Bruett & Leynes, 2015: Neuropsychologia, 78, 41-50).
Because the name-brand products could be matched to off-brand counterparts (e.g., “Dr. Skipper” is an off-brand version of “Dr. Pepper”), three ERP
studies tested whether viewing a name-brand product would prime the
off-brand counterpart and whether priming would affect the FN400. Offbrand primed FN400 amplitudes were predicted to be more positive than
off-brand products if the FN400 reflects conceptual implicit memory (e.g.,
Voss et al., 2012), whereas equivalent FN400 amplitudes were expected for
both novel, off-brand product types if the FN400 reflects familiarity (e.g.,
Rugg & Curran, 2007). All three experiments report evidence that namebrand products prime off-brand products (i.e., faster response times) and
elicit more positive FN400 ERPs than off-brand products, which supports
the conceptual implicit memory hypothesis. However, meaningless image
ERPs provided a baseline comparison that uncovered variations in namebrand FN400 amplitude across the three experiments that co-varied with
number of name-brand products in the test sequence. Collectively, this evidence suggests that the FN400 reflects both conceptual implicit memory
and fluid, online monitoring influenced by expectations. Consequently, a
more general characterization of cognitive processing associated with the
FN400 is needed to explain the results because ‘familiarity’ or ‘conceptual
implicit memory’ hypotheses are incomplete.

C124
NETWORK PROPERTIES OF THE HIPPOCAMPAL SUBNETWORK
CONTRIBUTE TO SUCCESSFUL EPISODIC MEMORY RETRIEVAL

Benjamin R Geib1, Mathew L Stanley1, Nancy Dennis2, Marty Woldorff1, Roberto
Cabeza1; 1Duke University, 2Pennsylvania State University — Multivariate func-

tional-connectivity analyses of neuroimaging data have revealed the importance of complex, distributed interactions between disparate yet interdependent brain regions. Recent work has shown that certain configurations
of functional brain networks aid cognitive functioning. Networks supporting healthy, successful, cognitive functioning should exhibit high-levels
of both segregation (local processing) and integration (global processing).

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

137

Poster Session C	
After constructing functional brain networks derived from an event-related
fMRI study of memory retrieval, we examined differences in topological
properties between successful and unsuccessful memory retrieval. Multivariate graph-theory analyses showed that successful memory retrieval
was associated with the left hippocampus becoming both more locally segregated and globally integrated. Follow-up analyses revealed that, between
successful and unsuccessful memory-retrieval conditions, the left hippocampus significantly reorganized its set of direct connections. Subsequent
bivariate functional-connectivity analyses indicated that with retrieval
success the left hippocampus showed stronger interactions with a diverse
group of brain regions, including the left precuneus, left caudate, bilateral
supramarginal gyrus, and bilateral dorslolateral superior frontal gyrus.
This collection of regions was identified as a left hippocampal subnetwork.
While many of the nodes in the subnetwork had increased segregation and
integration from unsuccessful to successful retrieval, the integrative properties of the subnetwork (with or without the left hippocampus hub) were
most important in predicting individual subjects’ memory performance.
These findings underscore the potential of multivariate brain-connectivity research for providing valuable new insights into the neural bases of
memory processes, emphasize the importance of integrative processing in
the brain, and complement prior work using bivariate connectivity methodologies.

C125
THE ROLE OF GENETIC VARIATIONS IN DOPAMINE TRANSPORTER AND D2 RECEPTOR GENES ON ERP AND OSCILLATORY CORRELATES OF RECOGNITION MEMORY Robert Ross1, Paolo
Medrano1, Andrew Smolen2, Tim Curran2, Erika Nyhus3; 1University of New Hampshire, 2University of Colorado at Boulder, 3Bowdoin College — Dopamine has

been related to multiple facets of memory. Specifically, allelic variations of
both the dopamine transporter (DAT) and dopamine 2 (D2) receptor genes
influence recognition memory processes. Event-related potentials (ERPs)
and oscillatory activity underlie successful memory retrieval. Therefore,
individual differences in memory performance may be driven by genetic
variation in dopamine related genes through changes in ERP and oscillatory activity. EEG, genetic, and behavioral data were collected from sixty
participants as they performed an item recognition task. Participants studied and encoded 200 words, which were then mixed with 200 new words
during retrieval. Participants were monitored with EEG during the retrieval
portion of the task. Three ROIs were established and ERP mean amplitudes
and oscillatory activity when correctly remembering old items (hits) and
recognizing new items (correct rejections) were compared as a function of
DAT and D2 genetic group. Results show that participants homozygous for
the 10-repeat allelic variant of the DAT gene (10/10 homozygotes), which
results in increased dopamine transporter expression, are significantly
slower performing an item memory recognition task and show decreased
ERP amplitude during hits over left parietal scalp locations. Additionally,
10/10 homozygotes show a decrease in beta oscillatory power during hits
and an increase in alpha oscillatory power during correct rejections over
prefrontal scalp locations. In contrast, polymorphisms of the D2 gene did
not influence behavior, ERP, or oscillations during item memory. These
results show how DAT, but not D2, genetic variation influences the electrophysiological dynamics associated with recognition memory.

C126
SHIFTING THE BALANCE BETWEEN PATTERN SEPARATION AND
COMPLETION: RECENT MEMORY RETRIEVAL INCREASES PEOPLE’S SUBSEQUENT ABILITY TO RECALL ASSOCIATIONS Anuya
Patil1, Freha Mian1, Jihad El Sheikh1, Katherine Duncan1; 1University of Toronto —

Emerging evidence suggests that recent exposure to novelty can influence
how people subsequently use their episodic memory. Much of this work
has focused on novelty’s influence on encoding, so here we designed an
experiment to identify how recent novelty and familiarity judgments influence different aspects of memory retrieval, namely, associative memory
retrieval and item recognition memory. Participants (N=29) studied words
paired with trial-unique images of either objects or scenes. They then made
memory decisions, which simultaneously assessed whether they thought
the images were ‘old’ or ‘new’ (recognition memory) and if they could
remember the word associated with each image (associative retrieval).
Critically, we manipulated whether each retrieval decision occurred after

138

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
an unrelated novel or familiar image. We found that recently identifying an
image as familiar rather than novel improved participants’ subsequent ability to recall word associates (beta=0.29, SE=0.07, p=0.0001). Importantly,
this boost in associative retrieval was not driven by response priming or
conceptual priming; the preceding image had always been studied in a separate block and contained distinct material (objects vs. scenes). In contrast
to enhancing associative memory, recent familiarity judgments may have
impaired participants’ ability to identify old images (beta=-0.15, SE=0.1,
p=0.15), indicating that familiarity does not improve subsequent memory
retrieval as a whole. In conclusion, familiarity’s power to facilitate subsequent associative retrieval is consistent with the proposal that familiarity
elicits a lingering processing bias toward pattern completion whereas novelty elicits a bias towards pattern separation (Duncan, Sadanand, & Davachi, 2012).

C127
A SYSTEMATIC MEASURE OF PERCEPTUAL RELATEDNESS IN
FALSE MEMORIES Indira Turney1, Nancy Dennis1; 1Pennsylvania State University — Previous memory research has exploited the perceptual similari-

ties between lures and targets in order to evoke false memories. While some
studies have attempted to use lures that are objectively more similar than
others, no study has systematically investigated the role perceptual relatedness plays in accounting for the false alarm rate or the neural processes
underlying perceptual false memories. The current study looked to fill this
gap in the literature by using face morphing to systematically vary the
amount of perceptual overlap between lures and targets. Our results converge with previous studies in finding that true and false memories engage
many of the same neural regions, including frontal, parietal, and visual cortices, as well as a common pattern of differences wherein true memories
exhibit increased activation in medial temporal lobe and early visual cortex
and false memories exhibit increased activity in prefrontal and lateral
temporal cortices. Expanding upon this work, parametric analyses found
that activity within bilateral middle temporal gyri and right medial PFC
increased with respect to the similarity between lures and targets. Moreover, this pattern of activation was unique to false memories and could
not be accounted for by relatedness alone. Interestingly neither the medial
temporal lobe nor the fusiform face area exhibited modulation as a function
of target-lure relatedness. Collectively, results provide great insight into
understanding the computational processes of different regions within the
false memory network and further enhance our understanding of the role
perceptual similarity plays in mediating false memories.

C128
FEATURES IN PRIOR NIGHT’S SLEEP RELATE TO THE NEURAL
REPRESENTATION AND BEHAVIORAL MEASURES OF NEW MEMORIES Emily Cowan1, Anli Liu2, Sanjeev Kothare2, Orrin Devinsky2, Lila Davachi1;
1

New York University, 2NYU Langone School of Medicine — Systems memory
consolidation theories posit that memories are stabilized as they become
distributed throughout the cortex. Prior work has linked sleep architecture
with successful memory consolidation, but relatively little is known about
the role of a prior night’s sleep on new encoding. Initial evidence shows
specific features of sleep are related to post-nap learning, and that sleep
deprivation has a detrimental effect on subsequent encoding. However,
the aspects of a prior night’s sleep architecture related to the neural representation and behavioral expression of subsequently encoded information
remain unknown. To investigate this relationship, we designed a three-day
experiment utilizing overnight measurements of polysomnography, fMRI,
and behavior. Subjects were asked to encode sets of word-image pairs
before sleeping overnight (Sleep List) and also upon waking the next morning (New List). Later that day, subjects restudied all word-image pairs in an
fMRI scanner. Cued source recall was probed both immediately following
the scan and after a 24-hour delay, providing a measure of memory across
time. Analysis of fMRI data demonstrated a positive correlation between
duration of Stage 2 sleep and univariate activity in ventromedial prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and perirhinal cortex, specifically for the successfully recalled New List pairs. Activity in the medial temporal lobe regions
significantly correlated only with immediate memory performance. These
findings suggest duration of Stage 2 sleep may benefit encoding and the

2016 Annual Meeting	
immediate use of this information. Additional analyses will focus on the
relationship between other oscillatory signals during sleep with the neural
representation and behavioral expression of memory traces.

METHODS: Neuroimaging
C129
SPONTANEOUSLY ORGANIZED BRAIN STATES REVEALED BY
DYNAMIC MULTIVARIATE PATTERN ANALYSIS OF RESTING STATE
FMRI Richard Chen1, Kaustubh Kulkarni1, Takuya Ito1, Michael Cole1; 1Rutgers,
the State University of New Jersey - Newark — Resting state functional connec-

tivity MRI is increasingly used to characterize functional networks in the
human brain. We recently found that the resting state network architecture
is present across a wide variety of tasks, suggesting the general functional
relevance of resting state networks. This illustrates the importance of better
understanding the processes underlying the organization of resting state
neural activity. Recent literature has focused on resting state dynamics –
variability in the structure of resting state activity across time. However,
current methods use arbitrary temporal window lengths to characterize
network configurations, despite rapid and variable transitions in spontaneous activity. Furthermore, we hypothesized that spontaneous dynamics are not restricted to functional connectivity changes – that they likely
extend to distributed multivariate activation pattern changes as well. We
therefore developed a dynamic multivariate pattern analysis (dMVPA)
approach, based on the popular MVPA approach used for task neuroimaging, to characterize global brain state transitions during resting state with
fMRI (functional MRI). This revealed rapid transitions across distinct but
stable brain states. When observing non-contiguous time points we found
that many of these multivariate patterns repeated across time (and across
subjects), suggesting some brain states are spontaneously “revisited”. In
addition to increasing our understanding of resting state dynamics and
brain state transitions, this approach may open possibilities for future
research by bringing a powerful class of methods developed for task neuroimaging to investigate resting state neuroimaging data.

C130
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY-BASED PARCELLATION OF THE
HUMAN FRONTAL POLE CORTEX Sehyun Kong1,2, Yoonjin Nah2, Sanghoon Han1,2; 1Department of Cognitive Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea,
2
Department of Psychology, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea — The frontal pole

(FP, Brodmann area 10) of human brain has been known to be involved in
higher order cognition, however, little is known about the subdivisions of
the regions. We used resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging
(rsfMRI) of 33 subjects with unsupervised clustering methods for the parcellation based on intrinsic functional connectivity pattern between FP and
all other AAL labeled whole-brain voxels. K-means clustering algorithm
was applied to the distance measure (1 – the correlation between FP and
all other AAL voxels) and performed parcellations of K clusters of voxels
with similar connectivity profiles. In order to decide optimal K, we computed variation of information (VIs) by applying K (K = 2, 3, ...,10) to the
randomly separated two groups and comparing one’s K with the other’s
with the highest stability. Results showed that clusters from frontal pole
cortex appear to have the direction of separation from medial to lateral with
hemispheric symmetry. Positive and negative resting-state functional connectivity with these subdivisions as seeds revealed segmented patterns of
networks involving different brain regions. To further investigate whether
these clusters of frontopolar cortex are functionally heterogeneous regions,
each cluster was adopted as region of interests (ROI) for various independent data set of task runs in which higher-order functions such as integration or joint consideration of intermediate decisions, comparison of relational judgments was manipulated across conditions. Extracted parameter
estimates from the general linear models demonstrated that FP’s parcellated subdivisions are also related to the levels of higher-order functional
roles.

Poster Session C

C131
WHEN THE GOING GETS TOUGH, THE LOW CHOLINERGIC STOP
GOING: CHOLINERGIC GENETIC VARIATION AND RIGHT PREFRONTAL ACTIVATION, SIGNAL DETECTION, AND REAL-WORLD
DISTRACTION. Alexandria Caple1, Ziyong Lin1, Anne Berry2, Martin Sarter1,
Randy D. Blakely3, Cindy Lustig1; 1University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 2Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, 3Vanderbilt University School of Medicine — Right middle/inferior frontal gyrus activation

has been linked to “attentional effort”, the motivated recruitment of attention and cognitive control. Parallel rodent and human studies suggest that
cholinergic inputs to right PFC make a critical contribution to the increased
activation seen in human fMRI studies during demands on attention (see
Lustig & Sarter, in press, for a recent view). We previously reported that a
genetic polymorphism thought to reduce cholinergic efficiency (Ile89Val
variant of the presynaptic choline transporter gene, rs1013940) was associated with reduced right PFC activation during a perceptual-attentional
challenge (Berry et al., 2015). Here we report secondary analyses more
closely examining the relationship of right PFC activation and connectivity
to behavior. In contrast to controls, Ile89Val participants failed to activate
right PFC in response to a perceptual-attentional challenge. A sizable proportion (30%) showed a reverse effect, with less right PFC activation in the
challenge condition than in the control condition. For Ile89Val participants,
reduced or reversed right PFC activation was associated with reduced
performance, specifically an increase in false alarms and in response-time
variability during correct rejections. These results suggest that reduced
cholinergic function and right PFC activation lead to a decrease in attentional effort in challenging conditions, and instead an increased reliance
on bottom-up salience. Consistent with this hypothesis, reduced right PFC
activation during the challenge condition also correlated with self-report
measures of real-world distractibility. Ongoing analyses examine right PFC
– parietal connectivity to test the hypothesis that these univariate results
reflect reduced recruitment of parietal regions.

C132
COMPLEMENTARY DTI FINDINGS RELATED TO LEARNING AND
MEMORY IMPAIRMENT IN SEPARATE MS AND TBI SAMPLES Mark
Zuppichini1,2, Joshua Sandry1,2,3, Kathy Chiou1,3, Helen Genova1,3, Nancy Chiaravalloti1,3; 1Kessler Foundation, 2Montclair State University, 3Rutgers - New Jersey
Medical School — Neurological insult results in negative consequences for

cognitive functioning including difficulty learning and remembering new
information. The aim of the present study is to use diffusion tensor imaging to investigate structural white matter differences related to learning
and memory impairment. Specifically, we investigated whether there are
common white matter differences in two memory-impaired populations;
individuals with multiple sclerosis (N=30) and individuals with traumatic
brain injury (N=16). Multiple sclerosis and traumatic brain injury participants were classified as either memory-impaired or memory-intact using
the Open-Trial Selective Reminding Test, a neuropsychological assessment
of learning and memory. The multiple sclerosis and traumatic brain injury
samples remained separate for all analyses. Fractional anisotropy (FA)
values were compared between memory-impaired and memory-intact
participants in the multiple sclerosis and traumatic brain injury samples,
respectively. Results revealed that participants with memory impairment
from both clinical samples showed similar patterns of lower FA in the
right anterior thalamic radiation, forceps major and forceps minor. These
findings suggest there are common patterns of white matter involvement
that are associated with learning and memory impairment in neurological
patients.

C133
EVALUATING ATYPICAL PRESENTATIONS OF ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE WITH AMYLOID POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET)
IMAGING AT AN ACADEMIC COGNITIVE NEUROLOGY CENTER
Julie Ciardullo1, Effie Mitis1, Heidi A Bender1, Lale Kostakoglu1, Josef Machac1,
Jane Martin1, Margaret Sewell1, Amy S Aloysi1, Mariel B Deutsch1, Clara Li1, Mary
Sano1, Samuel Gandy1; 1Mount Sinai Medical School — BACKGROUND: Positron emission tomography (PET) amyloid imaging is a newly-available

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

139

Poster Session C	
clinical tool for evaluating patients with cognitive impairment or dementia.
Most importantly, amyloid imaging may improve certainty of etiology in
situations where the differential diagnosis cannot be resolved on the basis
of standard clinical and laboratory criteria. RESULTS: A case series of 54
consecutive patients (age 57-90; 30M, 24F) were evaluated at a cognitive
center of a major urban academic medical center and referred for amyloid
PET imaging as part of a comprehensive dementia workup. Evaluation
included neurological examination and neuropsychological assessment by
dementia experts. Amyloid PET scans were read by trained nuclear medicine physicians using the qualitative binary approach. Scans were rated
as either positive or negative for the presence of cerebral amyloidosis. We
compared clinical diagnosis with that of amyloid scan result. For purposes
of this study, presentation was reported as either typical or atypical for
Alzheimer’s disease. Typical presentations were highly correlated with a
positive amyloid scan. Of the 28 typical presentations, 24 patients (86%)
had a positive amyloid scan. Even among the atypical presentations, positive amyloid scans were frequent. Of the 26 atypical presentations 12 (46%)
had a positive amyloid scan. CONCLUSIONS: The development of clinical
application of amyloid PET imaging has introduced a wide range of utilization challenges, from diagnostic interpretation to complex cost-benefit
economic individual and public health policy decisions. Results suggest
that amyloid PET imaging is especially helpful in diagnosing Alzheimer’s
disease when the presentation is atypical.

C134
COMPARATIVE RESTING-STATE MRI EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY
IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER Madelyn Glymour1,2, Ruben Sanchez-Romero1,2, Joseph D. Ramsey1,2, Clark Glymour1,2; 1Carnegie Mellon University, 2Center for Causal Discovery, U.Pitt-CMU — Comparative functional con-

nectivity studies between autism spectrum disorder (ASD) individuals and
controls have focused on quantifying differences in correlation coefficients,
network metrics, or topographies. In contrast, little work has been done
in estimating effective connectivity to explore discrepancies in neuronal
causal mechanisms underlying observed behavioral differences. To narrow
this gap we study resting-state MRI effective connectivity with the causal
search algorithm GES and its group-analysis version IMaGES together with
non-Gaussian directionality rules, applied to two ASD datasets from the
ABIDE project and 108 ROIs of the AAL atlas spanning the whole brain.
Robustness tests were performed to assess the effect in the estimation of
effective connections of three preprocessing procedures (spatial smoothing;
FSL’s cleaning tool FIX; and MNI normalization with spline interpolation)
that may alter the joint distributions of ROIs from which causal information is inferred. Our tests show that combined use of smoothing and FIX
produces highly robust connectivity graphs while the use of MNI normalization produced mixed results. Individual-level results show that within-group variability in connections and directions is consistently greater
in ASD groups than in controls, in left-, right- and whole-brain networks.
Group-level connectivity results show that control groups produce more
robust graphs than ASD groups, reflecting the greater variability in effective connections of individuals with ASD. These results are consistent with
previous studies, but add new and detailed causal connectivity information
useful to better characterize relevant differences in neuronal mechanisms
underlying ASD behaviors.

C135
IDENTIFYING LATENT SEMANTIC GROUPS OF STUDIES AND
THEIR CORRESPONDING BRAIN REGIONS FROM THE NEUROSYNTH DATABASE Fahd Alhazmi1, Derek Beaton1, Hervé Abdi1; 1The Uni-

versity of Texas at Dallas — In recent years, numerous meta-analytic and data

basing resources for neuroimaging literature have been created. Typically,
these resources—such as NeuroSynth—relate studies’ topics to their corresponding brain regions. Our aims in this work were to (1) reveal the latent
semantic structure of the neuroimaging literature, (2) identify semantically
defined domains within the literature, and (3) illustrate brain regions most
associated with these domains. To do so, we used Correspondence Analysis (CA)—which generalizes principal components analysis to categorical data and counts—on the NeuroSynth database. After preprocessing,
the data were co-occurrences between 10,898 studies and 3,163 keywords
(from abstracts). CA identified 3 reliable components via split-half resampling. Next, we identified 10 reliable word clusters (via factor scores) that

140

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
regrouped the words similarly used across studies. Cluster centers were
then used as fixed points to assign studies (i.e., using k-nearest neighbors).
Finally, we identified—from our groups of studies—the voxels selectively
associated with each group. Here, we highlight two of those clusters: (1)
the “fear, reward, addiction, pharmacology, and punishment” word cluster, which was associated with striatal regions on Components 1 and 2, and
thalamus, insula, and cingulate cortex on Component 3, and (2) the “gray
and white matter structural imaging in neuro-pathology and -development” word cluster, which was associated with the striatum, left amygdala,
and cingulate for Component 1, thalamus, insula, striatum, and medial
temporal lobes for Component 2, and posterior and anterior cingulate, hippocampus, and other subcortical structures for Component 3.

C136
CORTICAL NETWORK EFFICIENCY UNDERLIES INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN VISUAL PROCESSING SPEED Lyndahl Himes1, Nicholas
Hubbard1, Monroe Turner1, Bart Rypma1,2; 1University of Texas at Dallas, 2University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center — Previous work has shown that

neural activation efficiency benefits cognitive task performance. Less is
known regarding whether neural network efficiency similarly benefits performance. We investigated whether network efficiency, measured by functional connection density, changed from rest to a visual processing-speed
task (the digit-symbol substitution task; DSST). Further, we assessed
whether such connection-density changes could predict individual differences in visual processing speed. Nineteen healthy adults (ages 21-66;
Mean = 43.53) underwent fMRI at rest and during DSST performance.
Whole-brain, voxel-wise analyses were used to calculate node degree (i.e.,
the number of connections) of each voxel during rest and DSST. Density-change percentage was calculated from rest to DSST. Voxel-wise analysis showed significantly higher connection density at rest than during DSST
performance throughout the brain (all ps < .05). However, voxels within
the occipito-parietal dorsal visual system were hyper-connected compared
to other regions during DSST. Next, we assessed where these hyper-connected voxels were connected. Seed-based analyses showed connectivity
increases during DSST only for inter-connections within dorsal visual
system. Individual differences in DSST processing speed were also mapped
onto average DSST vs. rest node degree maps. Increases in node degree
from rest to DSST in prefrontal, temporal, and parietal nodes predicted
slower processing speed. These results suggest that connectivity within a
brain-wide network becomes largely specialized during visual processing.
Increases in the efficiency of these connections might underlie greater cognitive efficiency.

C137
EVALUATING THE IMPACT OF SCAN STATE ON THE RELIABILITY OF
INTER-INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN FULL-BRAIN FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY David O’Connor1,2, Natan Vega Potler1, Tamara Vanderwal3,

Lucas Parra4, Samantha Cohen4, Satrajit Ghosh5, Jasmine Escalera1, Natalie
Grant-Villegas1, Yael Osman1, Megan Kovacs1, Cameron Craddock1,2, Michael
Milham1,2; 1Child Mind Institute Healthy Brain Network, New York, 2Nathan Kline
Institute, Orangeburg, New York, 3Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, 4City
College of New York, New York, 5Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts — FMRI is a powerful tool for mapping functional
interactions within the human connectome. However, the optimal state
to acquire reliable data from individuals remains unclear given factors
such as participant compliance and cognitive load. To this end, a growing
number of scan conditions are being suggested, ranging from task-free rest
to active task performance. Intermediate to these are naturalistic viewing
paradigms, which can either be highly engaging movies or sequences of
abstract shapes (e.g. “Inscapes”). These states appear to reduce scanner
motion and increase tolerability, relative to the more popular task-free resting state. While clear consensus exists regarding the presence of systematic differences between states, it is not clear how much they impact the
detection of inter-individual differences in full-brain connectivity patterns.
In preparation for the Child Mind Institute Healthy Brain Network, a largescale multimodal data acquisition focused on child mental health, the present work aims to evaluate the impact of four scan states on inter-individual
differences in full-brain (200-unit) functional connectivity patterns (ages
18-45). Community-recruited adults are being scanned 12 separate times

2016 Annual Meeting	
under the following conditions: rest, Inscapes, movie excerpts, and flanker
task. Among the 12 sessions, each of 3 movies, Inscapes, or flanker task trial
orders repeat 4 times. Initial results from 5 participants found significantly
greater similarity of connectivity matrices obtained from the same individual (mean r=0.659;SD=0.123), regardless of acquisition condition, relative to
those obtained from differing individuals (mean r=0.466;SD=0.044) – even
when matched for condition. All data generated in the present initiative
will be openly shared.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition
C138
LISTENING TO ‘WOB WOB’ AND ‘WAH WAH’ - THE EFFECTS OF
EXPERTISE IN BEAT BOXING AND GUITAR PLAYING ON PERCEPTION NETWORKS. Sophie Scott1, Saloni Krishan1, Cesar Lima1, Tom Manly1,

Samuel Evans1, Harry Yeff2; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, UCL, London,
2
Get Involved LTD — Multiple fMRI studies have shown that motor areas are

activated when passively listening to speech or music. Yet, it is unclear
whether this activation is shaped by previous auditory-motor learning.
We study beatboxers and guitarists to explore whether their distinct motor
experiences lead to separable profiles of neural activation when listening.
The groups are selected for their selective motor expertise - while playing
the guitar involves skilled hand movements, beatboxing involves complex
manipulation of the vocal tract. We scanned 20 guitarists, 20 beatboxers and
20 non-musicians in a 1.5T scanner (sparse acquisition, TR = 9.5s; TA = 3.4s)
as they listened to technically demanding guitar and beatboxing excerpts.
Results revealed expertise-related activation in guitarists and beatboxers in
bilateral precentral and inferior frontal gyri, inferior parietal lobules and
supplementary motor areas when listening to music. Beatboxers showed
greater activation in these areas when listening to beatboxing relative to
guitar pieces; guitarists showed the opposite pattern. Non-musicians did
not show increased activation in either condition. These findings clearly
indicate that auditory-motor experience influences neural activation for
listening, and that some neural markers of expertise during listening generalise over these different auditory-motor experiences.

C139
NEURAL RESPONSES DURING MOVEMENT WITH AUDITORY
RHYTHMS Caroline Palmer1, Brian Mathias1, Anna Zamm1, Bernhard Ross2;
1

McGill University, 2Rotman Research Institute, University of Toronto — Audito-

ry-motor synchronization tasks (such as tapping to a beat) involve both
auditory and sensorimotor neural networks. Electrophysiologically-recorded steady-state evoked potentials have shown enhanced amplitudes
at specific stimulus frequencies during listening and tapping to external
rhythms. We attempted to distinguish neural responses to percepts and
actions during an auditory synchronization task, and to compare them with
behavioral synchronization measures. Neural responses during Synchronization were compared with those during Listen-only (no movement, same
stimulus) and Motor-only (no stimulus, same movement) tasks. Twenty-five
right-handed musicians tapped to a rhythmically regular stimulus as their
electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded. The Synchronization stimuli
varied in rhythmic complexity from low complexity (stimulus-to-tap ratio
of 1:1) to moderate (1:2) and high complexity (3:2); thus, the tapping frequency was held constant while the stimulus rate varied. Participants synchronized with the stimulus (Synchronize), listened to the same stimulus
rhythms (Listen-only) and detected occasional missing beats, or tapped at
the same rate (Motor-only). As the rhythmic complexity increased across
conditions, behavioral asynchrony (measured as tap onset minus stimulus
onset times) increased, and peak amplitudes in the EEG power spectra at
tap frequencies decreased. The Synchronize condition elicited greater ssEP
peak amplitudes than Listen-only and Motor-only conditions at both stimulus and tap frequencies. Individuals’ entrainment strength in low complexity (1:1) was predictive of their entrainment in high complexity (1:2,
2:3) rhythms. An additional ssEP component emerged in the 3:2 condition
at unique frequency where stimulus and taps aligned, suggesting neural
interactions between auditory and sensorimotor networks during auditory-motor synchronization.

Poster Session C

C140
CORTICAL MECHANISMS OF AUDITORY-VOCAL INTEGRATION
IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Hanjun Liu1, Xi Chen1, Xiyan Huang1, Nan Yan2,

Emily Wang3; 1The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, 2Shenzhen
Institutes of Advanced Technology at Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3RUSH University Medical Center — Motor speech disorders are highly common in indi-

viduals with Parkinson’s disease (PD). The underlying mechanisms, however, remain poorly understood. Our goal is to examine the integration of
auditory and vocal motor systems for speech motor control in PD. In the
present event-related potential (ERP) study, 18 individuals with PD and 18
healthy controls were exposed to frequency-altered feedback (FAF) (-200
cents) while producing a sustained vowel and listening to the playback of
self-produced vocal production. Behavioral results revealed that individuals with PD produced significantly larger vocal compensation for pitch
feedback errors than healthy controls, and exhibited a significant correlation between vocal response magnitude and the baseline voice variability.
At the cortical level, larger P2 responses were observed for individuals
with PD as compared to healthy controls. In the sLORERA analysis, this
effect was due to enhanced activity in superior, middle, and inferior frontal
gyrus, inferior parietal lobule, and superior temporal gyrus. Individuals
with PD also exhibited larger P2 responses during speaking vs. listening,
which was due to enhanced activity in inferior frontal gyrus, precental
gyrus, postcentral gyrus, and middle temporal gryus. This enhanced effect,
however, was not observed for healthy controls. These findings demonstrate that individuals with PD are associated with abnormal auditory-vocal integration for voice control at the levels of behavior and cortex, which
may be caused by their deficits in the detection/correction of errors in voice
auditory feedback.

C141
NEURAL CORRELATES OF ENDOGENOUS RHYTHMS IN PERFORMING MUSICIANS Anna Zamm1, Caroline Palmer1, Anna-Katharina R.

Bauer2, Martin G. Bleichner2, Alexander P. Demos1,3, Stefan Debener2,4; 1McGill
University, 2University of Oldenburg, 3University of Illinois at Chicago, 4Cluster of
Excellence Hearing4all — Rhythmic behaviours, from circadian sleep-wake

cycles to solo music performance, are often characterized by endogenous
rhythms: intrinsic periodicities that occur in the absence of external stimuli. We address the neural mechanisms that support endogenous rhythms
in self-paced music performance, a naturally rhythmic behavior for which
humans show a wide range of endogenous frequencies. Previous evidence
suggests that exogenous (externally paced) timing is supported by cortical
oscillations that respond to frequencies of external stimuli. We investigate
whether endogenous rhythms are characterized by cortical oscillations at
the frequency of one’s own behavior. Forty skilled pianists completed a
self -paced piano performance task in which they continuously performed
a melody at a comfortable rate while electroencephalography (EEG) was
recorded. Each pianist’s endogenous rhythms were assessed in terms of
their solo performance rate (number of tone onsets per second). Cortical
oscillations were assessed by computing EEG power spectra at each channel from the pianists’ performances. The pianists’ individual spectra were
normalized relative to a fixed window surrounding each pianist’s endogenous frequency, to allow comparison of spectral power associated with
different performance rates. A significant spectral peak was found at the
frequency of the solo rate across channels , with maximal power at fronto-central channels. Further analyses showed that the observed scalp distribution could not be accounted for solely by head movement or other
motion artefacts. This finding provides the first evidence that production
of endogenous rhythms is supported by increased power of cortical oscillations corresponding to the frequencies of each musician’s performance.

C142
THE EFFECTS OF STROKE ON CENTRAL AUDITORY PROCESSING ABILITIES IN CHRONIC STROKE PATIENTS Claudia Freigang1,
Kie Honjo2,3, Takako Fujioka4, Joyce Chen2,3,5, Sandra Black2,3,5, Bernhard
Ross1,5; 1Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, ON,Canada, 3HSF Canadian Partnership for
Stroke Recovery, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Department of Music and Stanford Neu-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

141

Poster Session C	
roscience Institute, Stanford University, California, USA, 5University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada — Stroke affects a large number of elderly people, and

is a major cause for adult disability. To help stroke patients return to an
independent lifestyle, patients need to actively participate in interventions.
This requires patients to be able to understand speech in noisy environments that may occur during therapy. Unfortunately, hearing is not routinely assessed in stroke patients, and thus the relationship between central
auditory processing (CAP) and stroke is not clear. Additionally, undetected
CAP deficits may also add to primary effects of stroke on cognitive function. In our present study, we investigated CAP in chronic stroke patients
with motor impairment in the upper limb. We hypothesized that hearing
sensitivity alone does not predict CAP. To test our hypothesis, we recorded
magnetoencephalography to complex acoustic stimuli in 28 chronic stroke
patients (18 right-hemispheric, 2 cerebellar, 8 left-hemispheric lesions) with
clinically normal audiograms. In our analysis, we focused on the evaluation
of the event-related fields (ERF) P1m, N1m, and P2m, which are thought
to represent distinct processing steps in integrating sound information in
auditory cortex. In six patients with normal symmetric hearing thresholds
only one auditory cortex was functional. In patients with bilaterally functional auditory cortices, ERFs amplitudes and latencies differed between
hemispheres. Most importantly, this study shows that stroke can affect the
functionality of the central auditory system, and that an audiogram is not
sufficient to evaluate CAP. Our results highlight the importance of assessing CAP after a stroke, and they reveal the need to systematically assess this
relationship further.

C143
TRANSCRANIAL ALTERNATING CURRENT STIMULATION BENEFIT
DEPENDS ON SPECTRO-TEMPORAL COMPLEXITY OF SOUNDS

Anna Wilsch1, Toralf Neuling3, Christoph S. Herrmann1,2; 1Department of Psychology, Cluster of Excellence “Hearing4all”, European Medical School, Carl
von Ossietzky University, Oldenburg, Germany, 2Research Center Neurosensory
Science, Carl von Ossietzky University, Oldenburg, Germany, 3Department of
Psychology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria — Entrainment of neural

responses to the spectro-temporal features of auditory information is crucial for successful auditory perception. Auditory stimuli can vary in their
spectro-temporal complexity and so does the concomitantly entrained
neural response. For example, detection of low-complex auditory sounds
depends on the neural phase in auditory cortex entrained to a sinusoidal
signal. Intelligibility of more complex signals such as speech depends on
the entrainment of neural oscillations in auditory cortex to the more complex spectro-temporal features of the acoustic signal. Besides perceptually
evoked neural entrainment, transcranial alternating current stimulation
(tACS) entrains neural oscillations by applying an electric signal to the
brain. Accordingly, tACS-induced neural entrainment in auditory cortex
has been shown to improve auditory perception. However, it is unclear in
how far tACS-induced entrainment modulates perception of auditory signals with increasing/varying spectro-temporal complexity. Therefore, we
applied tACS while presenting auditory stimuli of different spectro-temporal complexity. Complexity varied from low-complex sounds (e.g.,
pure tones) to medium-complex sounds (e.g., speech-like amplitude modulation) to high-complex sounds (e.g., real speech). The tACS signal was
aligned with the stimuli’s spectro-temporal features. Our results show that
tACS improves auditory perception of stimuli with low spectro-temporal
complexity. Perception of high-complex speech stimuli is not affected by
tACS. Thus, tACS-induced neural entrainment appears to be beneficial for
the perception of low-complex auditory stimuli. However, with increasing spectro-temporal complexity, tACS-induced entrainment to the spectro-temporal features of the stimulus might not be sufficient to improve
stimulus perception. The tACS benefit seems to depend on spectro-temporal complexity of sounds.

C144
A NEW FRAMEWORK TO INVESTIGATE HEMISPHERIC ASYMMETRIES IN SPEECH Adeen Flinker1, David Poeppel1,2; 1New York University, New
York, USA, 2Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, Frankfurt, Germany —
The left and right hemispheres have been argued to have different sensitivities to temporal and spectral auditory information, but the underlying
cortical mechanisms remain unknown. Two related models posit that asym-

142

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
metries arise from a relative difference in temporal integration windows
(i.e. AST, Poeppel 2003) or a difference in spectral versus temporal resolution (i.e. Zatorre et al. 2002). Here we examine a unifying scheme based on
the modulation power spectrum (MPS) of speech, providing a novel framework to parametrically manipulate speech stimuli and test psychophysical
and neurophysiological responses. In contrast with a spectrogram, which
represents the signal’s amplitude across time and frequency, the MPS is a
second order representation that assesses how the time-frequency power is
modulated across the spectral and temporal axes. We propose that the two
hemispheres integrate different ranges of spectral and temporal modulations. In order to address this hypothesis, we implemented a new filtering
technique and varied the degree of spectral and temporal modulations in
the signal to produce new sentences materials. We characterized the modulation space as a function of intelligibility as well as pitch (here: gender)
identification. Neurophysiological responses (MEG power 0.1-8 Hz) across
sensors correlated significantly with the temporal and spectral modulation
space. The spatial distribution of sensors was more left lateralized for the
temporal modulation axis and more right lateralized for the spectral modulation axis. Behaviorally, the fine-graded parametric steps reveal a sharp
intelligibility cutoff, a right ear dichotic advantage as well as an influence
of spectral modulation on pitch perception.

C145
PERCEPTUAL ASYMMETRY ASSOCIATED WITH P3 AMPLITUDE
DURING ROVING AUDITORY SEQUENTIAL SEARCH. Elizabeth G

Blundon1, Samuel P Rumak1, Lawrence M Ward1,2; 1University of British Columbia, 2UBC Brain Research Centre — Previously, we observed asymmetry in

auditory and visual sequential search using oddball stimuli. Consistent
with simultaneous search asymmetry (e.g., Treisman), RT and P300 latencies were shorter to oddball targets (20%) that contained a feature that standards (80%) did not (feature-present) than to targets that lacked a feature
that standards had (feature-absent). Although parallel search for popout
targets was ruled out by the serial nature of the task, it remained unclear
whether the asymmetry arose from perceptual or attention processes, as a
diffuse attention strategy could still have been used for feature-present targets. The present study aimed to uncover the locus of the effect by forcing
participants to apply a single focused-attention strategy to detect both feature-present and feature-absent targets. Participants identified rare targets
consisting of two different types of five-tone runs: flat runs (five identical
pure tones, feature-absent when targets) and change runs (four identical
tones plus a different-frequency fifth, feature-present when targets). The
base acoustic frequency varied (roved) so that no specific tone frequency
differentiated the target, forcing the use of focused attention in both conditions. RT and P300 latencies were not different between conditions but
accuracy and P300 amplitude were greater for feature-present than for feature-absent targets. This suggests that perceptual asymmetry persisted, but
the reduced salience of the unique feature in the feature-present condition
eliminated the RT and P300 latency asymmetry. The perceptual asymmetry
manifests as RT and P300 latency differences only when targets contain a
rare, salient, unpredictable feature that elicits a substantial P3a subcomponent.

C146
DIFFERENCES IN T-COMPLEX MEASURES OF VOWEL SOUNDS IN
BILINGUAL AND MONOLINGUAL SCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN Hia
Datta1, Arild Hestvik2, Valerie Shafer3; 1Molloy College, 2University of Delaware,
3
The Graduate Center, City University of New York — The T-complex is a series

of negative-positive-negative (Na, Ta, Tb) responses to auditory stimuli
such as tones and speech that peak between 70-140 ms in adults. They are
measured at lateral sites T7 and T8 and indexes the maturation of auditory
cortex (Tonnquist-Uhlen et al., 2003; Shafer, Yu & Wagner, 2014). The goal
of this study was to examine if the nature of language experience in schoolaged children impacts the amplitudes and/or the latencies of the peaks
within the T-complex as well. Fifteen English-speaking monolingual and
15 Spanish-English-speaking bilingual children, 8-10 years of age were participants in the study. They listened to repetitions of a 50 ms-long English
vowel [ε] sound while Event Related Potentials (ERPs) were recorded
from 64-channels via the Geodesic system. All bilingual participants were
exposed to both Spanish and English prior to 5 years of age. Overall, results
suggested that the T-complex in the right hemisphere was more stable than

2016 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session C

that in the left hemisphere. Na was the most robust peak for both groups
appearing 100% of the time in T8. The amplitudes and latencies of Na, Ta
and Tb for both language groups were extremely similar. However, the
bilingual children demonstrated a much higher variability in their latencies of the Na-Ta-Tb peaks than the monolingual children, particularly in
the left hemisphere. This suggests that differences in amounts of English/
Spanish language use modulates the auditory cortex as well, impacting
early even auditory evoked potentials such as the T-complex.

C147
EARLY AND ASYMMETRIC SENSITIVITY TO PHONOLOGICAL
BOUNDARIES AND WITHIN-CATEGORY VARIATION ACROSS
HEMISPHERES Laura Gwilliams1,2, Tal Linzen1, Kyriaki Neophytou2, Lena
1

1,3

1,2 1

2

Warnke , David Poeppel , Alec Marantz ; New York University, NYUAD Institute, 3Max-Planck-Institute, Frankfurt — Speech processing requires mapping

continuously variant acoustic signals to discrete phonological categories.
Previous studies suggest that this is achieved through the identification of
phonetic features and neutralisation of within-category variance by ~100ms
after phoneme onset. What happens, however, when a sound is consistent
with more than one category? 22 native English speakers performed forcedchoice consonant identification on consonant-vowel syllables during magnetoencephalography data acquisition. Stimuli were natural speech pairs,
digitally morphed to span an 11-step continuum of voice onset times (VOT;
p-b, t-d, k-g) and places of articulation (PoA; p-t, t-k). The behavioural
results replicated previous findings: Consonant selection was sharply categorical, and reaction-times increased at the boundary between phonological categories. Activity in left (but not right) Heschl’s gyrus increased
with proximity to the phoneme boundary ~50ms post-onset, mirroring
reaction-time data and suggesting that phonological categories are relevant
to speech processing earlier than previously considered. Amplitude of the
left M100 increased as VOT decreased, and was modulated by categorical
PoA: bilabial stops (/b/, /p/) elicited more activity than alveolar and velar
stops. Peak latency of the right M100 corresponded to participants’ binary
classification of the VOT continuum: latency was shorter for stimuli identified as voiceless (~110ms) than voiced (~125ms), and displayed no sensitivity to PoA or within-category variation. The data suggest that (1) neural
sensitivity to categorical ambiguity in left Heschl’s gyrus can be observed
before the time-window previously thought to reflect phonetic feature
identification; (2) phonological discretisation evokes bilateral responses,
but with a differential sensitivity and temporal profile across hemispheres.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
C148
VISUAL PROCESSING ABNORMALITIES IN LOW-FUNCTIONING
INDIVIDUALS WITH AUTISM MAY NOT BE DUE TO LOW-LEVEL
DEFICITS: A VISUAL EVOKED POTENTIAL/SPECTRAL ANALYSIS
STUDY Kyongje Sung1, Barry Gordon1; 1The Johns Hopkins University School of

Medicine — While it is generally accepted that sensory processing is often

abnormal in individuals with autism, the evidential basis for this conclusion
is actually inconclusive. Studies have been limited by great inter-individual
variability, and their generalizability questionable due to their exclusion
of low-functioning individuals with autism (LFA). We investigated the
visual-evoked potential (VEP) at Oz, responding to a 100msec presentation of a checkerboard stimulus during the course of shape discrimination
trials. Subjects were six low-functioning individuals with autism (LFA),
five high-functioning individuals with autism (HFA), and six normal controls (NC). Artifacts were cleaned using Independent Component Analysis
(ICA). Results: As a group, LFA showed significantly reduced P2 amplitude and delayed peak latency, compared to NC and HFA. There was a
tendency for faster peak latency of P1 in the LFA, but with great individual
variability. HFA fell in between NC and LFA in VEP statistics. Importantly,
NC and HFA showed significantly enhanced theta (4-7Hz) and beta (1430Hz) band activities and reduced alpha (8-13Hz) after stimulus onset.
LFA showed no sign of alpha reduction and no beta enhancement. Individually, NC and HFA participants showed a consistent pattern of VEP
and power spectra that matched their group averages. LFA demonstrated
great variability in those measures. Our results are more consistent with a

deficit in the triggering of higher-level perceptual and attentional processes
in LFA than they are with a low-level sensory deficit as has generally been
assumed by the sensory deficit theory of autism.

C149
ACQUIRED CROWDING DYSLEXIA Roberta Daini1,2, Emanuela Bricolo1,2,

Andrea Albonico1,2, Manuela Malaspina1,2, Lisa Arduino3,4, Marialuisa Martelli5,6;
1
Università di Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy, 2Milan Centre for Neuroscience,
Milan, Italy, 3LUMSA University, Rome, Italy, 4ISTC-CNR, Rome, Italy, 5Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 6Neuropsychology Unit, IRCCS Fondazione Santa
Lucia, Rome, Italy — Martelli et al (2011) suggested that error type analysis of
the reading impairment after right brain damage is diagnostic for the mechanisms involved. Letter substitution errors may, indeed, relate to a difficulty in segregating letters. In fact, increasing letter spacing restores recognition. This is related to crowding, a psychophysical phenomenon that
characterizes normal periphery, where letters are unrecognizable because
surrounded by nearby letters. Here we tested the hypothesis that a specific type of acquired dyslexia, mainly characterized by substitution errors,
involves the same mechanisms underlying crowding, i.e. is an acquired
crowding dyslexia. To this aim we selected ten right brain damaged
patients, who failed in reading single words and pseudowords. Patients’
eye movement behaviour was recorded and compared with that obtained
by ten neurologically healthy participants. Three experiments (i.e. visual
pursuit, text reading, spaced and unspaced pseudowords reading) were
conducted. Three out of ten patients, one with and two without unilateral
spatial neglect, 1) showed a majority of reading substitution errors; 2) were
sensitive to letter spacing, reducing the number of errors by increasing
letter spacing; 3) showed preserved eye movements in a visual pursuit
task; 4) showed a lower number and a higher fixation duration of than controls, consistent with the effect of crowding on eye-movements (Bricolo et
al, 2015). We conclude that the reading errors of patients that substitute
letters are due to crowding. We speculate that the effect might depend on
attentional difficulties needed to define the optimal fields of integration for
letter identification.

C150
THE EFFECT OF RTMS OVER RIGHT PARIETAL CORTEX ON RESTING-STATE EEG OSCILLATORY DYNAMICS Silvia Savazzi1, Chiara Bag-

attini2, Sonia Mele3, Paolo Manganotti1, Javier Sanchez Lopez1, Chiara Mazzi1;
1
University of Verona, Italy, 2IRCCS Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli,
Brescia, Italy, 3University of Ferrara, Italy — A significant reduction of cortical

excitability was recently shown following low-frequency (1Hz) rTMS over
right posterior parietal cortex (rPPC). This effect was found both underneath the stimulated site and in the interconnected contralateral homologous areas. The present study aims at testing whether the same protocol affects the cortico-cortical functional coupling at rest by measuring
coherence among areas. Two min of resting state EEG were recorded in 14
healthy participants before and after 30 min of rTMS at 1 Hz (or sham stimulation) over the rPPC (electrode position P6). Real stimulation was performed at 90% of motor threshold. Coherence was calculated considering
the three nearest electrodes to the stimulated site (i.e. P4, P8, and CP6) with
all pairwise combinations with the remaining EEG channels by using bootstrap statistical methods. Frequency bands analyzed were delta (0.5–4Hz),
theta (4–8Hz), alpha (8–12Hz), low beta (12–20Hz), high beta (20–30Hz)
and gamma (30–50Hz). Coherence analyses suggest a greater functional
coupling of rPPC with right frontal sites reflecting the activation of the
fronto-parietal network within the right hemisphere. Importantly, rTMS
enhanced coherence between rPPC and contralateral homologous sites.
These changes were most prominent in theta, alpha and beta frequency
bands. Summarizing, results confirmed the neuromodulatory effects of
rTMS enhancing cortico-cortical inter- and intra-hemispheric connectivity
along circumscribed functional networks as measured by the enhancement
in coherence among these areas. Moreover, the present results further confirm previous evidence indicating that the increase of coherence values is
related to inhibitory effects of rTMS.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

143

Poster Session C	

C151
THE P3B COMPONENT OF THE EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL
REFLECTS THE SUBITIZING / COUNTING DISTINCTION IN
NUMEROSITY PERCEPTION Mark Schmidt1; 1Columbus State University —

Subitizing and non-verbal counting are mechanisms proposed for numerosity perception of small item sets. Subitizing (1-3 items) is fast and accurate;
non-verbal counting (4-6 items) is systematically slower and less accurate.
The P3b component of the event-related potential (ERP) is a large positive
deflection with onset / offset latencies 300 - 900 ms post-stimulus and maximum amplitude over Pz. P3b amplitude and latency are thought to reflect
aspects of stimulus processing, with large amplitudes associated with better
discrimination, and short latencies associated with faster evaluation time.
In the current study, it was predicted that P3b amplitude and latency would
reflect the distinction between subitizing and non-verbal counting typically
seen with accuracy and response time measures. ERPs were recorded at Pz,
Cz, Fz in response to briefly presented dot displays varying in numerosity
(1-7). Dots were presented for 150 ms in six “odd-ball” tasks in which target
numerosity (1-6) occurred on 14% of trials. Participants (N=12) responded
by pressing one of two buttons (target / non-target) and were instructed
to emphasize accuracy and speed in responding. P3b difference waves
(DW) were obtained from target and non-target waveforms at Pz and the
jackknife-based scoring method was used to compare DW amplitude and
latency across target numerosities. Larger P3b amplitudes and shorter P3b
latencies were found in the subitizing range compared with the non-verbal
counting range. These results extend previous findings on the subitizing /
counting distinction, and provide additional support for P3b as a measure
of stimulus discrimination and evaluation time.

C152
DISTRIBUTED NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS FOR VISUAL CATEGORIES Zarrar Shehzad1, Gregory McCarthy1; 1Yale University — Neural rep-

resentations of visual categories such as faces are found in ventral visual
cortex. Here, we examine whether category information within ventral
cortex is localized or distributed. We measured trial-by-trial activity using
fMRI (N=20) for visual stimuli from four categories (faces, letters, fruits,
vehicles). Our analyses focused on six category-selective regions: right
fusiform-face area (FFA), left/right parahippocampal place area (PPA),
left/right lateral occipital complex (LOC), and left visual word form area
(VWF). We selected voxels whose patterns of activity predicted visual
categories using a regularized regression (elastic-net), which controls for
redundant information between brain areas by removing correlated and/
or uninformative voxels. First, when considering activity patterns in each
region separately, we found significant category classification in each
region (p<0.05; mean accuracy 34%, chance 25%) except L PPA (p=0.06;
accuracy 31%). Second, we combined the five significant regions into one
model and eliminated uninformative regions to find those with unique category information. We found a subset of three regions (R FFA, R PPA, L
VWF) that together best-predicted category membership (accuracy 45%).
For each category, classification accuracy for this model was significantly
greater than in any individual-region model or an all-region model. Finally,
using the three-region model, we found: 32% of voxels did not predict any
category, 33% of voxels predicted only one category, and 34% of voxels predicted two or more categories. Thus, our results show a distributed subset
of voxels in three regions (not just one region or across all regions) best
predicts category representations in the ventral cortex.

C153
VISUAL TRAINING IMPROVES PERCEPTUAL GROUPING BASED
ON BASIC STIMULUS FEATURES Daniel Kurylo1, Richard Waxman2,

Steven M. Silverstein3, Rachel Kidron2; 1Brooklyn College CUNY, 2Touro College, 3Rutgers University — Training on perceptual tasks has been shown to
improve performance on basic visual and auditory capacities over time.
Such improvement has been linked to changes in connectivity among
mediating neurons. We investigated whether similar training effects occur
for perceptual grouping, in which components of visual stimuli are perceptually integrated. It was hypothesized that repeated engagement of integration mechanisms will strengthen connections among associated units,
thereby enhancing grouping processes. Participants underwent 15 sessions
of training on a visual discrimination task that required perceptual group-

144

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
ing. Four stimulus dimensions were trained, in which grouping was based
on similarity in luminance, color, orientation, and motion. Psychophysical
thresholds of grouping were assessed before and after training. Results
indicate that performance in all four dimensions improved with training.
Training on a control condition, which paralleled the discrimination task
but without a grouping component, produced no improvement. In addition, training on only the luminance and orientation dimensions improved
performance for those stimuli as well as color, on which training had not
occurred. However, improvement from partial training did not generalized
to motion. Results demonstrate that a training protocol emphasizing stimulus integration enhanced perceptual grouping. Further, neural mechanisms
mediating grouping by common luminance and/or orientation contribute
to those mediating grouping by color, but do not share resources for grouping by common motion.

C154
THE NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF OBJECTS FORMED THROUGH
THE SPATIOTEMPORAL INTEGRATION OF VISUAL TRANSIENTS.
Gideon Caplovitz1, Gennady Erlikhman1, Gennadiy Gurariy1, Ryan Mruczek1,2;
1
University of Nevada Reno, 2Worcester State University — Oftentimes, objects

are only partially and transiently visible as parts of them become occluded
during observer or object motion. The visual system can integrate such
object fragments across space and time into perceptual wholes or spatiotemporal objects. This integrative and dynamic process may involve both
ventral and dorsal visual processing pathways, along which shape and
spatial representations are thought to arise. We measured fMRI BOLD
response to spatiotemporal objects and used multi-voxel pattern analysis
(MVPA) to decode shape information across 20 topographic regions of
visual cortex. Surprisingly, object identity could be decoded throughout
visual cortex, including intermediate (V3A, V3B, hV4, LO1-2,) and dorsal
(TO1-2, and IPS0-1) visual areas. Shape-specific information, therefore,
may not be limited to early and ventral visual areas, particularly when it
is dynamic and must be integrated. Contrary to the classic view that the
representation of objects is the purview of the ventral stream, intermediate
and dorsal areas may play a distinct and critical role in the construction of
object representations across space and time.

C155
ACTION EXPECTANCY GENERATION DURING EVENT COMPREHENSION IN SEQUENTIAL IMAGES Neil Cohn1, Martin Paczynski2, Marta
Kutas1; 1University of California, San Diego, 2George Mason University — Research

has shown precursors to the neural activation associated with viewing
action events (1). We hypothesized (2) that such pre-activation indexes
expectancies generated for discrete actions (throwing a ball, punching)
from viewing preparatory postures (e.g., reaching back an arm to throw or
punch) leading to the culminating action. Participants’ event-related brain
potentials (ERPs) were recorded for viewing action sequences in wordless
comic strips. We expected greater processing of action preparatory agent
panels (ex. reaching back an arm to punch) than those with non-preparatory
agents (ex. arm to the side) or patients (receiver of actions), given the additional pre-processing of event structures. We expected the inverse costs for
processing completed action panels (ex. agent punching patient). In Experiment 1, preparatory agents elicited a greater frontal positivity (600-900ms)
than either non-preparatory agents or patients, whereas completed actions
panels in preparatory agent strips elicited an attenuated frontal negativity,
compared to those with the other agent condition. Experiment 2 inserted
a blank panel just prior to the completed action, aimed at disrupting the
action expectancy generation. A left central negativity (300-900ms) was elicited by blank images in strips with preparatory agents compared to those
with non-preparatory agents. As this negativity preceded the completed
action, we take it to reflect the disruption of an action expectancy generated
by preparatory postures. Taken together, these results indicate that the processing of completed actions ultimately benefits from pre-processing and
expectancies generated from preparatory postures. (1) Zacks, et al. Nature
Neuroscience 2001. (2) Cohn & Paczynski. Cognitive Psychology 2013.

2016 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session C

C156
SURPRISE SPREADS ACROSS DIFFERENT FEATURES OF AN
OBJECT TO FORM OBJECT-LEVEL EXPECTATION IN VISUAL COGNITION Jiefeng Jiang1, Christopher Summerfield2, Tobias Egner1; 1Duke Univer-

THINKING: Decision making

textual expectations of the objects’ multiple features. For example, a soccer
player must form expectations about both the motion of surrounding players and the color of their jerseys, in order to quickly and accurately distinguish trajectories of teammates versus opponents. However, little is known
about how expectations of multiple features of an object interact to shape
its processing in the visual brain. We compared three plausible models of
how expectations for multiple object features might interact: the “independence model” assumes no interaction between feature expectations; the
“reconciliation model” assumes that prediction error (violation of expectation) of one feature spreads to the other feature to form an object-level
expectation; and the “segregation model” assumes that prediction error of
one feature breaks the processing of the object as a whole into segregated
features. We adjudicated between these models using computational modeling and empirical data from two experiments that orthogonally manipulated color-expectation, motion-expectation, and feature-based attention.
Specifically, each model generated “neural activity” for each experimental
condition in simulated primary and higher-level (V4, MT+) visual regions.
These simulated activity patterns were then compared with behavioral
data and neural patterns extracted from fMRI data. In three independent
comparisons, the reconciliation model outperformed the two other models
in accounting for behavioral and neural patterns of color- × motion-expectation interaction, and multi-feature expectation × attention interaction.
These results strongly favor the hypothesis that different features of an
object “mix” their prediction errors to form an object-level expectation that
facilitates object recognition.

Samantha Abram1; 1University of Minnesota — Foraging provides an import-

C157
TASK-BASED MODULATION OF FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN
THE HUMAN BRAIN Frank Garcea1,2, Roger Vargas, Jr.4, Quanjing Chen1,

C159
WHAT IS AUTOMATIZED DURING PERCEPTUAL CATEGORIZATION? Jessica Roeder1, F. Gregory Ashby2; 1University of Texas, Austin, 2Uni-

sity, 2University of Oxford — Object recognition greatly benefits from the con-

Darren Narayan4, Bradford Mahon1,2,3; 1Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, USA, 2Center for Visual Science, University of
Rochester, USA, 3Department of Neurosurgery, University of Rochester Medical
Center, USA, 4Rochester Institute of Technology, USA — A great deal is known

about the relation between resting functional connectivity and stimulus
preferences—far less is known about how different tasks may differentially
engage subnetworks within a broader set of regions. The network of brain
regions that supports the ability to identify and use manipulable objects
according to their function is an excellent model system within which to
study how task effects may affect network cohesiveness. We designed a
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiment in which undergraduate participants pantomimed object use or visually identified manipulable objects. A sparse design was used in which 45 seconds of fixation
was interposed between each stimulus in the experiment—this allowed us
to analyze functional connectivity as a function of both task (pantomiming
or object identification) and stimulus (pre-stimulus functional connectivity,
stimulus-driven functional connectivity). During object pantomiming there
was an increase in functional connectivity between ventral stream regions
and left parietal and left motor regions. During object viewing there was an
increase in functional connectivity among ventral stream regions. Graph
theory analyses over the functional connectivity data indicated that the left
parietal cortex and left premotor cortex were hub-like (increased betweenness centrality) during object pantomiming, while the left middle temporal
gyrus and left medial fusiform gyrus were hub-like during object identification. These results suggest that cortical representations of manipulable
objects differentially depend on interactions with dissociable subnetworks
within the broader set of regions that underpin our ability to recognize and
use manipulable objects.

C158
EXPERIENTIAL FORAGING IN HUMANS: BEHAVIORAL AND
IMAGING COMPARISON ACROSS SPECIES Angus MacDonald III1,

ant perspective on naturalistic decision-making. Computational accounts
of foraging reflect how humans and other animals allocate resources, such
as time, to maximize food, money, or drug rewards. One challenge in this
domain is the paucity of translational tasks to examine consistency across
human and animal choices. We drew on Information Foraging Theory and
the internet-usage literature to develop WebSurf (Abram, et al., 2015), a
human analogue of an assay for rat foraging, Restaurant Row (Steiner &
Redish, 2014). Whereas rats passed feeders with different food rewards
at differing delays, humans in WebSurf received offers at a serial set of
video galleries with different rewarding video clips that played after differing delays. In both cases, participants made a stay/go decision, reflecting their willingness to wait for that reward at that delay, indicating their
particular preferences and their providing them with real-time experiential
rewards. The current study examined 64 undergraduates who performed
the task and four who performed the task during 3T functional MRI (45’;
TR=720ms; 2mm3). WebSurf captured individual differences in preferences as measured by delay thresholds and within-subject consistency
with self-reported category preferences. Like rats, humans actively made
decisions with each offer and this reflected the participants’ overall strategic framework. Multivoxel pattern analyses (MVPA) of fMRI data demonstrate that the four reward categories were reliably separable, allowing the
examination of category-specific anticipatory decision-making. WebSurf
provides an experiential foraging paradigm that can be expanded to study
foraging problems, as with addictions.

versity of California, Santa Barbara — An experiment is described that tested

whether stimulus-response associations or an abstract rule are automatized
during extensive practice at perceptual categorization. Twenty-seven participants each completed 12,300 trials of perceptual categorization, either
on rule-based (RB) categories that could be learned explicitly or information-integration (II) categories that required procedural learning. Each
participant practiced predominantly on a primary category structure, but
every third session they switched to a secondary structure that used the
same stimuli and responses. Half the stimuli retained their same response
on the primary and secondary categories, and half switched responses. Performance on the primary categories met the standard criteria of automaticity by the end of training. Additionally, for the primary categories in the
RB condition, accuracy and response time (RT) were identical on congruent
and incongruent stimuli. In contrast, for the primary II categories, accuracy was higher and RT was lower for congruent than incongruent stimuli.
These results are consistent with the hypothesis that rules are automatized
in RB tasks, whereas stimulus-response associations are automatized in II
tasks. A cognitive neuroscience theory is proposed that accounts for these
results. Briefly, early II learning depends on the basal ganglia to learn stimulus-response associations, while automatic II categorization is mediated
entirely within cortex, and the development of II automaticity is associated
with a gradual transfer of control from the striatum to cortical-cortical projections from relevant sensory areas directly to premotor areas that initiate
behavior. Likewise, in RB learning, behavioral control gradually passes
from prefrontal cortex to rule-sensitive neurons in premotor cortex.

C160
GENERALIZATION IN GOAL-DIRECTED LEARNING: BENEFITS OF
INDEPENDENT CLUSTERING OF WORLD-MODEL AND GOALS
Nicholas Franklin1, Michael Frank1; 1Brown University — A hallmark of goal-di-

rected behavior is the ability to combine information about the effects of
actions with motivation to plan a novel course of action. This is particularly
adaptive in unfamiliar contexts where habitual actions may be less relevant.
However, this poses the additional challenge that it is often unclear how
knowledge of one context generalizes to another. Previous behavioral and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

145

Poster Session C	
EEG data suggest that rather than learning about specific contexts, humans
build abstract task structures and then learn to link contexts to these structures. Computational models further suggest this process involves context
popularity-based clustering, such that task structures that are most popular
across contexts are more likely to be revisited in new contexts. However, in
ecological settings, often a novel context indicates that some aspects of task
structure – such as what effects actions have on subsequent states – should
be generalized from one previous context whereas other aspects – such as
the value of those states – might generalize from other contexts. Here, we
consider how a non-parametric Bayesian agent can learn and cluster latent
structures in action-effects and outcome-values separately, as opposed to
unitary task structures associated with both. We show this leads to qualitatively different predictions in behavior than considering both together. We
develop a novel task to investigate how people can discover latent structure and generalize this knowledge in a flexible and goal-directed way. We
provide preliminary experimental evidence for this model of generalization and show that people generalize transition structure independently of
reward value.

C161
ADULT AGE DIFFERENCES IN THE INFLUENCE OF FINANCIAL
SKEWNESS ON CHOICE AND NEURAL ACTIVITY Kendra Seaman1,

Josiah Leong2, Charlene Wu2, Brian Knutson2, Gregory Samanez-Larkin1; 1Yale
University, 2Stanford University — Older adults are disproportionately targeted

by financial fraud attempts that promise rare opportunities for high returns
(positively-skewed risks). Sensitivity to skewed risks may be a factor that
contributes to vulnerability to fraud. Here we examined adult age differences in choice and neural activity while 34 individuals chose to reject (certain $0) or accept symmetric (50% chance of modest win or loss), positively
skewed (25% chance of large gain), or negatively skewed (25% chance of
large loss) risky gambles while undergoing fMRI. Logistic regression analyses of the behavioral data revealed that older adults relative to younger
adults were more likely to accept positively-skewed gambles and less
likely to accept negatively-skewed gambles. Replicating previous research
in young adults, there were main effects of nucleus accumbens (NAcc) and
anterior insula (INS) activity on choice such that increased neural activity in the NAcc increased acceptance of gambles while increased neural
activity in the INS increased rejection of gambles. However, both of these
main effects were qualified by significant interactions with age such that
the effects of activity in both of these regions on gambling were reduced
in older adults. Whole-brain analyses revealed age by condition (positive
vs. negative skew) interactions in dorsolateral and inferior frontal cortical
activity but activity in these regions did not significantly predict choice.
Collectively, these results suggest that age influences the willingness to
accept skewed gambles, and that age-related differences in the responses of
the NAcc and INS may underlie age differences in skewed choice.

C162
COMPUTATIONAL MODEL AND ERP ENABLED PREDICTION OF
SINGLE TRIAL BEHAVIOR ON A NUMERICAL COMPARISON TASK

Richard Prather1, Sara Heverly-Fitt1, Hyunjae Kim1, Ihechi Akwuole1, Samantha
Mutai1; 1University of Maryland - College Park — In the canonical number com-

parison task the distance between the two numerosities affects participant
response time, accuracy and neuroimaging measures. These variations
are referred to as the distance effect. In this study a non-symbolic number
comparison task used to observe behavioral and electrophysiological (EEG)
distance effects. Sixteen participants performed a number comparison task,
while reaction time, accuracy, and electrophysiological data were recorded.
Mean ERP amplitude within the time window of 280-380ms was extracted
for two conditions of trial difficulty (difficult and easy trials). Data were
analyzed using repeated measures ANOVA, with trial difficulty being the
within-subjects variable. Analyses revealed a significant effect of trial difficulty on mean ERP amplitude F(1, 15) = 25.58, p < .001. This neural distance effect between difficult and easy magnitude comparison trials was
present in the occipitoparietal area, replicating effects in existing literature
on numerical processing. We then used a dynamic systems model with
evolutionary genetic algorithm updating to predict participants behavior
trial-by-trial. Average ERP amplitude across occipitoparietal areas were
used as model input in addition to participant response and reaction time.
Computational Modeling fit individual participant responses separate.

146

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
Accuracy in predicting individual participant response ranged from 82%
to 89%. Deviation of reaction time prediction ranged from 220ms to 400ms
(mean 285ms). Correlation between participant and model reaction times
varied between R = -0.09 and R = 0.30. We discuss potential applications of
computational modeling enabled prediction of individual behavior on the
number comparison task; potential improvements and possible limitations
of the model.

C163
THE MOTIVATION-COGNITION INTERFACE IN DECISION-MAKING: EFFECTS OF MOTIVATIONAL MODE, AGE, AND VALUE. Jessica A. Cooper1, Darrell Worthy2, Sharon Noh1, W. Todd Maddox1; 1The University of Texas at Austin, 2Texas A&M University — We examined the effects of

motivational focus, age, and value on a dynamic decision-making task that
requires participants to forego an immediately rewarding option in favor of
increased long-term rewards. First, we examined the effect of chronic motivational mode of the individual (regulatory focus, measured with the Regulatory Focus Questionnaire) on decision-making performance in young
adults, finding that individuals in a match between chronic regulatory
focus and task reward structure perform better and utilize goal-directed
strategies while those in a mismatch use reward-based strategies. Next, we
examined shifts in motivation and subsequent performance associated with
age. Previous work has suggested that age affects the strategies that participants implement in this task, with older adults more often utilizing simple
heuristics than younger adults. We used a combination of behavioral analyses, imaging, and computational modeling to show that older adults’ performance at lower levels of difficulty is moderated by changes in state, with
activation in the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex correlating with performance. Older adults can perform well in simpler versions of this task, but
their performance decreases at higher levels of task difficulty due to a shift
to reward-based strategies (Worthy et al., 2014). In our final experiment,
we sought to improve older adults’ performance in the difficult version of
the task by increasing motivation and effort using high-value framing. We
found that high-value framing improved older adult performance. These
studies suggest that decision-making performance results from an interaction of age, task reward structure, and situational and individual aspects
of motivation.

C164
DECONSTRUCTING THE AESTHETIC BRAIN: EFFECTS OF PREFRONTAL DAMAGE ON THE WEIGHTING OF ART ATTRIBUTES
DURING VALUE JUDGMENT Avinash Vaidya1, Marcus Sefranek1, Lesley
Fellows1; 1Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University — Whether brows-

ing the rarefied galleries of the Metropolitan Museum of Art or the mass
manufactured plastic sculpting of the newest high-tech contraptions, we
are continuously exposed to varied and complex aesthetic experiences.
Despite the ever-present role of aesthetics in modern life, little is known
about the neuropsychological bases of aesthetic judgment. Imaging work
has pointed to role for the ventromedial frontal cortex (VMF) in processing the ‘value’ — or subjective rewarding properties of artwork. However,
it remains unclear what specific role this region plays in the construction
of value assessments for such stimuli. Here, we examined the information
underlying the value judgments made by 33 subjects with focal prefrontal
damage. Artwork stimuli were rated on twelve attributes from the Assessment of Art Attributes (Chatterjee et al., 2010) by a group of art experienced healthy subjects. A principal component analysis revealed that three
components could explain most of the variance in these attributes, approximately corresponding to the ‘concreteness,’ ‘energy’ and color (warmth/
saturation) of these stimuli. Healthy, older control subjects assigned higher
value ratings to more concrete artwork with cooler and less saturated colors.
The relationship between concreteness and value ratings was significantly
diminished, and frequently reversed, in the VMF damaged group, but not
other prefrontal (PFC) damaged subjects. However, PFC damaged subjects
did not differ in weighting color in their value ratings. These results indicate a critical role for VMF in the value assessment of artworks based on
representational information, but not perceptual features.

2016 Annual Meeting	

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Development
& aging
C165
THE IMPACT OF AGING ON HIGH-LEVEL POSTURAL FEEDBACK
PROCESSING Cameron Hassall1, Gail Eskes2, Olave Krigolson1; 1University of
Victoria, 2Dalhousie University — Detecting and correcting postural errors is

an essential part of postural control, and is of particular importance to older
adults, who are at greater risk of falling compared to younger adults. Deficits in postural control in older adults have been well documented, mostly
from the traditional position that postural control relies on reflexes alone.
However, cognitive factors such as high-level feedback processing have
also been shown to impact our ability to maintain an equilibrium position
while standing. A high-level postural error (failure to achieve a postural
goal) elicits a negative deflection in the human event-related potential
(ERP) known as the feedback-related negativity (FRN), thought to index a
generic learning system within medial-frontal cortex. We tested the impact
of aging on high-level postural feedback processing by recording electroencephalographic data while older adults performed a postural targeting
task. Participants were given feedback after attempting to move their centre
of mass into one of four target locations while standing on a balance board.
The size of the targets was adjusted using a staircase procedure in order to
ensure an even split of correct and incorrect feedback types. Compared to
younger controls, older adults displayed poorer overall performance (i.e.
larger target sizes) and greater centre of mass variability. Older adults also
had a reduced FRN, suggesting a cognitive component of the impact of
aging on postural control.

C166
MEG RECORDINGS IN PRESCHOOL AGE CHILDREN REVEAL
DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN PRIMARY MOTOR CORTEX Cecilia
Jobst1, Rita Al-Loos1, Wei He2, Huizhen Tang2, Blake Johnson2, Douglas Cheyne1,3;
1
The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada, 2Macquarie University, Sydney,
Australia, 3University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada — We recently reported dif-

ferences in movement-related MEG fields in preschool age children (mean
age 4.8 years) compared to those typically observed in adults, using a customized paediatric MEG system (Cheyne et al., 2014). High-frequency (70–
90Hz) motor cortex gamma oscillations, which may play an important role
in sensory guided action and error processing, were also observed, but at a
lower frequency range around 30–60Hz in some of the children. These findings suggested that maturation of the motor system is still incomplete in
the late preschool years. Here we report the results of follow-up recordings
in the same children performing the same task two and one-half years later
(mean age 7.3 years). These results showed changes in the event-related
movement field waveforms, with emergence of adult-like pre-movement
and movement-evoked field components. Moreover, the follow-up data
exhibited increases in the frequency of sensorimotor cortex rhythmic activity, including a shift in gamma oscillations to the adult frequency range.
This provides further evidence of functional changes in motor circuits
during early childhood that impact both motor field components and the
frequency “tuning” of oscillatory activity in motor cortex. To our knowledge, this is the first longitudinal MEG study demonstrating changes in
neural activity in the motor cortex during early childhood. Such changes
may reflect the maturation of cortical motor circuits that underlie the development of motor skills during early childhood, and could potentially serve
as a biomarker for the remission or persistence of certain motor disorders
(e.g., developmental stuttering) into adulthood.

C167
MATURATION OF SPEECH DISCRIMINATION AND ATTENTIONAL
REQUIREMENTS IN LATE CHILDHOOD Judith A. Iannotta1, Valerie L.

Shafer1, Brett A. Martin1, Hilary Gomes1; 1The Graduate Center of the City University of New York — The ability to perceive speech sound contrasts is refined

throughout development. While emerging models suggest that development is characterized by shifts from an attentionally-demanding mode
of processing speech sounds to one that occurs relatively automatically,
the specific developmental time-course of these changes remains unclear.

Poster Session C
This experiment used Event-Related Potential (ERP) measures, to examine
developmental changes in automaticity to native language speech sounds
in 10 to 17 year old children. ERPs were recorded to a difficult English
vowel contrast, (apa versus aepa) under different attentional conditions in
an oddball design. Attention was drawn towards or away from the auditory stimuli via a visual memory task. The mismatch negativity (MMN)
discriminative component was expected to be larger in the auditory attend
than the visual attend tasks for the youngest children, but with increased
automatization of processing, older children and adults were expected
to show little difference across tasks. Consistent with our prediction, we
found greater attention-related modulation of the MMN for younger than
older children. We also found evidence of age-related difference in the late
discriminatory negativity and P3b. Specifically, the late negativity and P3b
were larger with increasing age. These findings confirm that native language speech perception is not fully mature, even into the teenage years.

THINKING: Development & aging
C168
PREDICTIVE VISON: PREFRONTAL CORTEX DRIVES VISUAL RECOGNITION NETWORKS IN OLDER BUT NOT YOUNGER ADULTS Jessica Gilbert1, Rosalyn Moran1; 1Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute, Roanoke
VA — Predictive coding models of visual perception account for an agent’s

experience with his sensory environment and propose that top-down cortical signals promote efficient neural codes by carrying predictions of what
might be observed next. We hypothesized that older, compared to younger
brains, would employ these codes more prominently given their longer
repertoire of sensory experience. Electrophysiological recordings were
collected using a 64-channel EEG system while participants performed a
repetition-priming task. Behaviorally, both younger (N=23, mean age=23.8
years) and older (N=21, mean age=73.7 years) participants demonstrated
intact priming for repeated (N=50) compared with novel (N=50) pictures.
Using dynamic causal modeling (DCM) we measured the effective connectivity underlying stimulus-evoked responses in cortical visual networks
during the task. We found that in young adults, signals propagated from
early visual regions and reverberated along reciprocal connections to
temporal, parietal and frontal cortices. In contrast, the dynamics of visual
recognition in older brains was driven by both early visual and prefrontal
cortical inputs to the same distributed network. Our findings are supported
by previous anatomical and functional studies of so-called ‘gist’ pathways
that describe the influence of ascending magnocellular projections to PFC
on early visual stimulus processing. While previously thought of as exceptions to the rule of bottom-up hierarchical signal propagation, our results
emphasize a prominent role for prefrontal-driven vision in aged brains and
suggest that perceptual networks reorganize over the lifespan in line with
predictive coding accounts of neural processing.

C170
MEDICATED HYPERTENSION IMPROVES LEARNING FROM POSITIVE PROBABILISTIC FEEDBACK IN OLDER AFRICAN AMERICANS Ravi B. Sojitra1, Christina Inyang1, Ashlee Shaw1, Mark A. Gluck1; 1Rutgers
University-Newark — While it is well established that improvements in car-

diovascular fitness can yield cognitive benefits, past literature has focused
on improvements in the frontal lobe and hippocampus. The effect of exercise on striatal (i.e., probabilistic) learning is comparatively unclear. Studies
show that older adults learn worse from probabilistic feedback compared
to younger adults; it is not clear to whether these observed differences are
due to modifiable changes in cardiovascular fitness versus healthy neurobiological changes. As part of a larger, ongoing study of exercise-mediated
cognitive aging in African Americans (who are at increased risk of hypertension and hypertension-related disease), we tested older adults, ages
53-89, on a probabilistic category-learning task that distinguishes positive
(reward) from negative (punishment) feedback learning. Stimuli in the
positive feedback condition gave either positive feedback or no feedback
and stimuli in the negative feedback condition gave either no feedback or
negative feedback; each type of feedback was reliable on 90% of trials. We
found that among those who were being medicated for hypertension, those
with a systolic blood pressure (BP) of <140 mmHg learned better from
reward than those who had a systolic BP ≥140 mmHg. Additionally, those

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

147

Poster Session C	
who were medicated and had a systolic BP<140 mmHg learned better from
reward than those who were un-medicated, including those with a systolic
BP of <140 mmHg. There were no significant differences in learning from
negative feedback. These results suggest that medicating hypertension may
yield reward-learning benefits, underscoring the role of health disparities
in cognitive research.

C171
NEUROMAGNETIC CORRELATES OF NUMEROSITY TRAINING
IN CHILDREN WITH DYSCALCULIA Vera Dehmelt1,2, Jörg-Tobias Kuhn1,
Christin Schwenk1, Julia Raddatz1, Heinz Holling1, Christian Dobel1,3; 1WWU Münster, 2Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, 3Universitätsklinikum Jena
— Poor numeracy, the ability to competently deal with numbers, has been

related to earlier school drop-out, low economic well-being, and depression. Developmental dyscalculia (DD), a severe form of poor numeracy,
shows prevalence rates similar to those of dyslexia while being widely
unrecognized by the general public. The present study employed magnetoencephalography to evaluate a computer-based training (CODY- training)
aimed at improving basic numerical processing as assessed with several
measures of mathematical skills and reaction times (numerical distance
effect, NDE). The NDE reflects the notion that larger magnitude distances
correspond to faster RTs than smaller distances in magnitude decision
tasks. It often serves as a core measure for magnitude processing. Primary
school children suffering from DD received either the CODY- training or
a training of deductive thinking. The size of the NDE within the CODYgroup increased from pre- to post- training indexing more efficient processing. Increased NDE correlated with gains in tests of mathematical performance. Both training groups showed a modulation of neurophysiological
activity by numerical distance in a right parietal and a left temporo-parieto-frontal region. Activity within those regions was sensitive to training
and these changes were predictive of posttest- performance on math skill
measures. The study underscores the effectiveness of CODY training in DD
and corresponding changes in a neurophysiological network underlying
mathematical functions.

C172
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF
REMEMBERING, IMAGINING, AND MENTALIZING Elizabeth DuPre1,
Amber W. Lockrow1, Wen-Ming Luh1, R. Nathan Spreng1; 1Cornell University —

The default network has been reliably implicated in self-generated thought,
including autobiographical memory, prospection, and theory-of-mind.
Aging has been observed to affect these forms of cognition as well as the
integrity of the default network. To investigate how age-related changes
might impact these processes, functional neuroimages were collected in 31
younger (M=22y, SD=3.3y) and 30 older (M=68y, SD=6y) adults. Imaging
data were submitted to partial least squares analysis to detect shared and
unique patterns of neural activation and connectivity between age groups.
Relative to a sensory-motor control condition, in both groups, all three
forms of self-generated thought engaged medial prefrontal cortex (PFC),
precuneus, lateral temporal lobes, and the inferior parietal lobule, consistent with the default network. Additional activity was observed in lateral
PFC, the dorsal anterior cingulate, and anterior insula –regions typically
affiliated with the salience network. A second latent variable dissociated
autobiographical remembering and imagining from theory-of-mind reasoning, a dissociation that was attenuated in older adults. Here, autobiographical remembering and imagining engaged medial PFC, retrosplenial
cortex, and hippocampus. Theory-of-mind reasoning engaged the superior temporal sulcus bilaterally and the right temporoparietal junction.
Functional connectivity of the ventromedial PFC showed an age effect for
autobiographical memory, imagining, and theory of mind. Young adults
demonstrated greater connectivity with posterior hippocampus and inferior frontal gyrus; older adults showed greater connectivity locally within
ventromedial PFC and dorsal precuneus. Overall, we were struck by the
degree of preserved function in healthy aging. However, subtle age-related
changes were observed, particularly in functional connectivity.

148

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

C173
AGE DIFFERENCES IN BOLD ACTIVATION ASSOCIATED WITH
CHANGES IN DECISION-MAKING STATES Bo Pang1, Darrell A. Worthy1,
Tyler Davis2, Jessica Cooper3, Kirsten Smayda3, Kaileigh A. Byrne1, W. Todd
Maddox3; 1Texas A&M University, 2Texas Tech University, 3University of Texas at
Austin — We examined whether older or younger adults would be more

sensitive to state-change information by employing a state-based task
where participants were provided with cues that readily aligned with the
dynamic states of the task environment while undergoing fMRI. Younger
adults outperformed older adults, which suggests that they more readily
utilized the state-cues. We regressed BOLD activation on three measures
from a reinforcement learning model. We utilized an expected value
regressor that measured the difference between the immediate and longterm value of the selected option at the time of choice, and a state-change
regressor that represented the degree to which the selected option led to
an improvement or decline in state at the time of feedback. Additionally, a
time-lagged state-change regressor indicated the state-change signal from
the last trial when the chosen option was selected. This served as a metric
of the chosen option’s value in terms of recently inducing an improvement
or a decline state. Consistent with previous results, younger adults were
responsive to expected value-based signals which modulated activation in
ventral striatal and medial PFC regions, while older adults were sensitive
to recent state-change signals which modulated activation in right dorsolateral PFC. For time-lagged state-change signals, however, activation in striatum, ventromedial and dorsolateral PFC showed age-related decreases,
reflecting age-related decline in the use of recent state-change information
at the time of choice. These findings indicate that older adults were responsive to state information, but only during feedback while younger adults
utilized state information at the time of choice.

Poster Session D
ATTENTION: Spatial
D1
MEMORY SYSTEMS MAY BE INTEGRAL IN SPATIAL FUNCTION
AND SPATIAL NEGLECT. A. M. Barrett3, Karl Hoegler1,2,3; 1Kessler Foundation, 2Kessler Institute for Rehabilitation, 3Rutgers-New Jersey Medical School
— Spatial neglect is pathologic spatial bias, causing functional disability.

Recent evidence suggests therapeutic recovery of “Aiming” spatial neglect,
a directional, hemispatial and left body action deficit after right brain
stroke, may be critically supported by the medial temporal complex. This
region plays a critical role in declarative and even motor sequence learning.
We wished to learn if verbal memory was associated with spatial neglect,
and if motor learning slows with increasing spatial neglect symptoms. In
240 stroke survivors (mean age = 66.8), verbal recall was correlated with
two spatial neglect tests (Catherine Bergego Scale and Behavioural Inattention Test; r = -0.35 and 0.48, both p = 0.01), however factor analysis yielded
3 separable components. In 15 of these people with right stroke and spatial neglect, who were treated with prism adaptation, we examined motor
learning by dividing patients into those with increasing (poor motor learning) versus decreasing errors (good motor learning) over a training session.
Those with good motor learning had less neglect (CBS mean = 9.84) than
those with poor motor learning (CBS mean = 12.41, p < 0.05). BIT did not
differ by motor learning rate. Similarly, the rate of motor learning (error
slope) tended to be correlated with CBS (p < .10), but not BIT (p = 0.45). This
data is consistent with memory impairment in spatial neglect. Memory and
spatial function may simply be “good neighbors,” drawing upon the same
neural substrate. Alternately, body-spatial processing might contribute to
verbal memory.

D2
METHYLPHENIDATE MODIFIES ATTENTIONAL ORIENTING BIAS
IN HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS Rachel Tomer1, Hagar Gelbard1, Noa Brande-Eilat1, Shirel Dorman1, Polina Zozulinsky1, Hila Gvirts2, Aviv Segev2, Kfir Feffer2;
University of Haifa, Israel, 2Shalvata Mental Health Care Center, Israel — Atten-

1

tion Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is characterized by rightward
bias when performing a spatial orienting task, which may reflect reduced
dopamine signaling in the right hemisphere. Methylphenidate (MPH)
increases extracellular levels of dopamine, and was found to reduce the
spatial attention bias in ADHD patients, suggesting that this drug corrects
a unilateral dopamine deficit by differentially increases dopamine level
in the right hemisphere. Orienting bias can also be seen in healthy individuals and the differences in direction and magnitude of this bias have
been shown to reflect the individual’s asymmetric dopamine signaling. To
clarify whether MPH acts preferentially on the right hemisphere in healthy
subjects, we examined the effects of a single dose of MPH (20 mg) on orienting bias in 36 healthy individuals (18 females; age: 24 + 2.3) who performed
the Greyscales task in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, within-subject
design. Under placebo, 24 subjects showed a leftward bias, whereas the
other 12 showed a rightward bias. MPH had a differential effect on attentional bias, depending on the initial preference of the individual: subjects
with leftward bias under placebo made fewer left choices after receiving a
single dose of MPH, while a similar dose of MPH resulted in fewer right
choices among individuals showing rightward bias under placebo. These
results support the hypothesis that, in the healthy brain, MPH reduces bias
by increasing DA levels asymmetrically, with greater increase in the hemisphere with lower baseline DA level.

D3
TOP-DOWN CONTROL OF VISUAL ALPHA OSCILLATIONS:
SOURCES OF CONTROL SIGNALS AND THEIR MECHANISMS OF
ACTION Mingzhou Ding1, Chao Wang1, Rajasimhan Rajagovindan1, Sahng-Min
Han1; 1J Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical Engineering, University
of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611 — Alpha oscillations (8 to 12 Hz) inversely
correlate with cortical excitability. In visual spatial attention, alpha over

the attended location decreases, signifying increased excitability to facilitate the processing of impending stimuli. In contrast, in retention of verbal
working memory, alpha over visual cortex increases, signifying decreased
excitability to input to protect the information held online from sensory
interference. According to the prevailing model, this goal-oriented biasing
of sensory cortex is effected by top-down control signals from frontal and
parietal cortices. The present study tests and substantiates this hypothesis
by (a) identifying the signals that mediate the top-down biasing influence,
(b) examining whether the cortical areas issuing these signals are task-specific or task-independent, and (c) establishing the possible mechanism of
the biasing action. High-density human EEG data were recorded in (1) a
trial-by-trial cued visual spatial attention task and (2) the Sternberg verbal
working memory task. Applying Granger causality to both sensor-level
and source-level data we report the following findings. In covert visual
spatial attention, regions exerting top-down control over visual activity are
lateralized to the right hemisphere, with the right frontal eye field and the
right inferior frontal gyrus being the main sources of top-down influences.
During retention of verbal working memory, regions exerting top-down
control over visual activity are lateralized to the left hemisphere, with the
left middle frontal gyrus being the main source of top-down influences.
In both experiments, top-down influences are mediated by alpha oscillations, and the biasing effect is likely achieved via an inhibition-disinhibition
mechanism.

D4
INCENTIVE SALIENCE PRODUCES EARLY ATTENTION ALLOCATION: AN ERP INVESTIGATION Constanza de Dios1, Geoffrey Potts1; 1Uni-

versity of South Florida — This study used event-related potentials (ERPs) to

study how expected value influences spatial attention. The medial frontal
negativity (MFN) indexes expected value, being negative to unexpected
punishments and positive to unexpected rewards. The P1 indexes spatial
attention, being larger to stimuli in attended locations. This design attached
value to locations by making one visual hemifield economically rewarding (greater probability of a rewarding outcome) and the other punishing
(greater probability of a punishing outcome). Keypresses to a dot probe
following a reward-signifying stimulus were awarded money if correct,
and penalized following a punishment-signifying stimulus if incorrect. We
predicted that the MFN would be most negative to punishing outcomes in
the rewarding hemifield and most positive to rewarding outcomes in the
punishing hemifield. We also predicted that the P1 would be larger and
keypresses faster to probes appearing on the same side as an outcome that
violated expected value, indicating attention allocation to a location where
expectation was violated. Consistent with our hypothesis, in a sample of 20
participants, the MFN was most negative to punishments in the rewarding
hemifield and most positive to rewards in the punishing hemifield, indicating that value was attached to location. Contrary to our prediction, the
P1 was larger and keypresses faster to the probes when the preceding outcome did not violate expected value, indicating attention was allocated to
locations where economic expectation was confirmed. This suggests that
incentive salience directs spatial attention, but to expectation confirmation,
differently from perceptual salience, which attracts attention to expectation
violation.

D5
THE TIME COURSE OF HEMISPHERIC ASYMMETRY TO CONFIGURAL AND FEATURAL FACE PROCESSING IS GATED BY SPATIAL
ATTENTION Hailing Wang1, Shimin Fu1; 1Tsinghua University — Face recognition requires both configural (second-order relations) and featural processing. Previous studies have shown that configural face processing relies
more on the right hemisphere, whereas featural face processing involves
more the left. However, it is unclear about the temporal sequence of these
lateralized processing. Spatial attention paradigm was employed to instruct
participants to attend the face location (attended condition) or house location (unattended condition). The interaction from attention, face processing type and hemisphere on P1 and P2 components indicates the different
mechanisms of configural and featural face processing as a function of spa-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

149

Poster Session D	

2016 Annual Meeting

tial attention. Specifically, configural face processing had a larger posterior P1 (approximately 100 ms) than featural face processing on the right
hemisphere, whereas the P2 (approximately 220 ms) was larger for featural
than configural face processing on the left hemisphere, both under attended
condition. In contrast, when unattended, the P1 was larger for featural than
configural face processing on the left hemisphere, whereas P2 was larger
for configural than featural face processing on the right hemisphere. These
results suggest that configural and featural processing involve different
neural mechanisms, and more importantly, the time course of hemispheric
asymmetry on configural and featural face processing are differently modulated by spatial attention.

D6
CORTICAL THICKNESS AND SPATIAL FREQUENCY PROCESSING
DURING NATURAL SCENES PERCEPTION IN CHILDREN Nicolas
1,2

1

1

1

1

Poirel , François Orliac , Katell Mevel , Grégoire Borst , Julie Vidal , Arlette
Pineau1, Sonia Dollfus3,4, Olivier Houdé1,2, Carole Peyrin5, Grégory Simon1;
1
LaPsyDÉ, UMR 8240, CNRS, Université Paris Descartes, Université de Caen,
PRES Sorbonne Paris Cité, France, 2Institut Universitaire de France (IUF), France,
3
ISTS, UMR 6301, CNRS, CEA, Caen, France, 4CHU de Caen, Service de Psychiatrie, Centre Esquirol, Caen, France, 5LPNC, UMR 5105, CNRS, Université Pierre
Mendès France, France — Scene recognition is processed in terms of spatial

frequencies. Low spatial frequencies (LSF) first allow rapid scene recognition whereas high spatial frequencies (HSF) subsequently carry fine details.
The present Magnetic Resonance Imaging study investigated how cortical thickness covaried with LSF/HSF processing abilities in ten-year-old
children and adults. Participants indicated whether natural scenes filtered
either in LSF or in HSF were outdoor or indoor, while reaction times (RTs)
were recorded. In adults, faster RTs for LSF and HSF were always associated with an increase in cortical thickness (parahippocampal, middle
frontal gyrus, precentral and insula regions for LSF; parahippocampal,
fronto-marginal and supramarginal gyri for HSF). On the other hand, in
children, faster RTs for HSF were associated with increases in cortical thickness (posterior cingulate, supramarginal and calcarine) whereas faster RTs
for LSF were associated with decreases in cortical thickness (subcallosal
and insula). Increases in cortical thickness in adults and children could correspond to an expansion mechanism linked to the efficiency in processing
visual scenes, whereas the decrease in cortical thickness associated to LSF
efficiency in children could correspond to a pruning mechanism reflecting
an ongoing maturational process, in agreement with the view that LSF
efficiency continues to refine during childhood. In children, variations in
cortical thickness were particularly present in anterior regions of the brain,
in line with the view of a postero-anterior gradient in brain development.
Taken together, our results highlight the brain dynamic processes that
allow children and adults to perceive a visual natural scene in a coherent
way.

D7
INVESTIGATING THE FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY OF VISUAL AWARENESS: A MULTIVARIATE FMRI STUDY Jiaqing Chen1, Edward B. O’Neil1,
Andy C. H. Lee1,2, Matthias Niemeier1,3; 1University of Toronto Scarborough,
2
Baycrest Centre for Geriatric Care, 3Centre for Vision Research, York University
— The right hemisphere is dominant for spatial attention and visual aware-

ness. For example, patients with spatial neglect after right-brain damage
to ventral parietal, temporal, and/or ventral frontal areas ignore the left
side of space and show pathological biases to the right. In contrast, healthy
participants show complementary biases to the left, called pseudoneglect,
such as in perceptual judgement tasks. Pseudoneglect has been previously
proposed to be associated with dorsal regions, especially in parietal cortex,
known to activate in tasks of visual exploration and attentional shifts. However, this might reflect a confound because perceptual judgement tasks
might have required shifts of attention whereas control tasks might not.
Therefore, here we used a “grating-scales task” (GST) that requires participants to make perceptual judgements about the high (GST-HI) or low spatial frequency components (GST-LO) of the same stimuli, where both tasks
afford similar amounts of attentional shifts, but only the GST-HI induces
pseudoneglect. As expected, we found that participants exhibited pseudoneglect only during the GST-HI but not during the GST-LO. Imaging
results showed that dorsal areas such as the intraparietal sulcus activated

150

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

bilaterally. However, areas in inferior and medial frontal cortex as well as
insula cortex activated more on the right side during the GST-HI. Our data
suggest that pseudoneglect activates a network of areas in the right hemisphere associated with portions of the ventral attentional network. These
areas are consistent with some of the lesion sites observed in patients with
spatial neglect.

D8
ATTENTION TO ONGOING STIMULI MODULATES FEEDFORWARD PROCESSING IN HUMAN PRIMARY VISUAL CORTEX Ashley

Royston1, Jaime Napan1, Kira Anderson1, Aviel Haberman1, Steven J. Luck1,
Steven A. Hillyard2, W. Martin Usrey1, George R. Mangun1; 1University of California, Davis, 2University of California, San Diego — By enabling efficient selection

of task-relevant information and suppressing irrelevant information, selective attention drives successful goal-directed behavior. Traditionally, visual
selective attention is probed using briefly presented stimuli, yielding reliable attentional modulations of visual evoked activity. However, these classic designs fail to capture the complexity of continuously-visible real world
visual scenes, leaving open questions concerning the application of these
findings to more natural viewing scenarios, and perhaps failing to reveal
key mechanisms. For example, although electrophysiological studies in
nonhuman primates and fMRI studies in humans have reported replicable
effects of spatial selective attention in striate cortex and LGN, ERP studies
in humans have yielded inconsistent results. We hypothesize that in natural vision, the presence of continuous inputs may trigger an attention-related engagement of reafferent circuitry in V1 such that subsequent feedforward inputs benefit from enhanced attentional modulation at this early
cortical locus. To test this, we presented bilateral stimuli to human subjects
who covertly attended to one hemifield in order to detect occasional targets
under ongoing and classic conditions. The results we obtained support our
hypothesis, showing a significant modulation of ERPs generated in V1 (i.e.,
the C1 component of the visual ERP) in the ongoing stimulus condition
compared with the classic condition. Our findings suggest that attentional
engagement of reafferent circuitry enhances processing of feedforward
inputs in human V1 during selective attention to ongoing stimulation,
which is more similar to the conditions faced in natural vision.

D9
CUEING ATTENTION WITHOUT AWARENESS USING OBJECT-SUBSTITUTION MASKING Charles M. Giattino1, Zaynah M. Alam1, Marty G.
Woldorff1; 1Duke University — The relationship between attention and aware-

ness is not well understood, especially to what extent they are dissociable
and the neural underpinnings of each. Here we examined the orienting of
visual attention in an exogenous cueing paradigm while using object-substitution masking to manipulate participants’ awareness of the cues. A
delayed-offset mask was used on each trial, and awareness of the cues
was based on behavioral report at the end of each trial. Neurophysiological (EEG) data was recorded during the task, from which we extracted
event-related potential (ERP) responses. Behaviorally, results showed that
participants were unaware of the cue on 58% of trials. On cue-aware trials,
there was a 50ms validity effect (invalidly- minus validly-cued trials);
interestingly, on cue-unaware trials, participants still had a clear, although
somewhat reduced, validity effect (21ms). There was little indication of an
effect of cue awareness on early sensory ERPs (P1/N1), but instead manifested in later differences, starting with a parieto-occipital negativity from
200-300ms, suggesting the involvement of a reentrant process in cue awareness. An N2pc to the cue, indexing the lateralized focusing of attention,
was observed for cue-aware but not cue-unaware trials, despite the latter
still showing a clear behavioral validity effect. Finally, in response to the
targets, validity effects were observed at both the P1 and P2 latencies for
cue-aware trials, with similar but smaller effects on the cue-unaware trials.
These results suggest that shifts of visuospatial attention can be triggered
by unperceived stimuli, but through somewhat different mechanisms than
shifts triggered by perceived stimuli.

2016 Annual Meeting	

D10
NEUROMODULATION OF COGNITIVE CONTROL: DIFFERENT
EFFECTS OF LEFT AND RIGHT PARIETAL TDCS ON STIMULUS-RESPONSE ASSOCIATIONS Elisa Di Rosa1, Lara Bardi2, Margherita Forgione1,

Fabio Masina1, Carlo A. Umiltà1, Daniela Mapelli1,3; 1Department of General
Psychology, University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 2Department of Experimental
Psychology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 3Human Inspired Technologies
Research Center, University of Padua, Padua, Italy — Several neuroimaging and
neuropsychological data sustained the involvement of bilateral intraparietal sulcus (IPS) in number processing. At the same time, results of brain
stimulation studies are divergent: while some findings supported a left lateralization, others sustained that the integrity of the right IPS is essential in
number discrimination. Posterior parietal cortex, however, is well known to
be involved in spatial attention and in cognitive control mechanisms, often
implicated in numerical tasks. The goal of the present study was to gain
insight into the existence of hemispheric asymmetries underlying number
processing, investigating the effect of parietal transcranial direct current
stimulation (tDCS) on stimulus-response associations related to magnitude
and parity evaluation. Thirty subjects were tested: 15 received tDCS on the
right IPS and 15 have been stimulated on the left IPS, during the performance of a parity judgment task. Every subject underwent anodal, cathodal
and sham stimulation on the target site (P3 for left IPS and P4 for right IPS),
while the reference electrode was placed on the contralateral supraorbital
region. Our results revealed that the stimulation of left and right IPS have
different effects on participant’s performance. More specifically, while the
stimulation of the left IPS modulated both the magnitude and the parity
evaluation, the stimulation of the right IPS influenced only the processing of parity information. These results, which appear in contrast with the
hypothesis of a bilateral involvement of IPS in magnitude processing, are
discussed in the context of the parietal asymmetry in salience-based selection in stimulus-response association effects.

D11
READING AND SCENE EXPLORATION DEFICIT IN NEGLECT
PATIENTS: AN EYE MOVEMENT IMPAIRMENT Lisa Arduino1,2, Silvia Pri-

mativo3, Roberta Daini4, Maria De Luca5, Carlo Toneatto4, Marialuisa Martelli5,6;
1
Lumsa University - Rome, Italy, 2Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, CNR - Rome, Italy, 3Dementia Research Centre, University College London,
GB, 4Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy, 5Neuropsychology Unit, IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy, 6Department of
Psychology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy — Around 40% of patients

with unilateral spatial neglect (USN) show also a reading impairment (i.e.,
Neglect Dyslexia, ND). In Primativo et al. (2013) we proposed a new theoretical account by showing that ND is the consequence of the concomitant presence of USN plus a non-lateralized eye movement deficit. In the
present study we aimed at clarifying the features of the altered eye movement pattern. We present the results of seven experiments, showing how
an impaired eye movement pattern affects scene perception, reading, and
simple saccadic tasks in a large proportion of neglect patients. Using the eye
movement performance of a group of controls during a scene description
task, USN patients were divided according of their fixation location pattern, which was compared to that of controls. Patients identified as having
an impaired eye movement behaviour in the scene exploration task and in
the saccadic tasks, produced left lateralized errors also in reading words.
The abnormal oculomotor behaviour during reading confirmed the group
distinction based on scene exploration. Also, we showed that the disorder
extends to the vertical meridian and is independent from a possible attentional engagement problem. We conclude that the eye movement disorder,
which is present in a larger proportion of USN patients, reflects a general
oculo-motor disorder and affects both reading and scene perception. The
results are discussed within a new theoretical model of neglect dyslexia and
its relations with unilateral spatial neglect.

Poster Session D

D12
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF VISUAL BINDING
ERRORS AFTER BILATERAL PARIETAL DAMAGE Elena Pedrazzini1, Julia Fellrath1, Radek Ptak1; 1Laboratory of Cognitive Neurorehabilitation,
Department of Neuroscience, University of Geneva, Switzerland — The most dra-

matic expression of binding failures in vision are illusory conjunctions (e.g.
the confusion between the shape of one stimulus with the color of another
stimulus). Illusory conjunctions may be observed in healthy participants
when exposure is limited or during free viewing in patients with parietal
damage. Previous studies have attributed illusory conjunctions to failures
of spatial localization of the stimuli. However, it is unknown whether such
failures reflect the impairment at the level of early or late stages of visual
processing. Here, we examined the time-course of visual processing using
evoked potential measures in a patient with bilateral damage to the posterior parietal cortex presenting prominent binding failures. The patient
was asked to identify either one colored letter briefly flashed to the left
or right hemifield, or two simultaneously presented letters. In unilateral
presentation she adequately identified either the color or the shape of left
or right letters. In contrast, during bilateral presentation she either showed
complete extinction of the left letter or an illusory conjunction between
right letter shape and left letter color. Evoked potential analyses revealed
an electrophysiological signature starting ~70 ms after stimulus onset that
was specific to the occurrence of an illusory conjunction. These findings
indicate that illusory conjunctions reflect failures of early stages of spatial
processing relying on the posterior parietal cortex.

D13
TRAIT IMPULSIVITY DIMINISHES THE INHIBITION OF RETURN
EFFECT Grace Whitaker1, Ellen Poliakoff1, Joanna Neill1, Wael El-Deredy1; 1The

University of Manchester — Inhibition of return (IOR) is an attentional mech-

anism that impedes the re-inspection of spatial locations, making search
more efficient. IOR is proposed to reflect both prioritisation of ‘the new’
and inhibition of ‘the old’. The phenomenon is observed by measuring
slower reaction times (RTs) to targets appearing in the same spatial location as a cue (cued trial) compared to a different location (uncued trial).
The difference in RT to cued and uncued trials provides a measure of IOR
magnitude. How the personality trait of impulsivity affects IOR is unclear.
On the one hand, Impulsive individuals may fail to inhibit the old location,
reducing their IOR magnitude. On the other hand, they may over-prioritise novel spaces, increasing their IOR magnitude. This study explored the
relationship between measures of impulsivity and IOR magnitude to test
these conflicting hypotheses. Seventy-two healthy participants (ages 18 –
35, 42 female, 30 male) completed the Barratt Impulsivity Scale (BIS-11), the
Conner’s Adult ADHD Rating Scale (CAARS) and performed the Conner’s
Continuous Performance Test (CPT) to measure impulsivity. Participants’
IOR magnitude was then ascertained using a classic visual cue-target IOR
task. Linear regression analysis using the impulsivity measures as factors
demonstrated that cognitive instability (from the BIS-11) was the strongest
predictor of IOR magnitude: F(1, 70) = 9.960, p = 0.002; R Square = .125.
Scores in this aspect of impulsivity were negatively related to IOR magnitude. This study demonstrates that the inhibitory mechanisms necessary
for IOR are impaired in impulsive individuals.

D14
GAMMA BAND OSCILLATIONS REFLECT STRATEGY CHOICE IN A
MULTIPLE OBJECT-TRACKING TASK Christian Merkel1, Jens-Max Hopf1,2,

Mircea Ariel Schoenfeld1,2,3; 1Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, 2Leibniz
Institute for Neurobiology, Magdeburg, 3Schmieder Clinic, Allensbach — It is

possible to keep track of multiple simultaneously moving identical items.
Previous models that postulate increasing attentional resources with rising
tracking demands fail to account for interactions between the tracked items.
Recent neurophysiological evidence indicated that at least some of the subjects enhance their tracking abilities by building a geometrical figure based
on the spatial positions of the tracked items. These subjects show different
behavioral and electrophysiological responses to luminance probes on all
tracked items relative to subsets of target and distractor items. The current
study focuses on oscillatory signals during target-assignment and tracking,
for two afore mentioned different performance groups who were also different in their time-frequency profiles. Subjects who tracked the items by

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

151

Poster Session D	
building a figure showed strong transient gamma-bursts during target-assignment. The transient-gamma amplitude was correlated with the subsequent correct responses on the tracking task. In addition these subjects
also showed strong desynchronization in the beta-frequency range during
tracking. Subjects who did not form a figure during tracking do not exhibit
transient gamma-activity during target assignment but a sustained gamma-response during motion. The results provide strong support for two
fundamentally different multiple-objects-tracking strategies. Subjects who
track the shape of the items appear to encode a shape template representation prior to the tracking phase. The other subjects group rather appears to
use spatial visual short-term-memory to maintain each single item location
during tracking.

D15
CANCELLATION TASKS, NUMBERS AND TABLET PCS: THE PERFECT LINK FOR CLINICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL PURPOSES. Di
Luca Samuel1, Girelli Luisa2, Vallar Giuseppe2, Pesenti Mauro3, Blini Elvio4,
Schuller Anne-Marie1,5, Schiltz Christine1; 1University of Luxembourg, 2Università Milano-Bicocca, Italy, 3Université Catholique de Louvain, Belgium, 4Università di Padova, Italy, 5Rehazenter Clinic, Luxembourg. — Cancellation tasks

are typically used in the clinical assessment of patients’ ability to explore
extra-personal space. They require programming and executing on-line
and step-by-step exploration of a display, with serial cancellations of specific targets displayed between distracters. One of their major aims is to
detect the presence of unilateral spatial neglect, but when they are numerically adapted, they also allow measuring the subjective visuo-spatial displacements induced by number’s magnitude. In our experiments we implemented cancellation tasks on a tablet PC and computed analyses based on
the average x,y-coordinates of the participants’ cancellation marks. Using
a numerically adapted star cancellation task, we have firstly confirmed
that numbers can induce attentional shifts according to their magnitude
(small towards left and large towards right), even when participants are
freely exploring the peripersonal space (F(1,28)=12.713;p<.001). This effect
is purely due to the numbers. In fact by reorienting either the visual frame
reference or the digits used as distracters 90° (counter-)clockwise, we found
a vertical bias only when digits where tilted (F(1,37)=2.845;p<0.05). Moreover, by numerically adapting the OTA test, we induced “objet-based”
biases in which participants produced false positive errors as a function of
magnitude of distracter-digits, small vs. large (F(1,30)=3.010;p=.05). Finally
but importantly, we were able to use numbers as a clinical tool for the rehabilitation of left neglect patients, who showed a stronger recuperation of
their visual rightwards bias when presented with small digits to be marked
(F(2,33)=4.834;p<.014). These studies establish the clinical and experimental
interest of digitally administered cancellation tasks.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
D16
PERCEPTUAL REVERSALS OF NEGATIVE VS. NEUTRAL STIMULI
DURING BINOCULAR RIVALRY ARE MARKED BY HIGHER CURRENT SOURCE DENSITY AND INCREASED BETA POWER OVER
BILATERAL SCALP Navdeep Ahuja1, Nalin Mehta2, Ratna Sharma3; 1All
India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 2All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 3All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi — Binocular

rivalry is a phenomenon of alternating percepts when two different stimuli are presented simultaneously to different eyes. Emotional stimuli have
known to be perceived for longer durations during their binocular rivalry
with neutral stimuli. Present study aimed to examine perceptual reversals
in rivalry of negative and neutral stimuli. International Affective Picture
System (IAPS) pictures classified according to their valence ratings were
presented according to intermittent paradigm of binocular rivalry and their
perceptual rivalry was achieved with the help of a mirror stereoscope in
consenting healthy male subjects of age between 20-35 years. Quantitative
EEG with 128 channels (EGI, USA) was simultaneously recorded. Source
analysis was done using sLORETA(standardised low resolution brain electromagnetic tomography) and wavelet analysis was done with continuous

152

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
wavelet transform. Dominance durations of negative stimuli were found to
be more than that of neutral stimuli. A significantly higher beta power over
bilateral areas of scalp was found during perceptual reversals compared
to stable perception in time intervals of 100 ms before the stimulus onset
as well as during 600 ms after stimulus presentation. Statistically significant higher current source density of 36 cortical gyri was obtained 100 ms
before and in 46 gyri, 100 ms after the stimulus presentation. Pre-stimulus
activation of source areas may reflect their influence on conflict resolution
during binocular rivalry which is associated with higher beta power over
bilateral scalp areas.

D17
DEFAULT MODE NETWORK INTERACTIONS IN THE CONTEXT OF
SELF-REFLECTIVE PROCESSING Ryan Phillips1, Cameron Carter1; 1University of California, Davis — Resting state data suggest that default mode and

task positive networks (DMN/TPN) are often anti correlated. However the
relationship between default mode network activation and external task
performance remains poorly understood and is an area of active investigation. We sought to shed light on this issue using a novel task in order to
examine the impact of personal relevance on DMN activity and task performance and administered it to 16 subjects. This task combined self-reflective
processing with the AX Continuous Performance Task (AXCPT). Following
the task, subjects rated self-reflective stimuli on the basis of personal relevance. In a preliminary analysis neuroimaging data was then analyzed
across two levels of relevance and two levels of cognitive control demands.
We found a main effect of personal relevance resulting in greater DMN
activation, a main effect of cognitive control demands resulting in greater
TPN activation, and an interaction involving the ACC. Behavioral results
indicated an increase in attention lapses following high-relevance stimuli.
We interpret these results as indicating that the ACC increases in activity under conditions of elevated competition for attention. That is, under
conditions in which the subject is drawn to internal and external stimuli
simultaneously. It appears that personal significance does alter how DMN
activity influences external task processing, and that as previously has been
suggested the ACC may be an important region for switching between
internal and external focus of attention. Additional data in a larger sample
of subjects will be presented.

D18
EXPECTATION AND INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN EMOTION
REGULATION MODULATE NEURAL RESPONSES TO AFFECTIVE
STIMULI Emily G. Brudner1, Martin Paczynski2, Allen Osman1, Amishi P. Jha1;
1

University of Miami, 2George Mason University — We examined the influence
of valence expectation and individual differences in emotion-regulation
strategies on the Late Positive Potential (LPP), an event-related potential
(ERP) component to negative and neutral visual images from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS). During ERP recording, participants
(N=29) were asked to perform a simple category-judgment task in which
they indicated by button press if briefly presented IAPS pictures were
right-side up or upside down. Expectations regarding image valence were
manipulated by the presentation of abstract visual cues (red or blue shapes)
indicating the likely valence of the upcoming images. Cues were valid 75%
and invalid 25% of the time. The LPP in response to the images was investigated to determine if there were significant amplitude differences as a function of the cue and image valence. The Emotion Regulation Questionnaire
(ERQ) was used to measure individual differences in emotion regulation
strategies involving cognitive-reappraisal and suppression. LPP amplitude
was greater for negative than neutral images. Cue valence produced a similar pattern, with negative cues resulting in a larger LPP regardless of image
valence. The electrophysiological effects of cue but not image valence were
associated with ERQ reappraisal but not suppression scores. Low reappraisers evinced larger effects of cue valance than high reappraisers. This
would be expected if the tendency to reappraise promoted successful emotion regulation in response to negatively-cued images. These findings provide further insight into how the neural activity associated with emotional
reactions depends on the interplay between expectation, affective content,
and individual differences in emotion regulation.

2016 Annual Meeting	

D19
EEG MU-SUPPRESSION SHOWS SELF-OTHER DIFFERENCES
IN RESPONSE TO MOVING, BUT NOT STILL, EMOTIONAL FACES
Dylan Barbera1, Grossman Taylar1, C. Chad Woodruff1; 1Northern Arizona University — Previous investigation into Electroencephalographic (EEG)

mu-rhythm suppression (8-13 Hz) during action-observation vs. execution
tasks has indicated that self-other differences in mu suppression are related
to measures of perspective taking. Further study has shown that simply
observing self- vs. other- related stimuli elicits this relationship as well. In
the current study, we sought to investigate the necessity of motion perception in mu suppression and its discrimination between self and other. In
separate blocks, participants were presented with both videos and pictures
of either themselves or others expressing 1 of 4 emotional faces: happy,
sad, angry or neutral. Participants then completed a self-report measure of
empathy (Interpersonal Reactivity Index). Results revealed significant mu
suppression in response to video stimuli while no significant mu suppression was elicited by still photographs. Additionally, a significant self-other
difference was seen in mu suppression data of the motion condition. Mu
suppression values in the motion condition showed significant correlations
with empathy questionnaire’s while static condition mu-suppression failed
to elicit significant correlations. These data replicate previous mu suppression findings and further elucidate the relationship between mu suppression and self-reported empathy.

D20
THE EFFECT OF UNEXPECTED NEGATIVE EVENTS ON ENCODING
Brittany Corbett1, Lisa Weinberg1, Audrey Duarte1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology — Previous research has found that episodic memory is better for nega-

tively arousing events versus neutral events. What is unclear is how being
prepared for a negative event changes the way it is encoded. In an fMRI
paradigm, participants viewed negative and neutral pictures preceded by
cues that were either reliable predictors of the valence of the image (valid)
or cues that were unreliable predictors of the valence (invalid). Participants
were asked to rate the emotional intensity of these pictures during encoding and to complete a recognition task immediately after the fMRI scanning. Our results show that regardless of valence, pictures preceded by an
invalid cue were rated more intense than pictures preceded by a valid cue.
Participants were slower to respond for intensity ratings during pictures
preceded by an invalid cue than pictures preceded by a valid cue. Recognition memory accuracy was better for pictures preceded by an invalid cue
than pictures preceded by a valid cue. Activity in the anterior cingulate predicted greater accuracy for negative events preceded by invalid cues compared to valid cues. Collectively the behavioral results suggest that when
participants are unprepared to encode a negative event they are more likely
to rate the pictures as more intense and they are more likely to remember
those events. The imaging results suggest that unexpected negative events
lead participants to engage in emotional regulation, which in turn supports
subsequent memory performance.

D21
FOLLOW THE EYES - INFLUENCE OF EMOTIONAL EXPRESSION
ON VISUOSPATIAL ATTENTION Bastian Soehnchen1, Anna K Kastner1,
Elena LR Flohr1, Abby Looi2, Matthias J Wieser1, Paul Pauli1; 1University of Wuerzburg, 2University of California, Los Angeles — Perceived gaze direction has been

shown to introduce shifts in visuospatial attention. The influence of emotional facial expression on this effect seems to be small under normal circumstances. However, evidence suggests that the context in which an emotional face is viewed is important. The present study investigated whether
a threatening context mediates the effect of emotional expression on shifts
in visuospatial attention. Participants conducted a probe detection task in
two contexts. The contexts differed in level of threat, induced by context
conditioning. The presentation of probes was preceded by facial cues, differing in cue-target congruency and facial expression, being neutral, angry
or fearful faces. Behavioral results show a difference in reaction time (RT)
between congruency and emotional expression. While fearful faces induce
the typical congruency effect (faster RTs in congruent trials) in both contexts, the opposite effect is shown for angry expressions. However, this
only occurs in the threatening context, and not in the non-threatening context. Moreover, RTs of neutral faces were not affected. Electrophysiological

Poster Session D
results show that the N170 component, time-locked to cue onset, was larger
in emotional compared to neutral expressions. Furthermore, the N2pc component, an ERP associated with spatial shifts in attention, was significantly
mediated by emotional expression and gaze-target congruency. For neutral
faces N2pc difference scores are higher in incongruent, than in congruent
trials; the opposite was found for trials with angry faces. To conclude, emotional expression influences shifts in visuospatial attention. However, the
effect differs between expressions and is in some cases, context dependent.

D22
PRIOR EXPOSURE TO EXTREME PAIN ALTERS THE PERCEPTUAL PROCESSING OF OTHERS’ PAIN; THE EFFECT OF OXYTOCIN Moranne Eidelman-Rothman1, Abraham Goldstein1, Omri Weisman1, Inna
Schneiderman1, Orna Zagoory-Sharon1, Jean Decety2, Ruth Feldman1; 1Bar-Ilan
University, 2The University of Chicago — Extensive research examined brain

mechanisms implicated in pain perception and theorized that the overlapping response to pain of self and other marks the human capacity for empathy. Here we investigated how prior exposure to extreme pain affects pain
perception by assessing the spatio-temporal dynamics of pain processing
in veterans previously exposed to severe injury. Additionally, we examined the effect of the neuropeptide oxytocin on pain perception. Using a
double-blind, placebo-controlled, within-subject design, 43 participants(28
pain-exposed and 15 controls) underwent whole-head magnetoencephalography(MEG) twice following oxytocin/placebo administration while
performing a pain-perception task, including the presentation and evaluation of photographs depicting limbs in painful and non-painful conditions. In line with previous research, we found increased brain activation
in response to painful vs. non-painful stimuli among controls, indicated
by enhanced suppression in the alpha frequency band(8-12 Hz) in the pain
condition. This “pain-effect” was evident in two distinct time windows: an
early effect at 0-220 ms following stimulus onset, which was located to the
posterior cingulate(PCC) and sensorimotor cortices, and a later effect(760900 ms), located to the PCC, superior temporal gyrus(STG)/insula, and
fusiform gyrus. Importantly, no similar effect was found among pain-exposed individuals, who showed normative response to pain but no pain-tono-pain differentiation. Oxytocin administration attenuated overall activity
in the STG/insula and under oxytocin no pain-effect was found. Results
demonstrate alterations in pain perception following extreme pain exposure, chart the sequence from early(automatic) to later(evaluative) pain
processing and emphasize the importance of considering past experiences
in studying the neural response to others’ state.

D23
TIME PERCEPTION, EMOTION, & COGNITION: AN ERP INVESTIGATION Luke R. Pezanko1, Aminda J. O’Hare1; 1University of Massachusetts

Dartmouth — People often subjectively report time slowing down during

negative events. Prior research on the effects of emotion on time perception has found negative emotional images to alter time perception in time
reproduction tasks. Interestingly, when the type of negative emotion was
controlled for, only disgust images were found to correspond to over-reproductions of time, while fear images were found to correspond to
under-reproductions of time. Externally- versus internally-focused attention may account for these different effects, however, a better understanding of the effects of different types of negative emotion on time perception
is needed. The contingent negative variance (CNV), an event-related potential (ERP), has been found to fluctuate with over- and under-reproductions
of time. In the current study, participants (n = 36) completed a time reproduction task that presented high and low arousing angry, disgust, and fear
faces, as well as neutral faces at different durations. High-density, 64-channel EEG was recorded during the task to test CNV effects. A significant
main effect for emotion was found such that fearful faces elicited larger
CNV amplitudes compared to angry and disgust faces (p<.05). A significant main effect of presentation duration was found, such that shorter
(400ms) intervals elicited larger CNV amplitudes than 600ms and 800ms
intervals (p’s<.05). These data support previous research that has found
different negative emotions to have different effects on time perception;
however, the direction of the effect conflicts previous findings. Possible theoretical accounts for these findings will be discussed.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

153

Poster Session D	

D24
NEURONAL BASIS OF EMOTION AND COGNITIVE PROCESSING
IN YOUNG ADULTS AND ADOLESCENTS Lynn V. Fehlbaum1, Nora M.

Raschle1, Willeke M. Menks1, Felix Euler1, Christina Stadler1; 1Psychiatric University Clinics Basel, Basel, Switzerland — Neuroimaging during tasks combining

emotional and cognitive stimuli has suggested that negative cues can interfere with task performance. However, the neuronal networks involved in
emotion-cognition interaction and the processing of cognitive load remain
debated both in the typical population and in patients with impaired emotion regulation such as in conduct disorder (CD). Therefore, our goal is
the investigation of the neuronal basis of emotion-cognition interaction in
healthy young adults and adolescents with/without CD. We employed
whole brain functional magnetic resonance imaging using an emotional
priming task first in 30 gender-, age- and IQ-matched healthy young adults
and, secondly, in 34 adolescents with CD and 19 age-matched controls.
Each trial consisted of a number Stroop task (congruent/incongruent/
neutral) preceded by an aversive or neutral prime. Preliminary analysis in
young adults behaviorally revealed Stroop effects for aversive vs. neutral
trials and incongruent vs. congruent trials. Neuronally, activity in cognitive (left inferior frontal junction and parietal lobe) and emotion (amygdala,
insula, medial prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate) areas of the brain were
increased during emotional priming. More specifically, emotion-cognition
interaction led to increases in emotion and cognition related activation
when task load was low. As task load increased, interaction effects revealed
a relative decrease in activation within similar brain regions. Cognitive load
is, thus, a moderating factor in emotion-cognition interaction. This analysis
lays the foundation for data presented in younger adolescents with and
without CD. Here, we expect the neuronal interplay between emotion and
cognition to be impaired according to symptom severity and personality
characteristics.

D25
NEURAL CORRELATES OF MOTIVATION-EMOTION INTERACTION
DURING PERCEPTION Srikanth Padmala1, Mihai Sirbu1, Luiz Pessoa1; 1University of Maryland, College Park — We have recently reported that during

a challenging perceptual task, the impact of potent negative emotional
distractors was reduced in the presence of performance-based monetary
rewards (Padmala & Pessoa, 2014). In the current functional MRI (fMRI)
study, we investigated neural correlates of this behavior. On each trial,
participants (N=57) were asked to discriminate the orientation of peripheral bars while ignoring a centrally presented neutral or negative picture.
The angular difference between the peripheral bars was calibrated for each
participant such that participants produced approximately 80% correct
responses. Motivation was manipulated by presenting a reward (“$$”) or
no-reward (“##”) cue at the start of each trial. After a variable delay (2-6
s), the bars-plus-picture display was shown. Participants were instructed
that they could earn 25 cents for fast and accurate performance during the
reward condition. Behavioral RT results replicated our previous finding of
a motivation and emotion interaction, such that the emotional distractor
effect was significantly reduced during the reward compared to no-reward
condition. fMRI responses during the cue phase revealed stronger reward
(vs. no-reward) activation in ventral striatum and midbrain. Paralleling
the behavioral data, fMRI responses during the task phase exhibited a significant interaction between motivation and emotion in anterior insula,
anterior cingulate cortex, and intraparietal sulcus. Furthermore, reward
cue-related activation in ventral striatum was correlated with the behavioral motivation x emotion interaction. Taken together, our fMRI findings
add to our understanding of appetitive-aversive interactions in the brain
during task performance.

D26
FEASIBILITY AND INITIAL EFFICACY OF A NOVEL MOOD ASSESSMENT AND INTERVENTION APPLICATION IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Alit Stark-Inbar1,2, Ronnie Wanetick3, Michael Merzenich1, Thomas

Van Vleet1, Mor Nahum1; 1Posit Science Corporation, 2University of California,
Berkeley, 3Parkinson’s Disease Foundation — Prevalent mood disorders such

as depression and anxiety are among the most troublesome non-motor
symptoms in patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD). However, mood
disruption is often poorly addressed. Thus, we have developed a multi-

154

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
modal iPad-based application that facilitates continuous mood monitoring
and deployment of validated interventions in nearly any environment.
The game-like interface is comprised of 3 components: (1) a suite of mood
measures including validated questionnaires, behavioral tasks that capture
implicit mood related biases, and voice analyses; (2) cognitive-emotional
training exercises shown to improve mood states in several clinical populations; and (3) continuous connection with a cloud-based portal that provides performance feedback to users and remote clinical monitoring. Here
we report initial feasibility testing in 6 patients with mild to moderate PD.
Participants were asked to use the app at least twice per day for a period
of two weeks. Participants engaged with the app at both ON/OFF medication states and provided usage feedback. Overall, participants completed
96±18% of the required sessions, enjoyed using the app, and were willing
to recommend it to their peers. Data from the cognitive-emotion regulation
intervention showed evidence of improvement in the training exercises, in
that participants increased their working memory span and reduced their
level of distraction. In addition, following this short period, participants
showed trend-level improvements in several mood-related metrics. The
information collected from this initial field-study showed that remote, appbased mood tracking and treatment is feasible in PD. A larger, well-controlled follow-up study is underway to further examine app efficacy.

D27
EFFECTS OF EMOTIONAL CONTENT IN WRITTEN AND SPOKEN
WORD PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED BRAIN
POTENTIALS Annika Grass1, Wiebke Hammerschmidt1, Mareike Bayer1,

Annekathrin Schacht1; 1University of Goettingen, Germany — Spoken language

plays a major important role in human communication in our everyday
lives. Nevertheless, the investigation of effects of emotional meaning on
spoken word processing was neglected, relative to written words. In the
present study, the processing of emotional words in two modalities was
compared by means of event-related brain potentials (ERPs). Spoken words
were produced by a computer-voice (Experiment 1, N=25) and a human
speaker (Experiment 2, N=22) and compared to the same written words. In
both experiments, emotion effects for written words were evident roughly
between 230-400 ms in the early posterior negativity (EPN), which has been
suggested to reflect attention allocation to emotional content. Interestingly,
spoken words elicited a highly similar component between 460 and 510
ms, when considering the scalp distribution of the ERP differences between
emotional and neutral words. Source localization revealed comparable activations in occipital areas and the fusiform area for both visual and auditory
EPN activation, spreading to the frontal lobe for auditory words only. Our
finding indicate strong similarities in the processing of emotional content
across modalities that – at least partly – rely on the same neural system
leading to a comparable scalp distribution of emotion-related ERP effects.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Other
D28
HEARING AN EMOTION ALTERS HOW WE SEE EMOTION IN A
FACE AND THE CORRESPONDING PHYSIOLOGICAL STRESS
RESPONSE Vivian M. Ciaramitaro1, Anh Phan1, Daniel A. Harris1, Hannah E.
Lapp1, Richard G. Hunter1; 1University of Massachusetts Boston — Faces convey

a variety of important information such as gender, identity or emotional
state. Given that perception of emotional state is imperative for social
interactions, we examined how an emotion we hear might influence how
we see emotion in a face. We used an adaptation paradigm to quantify
the shift in an individual’s neutral point when seen and heard emotions
were congruent (angry face and angry voices or happy faces and happy
voices) versus incongruent (angry faces and happy voices or happy faces
and angry voices). We hypothesized that adapting to congruent visual
and auditory emotions would yield stronger perceptual shifts in the neutral point compared to incongruent emotions. To date, we have recruited
38 participants from the University of Massachusetts Boston (ages, 18-27
years). We quantified each participant’s neutral point by fitting behavioral
data with a cumulative normal to determine where faces are equally likely
to be judged happy as angry, before and after adaptation. We also quantified each subject’s physiological stress response by measuring salivary
cortisol before and after adaptation. Preliminary behavioral results suggest

2016 Annual Meeting	
stronger adaptation for the congruent (mean shift of 15%) versus incongruent (mean shift of 3%) condition within each emotional category, with
a trend for stronger effects after adaptation to happy versus angry faces.
Preliminary physiological results suggest complementary changes in the
cortisol stress response, with a trend for stronger effects, greater decreases
in cortisol, after adaptation to happy versus angry faces, and with physiological trends mirroring behavioral trends for congruent versus incongruent conditions.

D29
TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION AFFECTS
INTENTION PROCESSING IN MORAL JUDGMENT Tian Gan1,2, Xiaping

Lu2, Honghong Tang2, Chao Liu2, Yue-jia Luo3; 1Department of Psychology, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, 310018, China, 2State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neurosciences and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875,
China, 3Institute of Affective and Social Neuroscience,Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, China — When we evaluate the moral status of an action, we

consider not only its outcomes but also the intentions of the actor. Previous
studies showed that the right temporo-parietal junction (RTPJ) is the critical
brain region for understanding intention. The present study aims to investigate the anodal excitation effect of transcranial direct current sitmulation
(tDCS) on intention processing in moral judgment. 18 healthy subjects
underwent two tDCS sessions (anodal and sham tDCS) on 2 separate days
with 1 week interval between both stimulations. After stimulation, subjects
read stories in a 2 (intention: negative vs. neutral) × 2 (outcome: negative vs.
neutral) design and were asked to make moral judgment about how much
blame the actor deserves. Results showed significant interaction between
intention and outcome for the moral evaluation score. For the reaction time,
judgments of attempted and accidental harm were slower than the other
two conditions. Most importantly, the moral judgment was slower under
anodal than sham tDCS stimulation, especially under the attempted harm
and accidental harm conditions. These results implied that using anodal
tDCS to excite the neural activity of RTPJ enhanced the capacity of mentalizing in moral judgment, especially in the cases of attempted harm and accidental harm. Key words: moral judgment; intention; RTPJ; tDCS This work
was supported by NSFC (31400878), MOE Project of Humanities and Social
Sciences (14YJC190005), the Project of Zhejiang Federation of Humanities
and Social Sciences Circles (2014N145) and Science Foundation of ZSTU
under Grant No.13062172-Y.

D30
ARE CHANGES IN CHOICE PAYOFFS REFLECTED IN NEURAL
SYNCHRONY DURING THE PRISONER’S DILEMMA? AN EEG
ANALYSIS Bradley Robinson1, Nicholas JA Wan1, Kerry E Jordan1; 1Utah State
University — Previous research has explored behavior in social dilemmas.
Less is known about neural differences in the decision to cooperate or
defect. Research also has not explored whether differences in payoff quantities during the Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD) affect neural activation. Here, we
begin to explore possible neural differences when receiving a large reward
when compared to a smaller reward after choosing to defect or cooperate.
We examined activation in frontal and parietal regions using electroencephalography (EEG) while participants played the Prisoner’s Dilemma,
varying the payoff matrix between participants. Utilizing channel-wise
comparisons to examine alpha desynchrony in cooperation and defection,
we find greater alpha desynchrony in the cooperate condition (p = .035, F
= 5.785), irrespective of payoff quantity. In addition, we examined whether
there were differences in high (10-12 Hz) and low (8-10) alpha ranges. In
high-alpha desynchrony, choice comparisons revealed activation patterns
consistent with alpha desynchrony (p = .003), though with a greater effect
size (F=13.713). In low-alpha desynchrony, however, this difference was
not seen (p=.28), indicating that the desynchrony seen in the alpha band
during choice conditions is found more specifically in high-alpha ranges.
We did not see a significant difference when comparing payoff conditions
- irrespective of point matrices differences - to synchrony in any of the frequency bands examined. This suggests differences in quantity during social
dilemmas do not significantly alter activation in the regions of interest and
frequency bands explored here.

Poster Session D

D31
NOVEL TECHNIQUES FOR ELUCIDATING NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL
MECHANISMS OF SELECTIVE MUTISM Erica J. Ho1, Lindsay M. Alexander1, Nicolas Langer1,2, Maki S. Koyama1, Michael P. Milham1, Simon P. Kelly3,2;
1
Child Mind Institute, 2City College of New York, 3University College Dublin — Selec-

tive Mutism (SM) is an understudied anxiety disorder that inhibits an individual’s ability to speak in specific social settings. While existing research
has focused on behavioral characterizations, the present study used novel
techniques to elucidate the neurocognitive mechanisms underlying SM.
Ten SM-diagnosed children ages 5-10 participated. EEG and eye-tracking
were recorded while participants completed: 1) an emotional face processing task, displaying faces from the Todorov database (seven faces each,
along the trustworthiness and dominance dimensions); and 2) a response
task, measuring motor vs. verbal responses to indicate color decisions, with
and without a stranger present. Participants then completed tests of IQ,
motor coordination, and processing speed. Parents also submitted questionnaires about the children’s physical and mental well-being. Consistent
with prior work studying the same face database using fMRI, the present
work revealed orthogonal neurophysiological patterns for responses to
Dominance vs. Trustworthiness using EEG. Specifically, at PO8, decreased
P100 activity was associated with increased Dominance but not Trustworthiness, while the P300 showed increased amplitude with higher degrees of
Trustworthiness but not Dominance. The classic, face-sensitive N170 component did not discriminate between the two dimensions. In the Response
task, consistent with a priori predictions, the stranger’s presence significantly increased response latencies and also decreased speaking volumes.
Response-locked frontal activity patterns significantly differed between the
motor vs. verbal modalities. Upcoming work will increase sample size and
include a typically developing comparison group. This study demonstrates
the potential to develop a cognitive neuroscience-based framework for
indexing abnormalities in SM.

D32
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF HIGH OR LOW INTERNALIZING BEHAVIOR
IN PRODUCING EVERYDAY ANTISOCIAL BEHAVIOR. Natasha Hamilton1, Connie Shears , Ph.D.1; 1Chapman University — Research suggesting a

genetic or neuroanatomical correlation to antisocial behaviour is growing.
For example, the decreased fractional anisotropy in areas of dense white
matter tracts, which connect the frontal and temporal lobes, correlates with
the proximity of DNA methylation and the oxytocin receptor gene (Haney,
Caprihan, & Stevens 2014; Cecil et al., 2014). Antisocial behaviours are challenging to investigate using empirical methodologies and currently nearly
all research is limited to relational observations. This experiment tests
whether the change in physiology and propensity to repeatedly commit
antisocial behavior, specifically lying about stealing, increases for participants watching a moral perspective video relative to a control video. We
hypothesize that individuals who exhibit antisocial behavior, even on a
minor scale, and those who do not, can be evaluated based on pre-existing
levels of internalizing behavior and measured by changes in physiological
measures. Preliminary results show that participants who stole and had
pre-existing high internalizing scores exhibit greater increases in physiological measures than participants who also stole but had pre-existing low
internalizing scores and this was only after watching the moral video, not
the control video. With more empirical research focused on non-clinical
antisocial behaviors, psychologists may better understand causes of antisocial behavior from both a behavioural and biological level.

D33
MENTALIZING AND THE UNCANNY VALLEY Abdulaziz Abubshait1,
George A. Buzzell1, Paul J. Beatty1, Eva Wiese1; 1George Mason University —

The uncanny valley hypothesis refers to the notion that computer-generated avatars or humanoid robots can elicit feelings of unease when such
agents appear too similar to humans. Specifically, as visual human likeness
increases, positive ratings of humanoid robots generally increase, with the
exception of a sharp drop in positive ratings as robots come to more closely
resemble humans. Here, we investigated the relationship between mentalizing and the uncanny valley, using a combination of subjective reports and
a social attention paradigm. While being scanned with fMRI, participants
rated different agents (appearance varied on a spectrum from 0%-100%

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

155

Poster Session D	
human), in terms of whether the agents “had a mind”. Participants then
interacted with each of the agents in a social attention task, where the degree
of gaze-following is used as an index of the social relevance of the observed
behavior. Subjective ratings suggested a linear increase in mind attribution
as agents became more humanlike in appearance, with no indication of an
uncanny valley effect. In contrast, the gaze-following task revealed a clear
uncanny valley effect, with a sharp drop in gaze-following for the 60%80% human-like agents. Interestingly, preliminary fMRI analyses suggest
that two brain regions of the theory-of-mind (ToM) network, the posterior
Superior Temporal Gyrus and the Medial Frontal Cortex, were parametrically modulated in a manner similar to the uncanny valley. This suggests
that although conscious reports of ToM do not conform to the uncanny
valley, brain regions involved in mentalizing do, and that neural data can
predict actual behavioral interactions with agents.

D34
“MOO” SUPPRESSION- MU SUPPRESSION IN VEGANS AND
VEGETARIANS IS HIGHER COMPARED TO OMNIVORES WHEN
VIEWING A FOOD ANIMAL VIDEO Joseph Aruguete1, Nicholas James1,

Katherine Illecki1, Karlie Krause1, Chad Woodruff1; 1Northern Arizona University — Vegans and vegetarians have been shown in fMRI studies to have

structural neurophysical differences as compared to omnivores. Previous
research indicates that vegans and vegetarians have higher empathy for
food animals as compared to omnivores. Mu suppression, an 8-13Hz wave
believed to originate over the C3, Cz, and C4 electrodes, has been found
to negatively correlated with empathic perspective taking. This study
wanted to observe whether or not omnivores would display less observed
mu suppression when looking at food animals when compared to vegetarians. Using a 32 electrode EEG cap and Mitsar equipment, the study had
participants watch 80 second blocks of farm, pet, human, and white noise
videos. After the video was over, researchers gave participants (n=31) the
Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI) to measure empathy in the individuals. 3x3 ANOVAs (condition x electrode), within subjects of condition
and electrode, and 2x3x3 ANOVAs (diet x electrode x condition) with a
between subject of diet and a two within subjects of electrode and condition were performed, as well as correlational analyses between IRI scores
and mu suppression. Findings indicate that while there was no difference
found between the 3x3 ANOVAs, there was significance found in the 2x3x3
ANOVAs (p<.05), with omnivores showing greater suppression towards
pets and humans compared to food animals. Correlational analyses found
pet condition bands had a positive correlation with Personal Distress scale
subtype and negative correlation between food animals and Perspective
Taking. Our findings indicate omnivores empathize differently compared
to vegetarians when looking at food animals.

D35
THE EFFECTS OF TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION ON THE EVALUATION OF EVERYDAY MORAL DILEMMAS
Christopher H. Ramey1, Alex Fennell1, Erin M. Calhoun1; 1University of Kansas
— Human beings are social creatures who constantly judge each other.

The judgment of the morality of an everyday action (e.g., not returning a
dropped wallet) plays a major role in evaluating human conduct. Previous
research has revealed that the right temporoparietal junction (RTPJ) features in the understanding of another’s intentions and allows one to project
oneself mentally into another’s perspective. In this study we used tDCS
to affect the neural activity in the RTPJ during the evaluation of everyday moral dilemmas. Participants were healthy adult volunteers from the
undergraduate psychology research pool who read 40 normed vignettes
describing everyday moral dilemmas (Knutson et al., 2010), 20 very negative and 20 very positive dilemmas. After each vignette, participants
responded to five questions on the perceived emotional intensity, amount
of harm inflicted, level of premeditation, number of individuals involved,
and overall moral appropriateness of the action. Participants were randomly assigned to one of three conditions, one receiving inhibition to the
RTPJ, one receiving inhibition to the left temporoparietal junction (LTPJ),
and one sham. In both active tDCS conditions we applied 1500mA cathodal stimulation for 20 minutes. Results indicate that for negative moral
dilemmas, inhibiting LTPJ instead of RTPJ resulted in greater perceived
emotional intensity; inhibiting RTPJ led to longer reaction times. Inhibition
of RTPJ relative to LTPJ led to longer reaction times to judge the premedi-

156

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
tation of an action. Overall, results support the involvement of RTPJ in the
evaluation of everyday moral dilemmas and the possibility of modulating
moral judgments with tDCS.

D36
AVATARS AS A SUPPORT FOR FEEDBACK-BASED LEARNING Ali

Momen1,2, Marc Sebrechts2, Mowafak Allaham1; 1George Mason University, 2The
Catholic University of America — An avatar is a computer-based graphical

character that typically shows similarity to a human figure, without the
detail in visual characteristics or abilities. Previous work by Mumm and
Mutlu (2011) has shown that feedback delivered by an avatar results in
higher levels of motivation than when no avatar is present. These results fit
with a number of arguments that an avatar can enhance task performance
through a sense of “social presence.” Although computer-based feedback
studies have shown evidence for heightened learner perceptions, those
studies did not measure actual learning. So, there is minimal evidence for
this outcome. This experiment explored whether the inclusion of an avatar
displaying verbal and non-verbal affective cues in a feedback task would
enhance social presence and motivation as well as facilitate learning on a
Chinese symbol retention task. The main task was a feedback-based learning of the translation of Chinese symbols into English. Learning occurred
with four different computer-based agents: a computer generated figure, a
human figure, a non-humanoid image and a non-image verbal condition.
In each condition subjective measures of social presence and motivation
were collected. Analysis compared feedback conditions and related them
to social presence and motivation. The results showed no significant differences between groups on learning, although means showed best performance in the non-image verbal condition. Additionally, results showed
that participants perceived less social presence with the non-humanoid
image compared to feedback from the human figure.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
D37
LET’S CHAT: DEVELOPMENTAL NEURAL BASES OF SOCIAL MOTIVATION DURING REAL-TIME PEER INTERACTION Katherine Rice1,
Eleonora Sadikova1, Elizabeth Redcay1; 1University of Maryland — People are

strongly motivated to interact with others, but neuroimaging studies of
social motivation have predominately employed non-interactive contexts
(e.g., photographs of faces). Understanding the brain bases of real-world
social motivation is especially important in middle childhood (ages 8-12),
when social relationships become more complex and social-cognitive networks are specializing. The current fMRI study employed a novel, interactive task in which 19 children (8 males, mean age=10.5y) believed they were
communicating in real-time with a peer. We had two events of interest:
(1) Initiation, in which children answered a self-relevant prompt, believing
their answer was shared either with the peer or just the computer; and (2)
Reply, in which the peer agreed with the child’s answer (i.e., Peer Engagement) or was away (i.e., Peer Non-engagement). For computer trials, children were told their answer matched a randomly generated answer (i.e.,
Computer Engagement) or that the computer was offline (i.e., Computer
Non-engagement). During Initiation, ventral striatum (VS) was more active
for Peer than Computer. During Reply, VS, OFC, and dMPFC were more
active for Peer Engagement than for either Peer Non-engagement or Computer Engagement. Post-test ratings indicated that the difference in self-reported reward value between Peer Engagement and Non-engagement was
larger than the corresponding difference on Computer trials. These findings demonstrate a developmental role for the reward network in supporting on-going peer interaction using a naturalistic interactive task. The use
of interactive paradigms has implications for disorders such as autism and
social anxiety, where social motivation is more affected in real-world contexts.

D38
EXTRAPOLATION OF SOCIAL INFORMATION TO PHYSICALLY SIMILAR INDIVIDUALS CONTRIBUTES TO STEREOTYPING Brandon
Levy1, Chris I. Baker1; 1National Institute of Mental Health — Previous evidence

demonstrates that social evaluations of a face will transfer to morphed versions of the same face even when the transformed face is perceived as a

2016 Annual Meeting	
new identity (Todorov et al., 2010). The current study investigated whether
this similarity-driven generalization of social information might underlie
social stereotyping. We created three groups of faces with high degrees of
within-group similarity. A subset of individuals from each group appeared
in an investment game in which they returned or kept money invested with
them by the participant at different frequencies. Participants then replayed
the game during a test phase, this time choosing whether to invest with
novel individuals from each group without feedback. In Experiment 1,
we found that the behavior of the individuals seen in the first investment
game influenced both investment frequency and perceived trustworthiness of physically similar individuals at test. In Experiment 2, removing
the social aspect of the initial investment game while maintaining the pattern of reward eliminated these effects, suggesting that participants are not
simply learning a reward association. In Experiment 3, using a priming task
to minimize explicit comparisons of facial structure, preliminary results
also show a bias towards investing with faces preceded by face primes that
are physically similar to the more trustworthy individuals from the initial
investment game. Collectively, these results suggest that information about
a subset of individuals is readily utilized to create group-level stereotypes
that bias evaluations of perceptually similar individuals.

D39
A CAUSAL ROLE OF THE RIGHT SUPERIOR TEMPORAL SULCUS
IN EMOTION RECOGNITION FROM BIOLOGICAL MOTION Rochelle
Basil1, Margaret Westwater1,2, Martin Wiener1, James Thompson1; 1George Mason
University, Fairfax. VA, 2University of Cambridge — Successful social interactions

often depend upon our ability to detect and interpret the bodily kinematics
of others. One important facet of social interactions is the recognizing the
emotions of another person from nonverbal gestures and body movements.
Observers can recognize emotions even from sparse point light displays
(PLDs) of body movements, although this recognition can be impaired
in schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders. The right superior temporal sulcus (rSTS) is thought to be central to the perception of biological
motion; here, we used repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS)
to examine if rSTS plays a causal role in the recognition of emotion from
biological motion. Participants (N=23; 13 females) received continuous
theta-burst stimulation for 41 seconds in two separate sessions: (1) rSTS,
functionally localized in each participant using fMRI and a comparison of
intact vs scrambled biological motion and (2) over the vertex. Accuracy and
reaction time on emotion from biological motion and on a non-biological,
global motion control task were assessed before and after rTMS. Repeated
measures ANOVA revealed an interaction between rTMS site and stimulus
type (p < 0.05), with a reduction in accuracy of emotion from biological
motion following rSTS stimulation, but not following vertex stimulation,
and no effect on accuracy from either site for the global motion control.
Effects of rTMS on reaction time were not significant (p>0.1). These data
provide evidence for the causal role of the rSTS in decoding information
about other’s emotional state from their body movements and gestures.

D40
EFFECTS OF SELF-TRANSCENDENCE ON THE EMBODIED
UNDERSTANDING OF OTHERS’ EMOTIONAL STATES Cosimo
Urgesi1, Giulia D’Argenio1, Dusana Dorjee1, Paul E. Downing1; 1School of Psychology, Bangor University, Wales, UK — Mental representation of ourselves and

of others is strongly linked to mapping our bodily states (embodiment). At
the same time, the ability to assume an external perspective on actual body
perceptions and actions (self-transcendence) is inherently linked to human
spirituality. Here, we tested the effects of activating self-transcendent/
spiritual representations on the ability to recognize emotions in others’
faces. In two experiments, participants were presented with faces depicting
positive (happy) or negative (fearful) expressions and were asked to either
recognize the emotional valence (i.e., positive vs. negative) or the gender
of the faces. Before each picture a prime word was presented that could
be associated with spiritual or non-spiritual concepts. The prime was forward and backward masked by a string of Xs beside a central fixation point
and was task irrelevant. In experiment 1, participants responded by means
of speeded manual key presses and accuracy and responses times were
collected and analysed. Results revealed that the presentation of spiritual
prime words reduced emotion recognition performance as compared to
non-spiritual prime words, while gender recognition remained unaffected.

Poster Session D
In experiment 2, we used the same trial procedure but rather than requiring an explicit motor responses we recorded motor evoked potentials from
arms and forearm muscles. Results showed that presentation of spiritual
words reduced motor facilitation during emotion perception, suggesting
that priming spiritual representations alters the mapping of others’ emotions on the observer’s motor system. Overall, these findings point to the
role of sensorimotor embodiment in social perception.

D41
REDUCED REPETITION SUPPRESSION TO FACES AND REDUCED
FACE MEMORY IN ADULTS WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM CONDITIONS Michael Ewbank1, Philip Pell1, Thomas Powell1, Elisabeth von dem
Hagen2, Simon Baron-Cohen3, Andrew Calder1; 1Cognition and Brain Sciences
Unit, Cambridge, UK, 2Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK, 3University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK — Autism spectrum conditions (ASC) are associated with

difficulties in memory for facial identity, however the neural mechanisms
underlying this impairment are unclear. Functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) studies in neurotypical participants reveal that repeated
viewing of the same face leads to repetition suppression (RS) (i.e. a reduction in neural activity) in a region of occipitotemporal cortex known as the
fusiform face area (FFA). As yet, no studies have investigated RS to faces
in individuals with ASC, or investigated the relationship between RS and
face memory. Using fMRI, we measured RS to faces and geometric shapes
in the occipitotemporal cortex of individuals with ASC and in age and IQ
matched controls. Both groups also completed standardized tests of face
and object memory. Imaging data revealed that ASC participants showed
significantly reduced RS to faces in bilateral FFA relative to controls. By
contrast, RS to shapes in object-selective regions did not differ between
groups. ASC participants also performed significantly worse than controls
on a test of face memory but not on a test of object memory. A whole brain
analysis revealed that individual variation in face memory performance
(covarying out object memory scores) was positively correlated with RS in
regions of parietal and prefrontal cortex commonly activated during shortterm/working memory tasks. These findings suggest face memory deficits
in ASC may be a consequence of differences in the maintenance and/or
processing of face representations within a network of regions extending
across occipitotemporal, parietal and prefrontal cortex.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development
& aging
D42
WHITE MATTER MICROSTRUCTURAL DEGRADATION IS ASSOCIATED WITH DECREASED FINANCIAL ABILITY IN PATIENTS WITH
MCI AND ALZHEIMER’S DEMENTIA David A. Hoagey1, Kristen M. Kennedy1, Taylor Bartel2, Deborah Kerr2, Kristina Visscher2, Adam Gerstenecker2,
Daniel C. Marson2; 1Center for Vital Longevity, School of Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, The University of Texas at Dallas, 2Department of Neurology and Alzheimer’s Disease Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham — Previous

neuroimaging research using the Financial Capacity Instrument (FCI) has
shown that decreased volumetric grey matter in areas linked to the default
mode network (DMN) (angular gyri, precuneus, prefrontal cortex) coincide
with reduced financial abilities in patients with mild cognitive impairment
(MCI) and mild Alzheimer’s dementia (AD). We hypothesized that similar
structural declines would occur in corresponding white matter pathways
in these groups. We analyzed diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) scans for
MCI (n=31), AD (n=39), and older controls (NC)(n=60) using a voxelwise
analysis technique, Tract Based Spatial Statistics (TBSS), and subsequent
general linear models to estimate differences in white matter diffusivity
across the three groups and in relation to FCI performance. Group results
showed (1) better fractional anisotropy (FA) for NC and MCI compared to
AD; (2) poorer mean diffusivity (MD) and radial diffusivity (RD) for AD
than in NC and MCI; (3) poorer axial diffusivity (λ1) for AD than MCI.
Regarding financial performance, in the MCI group FCI score positively
correlated with FA in the corpus callosum, bilateral uncinate fasciculus
(UF) and cingulum, and left posterior portions of the superior longitudinal
fasciculus (SLF), inferior longitudinal fasciculus, and inferior fronto-oc-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

157

Poster Session D	
cipital fasciculus (IFOF). In the Alzheimer’s group, FCI score negatively
correlated with λ1 and MD in corpus callosum, cingulum, right UF, and
bilateral anterior IFOF and SLF. These white matter regions cluster in DMN
areas that receive neuronal projections from angular gyri, precuneus, and
prefrontal grey matter cortices, lending support to prior volumetric studies
of financial capacity. NIH support: AG-021927, AG-036818

D43
INCREASED DOPAMINE SYNTHESIS CAPACITY IS ASSOCIATED
WITH A LOWER RATE OF LEARNING IN OLDER ADULTS Vyoma D

Shah1, Anne S Berry1, Suzanne L Baker1, Taylor J Mellinger2, Kaitlin N Swinnerton2, Jacob W Vogel2, William J Jagust1; 1Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
2
University of California Berkeley — Ventral striatal (VST) dopamine influences

learning, and age-related disruption of the dopamine system may mediate
changes in learning across the lifespan. The present cross-sectional study
measured learning in young (n = 21, mean age = 23.8) and older adults (n
= 16, mean age = 77.6) using the Logical Memory Test (Wechsler Memory
Scale, 3rd Edition) and the Probabilistic Selection Task (Frank et al., 2004).
Dopamine synthesis capacity was measured using 6[18F]fluoro-L-m-tyrosine (FMT) PET. Consistent with previous reports in dorsal striatum
(Braskie et al., 2008), we found elevated dopamine synthesis capacity in
VST for older adults (t(35) = 3.79, p <.001; partial volume corrected (Rousset et al., 1998): t(35) = 2.02, p = .052). Though upregulation of dopamine
synthesis may reflect compensation for age-related deficits elsewhere in the
system, our analyses suggest a negative impact of elevated synthesis capacity on learning in older adults. For the Logical Memory Test, there was a
significant age x FMT Ki x learning interaction (F(1,30) = 9.60, p < .005) such
that high synthesis capacity was associated with low rates of learning in
older adults, but high rates of learning in young adults. A subset of participants completed the Probabilistic Selection Task. Preliminary analyses
mirror these findings such that high synthesis capacity in older adults was
associated with decreased learning from reward (r = -.48). These results are
in line with previous findings suggesting intermediate levels of dopamine
synthesis capacity, across age group, are associated with optimal cognitive
function.

D44
SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS, WHITE MATTER DEVELOPMENT, AND
EXECUTIVE FUNCTION Alexandra Ursache1, Kimberly Noble2; 1Columbia
University, 2Teachers College, Columbia University — A growing body of evi-

dence links socioeconomic status (SES) to children’s brain structure. Few
studies, however, have specifically investigated relations of SES to white
matter structure. Further, although several studies have demonstrated that
family SES is related to development of brain areas that support executive
functions (EF), less is known about the role that white matter structure plays
in the relation of SES to EF. One possibility is that white matter differences
may partially explain SES disparities in EF (i.e., a mediating relationship).
Alternatively, SES may differentially shape brain-behavior relations such
that the relation of white matter structure to EF may differ as a function of
SES (i.e., a moderating relationship). In a diverse sample of 1082 children
and adolescents from the PING Data Resource, we examine socioeconomic
disparities in white matter macrostructure and microstructure. We further
investigate relations between family SES, children’s white matter volume
and integrity in tracts supporting EF, and performance on EF tasks. Results
indicate that SES is associated with fractional anisotropy (FA) and volume
in multiple white matter tracts. Moreover, FA in the inferior longitudinal
fasciculus partially mediates the relation between parental education and
inhibitory control. Additionally, we find that SES moderates the relation
between white matter structure and cognitive flexibility. Specifically, across
multiple tracts of interest, lower FA or lower volume is associated with
reduced cognitive flexibility among children from lower income families.
In contrast, children from higher income families show preserved cognitive
flexibility in the face of low white matter FA or volume.

D45
SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS IS ASSOCIATED WITH HAIR CORTISOL
AND EXECUTIVE FUNCTION IN 5- TO 7-YEAR-OLD CHILDREN Emily

Merz1, Alexandra Ursache1, Jerrold Meyer2, Samantha Melvin1, Kimberly Noble1;
1
Columbia University, 2University of Massachusetts Amherst — Socioeconomic

158

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
disparities in executive function (EF) development have been well-documented (Noble, Norman, & Farah, 2005). However, less is known about the
associations between socioeconomic status (SES) and hair cortisol, an index
of cumulative stress exposure, or the extent to which hair cortisol might
mediate associations between SES and EF. As such, we examined SES, hair
cortisol, and executive function in a sample of 5- to 7-year-old children (N =
40; mean age = 6.32 years; 16 males; 20 Hispanic/Latino; 10 African American). Parents reported on their income and education; parental and child
hair samples were collected; and children completed the flanker, list sorting
working memory, and dimensional change card sort (DCCS) tasks from
the NIH Toolbox Cognition Battery (Akshoomoff et al., 2014). Adjusting
for child age, gender, and race/ethnicity, we found that parental education (but not income-to-needs ratio) was significantly negatively associated
with children’s hair cortisol (Cohen’s f2 = .24). Further, parental education
was significantly positively associated with children’s performance on the
flanker (Cohen’s f2 = .16) and working memory tasks (Cohen’s f2 = .11).
However, children’s hair cortisol was not significantly associated with their
performance on the EF tasks, and thus hair cortisol did not mediate the
links between family SES and children’s EF. These results converge with
recent findings (Vaghri et al., 2013) in showing a link between socioeconomic disadvantage and higher hair cortisol levels in children, and suggest that hair cortisol should be further investigated as a marker of chronic
stress among disadvantaged children.

D46
A VALIDATION STUDY OF THE RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN COGNITIVE RESERVE CAPACITY, MEMORY AND COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE IN HEALTHY MIDLIFE TO SENIOR ADULTS Lisa McGarrigle1,
Lorraine Boran1, Kate Irving1, Martin van Boxtel2, Sebastian Kohler2, Frans
Verhey2; 1Dublin City University, 2Maastricht University — The objective of this

research is to investigate the validity of a structural model of cognitive
reserve (CR) capacity and cognitive decline. Active models of CR highlight the brain’s ability to use pre-existing cognitive processes or enlist
compensatory processes (Stern, 2002), in the face of mental challenge.
The proposed CR model is comprised of Executive Function/Processing
Resources (EF/PR) and Cognitive Activity (CA). The aim of the present
study was to test this model of predictive relationships between baseline
CR and global cognition/memory outcomes in two longitudinal cohorts,
Dutch and Irish, at 6-year and 2-year follow-up, respectively. Analysis
was conducted on the Maastricht Ageing Study (n=1587), and the Irish
Longitudinal Study on Ageing (n=4512). Structural equation modelling
(WLSMV estimation) investigated relationships between CR capacity,
memory and cognitive performance in two age groups: 50-64 years and
65-82 years. Results indicate that overall the structural model fits the data
at just reasonable level for the Dutch dataset and very well for the Irish
dataset (Dutch 50-64/65-82 age-groups, respectively: RMSEA=.071[.059.083]/.075[.063-.087]; CFI=.923/.888. Irish 50-64/65-82 age-groups, respectively: RMSEA=.044[.039-.049]/.041[.036-.047]; CFI=.964/.968). Parameter
estimates across both datasets indicate a strong relationship between the
two CR factors in both age groups (covariance range: 0.59 - 0.82). In all
models EF/PR was a predictor of MMSE (standardized regression coefficient range: .325 - .386, p<.01). Investigating structure and fit of the CR
model in both Dutch and Irish contexts has provided evidence for the validity of the two-factor CR capacity model and its predictive relationship with
cognitive outcomes.

D47
AN INVESTIGATION OF SELF AND ERROR AWARENESS IN OLDER
ADULTS Eric A. Lacey1, Mahnaz Arvaneh2, Paul M. Dockree1, Ian H Robertson1; 1Trinity College Dublin, 2The University of Sheffield — Whether engaged

in highly demanding cognitive tasks or basic activities of daily living our
capacity to monitor and adapt our behavior in an efficient ‘online’ manner
has the potential to bestow enormous benefits upon us. This, coupled with
the ability to take corrective action following an erroneous response, is
highly dependent on a proficient level of self-awareness (SA). Recently our
laboratory has demonstrated that healthy older adults (65 years +) display
diminished awareness of errors, when compared to younger individuals, not only in everyday functioning but also when engaged in laboratory-based tasks. The current research sought to further elucidate on these
findings by comparing a group of 30 younger and 30 older adults who,

2016 Annual Meeting	
in addition to undergoing a multifaceted psychometric battery completed
the Error Awareness Dot Task (EADT), a Go/No-Go task which requires
participants to signal errors of commission via a motor response. Throughout testing electrophysiological measures; namely electroencephalography
(EEG) and electrodermal activity (EDA) were recorded. Whilst older adults
displayed higher levels of accuracy on the EADT than their younger counterparts, the older population were significantly less aware of their erroneous responses, this despite the task being modified in order to eliminate task
difficulty as a confounding variable. We also report that there is a marked
difference between older and younger individuals in both the amplitude
and time course of error positivity (Pe) and error related negativity (ERN),
two reliable neural signatures of erroneous behavior. A potential clinical
application of our EADT is briefly discussed.

D48
AGE-RELATED AND INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THE NEURAL
CORRELATES OF SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL INFORMATION IN
WORKING MEMORY Ya-Ping Chen1,2, Ya-Wen Fang1,3, Ching-Po Lin4, Ovid
Jyh-Lang Tzeng1,2,3,4, Hsu-Wen Huang1,3, Chih-Mao Huang1,3; 1Academia Sinica,
Taipei, Taiwan, 2Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, 3National Chiao-Tung
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, 4National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan —

Working memory (WM), the executive processes responsible for online
manipulation of various domains of information to guide goal-directed
behavior, declines with age. In the present study, we employed event-related functional MRI to investigate age-related and individual differences
in the neural correlates of spatial and temporal WM. Participants were
instructed to remember a sequence (for temporal WM) or spatial location
(for spatial WM) of the abstract shapes with three level of working memory
load. Behavioral results demonstrated that both young and older groups
showed increased reaction times with increasing task demands, whereas
only older adults showed reduced accuracy with increasing task demands.
A whole brain analysis revealed common fronto-parietal activations during
maintenance of temporal and spatial information in working memory
across age groups, including DLPFC, middle PFC, and bilateral posterior
parietal cortices (PPC). The young participants exhibited strongly left-lateralized fronto-parietal activation during temporal WM and strongly
right-lateralized fronto-parietal activation during spatial WM, whereas
older participants showed bilateral fronto-parietal activation across two
tasks. Moreover, age-related patterns of neural recruitment in response
to load effects were observed: whereas young participants showed reliably increased activity with increasing task demands, older participants
showed a pattern with a sharp increase at the lower level of WM load but
a flattening at higher level of WM load in inferior and superior PPC. These
findings suggest that posterior parietal regions may play a functional role
in modulation of working memory capacity for both temporal and spatial
information and provide converging evidence for hemispheric asymmetry
reduction in older adults.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Goal
maintenance & switching
D49
MOTIVATIONAL EFFECTS ON THE PROCESSING OF DELAYED
INTENTIONS IN THE ANTERIOR PREFRONTAL CORTEX Christine
Stelzel1,2,3, Jovita Bruening1,2,4, Vera U. Ludwig1,2, Lena M. Paschke1,2, Henrik
Walter1,3; 1Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 2Humboldt University Berlin, 3Berlin
Center for Advanced Neuroimaging, 4Technische Universität Berlin — Delaying

intentions bears the risk of interference from distracting activities during
the delay interval. Motivation can increase intention retrieval success but
little is known about the underlying brain mechanisms. Here, we investigated whether increased motivation modulates the processing of delayed
intentions in the anterior prefrontal cortex (aPFC), known to be crucial for
intention processing. 22 participants performed an ongoing n-back working
memory task and task phases with an additional intention (i.e. to respond
with a different response button when a certain word is presented) were
embedded into this n-back task. In a mixed blocked and event-related functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging design, we specifically tested whether

Poster Session D
motivation affects intention processing in a transient, phase-specific or in
a sustained manner. We found a generalized effect of motivation on both
correct intention retrieval and ongoing task performance. Within the intention-related network, sustained activity increases in rewarded compared to
non-rewarded blocks were present in fronto-parietal regions including left
lateral aPFC (Brodmann area 10). Importantly, higher activity in the sustained network was directly associated with greater reward-related behavioral improvements. Additionally, individual differences in reward-related performance benefits were related to the degree of transient signal
increases in right lateral aPFC specifically during intention encoding. This
suggests that the ability to mobilize control processes during the encoding
of future intentions is crucial for successful intention retrieval in addition
to general increases in processing effort. Bilateral aPFC is central to these
motivation-cognition interactions.

D50
ACTIVITY IN THE ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX IS ASSOCIATED
WITH A MORE EFFICIENT TASK-SWITCHING NETWORK AT THE
INDIVIDUAL LEVEL Kelly Steele1, John Butler2, John Foxe1,3; 1Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, 2Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 3University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY — Humans

rely on the ability to easily and quickly switch between tasks, however
there is a ‘switch cost’: a slowed response when switching between two
tasks (e.g. ABABA) relative to repeating tasks (e.g.AAABB). Other sources
of conflict increasing task-switching costs are “incongruency” (when the
stimulus affords one response under Task A, different from Task B), and
“motor-alternation” (whether the motor response on a given trial is different or the same as the previous trial). We explored individual differences in task-switching networks to determine which aspects of processing were associated with various sources of conflict. Adults performed a
task-switching paradigm while 256-electrode EEG was recorded. Each trial
started with a 700ms cue, indicating the task, followed by a letter-and-number stimulus for 1300ms, while they responded for the letter task if the letter
was a vowel and for the number task if the number was even. Group analysis revealed the expected frontoparietal network activation. However, there
was a range of individual behavioral phenotypes, associated with different networks. Reaction time and accuracy were negatively correlated (r =
-0.6494, p < 0.001): the most accurate were the fastest. The anterior cingulate
cortex detects conflicts and reallocates attention accordingly, and was more
active for individuals with incongruency and motor-alternation costs than
for those with switch costs; whereas the opposite was true for the middle
frontal gyrus. The decreased ACC activity during switching resulted in
delayed detection to changing tasks, and the MFG may have played a role
in the executive functions necessary to change tasks.

D51
FLEXIBLE HUB UPDATES BETWEEN TASKS ASSOCIATED WITH
GLOBAL INFORMATIONAL CONNECTIVITY CHANGES Takuya Ito1,

Douglas H. Schultz1, Levi I. Solomyak1, Richard H. Chen1, Ravi D. Mill1, Michael W.
Cole1; 1Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-Newark — We recently found

that regions in the cognitive control network (CCN) demonstrate adaptive
functional connectivity across task states, consistent with the flexible hub
theory (Cole et al., 2013). A recently developed informational connectivity
(IC) method utilizes multivariate activity patterns during tasks to elucidate the temporal relationship between multivariate information content
between regions (Coutanche & Thompson-Schill, 2013). Using this novel
approach, we hypothesized that information within CCN flexible hubs are
associated with highly distributed task-related information throughout the
brain. We analyzed a new fMRI task data set (N=32) during which subjects performed a modified version of the Permuted Rule Operation task
(Cole et al., 2010). Four different rules were permuted across three different
rule dimensions (logic, sensory, and motor), producing an experimental
design with 12 unique task rules and 64 distinct tasks. To perform IC metrics on flexible hub regions, we computed multivariate informational time
series using functionally defined brain regions, and computed IC estimates
of each CCN region to the rest of the brain. We found that several CCN
regions contained significantly distinct IC connections with a variety of
brain systems across the three rule dimensions (logic, sensory, and motor).
These findings suggest that domain-general changes in information content within CCN regions correspond with task-related information content

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

159

Poster Session D	
changes throughout the brain. Furthermore, we found that significant connectivity differences correspond to the recruitment of task-relevant regions,
suggesting that CCN regions coordinate crucial informational representations across the brain during task states.

D52
TONIC NORADRENERGIC ACTIVITY PREDICTS FLEXIBLE ATTENTIONAL SET SHIFTING: INSIGHTS FROM PUPILLOMETRY AND
EYE-TRACKING Péter Pajkossy1,2, Ágnes Szőllősi2, Mihály Racsmány1,2;
1

Research Group on Frontostriatal Disorders, Hungarian Academy of Sciences,
Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Hungary — A constant task

2

for every living organism is to decide whether to exploit rewards associated
with current behaviour or to explore the environment for more rewarding
options. Current empirical evidence indicates that exploitation is related to
phasic whereas exploration to tonic firing mode of noradrenergic neurons
in the locus coeruleus (Aston-Jones & Cohen, 2005; Bouret & Sara 2005). In
humans, this exploration-exploitation trade-off is subserved by the ability
to flexibly switch attention between task-related and task-irrelevant information. Here, we investigated whether this function, called attentional
set-shifting, is related to exploration and tonic noradrenergic discharge.
We measured pre-trial, baseline pupil dilation, proved to be strongly correlated with the activity of the locus coeruleus, while human participants
took part in the Intradimensional-Extradimensional Set Shifting Task. This
task requires participants to choose between two compound stimuli with
distinct stimulus-dimensions based on feedback provided for their previous decisions. Both the reward contingencies and the stimuli change periodically, thus participants are repeatedly required to reassess which stimulus-features are task-relevant (i.e. they have to shift their attentional set).
Our results showed that baseline pupil diameter increased after changes
in reward contingency. Moreover, higher levels of baseline pupil diameter
were related to better behavioural performance and also to eye-movement
patterns indexing attention to irrelevant stimulus features. Thus, our results
suggest that tonic firing mode of noradrenergic neurons in the locus coeruleus is implicated in attentional set shifting, as it biases attention toward
currently task-irrelevant stimulus-dimensions. This work was supported
by the KTIA NAP Grant (ID: 13-2-2014-0020).

D53
GOAL NEGLECT AND PROSPECTIVE MEMORY FAILURES: WHAT’S
THE DIFFERENCE? Francesca Biondo1,2, Daniel J Mitchell1, John Duncan1,3;
1

MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, 2University of Cambridge, 3University of
Oxford — At a descriptive level, Goal Neglect (GN) and Prospective Memory

failure (PMf) are analogous: both refer to a behavioural error whereby an
intended future action fails to be completed. These errors may be thought
of as dissociations between knowing and doing. We observed that the paradigms used to test these phenomena are similar enough to allow a close
comparison, and thus further constrain our understanding of the underlying cognitive mechanisms. To test the similarities and differences of GN
and PMf we ran a series of experiments involving both GN and PM tasks, in
which we manipulated instructional load and the transparency of instructional cues, and observed the diagnostic effects on reaction time and accuracy. A novel finding was that decreasing the transparency of the instructional cue increased GN, similarly to published PM findings. In addition,
our data suggested that cue transparency affected processes occurring at
earlier stages than those typically highlighted in similar PM studies (e.g.
Marsh et al., 2003; Meier & Zimmermann, 2015). A second result was that
increasing instructional load increased GN, replicating previous studies
(Duncan et al. 2008), however, interestingly, it did not affect PMf in a standard PM task. In addition, these errors appear to be associated with age and
fluid intelligence in different ways. Our interpretation is that there may be
several attentional mechanisms underlying performance on GN and PM
tasks, and their relative dominance depends on the structural features of
the tasks and individual differences.

D54
FEEDBACK PROCESSING IN PAIRED ASSOCIATE DECLARATIVE
LEARNING OF LINGUISTIC AND NONLINGUISTIC PARADIGMS

James Borders1, Yael Arbel1, Sofia Vallila-Rohter1, Lauryn Zipse1; 1MGH Institute
of Health Professions — The study evaluates feedback processing of declara-

160

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
tive learning in healthy adults using event-related potentials (ERPs). Participants completed linguistic and nonlinguistic two-choice paired associate
tasks in a block design. The linguistic task required participants to associate a non-word with a visually presented non-object. The nonlinguistic
task required them to create associations between two visually presented
non-objects. Behaviorally, participants had significantly better learning
outcomes in the linguistic paradigm, as well as faster response times. Additionally, participants reported significantly higher ratings of confidence in
their responses on the linguistic paradigm. These results suggest a learning
advantage when one is able to utilize the linguistic system in the learning
process. Temporal Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was utilized to
examine two ERPs, the feedback related negativity (FRN) and the positivity that follows. Neurophysiologically, significant differences were found
in these ERP components that were associated with learning outcomes in
the linguistic and nonlinguistic paradigms. These findings provide neurophysiological evidence of differences in feedback processing in two tasks
that differ in the ease of access to learning strategies. Clinical implications
are discussed for populations with weak linguistic systems such as children
with developmental language disorders and adults with Aphasia whose
impaired ability to use linguistic strategies may affect the efficiency with
which feedback is processed to facilitate learning.

D55
BILINGUAL AND MONOLINGUAL COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY: THE
ROLE OF THE DRD2 GENE Brandin Munson1, Kelly A Vaughn1, Maya R

Greene1, Aurora I Ramos-Nuñez1, Pilar Archilla-Suerte1, Arturo E Hernandez1;
1
University of Houston — The present study explored individual differences

in cognitive control abilities by examining the effects of genetic variability
in a sample of English monolinguals (N = 10) and Spanish-English bilingual adults (N = 16). Specifically, the researchers explored the presence of
a dopamine receptor-affecting genetic polymorphism that has been shown
to affect cognitive flexibility, DRD2 / ANKK1-TaqIa. Previous studies
found that carriers of the A1 DRD2 allele had less brain activity during
a switching task than A1 non-carriers. The bilingual sample was divided
into 2 groups: A1 carriers (n = 10) and A1 non-carriers (n = 6). All groups
and subgroups were matched on English proficiency and SES. Participants
were asked to perform a shape-color switching task during fMRI scanning.
Monolinguals showed increased activity relative to bilinguals in brain
regions found to be involved in control processes, including the MFG, the
ACC, the IPL, and the putamen. Interestingly, monolinguals demonstrated
similar patterns of increased activation in control regions relative to bilingual A1 allele non-carriers, but there were very few activation differences
when compared with bilingual carriers of the A1 allele. Contrary to earlier
findings, bilingual A1 allele carriers showed increased activity relative to
bilingual A1 allele non-carriers, in regions including the MFG, the IPL and
the caudate. The observed activation differences between monolinguals
and bilinguals therefore appear to differ depending on the presence of the
A1 DRD2 allele among bilinguals. Findings reveal the potential impact of
genetic variability on the manifestation of cognitive control differences due
to language background.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
D56
THE ORIGIN OF THE VISUAL WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY
LIMITATIONS Emmanuel Delgado1, Marjan Persuh1; 1Borough of Manhattan

Community College, City University of New York — Visual working memory has

very strict capacity limitations; on average, people are able to hold in their
memory only between 3 to 4 independent objects. Although most studies
examined the maintenance of visual information over time, capacity limitations might originate at the earlier, encoding phase. In the current study,
we tested this hypothesis directly; we modified the classical change detection paradigm by eliminating the maintenance phase. In change detection,
two stimulus arrays are presented sequentially, with a temporal gap and
observers are asked to report a change between two arrays. We have eliminated the temporal gap and presented two arrays simultaneously, side
by side, creating a parallel change detection. In the first experiment, we
compared detection of change in object orientation in both classical and

2016 Annual Meeting	
parallel change detection paradigms. Observers’ performance dropped
dramatically with increasing set size, even in parallel change detection
task, in which two arrays were presented simultaneously. In the second
experiment, we tested two visual features, orientation and size and their
conjunction in parallel change detection task. We replicated results from
the first experiment; furthermore, observers showed similar drop in performance with increasing set size for both, object size and conjunction of size
and orientation. Our results suggest that visual working memory capacity
limitations originate at the early, encoding phase of visual information processing and are therefore limitations of visual perception and not limitations of memory per se.

D57
DOPAMINE AND PARKINSON’S DISEASE DIFFERENTIALLY
AFFECT WORKING MEMORY COMPONENTS John Grogan1, Elizabeth

Coulthard1,2; 1University of Bristol, UK, 2North Bristol NHS Trust, UK — Parkin-

son’s disease (PD) has been previously shown to impair certain aspects of
working memory (WM), and dopamine has been heavily implicated in WM
in animals and humans. Working memory can be fractionated into distinct
sub-processes including phonological and visuospatial storage and information manipulation. Here we explore how PD and dopamine stimulation
might differentially contribute to these distinct processes underpinning
working memory. We tested 29 PD patients and 10 healthy controls (HC)
on the digit span WM test, which has three components: forwards span
which relies on phonological storage, backwards span involving visuospatial manipulation and sequence span which relies heavily on manipulation
and visuospatial processing. PD patients were significantly impaired only
on the sequence span (compared to HC). However, PD patients ON dopaminergic medication were significantly better than PD OFF medication for
the forwards span only. This result was most marked in patients with the
lowest spans OFF medication. Thus we have demonstrated that neurodegeneration in PD impairs sequence span which is dependent on visuo-spatial processing located in frontal cortex. In contrast, dopamine levels affect
performance on the forward span, suggesting dopaminergic innervation
of phonological loop. This result is unexpected as the site the phonological loop is generally thought to be inferior parietal lobe, with a sub-vocal
rehearsal component in the frontotemporal language areas, which are not
usually thought of as dopamine-related areas.

D58
WORKING MEMORY IMPAIRMENTS: CAUSES AND RESPONSES
TO TRAINING ACROSS SPECIFIC LEARNING DIFFICULTIES Erica

Bottacin1,2, Susan Gathercole1, Joni Holmes1; 1MRC Cognition & Brain Sciences
Unit, 2University of Cambridge — Deficits in working memory (WM) are

common in specific learning difficulties, but it is not yet known whether
these problems represent core cognitive difficulties. WM relies on efficient
sensory inputs and is part of a network of higher-order cognitive control
functions. Impairments in any of these related systems will impact on WM
performance. The aims of this study were i) to identify the potential source
of WM problems in children with specific difficulties in maths (MD), reading (RD) or in both maths and reading (MDRD), and ii) to investigate how
their different baseline profiles modulate responsiveness to WM training.
Children with MD, RD, or MDRD and a comparison group with normal
reading and maths skills completed a battery of tasks designed to assess
cognitive functions associated with WM before and after training. All
three groups were characterised by impairments in phonological processing at baseline. The RD group had additional deficits in verbal short-term
memory, while MDRD children were characterised by a broader profile
of impairment that extended to visuo-spatial processing, and verbal and
visuo-spatial WM tasks. Following training, improvements were observed
in verbal processing and verbal and visuo-spatial short-term memory for
MD children, and in verbal WM for the MDRD group. No training-related
gains were observed for the RD group. These data suggest that WM difficulties may occur downstream of information processing problems in
specific learning difficulties and that interventions targeting these specific
problems may be more effective than WM-based interventions.

Poster Session D

D59
EFFECTS OF A PROCESS-BASED COGNITIVE TRAINING INTERVENTION FOR PATIENTS WITH STRESS-RELATED EXHAUSTION:
AN FMRI-STUDY Hanna Malmberg Gavelin1, Anna Stigsdotter Neely2, Therese

Stenlund1, Lisbeth Slunga Järvholm1, Carl-Johan Boraxbekk1; 1Umeå University,
Sweden, 2Karlstad University, Sweden — Long-term stress has been associated

with cognitive impairments, mainly affecting executive function, attention
and episodic memory. However, with regard to rehabilitation of patients
with stress-related illness, little is known about the effects of treatment on
cognitive performance and associated neural mechanisms. The purpose of
this study was twofold. First we evaluated the effects of a process-based
cognitive training intervention in a clinical population of patients diagnosed with stress-related exhaustion. Second we examined training related
functional neural responses. The cognitive training group consisted of 27
patients, participating in a multimodal group stress-rehabilitation program
with the addition of a 12-week computerized process-based cognitive training intervention. The control group consisted of 32 patients, participating
in the multimodal group rehabilitation only. Cognitive functions were
assessed before and after the intervention, using an extensive cognitive test
battery assessing both near- and far transfer effects. functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) was performed on a subset of patients in the
cognitive training group (n = 10) and the control group (n = 12). The n-back
task served as the near transfer task in the scanner. Results showed pronounced training-related improvements on the criterion updating task, as
well as evidence of near transfer effects to updating and episodic memory.
fMRI-performance confirmed the transfer effect with associated changes in
functional neural response. These results suggest that process-based cognitive training may be a viable method inducing functional neural changes
affecting the cognitive impairments associated with long-term stress.

D60
LIMITED RESOURCES FOR ICONIC AND WORKING MEMORY
Youxi LI1, Robert Melara2, Marjan Persuh1; 1Borough of Manhattan Community
College, City University of New York, 2City College, City University of New York —

Working memory shows striking limits in capacity; it lasts on the order of
seconds and it stores only a few items. Because of the importance of working memory for human cognition, it is crucial to understand its precursor,
iconic memory, which has not been well characterized. In two experiments, we used the adjustment method to directly compare precision of
iconic and working memory. In the first experiment, we tested memory
for object orientation by displaying objects of different orientations. Participants reported the orientation of the cued object by clicking on a corresponding position on a circle. We varied the delay between object display
and cue to tap into two memory systems, iconic (no delay) and working
memory (delay). As expected, working memory precision declined with
increasing set size, confirming previous observations. Interestingly, iconic
memory showed similar pattern of results. Although precision for iconic
memory was higher, data revealed continuous decline of precision with
increasing set sizes, especially for set sizes four and higher. In the second
experiment, we tested precision of iconic and working memory for motion.
Iconic memory precision again declined with increasing set sizes, mimicking results for working memory. Our results demonstrate that iconic
memory is limited in precision and that capacity limitations of working
memory originate at the earliest stages of visual memory formation. In light
of this evidence, we suggest that short-term memory systems are perhaps
best conceived as a continuum rather than distinct memory stages.

D61
NEURAL CORRELATES OF MAINTAINING CONSTRUCTED
OBJECTS IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY Julia A. Ewerdwalbesloh1,
Satu Palva2, Patrick H. Khader1; 1Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,
2
University of Helsinki — How are visual objects that have been constructed
from object parts through mental imagery maintained as a coherent representation in working memory (WM)? Here we investigated this issue with
electroencephalography (EEG) and compared two conditions of WM maintenance that only differed in how the WM contents had been created. Participants maintained objects that they either had to create out of single features or that were presented to them as complete objects. Object complexity

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

161

Poster Session D	
varied between two and four features. Inter-areal synchronization may
underlie the integration of objects features into coherent object representations and we hypothesized that the maintenance of constructed objects
would be associated with stronger inter-areal synchronization compared to
the maintenance of complete objects. We analyzed phase synchrony from
EEG data in a time interval immediately before the appearance of a probe
stimulus, because here both groups maintained essentially the same objects.
Increased synchrony was observed between (predominantly left) frontal
and parietal-to-occipital cortical sources for constructed in comparison to
non-constructed objects in the theta, alpha, and gamma frequency bands.
A similar increase in synchrony was also found for increased WM load (2
vs. 4 features for non-constructed objects) between frontal and occipital
sources. However, under increased construction load (2 vs. 4 features for
constructed objects), the synchronization was restricted to fronto-parietal
couplings, suggesting additional activation in the fronto-parietal attention network specific for maintaining mentally constructed objects. Hence,
strengthened synchronization for constructed objects may reflect increased
attentional processes to keep the object parts together as a coherent representation.

D62
THE EFFECT OF MOTIVATION FROM HIGH REWARD VALUE ON
CATEGORY LEARNING Vivian V. Valentin1, Lauren E. Vucovich1, F. Gregory
Ashby1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara — Category learning recruits

procedural memory for information integration (II) tasks, and declarative memory for rule based (RB) tasks. Both learning systems make use of
reward in terms of positive feedback, but the extent to which each system
interacts with reward value learning and motivation has not been explored
fully. The literature suggests that decreased motivation due to sleep
deprivation affects RB, but not II learning. Our study examines whether
enhanced motivation has differential effects on RB and II learning. Given
that uncertainty (i.e. reward prediction at p(0.5)) has been shown to be
greatest near the category bound for both II and RB tasks, we compared
the effect of higher reward value given to stimuli near versus far from the
bound. In an RB task, higher reward value given to stimuli near the bound
resulted in better learning of both near and far from bound stimuli. In an II
task this effect was small. The data did not support the notion that reward
value influenced reward prediction error available to procedural learning,
because there were no stimulus specific effects. The somewhat better learning with higher rewards to stimuli near the bound in II was characterized
as a quicker switch to (or release of inhibition of) the procedural system.
The mechanism of giving up on rules and allowing the procedural system
to control responding is thought to involve executive function associated
with declarative memory. These results suggest that reward value learning
and motivation interacts more with declarative strategies than procedural
learning.

D63
HOW VIDEO-GAMES SHAPE THE BRAIN STRUCTURE – A VOXEL-BASED MORPHOMETRIC STUDY Natalia Kowalczyk1, Aneta

Brzezicka1, Artur Marchewka2, Paweł Dobrowolski3, Maciek Skorko3, Maksymilian Bielecki1, Małgorzata Kossut4; 1University of Social Sciences and Humanities, Warsaw, Poland, 2Laboratory of Brain Imaging, Neurobiology Center,
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology of Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw,
Poland, 3Institute of Psychology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland,
4
Laboratory of Neuroplasticity, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology of Polish
Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland — Introduction: It has been demon-

strated that video game players (VGPs) differ from non-video game players (NVGPs) in a wide range of cognitive functions. However, very little
is known about the relation between action video game experience and
structural brain plasticity. Aims: The aim of this study was to investigate
the grey matter volume (GMV) differences in VGPs and NVGPs. Here
we explore data obtained from voxel-based morphometry (VBM) with
behavioural measures of working memory. Methods: High-resolution
T1-weighted (T1w) images were collected from intensive real-time strategy
VGPs and age-and-sex-matched NVGPs in a 3T MRI scanner. Differences
between players and non-players were calculated using whole brain voxel-based morphometry analyses of GMV. Values from all of the significant
clusters were correlated with visuospatial N-back working memory task

162

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
performance. Results and Discussion: VBM based contrasts comparing the
VGPs and the NVGPs revealed a significant increase in GMV in the right
putamen for VGPs. There were no significant differences in GMV for the
reverse contrast (NVGPs > VGPs). Additionally, GMV increase in VGPs
was correlated with behavioural performance (more GMV translated to
smaller differences in RTs between low and high working memory conditions). We interpret this as evidence of brain plasticity changes as a result
of video game play. These findings are in line with previous evidence that
VGPs perform more complex tasks with less effort compared to NVGPs,
and provide evidence for its neural substrate. Supported by the National
Science Centre Grant 2013/11/N/HS6/01335.

D64
NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF SPATIAL LAYOUT ACROSS
MENTAL TRANSFORMATION – A TACTILE FMRI STUDY Lisa Alex-

andria Velenosi1,2, Timo Torsten Schmidt1,2, Felix Blankenburg1,2; 1Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Center for Cognitive Neuroscience Berlin, Berlin,
Germany — Sensorimotor recruitment models (Pasternak & Greenlee, 2005;

Postle, 2006) argue that pictorial working memory (WM) content requires
the activation of stimulus-specific neural networks within sensory-cortices. The current study addresses this hypothesis within the tactile domain
using fMRI by not only studying the spatially-distributed representations
underlying the maintenance but also the manipulation of mental stimulus representations with a delayed match to sample design. Subjects were
simultaneously presented two different patterned tactile stimuli to the two
index fingers using two 4x4-pin Braille-like displays (QuaeroSys). Using
a retro-cue design, subjects were instructed to encode one of the tactile
stimuli and either maintain it as experienced or move the representation
to the contralateral finger during a 6s retention period. 22 subjects were
scanned on a 3T Siemens Trio and the data was analyzed according to a
univariate General Linear Model (GLM) approach which provided evidence for the somatotopic recruitment of sensory regions. To explore
whether these regions also carry information regarding the stimulus identity, an assumption free whole-brain multivariate searchlight classification
was implemented. Stimulus-specific representations were identified within
the primary somatosensory areas, posterior parietal cortices and the inferior frontal gyrus. Finally, cross-classification analyses indicate the same
neural networks within posterior parietal cortices represent stimulus information during both the maintenance and manipulation of stimulus representations. The results provide support for the sensorimotor recruitment
model of WM as well as convergent evidence with findings from the visual
domain (Christophel et al., 2014) for the representation of modality independent spatial relationships within posterior parietal cortices.

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
D65
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL AUDITORY RESPONSE TO ACOUSTICALLY MODIFIED SYLLABLES IN PRETERM AND FULL TERM
INFANTS María Elizabeth Monica Carlier1, Thalía Harmony1, Omar Mendo-

za-Montoya2, Jose Luis Marroquin3, Donna Jackson-Maldonado4, Josefina Ricardo-Garcell1; 1Unidad de Investigación en Neurodesarrollo “Augusto Fernández
Guardiola,” Departamento de Neurobiologia Conductual y Cognitiva, Instituto de
Neurobiologia, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Campus Juriquilla.,
2
Freie Universität Berlin Department of Mathematics and Computer Science,
3
Centro de Investigación en Matemáticas (CIMAT), 4Universidad Autónoma de
Querétaro (UAQ) — This study explored the effect of extending the duration

of the syllable formant transition on auditory habituation in full-term and
preterm infants at 12 months, as measured by decreases in amplitude for
syllable repetition using EEG time-frequency analyses. EEG recordings
for four repetitions of the syllable (/ta/) under two different conditions
(non-modified and modified) were collected for one group of 13 full-term
and two groups of preterm infants differing in language production performance; 15 infants had high scores (HS), and 14 had low scores (LS). Fullterm and HS preterm infants showed significant decreases in amplitude for
syllable repetition in both conditions. LS preterm infants showed a decrease
only in the modified syllable condition, suggesting a facilitation effect of
modified syllables in the LS preterm group.

2016 Annual Meeting	

D66
EXAMINING COMPENSATORY MECHANISMS AND PROTECTIVE
FACTORS IN TYPICAL READERS WITH A FAMILY HISTORY OF
DYSLEXIA Xi Yu1,2, Talia Raney1, Bryce Becker1, Nadine Gaab1,2,3; 1Laboratories

of Cognitive Neuroscience, Division of Developmental Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Children’s Hospital Boston, MA, 02115, US, 2Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, 02115, US, 3Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, MA,
02138, US — Although developmental dyslexia (DD) is a heritable learning

disability, only half of children with a family history of DD (FHD+) will
subsequently develop into typical readers. However, the underlying compensatory mechanism and/or protective factors that contribute or mediate
typical reading development in FHD+ children are largely unknown. The
current study approached this question retrospectively. Thirty-eight second-graders with typical reading abilities were selected from the Boston
Longitudinal Dyslexia study. Nineteen are FHD+ and 19 were controls
(FHD-). Their imaging data for a phonological task, collected during their
prereading stage, was retrieved. Multivariate pattern analyses, combined
with the searchlight technique, were applied, in order to detect neural
regions that responded differently for phonological processing between
these two groups. Results revealed that neural patterns in the right inferior
frontal gyrus, left posterior tempoparietal and anterior temporal cortices
reliably categorized typical readers into FHD+ and FHD- groups (accuracy
> 68%, p < 0.01, k > 40). Subsequent univariate analyses conducted in the
observed regions further demonstrated greater activation for FHD- children in the left temporal gyri, but more importantly, higher activation for
FHD+ group in the right inferior frontal cortex. While lower activation in
the temporal cortices for the FHD+ children implies an imperfect neural
basis for phonological processing, higher reaction in the right frontal gyrus
suggests a protective or compensatory mechanism which supports their
typical reading development. Further studies in prereading children are
warranted to investigate the exact function of the right frontal gyrus, which
could inform the design of early intervention strategies.

D67
PHONOLOGICAL PATTERN LEARNING IN ADULTS AND CHILDREN
Margaret Ugolini1, Miriam Muñoz1, Rachel Yox1, Joe Pater1, Lisa D Sanders1; 1University of Massachusetts - Amherst — Learning a language requires acquisition

of the rules that govern how sounds can combine to make words (phonotactics) and how words can combine to make sentences (syntax). Decades
of research have suggested fundamental differences in how adults and
children acquire and use new language rules. However, previous research
has shown that adults can rapidly learn new phonotactic patterns from an
artificial language such that they respond differently to novel items that
do and do not fit the learned pattern (Pater & Moreton, 2014). Behavioral
results do not provide information about whether listeners rate novel items
by applying abstract rules or by analogy with words stored in their lexicon.
We exposed adults and 4- to 6-year-olds to a novel phonotactic pattern –
the consonants in consonant-vowel-consonant-vowel words either always
matched in voicing or never matched in voicing. Both groups were trained
on a word-picture matching task with 16 words that fit the phonotactic pattern. Behavioral and event-related potential (ERP) measures showed that
adults and children learned the trained words AND learned the phonotactic patterns. Novel items that violated the phonotactic pattern elicited a
larger late positive component (LPC) than novel items that fit the pattern.
These results indicate that adults retain the ability to learn and apply new
abstract rules, well beyond the end of any proposed critical period for language acquisition. However, differences in the ERP effects evident in adults
and children indicate that the process of learning new language rules is
distinct in these populations.

D68
WORKING MEMORY IN LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION IN OLDER
VS. YOUNGER ADULTS: AN EVENT RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY
Graciela Catalina Alatorre Cruz1, Juan Silva-Pereyra1, Thalia Fernandez Harmony2,
Sergio Manuel Sanchez Moguel2, Susana Angelica Castro Chavira2, Sonia Yanin
Cardenas Sanchez2, Mauricio Gonzalez Lopez2; 1Facultad de Estudios Superiores Iztacala, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 2Instituto de Neurobiologia, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Campus Juriquilla — Since

Poster Session D
Memory and language are affected by aging, older adults are less efficient
than younger adults in cognitive tasks that involve these processes. On
the other hand, working memory loads impact language comprehension.
To determine how cognitive decline during aging impacts language comprehension, effects of working memory loads in syntactic processing were
examined with event-related potential in sample including 17 older and 20
younger adults; 220 sentences were read by both groups, every sentence
had two features: working memory load, the number of words between
subject and adjective (high load, low load), and gender agreement (agreement, disagreement). Subjects had to determine if sentences were correct
or incorrect. Both groups showed a negativity (N400, 300-500ms) sensitive
to semantic relationships and a positivity (P600, 500-700 ms) related to
syntactic processing. Younger adults showed N400 effect (i.e. amplitude
differences between agreement and disagreement conditions) in low load
sentences in bilateral posterior topographic localizations, older adults did
not have this effect. P600 effect was found in older adults bilaterally. In
high load condition N400 effect was exhibited by young adults in the right
hemisphere while the elder show it bilaterally; P600 effect was observed
only among younger in left and anterior localizations. Topographical differences between groups can be seen as a compensatory mechanism since
no behavioral differences between groups were observed; however older
adults use different processing modules to perform the task, older adults
use syntactic processing while younger use semantic and syntactic processing. Acknowledges; Héctor Belmont, PAPIIT (IN225414 grant) and CONACYT (grant #290915).

D69
ACTIVATION DURING PHONOLOGICAL PROCESSING IS ASSOCIATED WITH WHITE MATTER MICROSTRUCTURE IN PRESCHOOLERS WITH AND WITHOUT A FAMILIAL RISK OF DEVELOPMENTAL
DYSLEXIA Michael Figuccio1,2, Xi Yu2,3, Yingying Wang2,3, Nadine Gaab2,3,4;
1

Boston University, 2Boston Children’s Hospital, 3Harvard Medical School, 4Harvard Graduate School of Education — Developmental dyslexia (DD) is a spe-

cific learning disorder characterized by deficits in phonological processing
and spelling. It has been shown that children and adults with DD display
reduced activation during reading-related tasks in key regions of the reading network and that these hypoactivations can already be observed in
pre-readers at familial risk of DD. Compared to controls, individuals with
DD also display reduced fractional anisotropy (FA) within the left arcuate fasciculus (LAF), a neural tract connecting parieto-temporal and inferior frontal regions, and increased FA in posterior corpus callosum (PCC).
However, the relationship between familial risk, white matter alterations,
and hypoactivations during reading-related tasks remains unclear. Twenty-one children (mean age=69.29, males=10) with a familial risk of DD and
twenty children (mean age=71.38, males=7) without a familial risk of DD
were examined using a phonological processing (PP) fMRI task and DTI
measures. Regions of interest previously shown to differ in preschoolers
with and without a familial risk of DD during the PP task were extracted.
LAF and PCC were segmented into 100 equidistant units with automated
fiber-tract quantification. Children with a familial risk of DD displayed
greater FA in the PCC compared to controls. Furthermore across groups,
FA measures of the LAF and PCC were positively correlated with weighted
parameter estimates in regions of interest during the phonological processing task. This suggests that, in children with a familial risk, hypoactivation
of PP is associated with microstructural changes in white matter prior to
reading onset.

D70
FUNCTIONAL NEAR INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY (FNIRS) INVESTIGATION OF EMERGING READING PATHWAYS IN CHILDREN
WITH POOR PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS Airey Lau1,2, Kaja Jasinska1,

Lan Shuai1, Heather Bortfeld1,3, Nicole Landi1,3, Kenneth Pugh1,3,4; 1Haskins
Laboratories, 2Columbia University, 3University of Connecticut, 4Yale University
School of Medicine — Skilled reading involves a left-lateralized network

of frontal, temporoparietal, and occipitotemporal regions. Children with
reading disorders show reduced neural activation in the left hemisphere
reading network and increased right hemispheric and prefrontal cortex
activation when reading. Such right hemisphere and frontal activation may
function as a compensatory pathway when the left hemisphere reading cir-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

163

Poster Session D	
cuit is less activated. However, little is known about what factors influence
the emergence of compensatory reading pathways in young children prior
to learning to read. In this ongoing study, we examined neural activation
in left hemisphere reading networks and compensatory pathways in children who are beginning to learn to read. Six children with poor phonological awareness (at-risk for reading difficulty) and 10 children with good
phonological awareness (typically-developing) were identified (ages 5-6).
Using functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS) neuroimaging, we
measured children’s neural activation during spoken and printed word
processing. Typically-developing children showed significant activation
in left superior temporal gyrus (STG; p<0.05) and inferior frontal gyrus
(IFG; p<0.05) when processing spoken and printed words. In contrast, children with poor phonological awareness showed significant activation in
the prefrontal cortex (p<0.01), right STG (p<0.01) and IFG (p<0.01) during
the same task. Preliminary results suggest children with poor phonological awareness show compensatory recruitment of prefrontal and right
hemisphere regions. These findings reveal new insights into the emergence
of compensatory reading pathways during the earliest stages of reading
development and suggest that compensatory pathways are not just linked
with reading ability, but also with phonological awareness—an important
predictor of reading.

D71
NEURAL CORRELATES OF PHONOLOGICAL PROCESSING:
DISRUPTED IN CHILDREN WITH READING DISORDERS AND
ENHANCED IN CHILDREN WITH MUSICAL TRAINING Meaghan
Mauer1, Jennifer Zuk1,2, Bryce Becker1, Nora Raschle1,3, Yingying Wang1, Michelle
Chang1, Nadine Gaab1,2,4; 1Boston Children’s Hospital, 2Harvard Medical School,
3
Psychiatric University Clinics Basel, 4Harvard Graduate School of Education —

Phonological processing (PP) is understood to be a key deficit of reading
disorders (RD), and prior studies have shown hypoactivation in left-temporoparietal and occipitotemporal regions in children with RD. In contrast,
musical training has been associated with enhanced PP abilities, but a
potential specialization of neural mechanisms for PP in musicians has yet
to be investigated. The present research examined neural correlates of PP
in typically developing children with musical training (musicians, n=16)
and without (nonmusicians, n=13), and children with RD (n=11) using
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). A whole brain ANOVA
examining group differences in functional activation in response to a PP
task identified significant differences in activation in bilateral temporoparietal regions. A post-hoc region-of-interest (ROI) analysis indicated a
typical pattern of left temporoparietal activation in nonmusicians, whereas
hypoactivation in this region was found in children with RD, and hyperactivation was observed in musicians. Musicians also showed right-hemispheric temporoparietal hyperactivation. These differential activation patterns were further supported by differences in lateralization indices among
the groups, such that musicians showed reduced left-lateralization relative
to nonmusicians in temporoparietal regions. The present results replicate
the previously described disruption in neural correlates of PP in children
with RD, and highlight specialized recruitment of bilateral temporoparietal
regions during PP in musicians. These results suggest possible implications
for musical training to support PP development and to stimulate compensatory neural mechanisms, particularly in children with RD.

D72
ARTERIAL SPIN LABELING REVEALS BRAIN CORRELATES OF
COGNITIVE RECOVERY IN LEFT STROKE PATIENTS. Olga Boukrina1,
A.M. Barrett1,3,4, William W. Graves2; 1Kessler Foundation, 2Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 3Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, 4Kessler Institute for
Rehabilitation — Arterial Spin Labeling (ASL) scans provide a non-invasive

absolute (ml/100g/min) measure of blood flow in the brain. After stroke,
acute lesions may include an ischemic penumbra, where salvageable tissue
is being affected by inadequate blood supply. This physiologic abnormality
may be invisible on standard clinically-acquired brain scans. In this study,
we examined ASL data in 5 left-hemisphere stroke patients within 5 weeks
of stroke, and again > 6 months after stroke. Following our previous work
on lesion-deficit mapping in these and other patients (N=14), we expected
recovery of phonological processing to be associated with increased perfusion within our previously identified phonology regions: anterior superior

164

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
temporal (aSTG), inferior occipitotemporal and parietal regions. In each
session, patients completed reading assessments and underwent structural MRI at 3T. We examined individual recovery trajectory across 3 cognitive domains of reading: semantics, orthography, and phonology; and
computed mean perfusion differences within our lesion-deficit mask. All
patients improved in phonological processing at follow up. All, but one,
also showed increased perfusion within a mask spanning all 3 phonology
areas. In the one patient without perfusion changes, the lesion affected
large portions of aSTG. However, this patient improved most in phonology
(27% improvement), suggesting that mechanisms other than re-perfusion
may be responsible for this recovery. Mean acute perfusion of the aSTG
was positively correlated with acute accuracy on phonology tests and negatively correlated with phonological recovery (Spearman rho = .98; p<.01),
suggesting that those with high acute perfusion in aSTG showed fewer
deficits and lower margin of recovery.

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
D73
MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBES REVISITED: STRUCTURAL CORRELATES OF LEXICAL ABILITIES IN HEALTHY AGING JungMoon

Hyun1, Susan De Santi2,3, James Babb2, Loraine Obler1; 1The Graduate Center of
the City University of New York, 2New York University School of Medicine, 3Piramal Imaging — There is controversy over brain patterns associated with

cognitive performance; are these associations task-specific or task-general
in older adults? The present study investigated the relationship between
regional brain volumes and lexical performance abilities on four lexical
tasks; the modified Boston Naming Test (BNT), two verbal fluency tests
(Semantic and Phonemic Fluency), and the WAIS vocabulary Test. Cognitively normal older adults (N=137, average age at the first visit =71.31
± 5.27) underwent structural MRI (T1 weighted scans) and performed
lexical tasks at least twice over 2-7 years. Regional brain volumes were
extracted via FreeSurfer and mixed effects modelling was employed to
examine the relationship between lexical performance and brain volumes.
Results revealed the presence of both general and specific brain associations. Regional volumes in the medial temporal lobes (MTL) were related
to performance on all four lexical tasks while other brain region volumes
showed distinctive associations with individual tasks. Frontal pole volume
was related to BNT performance; the volumes of temporal pole, supramarginal gyrus, and superior frontal lobe were related to WAIS vocabulary
Test scores; the volumes of dorsolateral prefrontal and precuneus were
related to Semantic Fluency score; the volumes of the fusiform gyrus, inferior frontal and superior parietal lobes were related to Phonemic Fluency
score. We argue that beyond the classic language areas seen in patients with
aphasia and other language disorders, the MTL should be considered an
important lexical network region for people undergoing a gradual aging
process without frank brain damage.

D74
ISOLATING VISUAL, ORTHOGRAPHIC, AND SEMANTIC PRE-ACTIVATION DURING LEXICAL PROCESSING Trevor Brothers1,2, Tamara Y.

Swaab1,2, Matthew J. Traxler1,2; 1Univeristy of California, Davis, 2Center for Mind
and Brain, UCD — During language comprehension, the predictability of a

particular word in context is an important predictor of both online processing difficulty and N400 amplitude. Recent evidence suggests that contextual anticipation can influence multiple stages of word processing via the
pre-activation of distinct lexical features. In the current study, we used the
event-related potential (ERP) recording in combination with the “prediction paradigm” (Brothers, Swaab & Traxler, 2015) to identify which stages
of word processing are influenced by successful lexical pre-activation.
Participants were presented with associated word pairs (above – BELOW,
miner – COAL) with an average forward association strength of 0.5. Participants were asked to actively predict each upcoming target word, and to
report the accuracy of their prediction after a delay. We assessed the magnitude of three lexical ERP effects (word length, orthographic neighborhood
size, and concreteness) separately for correctly predicted and unpredicted
target words. Consistent with previous findings, correctly predicted target
words showed reductions in the size of the concreteness effect, suggesting
pre-activation at the level of semantic features. We also observed significant

2016 Annual Meeting	
reductions in the size of the orthographic neighborhood effect for successfully predicted words, suggesting reduced activation of lexical competitors.
Finally, while word length resulted in larger P1 amplitudes (80-140ms), this
effect was only present for unpredicted words but not correctly predicted
targets. These findings suggest that specific lexical predictions have clear
processing consequences during lexical access, even at the level of early
visual processing.

D75
AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF THE EFFECTS OF ORTHOGRAPHY-BASED AND PHONOLOGY-BASED TYPING METHODS ON
ORTHOGRAPHIC PROCESSING OF CHINESE CHARACTERS

Hsiang-Yu Chen1, Erik Chang1,2, Denise Wu1,2; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University, Taiwan, 2Research Center for Mind, Brain,
& Learning, National Chengchi University, Taiwan — Previous literature has

shown that typed spelling involved similar neural networks with reading
and writing English words (Purcell, Napoliello, & Eden, 2011), which might
not be surprising as all these activities access representations of alphabet
sequences. However, whether common neural substrates would underpin
typed spelling via an orthography-based (Cang-Jie) and a phonology-based
(Zhu-Yin) typing method is an open question. Because Cang-Jie typists
have extensive experience in accessing (output) orthographic knowledge
to convert it to decomposed character parts for typing, we hypothesized
that orthographic representations cast extraordinary impact when they
write Chinese characters. On the other hand, because Zhu-Yin typists have
extensive experience in accessing (output) phonological knowledge to map
it to phonetic symbols for typing, we hypothesized that phonological representations and/or orthography-to-phonology conversion strongly influence their Chinese writing. To investigate these hypotheses, we contrasted
fMRI recording of proficient Cang-Jie and Zhu-Yin typists when they performed a written picture naming task and a line drawing task. The results
identified a typical neural network from the temporoparietal to frontal
regions supporting writing behaviors in both groups. Critically, Cang-Jie
typists demonstrated higher activations on the anterior part of right middle
frontal gyrus (BA 10) than Zhu-Yin typists, while Zhu-Yin typists demonstrated higher activations on bilateral subcortical regions than Cang-Jie
typists. These findings suggest that long-term experiences of retrieving
orthographic knowledge in Cang-Jie typists is related to the reliance of
memory-based processes in writing, which evidenced the specific effects of
cultural artifacts on cognition.

D76
WORD CO-OCCURRENCE STATISTICS AND CONCEPTUAL TAXONOMIES PREDICT DISSOCIABLE FMRI INFORMATION PATTERNS
IN THE BRAIN SEMANTIC SYSTEMS. Francesca Carota1, Hamed Nili2,
Friedemann Pulvermüller3, Nikolaus Kriegeskorte1; 1MRC - Cognition and Brain
Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, 2Experimental Psychology Department, University
of Oxford, UK, 3Freie Universität, Berlin, Germany — Language comprehension

relies on distributed brain systems, supporting both general and category-specific lexical semantic processes. However, the nature of the underlying
lexical semantic representations is still poorly understood. Here we investigated how conceptual (e.g. peach and plum) and context-based associative
relationships (e.g. peach and knife or peach and to peel) between single
words of different semantic types affect the representational content of the
semantic systems. Using representational similarity analysis (RSA), we performed whole-brain searchlights to relate multivariate fMRI patterns elicited by single words to computational linguistic models of both conceptual
taxonomies of different types of actions and objects (Framenet, Wordnet),
and word co-occurrence distributions in context (LSA, COALS). Co-occurrence statistics for all words (irrespective of their semantic type) predicted
similarity fMRI patterns in general semantic binding hubs, including pars
orbitalis (BA 47) of inferior frontal gyrus bilaterally, left anterior temporal
cortex, bilateral angular gyrus, and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. On the
other hand, conceptual and co-occurrence properties specific to action and
object words were reflected, to different degrees, by dissociable similarity
patterns in premotor cortex, middle temporal gyrus, postcentral, parietal
and temporo-occipital regions. Within the sub-set of object-related words,
the representations of tool and food words were better explained, respectively, by co-occurrence and category-specific information in separate fron-

Poster Session D
to-temporal and premotor regions. Extending current distributed accounts,
these results suggest that the mapping of different word types in language,
sensorimotor and visual regions arises from representational gradients of
qualitatively different, fine-grained semantic information about individual
words and their conceptual and contextual relationships.

D77
THE ROLE OF ORTHOGRAPHIC BIAS INFORMATION DURING
BILINGUAL WORD RECOGNITION Liv J. Hoversten1, Trevor Brothers1,
Tamara Y. Swaab1, Matthew J. Traxler1; 1University of California- Davis — To func-

tion in a single target language, bilinguals need to attend to the target language while ignoring or inhibiting potentially active nontarget language
representations. Previous research has shown that language membership
information is available early enough during lexico-semantic processing
that it can serve to restrict the depth of processing in a nontarget language
(Hoversten, Brothers, Swaab, & Traxler, 2015). It is unclear, however, how
language membership information accumulates upon stimulus presentation. The present experiment aimed to investigate the role of sublexical
form information in language membership identification. Bilinguals viewed
Spanish and English words and pseudowords with an orthographic bias
toward one language or the other during electroencephalogram recording.
The probability of encountering words in each language was manipulated
in an oddball paradigm in which participants only responded to real words
in the rare language category. In half of the experiment, words had an
orthographic bias consistent with language membership (Bias blocks), and
in the other half of the experiment, words were not orthographically biased
(Non-Bias blocks). Words in the rare language category elicited a typical
oddball P3 in both Bias and Non-Bias blocks. Pseudowords resembling the
rare language category also elicited a P3 in the Bias blocks only. Finally, lateralized readiness potentials for words in the rare language category began
significantly earlier in Bias than Non-Bias blocks. These results suggest that
the bilingual brain is sensitive to orthographic bias information even in the
absence of lexical information and that orthographic bias aids in language
membership identification during bilingual word recognition.

D78
INVESTIGATING THE ROLE OF HIGH AND LOW SPATIAL FREQUENCIES IN WRITTEN WORD RECOGNITION: EVIDENCE FROM ERP
MASKED PRIMING Kurt Winsler1, Jonathan Grainger2, Ben Eaton1, Katherine

Midgley1, Phillip Holcomb1; 1San Diego State University, 2CNRS and University of
Aix-Marseille — Previous studies have implicated different streams of spatial

frequency information during the processing of complex visual stimuli. A
number of these studies have suggested that low spatial frequencies play
an important role in some aspect of written language comprehension (e.g.,
the global shape of the word). This study examined the role of different
spatial frequencies in visual word recognition using ERP masked priming.
EEG was recorded from 32 scalp sites in 28 English-speaking adults in a
go/no-go semantic categorization task. Stimuli were white characters on a
neutral grey background. Targets were unfiltered uppercase 5 letter words
preceded by a 300 ms unfiltered forward-mask (#######) and a 50ms lowercase prime. Primes were either the same word (repeated) or a different
word (un-repeated) than the subsequent target and either contained only
high (> 7.0 Hz/letter), only low (< 1.7 Hz/letter), or full spatial frequency
information. In the full spatial frequency condition, typical ERP masked
priming effects were found with an attenuated N/P150 (feature), N250
(sub-lexical) and N400 (lexical-semantic) for repeated compared to un-repeated primes. For high spatial frequency primes there was a clear posterior N250 effect, but no evidence of the earlier N/P150 or later N400. Low
spatial frequency primes did not produce any of the classic ERP priming
effects. This pattern supports the view that while the low spatial frequency
content of a word is not sufficient on its own to modulate priming, when
combined with higher spatial frequencies they do make an important contribution to visual word recognition.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

165

Poster Session D	

LANGUAGE: Other
D79
BRAIN ACTIVATIONS OF CATEGORICAL TONE PERCEPTION:
WITHIN-CATEGORY AND ACROSS-CATEGORY VARIATIONS HueiMei Liu1, Ming-Hsien Tsai1, WeiChin Hsu2, Feng-Ming Tsao3; 1Department of
Special Education, National Taiwan Normal University, 2Applied Science and
Technology, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, 3Department
of Psychology, National Taiwan University — Categorical perception allows us

to efficiently categorize the acoustic continuum into a number of limited
phonetic categories. For speakers of tonal languages, lexical tone perception is critical to language processing. Although the neural representation
of speech sounds is categorically and mainly organized in the superior
temporal gyrus (STG), the neural mechanism of categorical perception of
lexical tones has not been well explored. The purpose of this study was
to examine the brain activations of categorical perception of lexical tones
in Mandarin-speaking adults using a block design fMRI protocol. Twenty
neurologically healthy, college students participated in the experiment. The
stimuli were a nine-point synthesized tone continuum ranging from Mandarin /ba2/-/ba4/ syllables (tone 2 and 4). In the behavioral experiments,
the identification and discrimination tasks were conducted to locate the
lexical tone category boundaries. A pivotal stimulus, a within-category and
an across-category stimulus with equal acoustic distances were selected.
In the fMRI experiment, the across-category, within-category and silence
block were contrasted. The fMRI results revealed that left superior temporal gyrus (STG) was activated in both cross-category and within-category
tone discrimination. In addition, left Middle Frontal Gyrus and Inferior
Frontal Gyrus were activated during the across-category tone discrimination. The right Anterior Cingulate Caudate, right Fusiform Gyrus, and
the right STG were activated during the within-category discrimination.
The different brain activations shown for across-category and within-category perception suggest that the mechanisms of ‘‘top-down’’ phonological
representations, the ‘‘bottom-up’’ acoustic analysis, and the cognitive processes (ie., attention, executive functions) are involved in the categorical
tone perception.

D80
LATERALIZATION OF THE N170 FOR WORD AND FACE PROCESSING IN DEAF SIGNERS Zed Sevcikova Sehyr1, Karen Emmorey1, Katherine
Midgley1, Phillip Holcomb1; 1San Diego State University — Left-lateralization for

words develops before right-lateralization for faces, and hemispheric specialization for faces may be contingent upon prior lateralization for words
(Dundas, Plaut & Behrmann, 2014). We examined the relationship between
word and face processing for deaf native users of American Sign Language
who have distinct developmental experiences with both words and faces
(e.g., the face conveys linguistic information). We investigated whether
hemispheric organization of word and face recognition (indexed by lateralization of the N170) is uniquely shaped by sign language experience. Hearing non-signers and deaf signers made same-different judgments to pairs
of words or faces (192 trials each), where the first stimulus was presented
centrally and the second was presented to either the left (LH) or right hemisphere (RH). EEG was recorded to the centrally presented stimulus and
referenced to the average of all 32 electrode sites. We observed a similar
pattern of N170 laterality for deaf and hearing participants, but with a different scalp distribution. For both groups, the N170 to words was larger
at LH occipital sites, but only hearing participants also showed a larger
N170 at LH temporal sites. For faces, deaf signers showed a larger N170
response at RH temporal sites, with a weaker amplitude difference at occipital sites. Hearing participants showed a similar RH lateralized response
over both temporal and occipital sites. Thus, lateralization for words and
faces appears similar for deaf and hearing individuals, but differences in
scalp distribution may reflect unique organization of visual pathways in
the occipitotemporal cortex for deaf signers.

2016 Annual Meeting

D81
NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF WORD LEARNING IN ADULTS: A
META-ANALYSIS OF FMRI STUDIES Oliver Morgan1, Jie Yang1,2; 1Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia, 2ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and
its Disorders, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia — How people learn

words is a fundamental issue in language acquisition and has been increasingly studied via functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Although
a large body of research has investigated the related neural networks, these
studies are varied in stimuli input and paradigms, and thus the conclusion is still unclear. To address this issue, we conducted an activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis on 13 fMRI studies while considering the
impacts of input modality (auditory, visual, or visual auditory) and paradigm (word in isolation or in context). The results of auditory training
showed significant effects in the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and right
superior temporal gyrus (STG), areas involved in semantic and phonological processing. For visual training, significant effects were found in the left
posterior STG close to the occipital and parietal cortices, an area thought
be involved in processing visual linguistic information. For visual-auditory
training, significant effects were found in the right anterior cingulate gyrus
and left precuneus, areas thought to process both word phonology and
structural information. When words were learnt in isolation, significant
effects were found in the left dorsal IFG and left precentral gyrus. When
words were learnt in context, a strong effect was found in the left posterior
middle temporal gyrus, an area thought to play an important role in lexical
semantic processing. To conclude, the meta-analysis results demonstrate
modality-specific effects across different studies, and suggest the role of
sentential context in effective word learning.

D82
SIMILAR BRAIN RESPONSES TO LIP-READ, READ, AND LISTENED NARRATIVE SPEECH Jussi Alho1, Satu Saalasti1, Juha Lahnakoski2,

Mareike Bacha-Trams1, Uri Hasson3, Iiro Jääskeläinen1, Mikko Sams1; 1Aalto
University, 2Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, 3Princeton University — Previous

brain imaging studies have demonstrated that viewing silent visual speech
(lip-reading) activates brain areas associated with both auditory speech
perception as well as reading. However, previous studies have predominantly used simple linguistic units as stimuli that do not engage all the
processes involved in real-life language processing. The current study took
advantage of recent advances in neuroimaging data analysis to investigate
the extent to which lip-reading a narrative engages similar neural processes
as listening or reading the same narrative. Participants (N=29), with a wide
variation in lip-reading ability, had their brain activity measured with 3-T
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while they 1) listened to an
8-min spoken narrative, 2) read a time-locked transcript of the narrative,
3) lip-read the narrative from a silent video showing the speaker’s face.
The data were analyzed by voxel-wise comparison of the blood-oxygenation-level-dependent (BOLD) signal time courses elicited by the lip-read,
read, and listened narratives. This allowed us to identify the brain areas
responding with similar temporal response profiles to different stimulation
types. All stimuli elicited similar responses in the middle temporal gyrus,
inferior frontal gyrus, premotor cortex, precuneus, and cerebellum. Furthermore, individual lip-reading ability correlated with the response similarity
between lip-reading and listening in the left middle and anterior superior
temporal gyrus. Our novel results demonstrate that many linguistic brain
areas do not differentiate whether speech narrative is lip-read, read, or listened. In addition, a characteristic feature of skilled lip-reading appears to
be the efficient use of peri-auditory language processing mechanisms.

D83
AUDITORY PERCEPTION AND EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS IN SIMULTANEOUS INTERPRETERS: RE-EXAMINING THE MUSIC-LANGUAGE RELATIONSHIP Vanessa Tsz Man Chan1,2, Claude Alain1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Hospital — Music and

language have been proposed to share processing resources in the brain; an
extension of this proposition is that expertise in one of these two skills may
enhance processing of the other. Although many studies have examined
the effect of musicianship on linguistic processing, comparatively fewer
studies have examined this relationship from the perspective of linguistic
expertise, and what constitutes a suitable linguistic expert to compare to

166

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting	
musicianship is up for debate. This study aimed to use an experience-dependent linguistic expert – simultaneous interpreters (SIs) – to address
whether linguistic expertise enhances auditory processing outside of the
linguistic domain, particularly in measures where musical expertise has
been shown to improve performance. SIs and non-interpreter controls were
compared on several measures, spanning fine temporal and spectral discrimination, speech-in-noise perception, memory for pitch, visual working
memory and cognitive flexibility. Tasks were selected to match those which
musicians have been shown to perform better in compared to non-musicians, to further address whether this form of linguistic expertise may tap
into the same set of cognitive resources as musicianship. No significant differences were found between SI and two control groups (non-SI bilinguals
and English-speaking monolinguals) on any of the tested measures except
in the speech-in-noise task. The current findings suggest a limitation in the
extent of transferability in this form of linguistic expertise, as well as the
bidirectionality of transfer between language and music.

D84
L3 ITALIAN AND L2 SPANISH TRANSFER AFFECTS GRAMMATICAL GENDER ACQUISITION: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL
STUDY Margarita Zeitlin1, Judith L McLaughlin1, Jerimiah Rice1, Lee Osterhout1;
1

University of Washington — Research has shown that L2/L3 learners progress from a “lexical” stage (in which grammatical anomalies elicit N400
effects) to a “grammaticalized” stage (in which the same anomalies elicit
P600 effects). The transition from one stage to the next is quantified by the
response dominance index (RDI; Tanner et al., 2013), with larger values
reflecting greater P600 dominance. We separately recorded ERP responses
to Italian and Spanish grammatical gender anomalies in novice, intermediate, and advanced L1 English L3 Italian learners (most had previously studied L2 Spanish). Sentences contained nouns whose grammatical gender was
either orthographically transparent (il occhio/el ojo) or opaque (la salute/
la salud), and either congruent or incongruent across Italian and Spanish.
Stimuli included well-formed sentences and sentences with article-noun
gender agreement violations (*la occhio/*la ojo; *il salute/*el salud). Learners were also given tests of Italian and Spanish proficiency. In the Italian
sentence-reading task, greater Italian proficiency was correlated with larger
RDI values for the anomalous opaque and incongruent stimuli, but only for
learners with L2 Spanish. Gender agreement anomalies in Italian sentences
elicited a P600 in advanced Italian learners in the transparent condition,
but not in novice and intermediate learners. Anomalies in the transparent
condition in Spanish sentences elicited a P600 in advanced Italian learners
with prior Spanish instruction, and an N400 effect in Italian learners who
had not studied Spanish. Our results show that L2-L3 typological similarity
enhances L3 acquisition and L2 retention, and that aspects of an L3 can
transfer to an unstudied but typologically related language.

D85
COMPARING STATISTICAL LEARNING OF SYLLABLES AND PURE
TONES USING NIRS Sandrine Girard1, Ted Huppert2, Jeff Barker2, Erik
Thiessen1; 1Carnegie Mellon University, 2University of Pittsburgh — Successful

language acquisition requires learners to segment units embedded within
larger structures; for example, words within phrases. Infants and adults
employ a learning mechanism, statistical learning (SL), that facilitates the
segmentation process by tracking the statistical regularities that define the
linguistic input (e.g., syllables within a word are more likely to co-occur
than syllables across word boundaries). While behavioral studies indicate
that learners are sensitive to statistical structure, the neural correlates of
SL remain undefined. We utilized near-infrared spectroscopy to measure
changes in blood oxygenation in Broca’s area and its right hemisphere
counterpart while undergraduates completed a tone and syllable SL task.
Two versions of each task were created to assess the effect of pre-training.
In the pre-training version, participants were familiarized with the words
from an artificial language before being presented with 30-second blocks
of continuous sound (alternating between statistically structured and
unstructured stimuli) interspersed with 30 seconds of silence. In the version
without pre-training, participants experienced the same stimuli and procedure, except without pre-familiarization with the words in the language.
We predicted an increase in blood oxygenation for structured syllables and
tones in the left hemisphere. As predicted, participants showed increased
blood oxygenation when listening to blocks of structured syllables. Surpris-

Poster Session D
ingly, participants showed decreased blood oxygenation during blocks of
unstructured tones, rather than an increase during structured input. These
results suggest that activation in Broca’s area that is associated with recognition is sensitive to statistical structure, and that this sensitivity manifests
differently for linguistic and non-linguistic stimuli.

D86
UNITS FIRST OR TENS FIRST: DOES LANGUAGE MATTER WHEN
PROCESSING VISUALLY PRESENTED TWO-DIGIT NUMBERS?

Alexandre Poncin1, Amandine Van Rinsveld1, Christine Schiltz1; 1Université du
Luxembourg — The German number word system inverts units and tens com-

pared to the Arabic notation. This is not the case in French, which is more
transparent with respect to the Arabic number code. The linguistic structure of number words can facilitate or impede numerical development and
performances in number transcoding tasks. We used an original transcoding paradigm with French-speaking (N=28) and German-speaking (N=19)
4th grade children who listened to two-digit numbers and had to identify
the heard number amongst four visually presented Arabic numbers. The
novelty of our paradigm consisted in manipulating the order of appearance
of the units and tens of the Arabic numbers, leading to three conditions:
Units-first, Tens-first and Simultaneous appearance. While German-speakers were globally slower than French-speakers, (F(1,45)=3.95; p=.053) we
also observed an interaction between language group and transcoding condition, (F(2,90)=13.26; p<.001) as the largest group difference was observed
for the Tens-first condition, (t(45)=-3.729; p=.00). Moreover, when the order
of appearance was congruent with the number word system, (i.e. Units-first
in German and Tens-first in French) transcoding was faster in both groups.
For German-speaking children both Units-first and Tens-first conditions
were faster than the Simultaneous condition, while for the French-speaking
children the Tens-first condition was faster than both other conditions. In
other words, our results suggest that children are influenced by the verbal
structure of numbers of their respective language when processing visually
presented Arabic numbers. Taken together, they provide new insights on
how language structure qualitatively impacts basic numerical processing
in children.

D87
READING AN ARTIFICIAL ORTHOGRAPHY RESULTS IN LEFT
VISUAL WORD FORM AREA ACTIVATION Lea Martin1,2, Corrine

Durisko1,3, Michelle Moore4, Julie Fiez1,2,3; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2Center for
the Neural Basis of Cognition, Pittsburgh, PA, 3Learning Research and Development Center, Pittsburgh, PA, 4West Virginia University — The visual word form

area (VWFA) is a left-lateralized region in visual association cortex. It
responds preferentially to orthographic as compared to non-orthographic
stimuli (Cohen & Dehaene, 2004). There is some debate as to whether the
VWFA responds to the perceptual features of written language (visuo-spatial account) or if it is positioned to connect visual input with aspects of
spoken language (linguistic bridge account). The current study pitted
these accounts against each other, by training subjects to read an artificial
“HouseFont” alphabet. In HouseFont, house images serve as letters that
represent spoken English, with each image mapped to a specific phoneme.
Twelve participants underwent a two-week training protocol to establish
basic HouseFont reading proficiency. Functional neuroimaging data were
collected while subjects viewed printed HouseFont words and control stimuli. The primary analyses focused on three regions identified by a localizer
protocol prior to HouseFont training: the VWFA and the left and right
parahippocampal place area (PPA). Significant pre- versus post-training
increases in the response to HouseFont was observed in the VWFA, while
no effect of training was observed in the left and right PPA. These results
are consistent with behavioral and neuroimaging findings from our previous work which focused on the role of the VWFA in reading an artificial,
alphabetic orthography comprised of faces, “FaceFont” (Moore, et al, 2014).
Together, the body of findings supports the linguistic bridge account of
VWFA specialization while also suggesting that the VWFA is not restricted
to using traditional orthographic forms as graphemes.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

167

Poster Session D	

D88
SENSITIVITY TO REGULARITY OF COMBINATORIAL VISUAL STIMULI CORRELATES WITH CHINESE CHARACTER RECOGNITION
Anya Yu1, Henry Brice2, Ram Frost2,3,4, Denise H. Wu1; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University, Taiwan, 2Department of Psychology, The
Hebrew University, Israel, 3Haskins Laboratory, Yale University, USA, 4Basque
Center on Cognition, Brain, and Language, Spain — Recent research has shown

that the abilities of statistical learning in the visual modality (VSL) have
consistently correlated with literacy acquisition of alphabetic (Hebrew)
and non-alphabetic (Chinese) languages alike. However, whether there
are different aspects of VSL and whether these aspects contribute to literacy acquisition equally remain to be clarified. To explore these issues,
the sensitivities to transitional probability in the spatial layout, sequential
ordering, and feature combination of visual stimuli in Taiwan college students, as well as their IQ, working memory, and performance of lexical
decision on Chinese characters, were measured. Because the majority of
modern Chinese characters are phonograms, which are typically composed
of a semantic and a phonetic radical on the left and right side of a character,
respectively, we hypothesized that the VSL of combinatorial regularities
(CVSL) would exhibit a stronger correlation with the literacy index than
the VSL of spatial and sequential VSL. Consistent with this hypothesis, the
results demonstrated that the reaction times of lexical decision correlated
with CVSL but not with sequential or spatial VSL. In addition, sequential
VSL correlated with IQ as measured in the block design task, while spatial
VSL correlated with working memory as measured in forward digit span,
suggesting that VSL encompasses sensitivity to different kinds of regularity. Based on these results, brain activations in the regions sensitive to radical processing in Chinese character recognition, such as the left inferior
parietal cortex for orthography-phonology conversion, are predicted to
correlate with the ability of CVSL.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
D89
PRIORITIZATION BENEFITS ON ADOLESCENTS’ MEMORY FOR
PROSE PASSAGES ARE ENHANCED OVER TIME AND SLEEP Kelly
Bennion1, June Lo2, Michael Chee2; 1Boston College, 2Duke-National University of Singapore Graduate Medical School — As chronic sleep restriction is

a widespread problem among adolescents, the present study investigated
the effects of a one-week sleep restriction (SR) versus control period on
the consolidation of long-term memory for prose passages. We also determined whether the benefit of prioritization on memory is modulated by
adequate sleep occurring during consolidation. Fifty-six healthy adolescents (25 male, ages 15-19) were instructed to remember a prose passage in
which half of the content was highlighted (prioritized), and were told they
would receive an additional bonus for remembering highlighted content.
Following an initial free recall test, participants underwent a 7-night period
in which they received either a 5-hour (SR) or 9-hour (control) nightly sleep
opportunity, monitored by polysomnography on selected nights. Free
recall was tested at the end of the sleep manipulation period (one week
after encoding), and again six weeks after encoding. Recall of highlighted
content was superior to that of non-highlighted content at all three time
points (initial, one week, six weeks). This beneficial effect of prioritization
on memory was stronger one week relative to a few minutes after encoding
for the control, but not SR group. N3 was similar in the control and SR
groups. Overall, results show that the benefits of prioritization on memory
are enhanced over time, requiring time and sleep to fully unfold. Partial
sleep deprivation may attenuate such benefits, but this may be offset by
preservation of stage N3 sleep -- suggesting that adolescents are relatively
resilient to cognitive consequences of sleep restriction on consolidation.

D90
PLACE MEMORY SUB-REGIONS IN THE HUMAN HIPPOCAMPUS

Brittany M. Jeye1, Jessica M. Karanian1, Scott D. Slotnick1; 1Boston College
— Research in animals indicates that the hippocampus is associated with
specific spatial processing, as illustrated by place cells. A separate line of
research in humans indicates that the hippocampus is associated with general context processing. In the present fMRI study, we determined whether

168

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
the human hippocampus was associated with specific spatial processing
by evaluating whether distinct sub-regions were differentially associated
with spatial memory for items presented in different quadrants of the
visual field. During encoding, participants maintained fixation and viewed
abstract shapes presented in the upper-right quadrant, the lower-right
quadrant, the upper-left quadrant, or the lower-left quadrant. During
retrieval, old shapes were presented at fixation and participants classified
each shape as previously in the “upper-right”, “lower-right”, “upper-left”,
or “lower-left”. Data were acquired at 3T with a 32 channel head coil, and
a random-effect general linear model was conducted. Preliminary analyses
revealed that accurate spatial memory for shapes in each quadrant of the
visual field was associated with distinct hippocampal sub-regions (identified by contrasting hits > misses for each quadrant). For instance, accurate
spatial memory for shapes in the upper-right quadrant was associated with
activity in hippocampal sub-regions that were distinct from the hippocampal sub-regions associated with accurate spatial memory for shapes in the
lower-right, upper-left, and lower-left quadrants. The present results indicate that the human hippocampus consists of sub-regions spanning many
millimeters that are associated with memory for specific places in the visual
field. These findings suggest that the hippocampus in humans, like animals, is associated with specific spatial processing.

D91
NEUROMODULATION OF UNINTENTIONAL FORGETTING: A TDCS
STUDY Davide Francesco Stramaccia1, Barbara Penolazzi2, Federica L’Abbate1,
Giovanni Galfano1; 1University of Padua (Italy), 2University of Trieste (Italy) —

Background. Unintentional forgetting in episodic memory is mainly investigated with the retrieval-practice paradigm (RPP). Here, participants selectively retrieve part of previously studied material, which leads to forgetting
of that part of the remaining material which is strongly associated to the
former: a phenomenon known as retrieval-induced forgetting (RIF). The
present work aimed to extend a previous study, where transcranial Direct
Current Stimulation (tDCS) over the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
successfully modulated RIF, by testing the involvement of another cortical
area (the right Inferior Frontal Gyrus, rIFG), which has been shown to be
involved in episodic forgetting as revealed by neuroimaging studies. Methods. 72 healthy volunteers performed a standard RPP. During the practice
phase, participants received either sham, anodal, or cathodal tDCS (1.5mA,
20 min, 16cm2 electrodes, contralateral supraorbital reference) to the rIFG.
Results. Retrieval-induced facilitation of studied material was significant
in all groups. Conversely, although group differences (sham vs anodal
tDCS, sham vs cathodal tDCS) were not reliable overall, RIF was significant (p<0.05) in the sham tDCS group only. Conclusions. Although further
replication attempts are needed to corroborate between-group differences,
these findings seem to support previous studies, where tDCS significantly
affected inhibitory performance in the RPP, and help refining the overall
picture by addressing the role of rIFG in unintentional forgetting.

D92
ANATOMICAL CORRELATES OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN
SPATIAL ASPECTS OF AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY Melissa Hebscher1,2, Alita Fernandez1,2, Brian Levine1,2, Asaf Gilboa1,2; 1Rotman Research
Institute, Baycrest, 2University of Toronto — A distributed network of brain

regions supports autobiographical memory (AM). A small number of studies have suggested that the hippocampus reinstates allocentric (world-centred) spatial representations early during AM recall. These are then translated to egocentric (body-centred) representations for mental imagery and
re-experiencing by parietal regions. The current study investigated these
proposed processes and how they contribute to individual differences in
AM. We cued participants with personalized stimuli consisting of location
and non-location cues and assessed (1) the time taken to recall AMs, (2) the
first thing that came to mind when recalling the event, and (3) subjective
memory quality. The likelihood of selecting location (versus non-location)
as the first thing that came to mind was associated with faster recall and
decreased re-experiencing of memories. Hippocampal volume predicted
faster reaction times while superior parietal and precuneus volume/thickness predicted slower reactions times and a lower likelihood of selecting
location as the first thing that came to mind. Additionally, the tendency
to recall memories from an egocentric perspective was associated with
increased precuneus and superior parietal volume/thickness, while the

2016 Annual Meeting	
tendency to recall memories allocentrically was associated with increased
parrahippocampal thickness. These findings suggest that allocentric spatial information plays an early role in memory retrieval, likely supported
by the hippocampus and parrahippocampus. Conversely, parietal regions
may be later involved in slower, egocentric-focused recall promoting re-experiencing of memories. Individual differences in these regions may lead to
variability in the subjective experience of remembering.

D93
MODULATION OF MNEMONIC PROCESSING BASED ON TASK
RELEVANCE Lynn Lohnas1, Katherine Duncan2, Thomas Thesen1, Orrin Devinsky1, Lila Davachi1; 1New York University, 2University of Toronto — Encoding and

retrieval of episodic memories depend not only on the information being
processed, but also on how that information relates to previously formed
memories and task demands. In a continuous recognition paradigm,
memory processing requires switching between encoding novel representations and retrieving prior representations. We examined the neural
correlates of such switches in processing using a continuous recognition
paradigm, while recording electrocorticography (ECoG) activity (n=5).
Specifically, participants performed two versions of the paradigm in a
blocked design. In the ‘fine-grained’ task, participants indicated whether
they had seen this exact image before (‘old’), whether they had seen a similar but not identical version of this image (‘similar’) or whether the item
was entirely new (‘new’). In the ‘coarse-grained’ task, participants only
distinguished between ‘old’ and ‘new’ items; a ‘similar’ item was considered ‘old’ inasmuch as it shared a majority of features with a previously
presented item. We first examined local -frequency activity (HFA, 45-115)
in the hippocampus, a region proposed to switch dynamically between
encoding and retrieval. In the fine-grained task, hippocampal HFA distinguished between correct responses across stimulus types as well as successful vs. unsuccessful memory for similar items. Surprisingly, hippocampal
HFA didn’t exhibit significant differences between stimulus or response
types in the coarse-grained task. HFA in upstream lateral ventral temporal
cortex and downstream dorsolateral prefrontal cortex exhibited the same
differences between stimulus types irrespective of task demands, underscoring the role of the hippocampus in filtering information relevant to
memory processing.

D94
SPATIAL RECONSTRUCTION AND PATTERN SEPARATION
TASKS ARE DIFFERENTIALLY SENSITIVE TO THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN HEALTH BEHAVIORS AND HIPPOCAMPAL FUNCTION
Kelsey M. Hassevoort1, Sarah E. Zola1, Charles H. Hillman1, Neal J. Cohen1; 1The
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Researchers have taken a number

of different approaches in their exploration of hippocampal function. One
approach probes the memory representations that the hippocampus supports. Another approach focuses on the hippocampus’s role in the processes
of pattern separation and pattern completion. Each of these approaches to
understanding hippocampal function utilizes a distinct set of specialized
tasks, and both of these task sets have been shown to be sensitive to changes
in hippocampal function with age and disease status. But are the tasks utilized in these two approaches tapping into the same aspects of hippocampal function? The current study addressed this issue by employing sensitive tasks from both approaches in preadolescent children (N=45; mean age
= 9.0 years) who underwent aerobic fitness and nutritional assessments as
part of a larger randomized controlled trial. Participants completed both
a relational memory task involving spatial reconstruction (Watson et al.,
2013) and a pattern separation task (the MST or BPS-O task, Stark et al.,
2013). Pattern separation performance was significantly related to spatial
reconstruction performance, with pattern separation performance negatively associated with the rate of “swap errors”, a type of relational memory
error in spatial reconstruction (Watson et al., 2013). But only spatial reconstruction performance, and not pattern separation, was significantly associated with aerobic fitness. These results suggest that, while pattern separation and spatial reconstruction tasks both tap into hippocampal function,
relational memory, at least as assessed via spatial reconstruction, may be
particularly sensitive to lifestyle factors known to affect the hippocampus.

Poster Session D

D95
NEURAL CORRELATES OF MENTAL AND PHYSICAL CONTEXT
REINSTATEMENT SUPPORTING EPISODIC MEMORY RETRIEVAL
Inês Bramão1, Anna Karlsson1, Mikael Johansson1; 1Lund University, Sweden
— Human episodic memory is highly dependent on spatiotemporal con-

text. This is corroborated by previous work showing superior memory
performance when encoding and retrieval conditions overlap. In the present study, we investigated if mental reinstatement of an encoding context
during retrieval yields a similar beneficial effect on episodic memory accessibility. We designed a paradigm where the overlap between encoding and
retrieval context and the nature of context reinstatement (physical versus
mental) were manipulated in a cued-recall task. During encoding, participants were asked to memorize word-pairs (cue – target) superimposed
on visual background scenes. At retrieval, the cue word was presented
in either an overlapping or a non-overlapping background context and
participants were asked to retrieve the associated target word. Retrieval
was preceded either by the active mental reinstatement of the context or
by its visual presentation (physical context reinstatement). Behavioral data
show that memory performance indeed improved when the encoding and
retrieval context overlapped, and, notably, in a comparable way for mental
and physical context reinstatements. The electrophysiological data, however, reveal different ERP correlates for the mental and physical reinstatement of the context, where mental reinstatement was characterized by later
and more sustained ERP effects. Taken together, the present results suggest
that the access to episodic memories can be facilitated also by mentally reinstating the encoding context, and furthermore that such benefits may be
supported by processes differently engaged than when the encoding context is physically re-presented at the time of retrieval.

D96
MNEMONIC DISCRIMINATION OF OBJECT AND SPATIAL INFORMATION AS EARLY INDICES OF AGE-RELATED NEUROCOGNITIVE
DECLINE Zachariah Reagh1, Huy Ho1, Jessica Noche1, Amanda Chun1, Steph-

anie Leal1,2, Elizabeth Murray1, Michael Yassa1; 1Department of Neurobiology
and Behavior; UC Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders;
Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory; University of California,
Irvine, 2Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Johns Hopkins University — Cross-species research has repeatedly shown episodic memory loss

with aging. Episodic memory is reliant upon the medial temporal lobes
(MTL), and different subregions of the MTL are thought to perform distinct
but complementary functions. In addition to the hippocampus and its subfields, perirhinal and lateral entorhinal cortices (PRC/LEC) are thought to
support memory for objects/items, whereas parahippocampal and medial
entorhinal cortices (PHC/MEC) are thought to support memory for space/
contexts. Recent work in animal models suggests that PRC/LEC may be
selectively vulnerable to early age-related neuropathology. We designed a
task taxing mnemonic discrimination (MD) of object and spatial information in samples of healthy young adults and aged adults with and without
subclinical memory impairment (“impaired” and “unimpaired” groups).
We find that all aged adults are outperformed by young adults on object
MD (including the relatively “unimpaired” aged group), whereas only
“impaired” aged adults struggle with both object and spatial MD. Importantly, unlike MD, simple recognition memory did not differ from young
adults in either aged group. These findings suggest greater and more general age-related decline of object memory compared to spatial memory, consistent with animal models showing selective vulnerability in PRC/LEC.
Furthermore, we find spatial memory deficits in the relatively “impaired”
aged group, suggesting dysfunction of PHC/MEC in these individuals. In
light of these behavioral data and related neuroimaging findings, we propose a framework of healthy vs. pathological aging trajectories based on the
functional and structural integrity of MTL cortices.

D97
EFFECT OF POSTERIOR PARIETAL STIMULATION ON EPISODIC
RETRIEVAL Marty Fiati1, Peter Bright1; 1Anglia Ruskin University — Increasingly findings from the memory literature have implicated the posterior
parietal cortex (PPC) in the memory operations which occur at the time
of episodic retrieval. Involvement of the PPC has been found to support

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

169

Poster Session D	
fine multi-sensory recollection of features within episodic memories, and
has also been suggested to reflect binding of such contextual information
within an episode. In the current study, participants performed a multisensory episodic retrieval task in which they first identified previously studied (Old) faces, and subsequently made context-based source judgements
denoting the spatial location (left/right), voice (male/female), and study
task (pleasantness rating/celebrity judgement) that they had associated
with each face at study. Recorded ERPs associated accuracy of source recollection with a late positivity (450ms-800ms) maximal over centro-parietal sites. In order to evaluate the causal relationship of this activity with
retrieval transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), was employed.
Participants underwent tDCS at the site of maximal peak activity in the left
PPC (P3) before performing the retrieval task. The performance following
excitatory anodal tDCS for 15 participants, and inhibitory cathodal tDCS
for 15 participants, was compared to sham tDCS . Excitatory stimulation
was not found to lead to greater retrieval of multimodal contexts than sham
stimulation overall. Inhibitory stimulation however was found to decrease
retrieval of multimodal episodic contexts compared to sham stimulation.
The findings indicate that the binding of different sensory features of an
episode at retrieval is decreased by reductions in activation of the PPC, and
this region therefore may mediate the richness of episodic retrieval.

D98
IN WHAT WAY DOES PREPARATORY CUEING SUPPORT SOURCE
MEMORY ENCODING? Jonathan Strunk1, Audrey Duarte1; 1Georgia Institute
of Technology — Previous evidence suggests that neural activity preceding

stimulus onset predicts subsequent episodic memory performance. It is
currently unclear, however, whether pre-stimulus preparation benefits episodic memory performance nor what kinds of processes underlie preparatory activity. In the current fMRI study, we manipulated the informative
value of a pre-stimulus cue during the encoding phase of a source memory
task. We assessed the effects of cue type on source memory accuracy and
related neural activity both prior to and after stimulus onset. During encoding, participants were asked to assess the likelihood of an object and face
(source) or object and scene (source) pairing. Prior to each encoding event,
informative cues indicated whether the object would be paired with a face
or a scene, while neutral cues provided no information. Reaction times
during encoding were faster for informative than for neutral cued trials,
and source memory accuracy was higher for informative than neutral cued
trials. fMRI results indicated that both category-specific (face/scene) activity in visual association cortex and category-general activity in the medial
temporal lobe underlie cue-locked preparatory activity. Stimulus-locked
activity in the hippocampus predicted subsequent source memory accuracy to a greater extent for informative trials compared to neutral trials,
across source category. These results suggest that preparatory cues may
facilitate source memory performance through “priming” of activity in
domain-specific visual cortex and domain-general MTL, as well as by
recruiting domain-general hippocampal binding operations during encoding.

D99
THE HUMAN DENTATE GYRUS PLAYS A NECESSARY ROLE IN
PATTERN SEPARATION Stevenson Baker1, Fuqiang Gao2, Paula Vieweg3,

Thomas Wolbers3,4, Sandra E. Black2,5,6, Asaf Gilboa6, R. Shayna Rosenbaum1,6;
1
York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2LC Campbell Cognitive Neurology
Research Unit, Canadian Partnership for Stroke Recovery (Sunnybrook site) and
Brain Science Research Program, Sunnybrook Research Institute, University of
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 3Aging and Cognition Research Group, German Center
for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, 4Center for Behavioral Brain Sciences, Magdeburg,
Germany, 5Department of Medicine (Neurology), University of Toronto, Ontario,
Canada, 6Rotman Research Institute and Canadian Partnership for Stroke Recovery (Baycrest site), Baycrest, Toronto, Ontario, Canada — The ability to repre-

sent past experiences in episodic memory is believed to require at least two
mechanisms: 1) pattern separation (PS), or the act of reducing interference
among similar neural inputs by using non-overlapping representations;
and, 2) pattern completion (PC), or the recollection of a past experience
or event from a degraded or incomplete cue. Extant evidence that the two
processes are dissociable within the hippocampus, with PS dependent on

170

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
the dentate gyrus (DG) and PC dependent on the adjoining CA3 subfield,
is indirect and correlational or based on patients with large hippocampal
lesions that encompass multiple subfields. Here we report the rare case of
B.L., a 54-year-old male who presents with bilateral hippocampal damage
that is relatively restricted to the DG. PS and PC were examined in B.L.
and age-matched controls using well-established tasks, the Mnemonic Similarity Task (MST) and Partial Scene Recognition task (PSR). Performance
on the two tasks indicated that, relative to controls, B.L. had difficulty distinguishing between studied targets and unstudied lures that were similar in visual appearance and conceptual category, indicating a failure to
pattern separate. B.L. also showed a heightened tendency to pattern complete when presented with degraded pictures of scenes. Taken together, the
results provide the first definitive evidence in humans that PS and PC are
indeed dissociable, with PS dependent on DG integrity.

D100
THE IMPORTANCE OF CONTEXT FOR POST-ENCODING STRESS
EFFECTS ON MEMORY; AN ALTERNATIVE TO CONSOLIDATION
THEORY Matthew Sazma1, Andrew McCullough1, Andy Yonelinas1; 1University of

California - Davis — Acute stress immediately after learning has been shown

to improve memory for the items learned prior to stress. This effect is
believed to be a result of a consolidation process that acts to solidify recently
encoded memories. However, an alternative account is that stress serves
as a context shift that protects recently encoded memories from the effects
of retroactive interference. The effect of context change on stress related
memory effects has not yet been directly examined. In the current study,
subjects encoded negative and neutral pictures, and then experienced stress
(i.e., submerging their arm in ice water for 3 minutes) or a control condition
(i.e., room temperature water). For half of the subjects, the stress/control
manipulations occurred in the same room as the encoding phase, whereas
the other half were moved to another room for the stress/control manipulations. Two days later, all participants returned to the initial encoding room
and completed a recognition memory test. Preliminary results indicate that
stress improved memory when it occurred in the same context as encoding,
but not when the context had changed between study and stress. Importantly, simply changing context in the non-stressed groups also improved
memory. The results suggest that post-encoding stress may act to reduce
interference rather than to consolidate recently encoding memories.

D101
NEURAL OSCILLATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH LEARNING OF TEMPORAL SEQUENCES Jordan Crivelli-Decker1, Liang-Tien Hsieh1, Charan

Ranganath1; 1Center for Neuroscience, UC Davis, USA — Episodic memories

are conceptualized as sequences of events. Computational models suggest
that neural oscillations play a role in the coding of temporal sequences, but
the extent to which oscillations support sequence representation remains
unclear. To address this question, we used electroencephalography (EEG)
recordings to examine oscillatory activity over the course of repeated
exposure to sequences of objects. EEG was recorded as participants made
semantic decisions in response to a continuous stream of presented objects.
For three of the sequences, the order of the objects was always fixed. Activity during these learned sequences was compared to a “Random” and a
“Novel” sequence. Random sequences consisted of the same objects presented in a different order on each repetition, whereas Novel sequences
consisted of trial-unique objects. Behavioral results showed that, over the
course of learning, semantic judgments were faster for objects in learned
sequences, as compared to objects in Random and Novel sequences. These
findings indicate that, although participants were not required to recall
sequence information during the semantic decision task, they used knowledge of learned sequences to optimize their decisions. Preliminary EEG
analyses revealed increased oscillations in the beta (13-27Hz) band for
objects in fixed sequences compared to objects in random sequences. This
effect was most evident in late learning blocks, suggesting a role of beta
oscillations in reinforcing structured order information over the course of
sequence learning. Further analyses will evaluate how beta activity relates
to behavioral measures of sequence learning and how it is modulated by
serial position within sequences.

2016 Annual Meeting	

D102
GENETIC ASSOCIATIONS OF OBJECTIVE AND SUBJECTIVE MEASURES OF AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY. Derek Beaton1, Daniela

J. Palombo2, Aggie Bacopulos3, Rebecca M. Todd4, Daniel J. Müller5,6, Adam K.
Anderson7, Hervé Abdi1, Brian Levine3,6; 1The University of Texas at Dallas, 2VA
Boston Healthcare System, 3Rotman Research Institute, 4University of British
Columbia, 5Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 6University of Toronto, 7Cornell University — To date, few genes have been associated with performance

on laboratory measures of memory, whereas the genetic correlates of realworld (autobiographical) memory (AM) have been largely unaddressed.
In the present study, we investigated genetic associations of AM with:
(1) a “subjective” (self-report) measure: the Survey of Autobiographical
Memory (SAM; Palombo et al., 2012), and (2) an “objective” (experimenter-rated) measure: the Autobiographical Interview (AI; Levine et al., 2002)
in 268 healthy young adults. In accordance with the notion that memory is
a polygenic trait, we focused on multiple genetic markers—ApoE, BDNF,
ADRA2, SLC6A4, HTR2A, KIBRA, COMT, DRD2, DRD4, and DAT1—
that are likely, or have previously been, associated with various aspects of
memory. We used multiple correspondence analysis (a multivariate technique) to relate patterns of genetic markers to patterns of AM scores. The
largest observable associations between genetics and AM were, generally,
in relation to KIBRA and dopaminergic markers. For example, (1) DRD4
(Exon III LL repeats) are associated with generally low scores on both the
SAM and the AI, (2) DRD2 (TT) is associated with relatively high scores on
the SAM, with mid-to-low scores on the AI, and (3) KIBRA (TT) is associated with moderate-to-high scores on both the SAM and the AI. In conclusion, our results show that a number of genetic markers are associated with
distinct (SAM or AI separately) or combined aspects of AM, and highlight
the essential role of dopaminergic markers as stronger contributors to AM
than other (typically observed) markers.

D103
EXPLORING THE VARIETY OF CONTEXTUAL FACTORS IN EPISODIC MEMORY: THE HIGH-RESOLUTION FMRI STUDY Jonghyun
Park1, Yoonjin Nah1, Na-Young Shin2, Seung-Koo Lee3, Sanghoon Han1; 1Yonsei
University, 2Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, 3Yonsei University, College of Medicine — Episodic memory consists of core event and the contexts

around it. Although the role of hippocampus and neighboring regions in
contextual representations during encoding has become increasingly evident, it remains unclear how the regions handle the various context-specific information other than spatiotemporal contexts. Using high-resolution
functional MRI, we explored patterns of para-/hippocampal involvement
during the encoding of various contextual information (i.e., journalism principle 5W1H); “Who did it?”, “Why did it happen?”, “How did it happen?”,
“What happened?”, “When did it happen?”, “Where did it happen?” Six
different contextual questions were asked to participants while looking at
the simple experimental events of two faces with one object in the screen.
General linear model analyses revealed the robust medial temporal lobe
(MTL) activation during encoding in all six conditions. However, unlike
the spatiotemporal contextual (Where, When) processing, the cause-effect
(Who, Why, How) contexts showed the activation of the distinct MTL subregions linked with prefrontal, amygdala, fusiform, and other regions relative to item-based (What) information encoding. To further investigate the
relative functional involvement of hippocampal subfields sensitive to each
condition, the multivariate pattern analysis with voxel-wise searchlight
methods was conducted within bilateral MTL, using multiple single-trial as
regressors to iteratively acquire beta estimate patterns. Results showed that
anterior-to-posterior hippocampus and parahippocampal regions demonstrated differential engagement between spatiotemporal versus cause-effect contextual representations. In addition, the whole-brain functional connectivity was measured with each MTL subregion seed, which also allowed
us to investigate the differential connectivity patterns within hippocampal
regions across contextual conditions.

Poster Session D

D104
PREFRONTAL THETA-BURST STIMULATION MODULATES EPISODIC MEMORY ORGANIZATION Bianca-Maria Marin1, Joel Voss1, Donna
Bridge1; 1Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine — Although mul-

tiple elements comprise an episodic memory, some are “dominant” in that
they are disproportionately bound with other elements and therefore serve
as strong reminder cues for the entire episode. We have previously shown
that active retrieval selectively increases dominance of specific episode elements. This dominance establishment was associated with activity of right
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (rDLPFC) and hippocampus, hypothesized to
reflect active maintenance of dominant elements and binding of dominant
elements with other elements, respectively. In the current study, we applied
continuous theta-burst transcranial magnetic stimulation (TBS) to rDLPFC
to test its causal role in dominance establishment. Anatomically-targeted
TBS was applied prior to task performance in one rDLPFC TBS session and
one sham TBS session following a counterbalanced within-subjects design
(N=16). Subjects studied three objects at specific locations. One object was
selected for an active or passive (control) manipulation. Active manipulation involved short-term memory retrieval of the selected object’s location, whereas passive manipulation involved moving the selected object
to a visually marked location. After the manipulation, subjects restudied
the object-location associations. Memory was later tested for non-manipulated objects given either manipulated objects or other non-manipulated
objects as reminder cues. Compared to sham, TBS enhanced the retrieval of
object-locations when the actively retrieved object was used as a reminder
cue relative to when non-manipulated objects were reminder cues. These
findings suggest that rDLPFC causally contributes to dominance establishment and thereby the organization of episodic memory.

D105
NEURAL CORRELATES UNDERLYING THE EFFECT OF VALUE ON
RECOGNITION MEMORY Blake Elliott1, Chris Blais1, Gene Brewer1; 1Arizona
State University — In the present research we examined behavioral and neu-

rophysiological correlates of value-directed recognition memory. Participants encoded words in multiple study phases that were assigned either
high or low point values and were instructed that it was more important
to remember the higher value words than the lower value words in order
to increase their score on a subsequent word recognition test. Subjective
states of recollection (i.e., “Remember”) and familiarity (i.e., “Know”) were
assessed at retrieval. High value words were discriminated more effectively than low value words and this difference was primarily driven by
increases in Remember responses with no difference in Know responses.
A corresponding parietal old-new effect (500-800 ms post-stimulus) over
posterior electrodes differentiated neurophysiological correlates of high
and low value words. Overall, the behavioral and neurophysiological data
add to previous evidence that two distinct processes support recognition
memory decisions, and that value-directed encoding results in a greater
effect on subjective states of recollection.

D106
USING EYE-TRACKING TO INVESTIGATE LONG-TERM MEMORY
ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL IN ADULTS WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM CONDITIONS Rose Cooper1, Kate Plaisted-Grant1, Simon Baron-Cohen1, Jon Simons1; 1University of Cambridge — Individuals with autism spec-

trum conditions (ASC) exhibit subtle deficits in recollection, as evidenced
by reduced ‘remember’ responses, reduced source memory, and difficulty distinguishing old and similar lure items in memory. However, the
encoding and retrieval processes underlying these deficits remain unclear.
Using eye-tracking to explore encoding and retrieval processes provides
benefits over explicit memory responses, having recently been used to
investigate implicit memory, false recognition of similar lure items, and
differences between recollection and familiarity during encoding and
retrieval. In the current study, we used eye-tracking alongside a long-term
memory paradigm, where participants were asked to distinguish between
old and similar lure scenes and provide ‘remember’/’familiar’ responses,
to investigate encoding and retrieval differences in adults with ASC. The
ASC group were impaired in their ability to distinguish old and similar
lure scenes in memory, accompanied by a reduction in remember but not
familiar responses. In controls, subsequent lure false alarms and familiarity

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

171

Poster Session D	

2016 Annual Meeting

responses were associated with fewer encoding fixations than lure correct
rejections and recollection responses. In contrast, number of fixations did
not predict subsequent memory in the ASC group. Recollection in the control group was associated with enhanced reinstatement of eye movements,
which was not the case in the ASC group. The eye-tracking results suggest
disruptions to recollection may predominantly occur after encoding in ASC
and the experience of recollection may be less specific as well as less frequent in this population.

D107
DIFFERENCES IN FUNCTIONAL NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
BETWEEN SUCCESSFUL SOURCE AND ITEM MEMORY Zachary
1

1

1

1 1

Monge , Matthew Stanley , Simon Davis , Roberto Cabeza ; Duke University
— There is a fundamental distinction in memory research between source

(SM; where, when, and how?) and item (IM; what?) memory. Available
evidence suggests that SM relies more on executive processing in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), whereas IM relies more on memory processing in
the medial temporal lobe (MTL). These brain regions do not operate independently from the rest of the brain, but rather they are embedded within
a large scale, integrative network. We used graph theory to investigate the
integrative properties of the PFC and MTL within the memory network.
Healthy older participants (n=42) encoded words under a pleasantness
or size judgment task. During retrieval they made SM decisions about the
encoding task or IM recognition decisions (old/new). In order to identify
brain regions important for successful SM and IM networks, graph theory
measures of centrality and efficiency were calculated on a nodal level. For
SM compared to IM trials there was higher degree centrality (more functional connections), PageRank centrality (more functional connections to
highly connected nodes), and global efficiency (shorter functional connections) in the right lateral PFC. For IM compared to SM trials there was
higher degree centrality, PageRank centrality, global efficiency, and local
efficiency (shorter functional connections in neighboring nodes) in bilateral
MTL and medial PFC. Here, we showed a double dissociation in integrative
properties between the contributions of PFC to SM and MTL to IM. These
results confirm and extend previous findings by showing the differential
contributions of these regions within a general memory network.

D108
AGE-RELATED DEFICITS IN SELECTIVE ATTENTION DURING
ENCODING INCREASE DEMANDS ON EPISODIC RECONSTRUCTION DURING SOURCE RETRIEVAL: AN ERP STUDY Taylor James1,
Jonathan Strunk1, Jason Arndt2, Audrey Duarte1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology,
2
Middlebury College — Previous event-related potential (ERP) and neuro-

imaging evidence suggests that directing attention toward single itemsource associations at encoding improves source memory performance
and reduces demands on strategic retrieval operations in young and older
adults. In everyday situations, however, there are multiple event features
competing for our attention. It is not currently known how selectively
attending to one source feature while attempting to ignore another influences source memory performance and the processes that support successful retrieval in the young and old. We investigated this issue in the current
ERP study. Young and older participants studied pictures of objects in the
presence of two source features: a color and a scene, and their attention was
directed to the object’s relationship with one of those sources. Participants
made source memory decisions for both attended and unattended sources
and rated their confidence in those decisions. Behavioral results showed
that while both groups were generally successful in applying selective
attention during source encoding, older adults were less confident in their
source memory decisions for attended features and showed greater dependence in source memory accuracy for attended and unattended source features, i.e. ‘hyper-binding’. ERP results were largely consistent between age
groups but older adults showed a more pronounced late posterior negativity (LPN) implicated in episodic reconstruction processes. We conclude
that age-related suppression deficits during encoding result in reduced
selectivity in source memory, thereby increasing subsequent demands on
episodic reconstruction processes when sought after details are not readily
retrieved.

172

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Semantic
D109
INVESTIGATING THE TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF RETRIEVING
NEW “FOIL” SEMANTIC AND PHONOLOGICAL INFORMATION

David Amadeus Vogelsang1, Matthias Gruber2, Zara Bergstrom3, Charan Ranganath2, Jon Simons1; 1Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, UK,
2
Center for Neuroscience, University of California at Davis, CA, USA, 3School of
Psychology, Keynes College, University of Kent, UK — Previous research has

suggested that incidental encoding of new “foil” words during an old/
new recognition test is better when participants search their memory for
items that were encoded semantically compared to phonologically when
previously studied. However, the temporal dynamics underlying this
behavioural effect remain unresolved. In this EEG experiment, participants
encoded information in both a deep semantic and shallow phonological
task and were tested in a subsequent blocked memory test to examine how
orienting retrieval towards these different types of information influences
encoding of “foils”. After this memory test, participants performed a further surprise old/new recognition test on foil items that were incidentally
learned during the previous semantic and phonological testing blocks. Recognition memory during this foil test was significantly better for semantic
foils than phonological foils, even though the only difference between the
foils was the type of information that was oriented towards when they were
first encountered. Time-frequency analysis on the EEG data during the initial study phase revealed that semantic compared to phonological processing was associated with alpha decreases in the left frontal electrode cluster. Results from the first test phase revealed that decreases in alpha and
theta oscillatory activity in the left frontal electrode cluster differentially
predicted successful memory for semantic and phonological foils on the
final foil recognition test. These results suggest that attempting to retrieve
semantic versus phonological information involves reinstating the distinct
neurocognitive operations that were engaged during initial encoding.

D110
SHARP CATEGORY BOUNDARIES IN THE HUMAN BRAIN
REVEALED THROUGH MULTIVARIATE ANALYSES OF FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY AND STIMULUS PREFERENCES Quanjing
Chen1, Frank Garcea1, Jorge Almeida2, Bradford.Z Mahon1; 1University of Rochester, 2University of Coimbra — The ventral visual pathway supports object and

scene identification and exhibits a macroscopic organization by semantic
domain. Multivariate techniques have recently been increasingly used to
show that category-selectivity in the ventral stream is not all or none, leading to the argument that there are ‘graded’ object representations in the
ventral stream. Here we show that sharp categorical boundaries do in fact
exist in the ventral stream when the same multivariate techniques are used
to map distributed patterns of functional connectivity onto distributed patterns of stimulus preferences. We focus on a subregion of the ventral stream
(medial fusiform gyrus, parahippocampal gyrus) that exhibits differential
activity for places compared to tools, and differential activity for tools compared to animals and faces. The same region exhibits overall stronger functional connectivity to retrosplenial cortex compared to left parietal regions.
Nonetheless, within that region, multivariate analyses indicate that tool
preferences over voxels are selectively related to variability over voxels in
functional connectivity to the inferior parietal lobule. In contrast, and over
the same set of voxels, place preferences are selectively related to variability
in functional connectivity to retrosplenial cortex. These findings indicate
that the basic organizing principle of the ventral stream may be captured
best by neither functional connectivity alone, nor stimulus preferences
alone, but rather by the common code that relates stimulus preferences to
functional connectivity.

D111
THE EFFECTS OF VISUOMOTOR ENGAGEMENT ON SEMANTIC
RETRIEVAL FOR FLEXIBLE OBJECT USE Hannah M. Morrow1, Evangelia G. Chrysikou1; 1University of Kansas — Cognitive neuroscience research on

the organization of semantic memory for objects has revealed that different
object attributes (e.g., color vs. function), different stimuli (e.g. visual or
verbal), and different tasks (e.g., naming vs. object use) can influence the

2016 Annual Meeting	
retrieval of semantic information about objects. For example, past work
in healthy adults and patients with semantic dementia has shown that
certain aspects of object knowledge (e.g., the object’s function or mode of
manipulation) can be accessed independently of more abstract properties
of the object (e.g., its name) and faster when participants are presented with
three-dimensional objects relative to stimuli in pictorial format. However,
the majority of these studies have focused on the retrieval of canonical
object attributes. Nevertheless, frequently in daily life, one is required to
solve a problem or satisfy a goal under unexpected or emergency circumstances, when an object may have to be used in a manner different from its
typical use. Here we examined whether visual and manual experience with
three-dimensional objects, relative to two-dimensional pictures of these
objects, would allow for differential access to semantic memory under
conditions of impromptu goal achievement (i.e., when a participant has to
come up with an unusual, relative to a typical, use for a common object).
Our results showed that participants who engaged with three-dimensional
object stimuli during the flexible object use task showed facilitated access
to sensorimotor object properties, yielding better performance on this task.
We discuss these implications of these results for theories of object knowledge retrieval.

D112
PUPIL DILATION REFLECTS INTERFERENCE DURING COMPETITIVE MEMORY RETRIEVAL Roger Johansson1, Amanda Bjernestedt1, Philip
Pärnamets1,2, Mikael Johansson1; 1Lund University, 2Karolinska Institutet — The

present study investigated the relationship between pupil dilation and
interference during competitive memory retrieval. Pupil diameter was
recorded from 31 participants engaged in a memory task designed to cause
proactive interference. Participants completed 12 blocks each consisting of
4 trials for two conditions which differed on the last trial. In each trial they
encoded 3 words from the same semantic category, which subsequently
were to be recalled in their original presentation order. In the proactive
interference (PI) condition the target words came from the same semantic
category for all 4 trials, leading to a progressive buildup of interference
from previous words. In the release from proactive interference (RPI) condition the semantic category was switched for the 4th trial, leading to a
release from interference. As expected, results showed that retrieval performance systematically declined for both conditions until the last trial,
where it continued to decline for the PI condition, but improved for the RPI
condition. Results for pupil size revealed a mirroring pattern, where pupil
dilation systematically increased for both conditions over the first 3 trials of
retrieval. Critically, the pupil was significantly more dilated in the PI condition than in the RPI condition during the last trial. To our knowledge, this is
the first study to show that pupil dilation can be used as a reliable index of
the cognitive effort needed to handle interference from competing memory
traces during memory retrieval and thus demonstrates the possibility of
using pupillometry to track interference independent of explicit responses.

D113
DIFFERENT RATES OF FORGETTING IN LONG-TERM MEMORY:
THE ROLES OF ASSOCIATIVE BINDING, SEMANTIC RELATEDNESS, AND SLEEP Samantha Audrain1,2, Mary Pat McAndrews1,2; 1University
of Toronto, 2Toronto Western Research Institute — Many factors impact reten-

tion of information including the degree of associative binding required
for memory, semantic relatedness of learned associations, and sleep-dependent consolidation processes. We sought to determine how these factors
interact and influence rate of forgetting in the long-term, which has yet to
be directly explored. Healthy participants studied semantically related and
unrelated object-scene pairs and completed a forced-choice recognition
task after 5 delays ranging from minutes to days. Half of the recognition
trials could be solved using only familiarity or item memory (old/new
object-scene pairs) whereas associative memory was required for the other
half (intact/re-paired object-scene combinations). Semantically related and
unrelated item and associative memory trials were compared over time.
We found that participants recognized significantly less associative than
item stimuli by 6 hours post-study. However, after a night of sleep there
was no difference in retention between the two conditions due to a boost
in memory for associative stimuli, which continued to decline significantly
faster than item memory thereafter. This effect was particularly robust for

Poster Session D
associative pairs that were semantically unrelated, as semantic relatedness
benefitted both types of memory with little decline over time. Our findings
demonstrate that associative memory shows the greatest forgetting over
time, benefits temporarily from a night of sleep, and shows a long-lasting
benefit from existing cortical schemas for learned associations.

D114
QUANTIFYING NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF SEMANTIC SIMILARITY Ellen L. Zippi1, Neal W Morton1, Alison R. Preston1; 1The University of

Texas at Austin — While prior work has identified brain regions that respond

preferentially to items from specific visual categories, less is known about
how meaning is represented in the brain. To identify where meaning is
represented, we first constructed a model to determine quantitative measures of latent semantic similarity. Articles from Wikipedia corresponding
to each stimulus in a pool consisting of famous people and famous landmarks were used to build a text corpus. We used natural language processing tools and dimensionality reduction techniques to calculate vector
representations of the articles. These vector representations were used to
estimate the cosine similarity between each pair of items. Then, the model
was trained to maximize the difference in similarity between within-category and across-category pairs. To measure the neural representations
of these stimuli, participants were shown images of each stimulus during
fMRI scanning. The trained model makes predictions about the similarity
of meaning between different pairs of stimuli. We find a significant correlation between representational dissimilarity maps for observed activity patterns in the ventral temporal cortex and the model-based similarity predictions for different landmarks. This finding is consistent with the idea that
ventral temporal cortex is representing the meaning of the stimuli. Moreover, our technique can be used to identify specific sub-regions of ventral
temporal cortex involved in representation of meaning.

D115
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY THETA ACTIVITY ELICITED BY
VISUALLY PRESENTED SEMANTIC CATEGORIES Jihyeon Choi1, Bambi
L. DeLaRosa1, Michael A. Motes1, Ryan Tychinsky1, Scott Shakal1, John Hart Jr.1,2;
1
Center for BrainHealth, The University of Texas at Dallas, 2Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
— Current models of semantic memory suggest that an object is represented

in distributed neural systems, including sensory-motor cortices, with activation of object representations via temporally coordinated electrical activity. In this study, topographical theta band (4-8 Hz) was investigated in
response to visually presented objects that varied on categorical membership. Electroencephalography (EEG) was measured from 64 electrodes in
74 healthy adults during a Go-NoGo paradigm (Object-Animal task) with
a focus on categorical effects for the Go condition. Go stimuli consists of
line drawings of six categories: body parts, cars, clothes, food, kitchen, and
tools. Reaction times for each category in the Go condition were different
from each other, with car category as the fastest and the human body parts
category as the slowest. EEG results showed that over motor cortex (electrode FC3) the categories of cars and tools had greater theta power than
the other categories of clothes, food, and kitchen. In occipital cortex (electrode OZ) the food category showed the most substantial theta power over
cars, clothes, kitchen, and tools categories. The findings show topographical theta activity over brain regions corresponding to the features of the
semantic categories.

D116
VIVIDLY REMEMBERED: NON-CLINICAL DELUSIONAL IDEATION
AND FALSE MEMORIES Ahmad Alsemari1, Ferrinne Spector1; 1Edgewood
College — On any given day, a person may have an average of six delusional

thoughts (Peters et al., 2004) and any number of false recollections. While
we know that false memories represent a risk factor for delusions in the clinical population, little is known about non-clinical delusions and false memories. Here we examine the relationship between delusional ideation and
false memories in the non-clinical population. We measured participants’
delusional ideation using an inventory designed to measure delusional
thinking in the normal, healthy population (Peters et al., 2004). We assessed
memory performance in 80 typical healthy participants across two exper-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

173

Poster Session D	
iments. The first experiment was a list-learning paradigm modeled after
Roedinger and McDermott (1995) in which participants viewed words that
were highly associated with non-presented target words and later asked to
recognize the words from within a list loaded with distracter/target words.
In Experiment 2, participants viewed words followed by either an image of
the object, or a blank rectangle. Participants were later instructed to identify
only the words for which they had seen an image from a spoken word list.
Participants who identified the target words in Experiment 1 and words
for which they had not seen an image in Experiment 2 are exhibiting false
memory. Results suggest a positive correlation between delusional ideation
and false memories, with high delusional participants showing greater confidence for falsely remembered items. These results support the hypothesis
that healthy participants who are high in delusional ideation do show an
increased tendency to make false memory judgments.

D117
WHEN A MARSHMALLOW IS MORE LIKE A PILLOW THAN A
GRAHAM CRACKER: PARSING PERCEPTUAL AND CONCEPTUAL
PROCESSES OF THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE Rachel Newsome1,2,
Danielle Douglas1, Louisa Man1, Morgan Barense1,2; 1University of Toronto,
2
Rotman Research Institute — It is largely accepted that the anterior temporal

lobes and perirhinal cortex (PRC) are important structures for representing
conceptual information about objects. For example, recent findings show
that the PRC is active when distinguishing semantically similar objects.
However, in these studies, there is an inherent confound: semantically
related objects are often also perceptually similar (i.e., lions and tigers are
conceptually related – both are jungle cats, predators; they are also perceptually related – both have big claws, four legs). Evidence suggests that
the PRC is also critical for aspects of object perception, particularly when
a task requires discriminating highly overlapping visual features. In the
present study, we created a novel paradigm that independently manipulated perceptual and conceptual overlap across items. We asked participants to make similarity judgments on objects based on either perceptual or
conceptual relatedness. Critically, we equated the relatedness of the targets
and foils, such that for every conceptual target there was a matched perceptual foil (and vice versa). We tested amnesic patients whose damage
included or excluded the PRC and age-matched healthy controls. We found
that PRC damage was associated with object discrimination impairments
in both conditions, with greater deficits in the perceptual condition. In contrast, patients whose damage did not include the PRC were not impaired
on perceptual or semantic judgments. Our findings provide evidence that
the PRC may be required for discriminating both perceptual and semantic
ambiguities. Furthermore, we provide a novel task to differentiate perceptual and conceptual commonality in real-world objects.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Skill learning
D118
EFFECTS OF DOPAMINE ON THE CONSOLIDATION OF LEARNING AND MEMORY: IMPLICATIONS FOR PARKINSON’S DISEASE
Madeleine Sharp1, Katherine Duncan2, Karin Foerde3, Rebecca Kahane4, Daphna
Shohamy4; 1Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center,
2
Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, 3Department of Psychology,
New York University, 4Department of Psychology, Columbia University — Dopa-

mine plays an important role in multiple aspects of learning, but its role
in the consolidation of learning is not well understood. Here, we aimed
to address this gap by examining the role of dopamine in the consolidation of different forms of learning and memory in humans. Specifically, we
asked: First, does dopamine contribute to the consolidation of incremental
learning? Second, does dopamine contribute to the consolidation of episodic memory? And third, are there differences in consolidation of learning
from positive vs. negative outcomes? To address these questions, we used
a task that measures both probabilistic incremental learning and episodic
memory. To test the effect of dopamine on the persistence of incremental
learning and episodic memory, we tested participants with Parkinson’s disease, either ON or OFF their dopaminergic medications, at two time points
across a two-day delay. Results show that initial learning was similar
among Parkinson’s patients and controls, but Parkinson’s patients showed

174

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
weaker consolidation than controls for both incremental learning and episodic memory. This pattern of results was also seen when comparing the
consolidation of learning from positive or negative outcomes, suggesting a
general difference in consolidation of learning between the groups. These
findings suggest that dopamine plays a role in the consolidation of both
incremental and episodic memory. Identifying the vulnerable stages of
learning in Parkinson’s patients has implications for effectively designing
and delivering the learning based therapies so often used in Parkinson’s
disease.

D119
USING COMPUTATIONAL METHODS TO CHARACTERIZE IMPLICIT
SEQUENCE LEARNING Kelsey R Thompson1, Paul J Reber1; 1Northwestern

University — Implicit learning involves extracting statistical variation from

the environment in order to improve behavior. Because knowledge of
environmental structure is acquired outside of awareness, it is challenging
to determine the precise nature of the information that is obtained from
experience. Here we report the development of a computational simulation model aimed at identifying the simplest possible mechanisms (e.g., the
model with the minimum necessary free parameters that provides the closest prediction of participant behavior) that could underlie human implicit
sequence learning. Typical paradigms covertly embed repeating sequences
constructed to require learning of second-order conditional probabilities. As a result, although the repeating sequence could be 12 or 30 items
long, it is only necessary to calculate statistics of trigram fragments to perfectly predict the next item in the sequence. However, a simulation model
restricted to trigram statistics is unable to provide a fit to human learning
data. An identically structured model that extracts higher-order statistics
(fourth-order conditional probabilities) provides a more accurate fit, offering a hypothesis about the representational structure of the underlying
human learning mechanism. In addition, detailed comparison of the computational predictions and fine-grained performance analysis illustrates
the need for additional performance mechanisms (such as the effect of
adaptive speed on performance) beyond simple power-law or exponential
learning of the statistical frequency of sequential response co-occurrences.
Based on the model structure, predictions are described for future experiments that might require the addition of more complex or abstract representations (e.g., non-adjacent dependencies, abstract patterns, hierarchical
chunk structures) to the model.

D120
IS IMPLICIT LEARNING INTACT IN AUTISM? BEHAVIORAL AND
ERP RESULTS FROM A STATISTICAL LEARNING TASK Fenny Zwart1,

Roald Maes1, Constance Vissers1,2, Paul Eling1, Jos Egger1,3,4, Roy Kessels1,5;
1
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, 2Koninklijke
Kentalis, Sint-Michielsgestel, 3Vincent van Gogh Institute for Psychiatry, Venray,
4
Behavioural Science Institute, Nijmegen, 5Radboud University Medical Centre,
Nijmegen — Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is characterized by deficits in

social and communication skills as well as deficits in language and motor
domains. It is precisely these skills that are thought to develop largely by
implicit, or ‘incidental’, learning mechanisms. Hence, an influential theory
in ASD research posits that ASD originates from a deficit in implicit learning
capacities. However, the majority of implicit learning studies in ASD does
not find support for this theory. The aim of the current project is to provide
evidence that implicit learning capacities are intact in ASD and it is rather
the propensity to use implicit learning strategies that differs from people
without ASD; while people with ASD can learn implicitly, they prefer to
use other, explicit strategies. In the current EEG-study, implicit and explicit
learning are investigated in a group of adults with ASD (n=20) and a group
of controls (n=23) by using an adapted version of the widely used Serial
Reaction Time Task (SRTT). Behavioral results show evidence that implicit
learning as well as explicit learning is similar for the ASD group compared
to the control group. However, interestingly, EEG results suggest reduced
evidence of implicit learning as represented by an enhancement of P300 to
novel stimuli for the ASD group. Our lab is currently performing in-depth
analyses on the EEG data which should elucidate further on the question
whether electrophysiological mechanisms underlying implicit learning are
altered in ASD.

2016 Annual Meeting	

D121
(DON’T) MIND THE EFFORT: EFFECTS OF CONTEXTUAL INTERFERENCE ON ERP INDICATORS OF MOTOR PREPARATION Romy

Frömer1, Birgit Stürmer2, Werner Sommer1; 1Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin,
2
International Psychoanalytic University Berlin — Motor learning is associated

with a decrease in frontal control-related brain activity and increase of
central and parietal motor-related activity. Contextual interference (CI),
manipulated typically by blocked versus randomized training schedules,
affects motor learning, resulting in inferior performance during training
but in superior retention and transfer. The CI effect is often explained by
increased processing demands under high CI training. Consistently, in the
motor preparatory phase the activity of control and attention related areas
is higher under high CI. Here we investigated the effect of CI on learning-related changes in event related brain potentials during motor preparation. Participants learned throwing at virtual targets and were retested on
the target condition one week later. Frontal P3 activity decreased in retention for both low and high CI training. In the low CI group, stimulus related
initial CNV was unaffected, but late CNV amplitude, as a measure of
abstract motor preparation, was increased in retention compared to training, consistent with previous literature. In contrast, in the high CI group,
amplitudes of both, initial CNV as well as late CNV were lower in retention
than training. High CI training furthermore resulted in significantly lower
prefrontal and right lateral occipital activity in retention compared with
training, reflecting the decrease in processing demands. We conclude that
CI modulates the interplay of cognitive and motor processes in the preparatory phase of motor learning and that higher contribution of cognitive
processes under high CI in training accounts for differential effects of CI on
motor preparatory ERPs in retention.

D122
WHY REDUCING FEEDBACK FREQUENCY ENHANCES LEARNING:
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC EVIDENCE Francisco Colino1, Gordon
Binsted2, Olave Krigolson1; 1University of Victoria, 2University of British Columbia — Behavioural studies suggest that providing feedback to participants

after every trial in learning tasks is not optimal. Indeed, overwhelming
behavioural evidence suggests that a reduced feedback schedule (e.g., Wulf
et al., 1993) results in greater learning. Here, we investigate the neural basis
for the reduced feedback frequency effect. We hypothesized that a reduced
feedback frequency schedule might result in greater learning related activity within a neural learning system in the human medial-frontal cortex.
Specifically, we predicted that during a reduced feedback schedule the
amplitude of the reward positivity – a component of the human event-related brain potential associated with reward processing – would be greater
in a reduced feedback schedule. Two groups of participants completed a
line drawing task while electroencephalographic data was recorded. In a
key manipulation, each group received a different feedback schedule – one
group of participants received feedback on every trial the other on only half
of the experimental trials. Following completion of the acquisition phase
of the experiment both groups of participants completed a retention test
to gauge learning. An analysis of our behavioural data revealed learning
effects in line with expectations. Interestingly, an analysis of the electroencephalographic data revealed that during learning the amplitude of the
reward positivity was greater for participants on a reduced as opposed to
a full feedback schedule. Our data suggest that during a reduced feedback
schedule the “gain” of the medial-frontal learning system is increased –
perhaps in an attempt to take advantage of sparse feedback – and as such
greater learning occurs.

D123
DISSOCIATING THE IMPACT OF REWARD AND PUNISHMENT ON
PERFORMANCE AND RETENTION OF SKILLED BEHAVIORS Adam

Steel1,2, Edward Silson1, Charlotte Stagg2, Chris Baker1; 1Laboratory of Brain and
Cognition, NIMH, NIH, 2FMRIB, University of Oxford — Feedback during skill

learning improves immediate performance and aids long-term memory
formation. However, neither the specific effects of reward (REW) and punishment (PUN) nor generalizability of those effects across skill domains is
well understood. The present study investigated the influence of REW and
PUN on learning two different tasks: a serial reaction time task (SRT) and
a force-tracking task (FTT). 72 subjects were evenly distributed across the

Poster Session D
two tasks, and split into three feedback conditions: REW, PUN or control
(CONT). Feedback was based on ongoing performance; in SRT, accuracy
and reaction time determined feedback, which was given after each button
press. In FTT, feedback was given whenever the subject was inside their
previous error margin. In REW, subjects were told if their performance
improved compared to their previous block. In PUN, subjects were told
when their performance was worse than their previous block. In CONT,
subjects received feedback unrelated to their performance. We examined
performance during learning and tested retention at 1 hour, 24 hours, and
30 days after the learning finished. The effect of feedback on performance
during learning differed between the tasks. For SRT, subjects in PUN condition responded faster than those in REW or CONT, with minimal impairment in accuracy, i.e. they performed better. In the FTT, REW had the least
error, equating with better performance. There was little difference between
the feedback conditions on retention on either task. These results suggest
that feedback influences performance rather than long-term memory.

OTHER
D124
ARITHMETIC PROCESSING IN CHILDREN WITH SPECIFIC MATHEMATICS LEARNING DISORDER AND CHILDREN WITH NORMAL
ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE. AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL
STUDY. Sonia Yanin Cárdenas Sánchez1, Thalía Fernández Harmony1, Juan Silva

Pereyra2, Belén Prieto Corona2, Ana Milene Roca Stappung1, Benito Martínez Briones1, Minerva Rojas Méndez3, Graciela Catalina Alatorre Cruz2; 1Department of
Behavior and Cognitive Neurobiology, Neurobiology Institute, National Autonomous University of Mexico., 2Faculty of Iztacala, National Autonomous University
of Mexico., 3National Pedagogic University of Mexico — Specific Mathematics

Learning Disorder (SMLD) affects academic performance and daily life, so
it is of interest study the brain’s electrical activity underlying this disorder.
Objective: To compare arithmetic processing between a group of 20 children with SMLD and a group of 18 children with Normal Academic Performance (NAP) using Event-Related Potential (ERP) during an arithmetic
verification task. Each trial corresponds to one-digit sum followed by a correct or incorrect probe (experimental conditions). Children decided if their
own result match or mismatch regarding the probe. ERP were obtained
time-locked to onset of the probe. A non-parametric permutation multivariate analysis was applied to evaluate differences between conditions. In
both groups there was a higher percentage of right answers for the incorrect-probe compared to correct-probe. In both conditions, the percentage of
right answers was higher in NAP than SMLD group. NAP group showed an
N400 effect (i.e., higher amplitudes to incorrect-probes than correct-probes)
and a late positive shift effect with widespread distribution. In contrast,
SMLD group displayed no significant N400 effect but a focal late positive
shift effect. This suggests that SMLD group has significant problems from
arithmetic and matching-probe processes, reflected by N400, to a deficient
verification process manifested by the late positivity. Acknowledgments:
Dr. María Elena Juárez, Ing. Héctor Belmont, Lic. Lucero Albarrán Cárdenas, CONACYT (218556) y PAPIIT (IN204613).

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Skill learning
D125
FAILURE OF OBSERVATIONAL LEARNING OF 2D, BUT NOT 1D
CATEGORIES Yi-Wen Wang1, Vivian Valentin1, F.Gregory Ashby1; 1UC Santa
Barbara — Humans can learn about categories by observing exemplars

in each category, or by receiving feedback after making a categorization
response. Previous research indicates that observational learning works
better for the declarative rule-based (RB) task than the procedural information-integration (II) task, because participants tend to use suboptimal rules
for the II task shown by the categorization transfer test following training.
Two confounding factors challenge this interpretation. First, there are 2 relevant dimensions (2D) in the more difficult II task compared to 1-dimension (1D) in the RB task. Second, randomly intermixing stimuli from both
categories might encourage participants to compare stimuli and generate
rules. We avoided these confounding factors by adding difficult 1D and 2D

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

175

Poster Session D	
RB tasks, and by asking participants to memorize exemplars from blocks
of 2 alternating categories. Recognition tests after each block and a transfer
to categorization test after training were given. For participants with good
recognition of the exemplars, transfer of category knowledge was severely
affected in the 2D, but not the 1D categories. People tend to come up with
suboptimal 1D rules in observational learning, even for category structures
that require use of both dimensions (i.e. II and 2D RB). Our results show
that feedback learning is a more efficient way than exemplar memorization
for learning categories, and it is difficult for people to form proper category
structures by merely exposing them to multiple exemplars in categories.

D126
ACQUISITION AND CONSOLIDATION OF MOTOR SEQUENCE
LEARNING IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Lucy L W Owen1, Madeleine E

Sharp2, Daphna Shohamy1; 1Department of Psychology, Columbia University,
2
Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center — The striatum

lies at the interface of actions and outcomes. Disrupted striatal function,
such as occurs in Parkinson’s disease, impairs learning of action-outcome
associations as well as learning of motor sequences. But patients with Parkinson’s disease are also impaired at motor control itself, regardless of
learning, and it remains unclear to what degree the motor learning deficits reflect learning deficits per se, deficits in motor performance, or deficits
in the consolidation of learning. We aimed to address this gap. We used
a sequence learning task which allowed a separate assessment of performance, acquisition and consolidation of learning. Parkinson’s patients and
matched control participants first performed a motor sequence task, then
trained on the learning of the motor sequence, and finally were retested
after two days to assess consolidation of learning. Not surprisingly, we
found that overall performance of the motor task was worse in the Parkinson’s patients, to begin with. But, taking this baseline difference into
account, the degree of learning of the sequence was actually similar in the
Parkinson’s patients and the controls. Furthermore, patients and controls
showed similar consolidation and retention of learning across the two-day
delay, and similar vulnerability to interference as assessed with a competing motor sequence condition. These findings suggest that despite impaired
performance of a motor sequence, Parkinson’s patients have preserved
motor sequence learning and preserved consolidation of motor learning.

D127
EVALUATING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WHITE MATTER
INTEGRITY, COGNITION AND VARIETIES OF VIDEO GAME LEARNING: AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES AND INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES Nicholas Ray1,2, Margaret O’Connell1,2, Kaoru Nashiro3, Evan Smith1,2,
Shuo Quin1,2, Chandramallika Basak1,2; 1University of Texas at Dallas, 2Center
for Vital Longevity, 3University of Southern California — Videogames have been

proposed as a possible intervention to age-related declines in cognition, by
reducing degradation of anterior brain regions that decline rapidly with
aging (Basak et al., 2008; 2011). This anterior-posterior gradient has been
shown in white matter FA of the corpus callosum (Head et al., 2004; Salat
et al., 2005). The current study of 55 participants (24 young and 31 old) was
designed to a) assess the age-related declines in white matter integrity, b)
evaluate the common as well as different white matter FA predictors of
varieties of game learning – one action and one strategy, and c) evaluate the
relationship between white matter integrity, cognitive abilities and types
of game learning. Our results support previous research regarding age-related differences in integrity of corpus callosum; we observed a negative
correlation between age and FA in the genu, but no correlation between age
and FA in the splenium. We also found different predictors of the two types
of game learning, with measures of cognitive control, FA in splenium and
FA in left cingulum hippocampal correlated positively with the strategy
game learning, but working memory capacity, FA in genu and FA in right
cingulum hippocampal correlated positively with the action game learning. Multivariate analyses to evaluate the structure-cognition-game learning relationship are being conducted, which would help us devise better
cognitive training interventions.

176

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

METHODS: Other
D128
HEMISPHERIC INTERACTION AND LATERALIZATION IN SIMPLE
AND COMPLEX ADDITION PROCESSING: A NOVEL BEHAVIORAL
TASK Eric J Failes1, Andrew J Hughes2, Barbara J Rutherford3; 1Washington University in St. Louis, 2University of North Dakota School of Medicine and Health
Sciences, 3University of British Columbia Okanagan — Past studies of hemi-

spheric interaction and lateralization of arithmetic processing fall primarily
into two categories: behavioral studies using lateralized visual or auditory
presentations, and physiological/neuroimaging studies. Lateralized presentations lack ecological validity, as arithmetic problems are not naturally
solved using peripheral vision or single ear presentation; physiological/
neuroimaging research is expensive. Prior studies support left hemisphere
dominance for addition processing, but simple addition processing may
involve greater hemispheric interaction. We replicated past findings using
a novel behavioral task in which simple and complex addition problems
were presented at fixation either alone or with a distractor in the left or
right visual field. The distractor weights problem processing to the ipsilateral hemisphere by competing for the attention of the contralateral hemisphere. Comparison of distractor-present trials with distractor-absent trials
measures relative costs or benefits of hemispheric interaction. Experiment
1 tested problems with single-digit addends involving two (simple) or
three (complex) operands. Experiment 2 tested problems that either did not
require carry-over from the ones to tens column (simple) or did (complex).
Only problems with two single-digit addends in Experiment 1 showed
benefits to response time and accuracy from hemispheric interaction (no
distractor) compared to each distractor-present condition; other problems
showed no benefit or a cost. Regardless of complexity, responses were
faster to problems with a left versus right distractor. The findings support
left hemisphere dominance for addition, and suggest that collaboration
between the hemispheres shifts to conflict as problem complexity increases.
Convergence with past studies supports the procedure as an alternative
behavioral test.

D129
USING VIRTUAL REALITY ENVIRONMENTS TO ASSESS WITHIN
AND ACROSS CONTEXT SEGMENTATION AND SPATIAL MEMORY
PERFORMANCE Kevin Horecka1, Michael Dulas1, Christopher Widdowson1,

Neal Cohen1; 1Beckman Institute of Advanced Science and Technology, University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Virtual Reality (VR) has been identified as a

useful tool in neuropsychological evaluation thanks to its increased control
and measurement capabilities over other methods (Schultheis et al, 2002).
More recently, evidence shows that along many measures, VR provides
similar ecological validity to real environments (Kuliga et al, 2014). One
area of research which is particularly amenable to VR paradigms is learning
and memory. Previous work has suggested that context-boundaries have
a selective effect on sequential binding of information and, therefore, item
relationships which span contexts should show segmentation effects when
compared to within-context items (DuBrow & Davachi, 2013). In this study,
a VR spatial navigation task with four contexts (colored rooms) was constructed to evaluate how judgments of item pair locations within a context
different from pairs which cross contexts. During the task, subjects were
instructed to explore their environment (beginning from pseudo-random
positions and orientations) and study locations of all items before being
tested. Measurements of subject position, orientation, and memory for item
locations were assessed. The data show significant increases in performance
(speed, efficiency of movement/orientation, and memory accuracy) across
successive training/test trial as well as significant difference in distance
between within-context and across-context item pairs (with across context
pairs being placed further apart and within context pairs closer together
despite the pairs being equidistant). These results show that virtual reality
can be used successfully in exploring spatial memory segmentation phenomena as well as provide tantalizing new measures which increase spatiotemporal resolution on behavior beyond other existing methods.

2016 Annual Meeting	

D130
DESIGN OF A MICROCONTROLLED LED SYSTEM WITH VERY HIGH
PRECISION TIMING PARAMETERS FOR USE IN EEG ENTRAINMENT EXPERIMENTS Maria Ruiz-Blondet1, Sarah Laszlo1; 1Cognitive and
Brain Sciences, State University of New York at Binghamton — EEG entrainment

is a robust and increasingly prominent phenomenon by which neural oscillations can be synchronized to an exogenous frequency, by presenting a
visual stimulus at that frequency-- usually a flickering computer monitor.
It is well-established that, for entrainment to be successful, it is necessary
to have high precision control over the frequency at which the stimulus
is shown. Here, with the use of a photosensor, we formally compare two
common methods of computer monitor flicker control (CPU control and
refresh synchronization) with a new method based on a device we have
constructed to control LED lights with the help of a microcontroller, the
Raspberry Pi. Results indicate that while refresh synchronization can produce fairly high temporal precision flicker, the physical limitations of even
high-end computer monitors (i.e., the finite refresh rate) result in occasional
frame dropping and consequent loss of precision in the timing of the flicker
stimulus. Our microcontrolled LED system, in contrast, is not subject to the
same physical limitations as a computer monitor and is therefore shown to
have better temporal precision for implementing flicker stimuli. We include
in the poster details of how to build and implement the LED device.

D131
PERSISTENT INFLUENCE OF SPORT-RELATED CONCUSSION ON
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL FUNCTION IN MALE AND FEMALE ATHLETES Veronik Sicard1,2, Robert Davis Moore1,2, Dave Ellemberg1,2; 1Université
de Montréal, 2Centre de Recherche en Neuropsychologie et Cognition — Despite

the increasing participation of females in sport over the last decades, there
is limited evidence that sex differences exist in outcomes of concussive
injuries. Therefore, we sought to determine if there is a sex difference in
the long-term cognitive outcome of athletes with a history of concussion
(HOC). One hundred and ninety-six collegiate athletes (49 HOC women,
HOC 49 men, 49 women matched controls, 49 men matched controls) completed the Cogstate test battery, to which a 2-back condition (N-back task)
was added to increase our ability to detect persistent deficits in higher
cognition. All participants were asymptomatic at time of testing and those
with a HOC were 6+ months from injury (24.0 ± 15.8 months). No group
difference was observed for target and non-target reaction time or accuracy (ps>0.05). However, HOC men exhibited a greater number of omission errors relative to HOC women (p<0.01) on the N-back task. Additionally, irrespective of sex, HOC athletes exhibited a greater number of errors
on the 1-back and 2-back conditions (ps<0.01), relative to controls. HOC
athletes also exhibited decreased accuracy on the 1-back and 2-back conditions (ps<0.01), relative to controls. Conversely, analysis failed to reveal
any group differences on tasks measuring lower-level cognitive functions
(ps>0.05). The current results suggest that beyond the acute phase of the
injury, sex does not seem as a moderating variable of cognitive outcomes
following concussion. Furthermore, the results reaffirm that concussive
injuries can result in persistent deficits in aspects of higher cognition.

D132
REMOTE ACQUISITION OF NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DATA
THROUGH THE USE OF A COLLABORATIVE VIDEOCONFERENCING SYSTEM Ololade Adebiyi1, Corrine Durisko1, Michael McCue1, Patrick J.

Doyle2, Michael W. Dickey1, Julie A. Fiez1; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2VA Pittsburgh
Healthcare System — Neuropsychology, or the “lesion method”, is the study

of behavioral changes that occur as a consequence of focal brain injury. For
more than 100 years it has played a central role in research that seeks to
understand the mind in terms of underlying neural structure and function.
Standard neuropsychological methods rely upon face-to-face interactions
between a patient and researcher. This creates geographic and logistical
barriers that impede research progress. To overcome these barriers, we created a flexible and integrated system for the remote acquisition of neuropsychological data (RAND). The system we developed has a secure architecture that permits collaborative videoconferencing. The system supports
shared audiovisual feeds that can provide continuous virtual interaction
between a participant and researcher throughout a testing session. Shared

Poster Session D
presentation and computing controls can be used to deliver auditory and
visual test items adapted from standard face-to-face materials or execute computer-based assessments. Spoken and manual responses can be
acquired and the session can be recorded for offline data analysis. Using
our RAND system, we administered a speech-language battery to stroke
survivors with a variety of communication, sensory, and motor impairments. The sessions were initiated virtually without prior face-to-face
instruction. Neuropsychological data were successfully acquired and participants indicated a high level of satisfaction with their testing experience.
Because our RAND system architecture uses off-the-shelf technology and
software it can be duplicated without specialized expertise or equipment.
In sum, our RAND system offers a readily available and promising alternative to face-to-face neuropsychological assessment.

D133
ALPHA TACS DOWN-REGULATES OCCIPITAL BOLD SIGNALS IN A
VISUAL DISCRIMINATION TASK Johannes Vosskuhl1, Sara da Ponte Martins Calado1, Christoph S. Herrmann1; 1University of Oldenburg, European Medical School, Oldenburg, Germany — Transcranial Alternating Current Stimu-

lation (tACS) at the individual alpha frequency (IAF) has been shown to
elevate EEG amplitudes at the IAF in a time period exceeding stimulation
for at least 30 minutes. Whether this amplitude increase results in a change
of brain activation, as measured by the Blood Oxygen Level Dependent
(BOLD) signal, is only sparsely investigated so far. Previous studies suggest that task related BOLD-signals but not resting state activation react
to tACS. In many studies, the occipital BOLD-signal correlates negatively
with alpha (8-13 Hz) and positively with gamma (30-80 Hz) oscillations.
Therefore, we conducted an experiment, in which tACS was delivered at
IAF (N=7) and 40 Hz (N=8) between groups, to induce a double dissociation between BOLD-effects as measured throughout the experiment. We
conducted three blocks (15 min each) of a visual discrimination task. Stimulation (1 mA current strength) was active only in the middle block. During
stimulation, a reduced BOLD-reaction to visual stimuli in the IAF group
relative to the 40 Hz group could be demonstrated. The same comparison
after tACS-offset showed a return to pre-stimulation baseline BOLD-signal
differences. Additional analyses indicated that the effect was mainly driven
by the IAF group. These results replicated previous findings and thereby
consolidated the notion of tACS being able to directly manipulate brain
activation. The after-effect documented in previous EEG-studies, was not
present in the BOLD-signal. Given the novelty of the combination of tACS
with measures of the BOLD-signal, these results yield important insights
into the functional mechanisms behind tACS.

D134
MODULATION OF CORTICAL ACTIVITY USING HIGH DENSITY
TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION Devin Adair1,2,

Dennis Truong1, Marom Bikson1; 1The City College of New York, CUNY, New York,
USA, 2The Graduate Center of The City University of New York, New York, NY, USA —

Background: Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) is a non-invasive neuromodulation technique that applies low currents across the scalp
to alter brain excitability. tDCS is well tolerated and easily adjusted to stimulate different brain regions, resulting in its application to a number of clinical and research question within the field of cognitive neuroscience. In conventional tDCS (1x1) two large pad electrodes with opposing charges are
used to modulate underlying cortical function. However, confrontational
modeling studies of current flow produced by conventional tDCS indicate
that regions between the electrodes and deep in the brain are also stimulated. We propose that the use of the 4x1 high-definition tDCS (HD-tDCS)
montage can be used to produce neuromodulation that is largely unidirectional and restricted to one targeted cortical region of interest. Methods:
Here we use high resolution cortical electrical field models to describe the
basic features of designing a 4x1 HD-tDCS montage. Namely, altering location, polarity and radius of the center and surrounding electrodes. Results:
The best fit solutions were arrived at using finite element method (FEM).
The results indicate that increasing the ring diameter for a given current
increased peak cortical current intensity and depth of penetration. The
degree of unidirectionality was not significantly influenced by ring diameter. The 4x1 HD-tDCS approach also produces much more consistent cortical targeting across brain regions and across individuals.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

177

Poster Session D	

D135
EXAMINING THE EVIDENTIAL VALUE OF TDCS STUDIES USING
A P-CURVE ANALYSIS Sam Cason1, Jared Medina1; 1University of Delaware

— Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) is a non-invasive method

of brain stimulation that has been shown to modulate neural excitability
via electrical currents. A number of studies across cognitive domains have
claimed that tDCS can influence behavior. However, recent meta-analyses
(e.g. Horvath, Carter, and Forte, 2014) have found no effects of single-session tDCS on cognitive tasks. Due to the incentivization of novelty and
pressures to publish throughout academia, selective analyses or samples
that produce significant p-values can be favored over those that do not.
This phenomenon – p-hacking – may artificially inflate the real strength
of an effect. Given questions regarding whether p-hacking is prevalent in
the tDCS literature, we applied a p-curve meta-analysis to a random selection of manuscripts that used tDCS to modulate performance on cognitive
tasks in healthy adults. A p-curve analysis, developed by Simonsohn and
colleagues (2014), analyzes the distribution of significant p-values (i.e. <
.05) over a series of papers. If the selected studies have some evidential
value, the distribution of p-values should be right-skewed (e.g. more .01s
than .04s), while p-hacked distributions are either flat or left-skewed (more
.04s than .01s). Our distribution of p-values was significantly more rightskewed than expected by chance, providing evidence that these studies
contain some evidential value.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
D136
MOTOR CORTEX INVOLVEMENT IN OFF-LINE EFFECTOR RECOGNITION Katherine R Naish1, Sukhvinder S Obhi1; 1McMaster University —

Observing an action performed by another person modulates activity in
the observer’s motor system. Most research to date has focused on how
this modulation contributes to action perception in real time, and there
has been little work on what happens after an action is observed. In previous work, we showed that interfering with motor activity during action
observation impairs recognition of the objects involved in the action. In the
current study, we examined whether motor interference impairs effector
recognition in a similar way. In two experiments, single-pulse transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) was delivered over the primary motor cortex
(M1) to briefly disrupt motor activity as participants watched an on-screen
hand action. After a visual mask, a second video clip or a still image of a
hand was presented, and participants judged whether the hand was the
same or different to that viewed previously. Our results showed an impairment of effector recognition on trials where TMS had been delivered over
M1 during action observation, compared to trials on which TMS was not
applied or was delivered over the vertex. Importantly, stimulation over M1
did not influence recognition of hands that were presented as static images,
or recognition of dot configurations or a moving shape. This work suggests
a role for motor cortex in offline recognition of elements of action, with the
motor system retaining a representation of the acting effector beyond the
action observation period. Such lasting representations could play a role in
observational learning and delayed action imitation.

D137
CTBS DISRUPTION OF THE SUPPLEMENTARY MOTOR AREA
STRENGTHENS THE INVOLVEMENT OF HIPPOCAMPUS IN
SEQUENCE PROCESSING Oleg Solopchuk1, Andrea Alamia1, Etienne Oliv-

ier1, Alexandre Zénon1; 1Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium
— Two neural circuits are thought to be involved in sequence processing.

The dorsal system (parietal and supplementary motor areas, SMA) would
be responsible for procedural sequence memory while the ventral system
(medial temporal lobes) would be responsible for declarative sequence
memory. Here, we wanted to investigate whether those neural systems run
in parallel during sequence processing and what is their respective contribution to sequence performance. Twelve subjects were trained for 4 days
to execute 3 different movement sequences. Then they underwent 2 sessions of continuous Theta Burst Stimulation (cTBS) immediately followed
by a functional neuroimaging (fMRI) session during which they executed
trained or novel sequences and single finger movements. In one of the ses-

178

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
sions, cTBS targeted the SMA, a core node of the dorsal learning system network. In the control session, cTBS was delivered over a region of somatosensory cortex corresponding to the leg representation. Our preliminary
results showed that in both sessions the cortical network responsible for
sequence execution (mainly primary motor and premotor cortex) was less
activated during performance of trained versus novel sequences, in accordance with the literature. SMA cTBS did not affect subjects’ task performance in terms of reaction time but increased the involvement of bilateral
hippocampus during the execution of the trained motor sequences. This
suggests that the ventral (declarative) sequence processing system compensated the deficit induced by the disruption of the dorsal (procedural)
system. We expect multivariate analyses to shed more light on the integration of the neural circuits involved in motor sequence learning.

D139
THE MAGNITUDE OF SUPPRESSION TO SELF-INITIATED SENSATIONS IS DEPENDENT ON THE INITIATING MOTOR-ACTION Nathan
Mifsud1, Tom Beesley1, Thomas Whitford1; 1UNSW Australia — Self-initiated

auditory sensations elicit smaller N1 amplitudes in the auditory evoked
potential compared to physically identical externally-initiated sensations.
The magnitude of this effect, known as ‘N1-suppression’, is typically larger
for sounds evoked by willed vocalizations compared to sounds evoked
indirectly by motor actions (e.g., button-pressing for tones). While this
effect may be due to a learning effect (i.e., auditory sensations are more
likely to result from mouth movements than finger movements), it could
be due to the different sensations elicited in the different conditions. The
present study compared N1-suppression evoked by three different types
of motor movements. We collected ERP data from healthy individuals who
either blew into a microphone (Blow condition), pressed a button (Press
condition), or moved their eyes (Saccade condition) to generate a simple
auditory tone. N1-suppression was calculated for each of the three conditions by subtracting N1-amplitude for each condition from the External
condition, in which the computer automatically generated stimuli. There
were marked differences in N1-suppression between the three conditions.
N1-suppression was largest in the Blow condition and smallest in the
Saccade condition, with the Press condition showing intermediate levels
of N1-suppression. These results indicate that when holding auditory
stimulus constant, N1-suppression magnitude is dependent on the eliciting motor action; mouth movements are associated with higher levels of
N1-suppression than eye movements, with finger movements in between.
These results suggest that N1-suppression is influenced by prior ‘learning’
as to the likelihood that a given motor action will result in an auditory sensation.

D140
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF MOVEMENT IMAGERY: MU
RHYTHM REFLECTS IMAGERY SUCCESS AND ABILITY Kathryn
Lambert1, Yvonne Chen1,2, Christopher Madan1,3, Anthony Singhal1,2; 1University of Alberta, 2Neuroscience & Mental Health Institute, 3Boston College — The

mu rhythm (8-12 Hz) is a variant of the alpha band that is recorded over
the motor regions of the brain. Research has indicated that the mu rhythm
is related to sensorimotor processes as it is suppressed during both overt
movement and action observation. However, the relationship between this
rhythm and imagined movements is less clear. Here we were interested in
examining brain rhythms in the context of movement imagery success and
ability. We recorded continuous EEG while 61 participants performed the
Test of Ability in Movement Imagery (TAMI; Madan & Singhal, 2013), an
objective measure of movement imagery ability. We hypothesized that mu
activity would be suppressed during successful movement imagery trials
in addition to varying as a function of overall motor imagery ability. The
results demonstrated that, as expected, the mu rhythm was significantly
suppressed on successful movement imagery trials compared to unsuccessful ones. We also examined the data with an alternative scoring method for
the TAMI (Madan & Singhal, 2014) that allowed us to compare the “good”
imagers with the “poor” imagers. These analyses revealed that the good
imagers had higher levels of mu activity on average compared to the poor
imagers. Taken together, these results suggest that the mu rhythm reflects
important processes related to movement imagery, which are likely closely
related to the processes that underlie overt movements and action understanding.

2016 Annual Meeting	

D141
MUSICAL RHYTHM ACROSS SPECIES: DISENTANGLING MOTOR
CONTROL LIMITS AND AESTHETIC PREFERENCES Tina Roeske1,

Eathan Janney2; 1Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, Frankfurt, Germany, 2Psychology Department, Hunter College, New York, NY, USA — In a skill-

ful musical performance, motor actions will often be executed close to a
motor-control limit. Sometimes this becomes apparent in the music itself
(e.g. shriller voice close to its upper pitch limit, less expressive timing
manipulations at high than at lower tempo). Here we present a way to
directly compare a motor-control limit in human musicians and songbirds,
by measuring how the timing of notes is manipulated at fast tempi. When
human musicians swing (= produce long-short patterns instead of uniform
note repetitions, e.g. in jazz), they are known to decrease the swing and
approach a uniform rhythm as tempo increases3. This might be due to
reaching a motor limit: the musicians are no longer able to independently
manipulate adjacent timing intervals. Here we show a similar effect in
thrush nightingales who frequently produce repetitive long-short patterns
(swing). Their swing patterns fall into different groups revealing different
kinds of motor constraints: 1) In the fastest swing patterns, the birds seem
to have no control over the short time interval duration, consistent with
a production mechanism where one gesture creates a double sound (like
clicking your tongue). 2) At medium tempi, swing patterns form distinct,
non-overlapping groups characterized by swing ratio (long-to-short time
interval ratio). Each group’s swing ratio decreases with increasing tempo,
again suggesting motor limits on timing manipulations in faster sequences.
However, the occurrence of such distinct groups with different swing
strengths is unlikely to result from constraints, but might reflect aesthetic
preference for distinct rhythmic patterns instead.

D142
PLACEBO AND NOCEBO EFFECTS: A TMS STUDY ON THE CONGRUENCY BETWEEN CONDITIONING AND VERBAL SUGGESTION Nicole Corsi1,2, Michele Tinazzi1, Mehran Emadi-Andani1,3, Mirta Fiorio1;
1

University of Verona - Italy, 2University of Maryland Baltimore - USA, 3University
of Isfahan - Iran — Placebo and Nocebo refer respectively to a positive or a
negative outcome induced by expectation about the effect of a treatment,
actually inert. These effects can be induced by conditioning processes and
verbal suggestion, that typically match (i.e., both positive or both negative).
Until now, no study has examined what happens when these two variables
do not go hand by hand. Our study included 50 participants tested in a
motor task and assigned to four groups: two with congruent conditioning
and verbal suggestion (both positive or negative) and two with incongruent ones (one positive and one negative). The protocol consisted of three
sessions and after the second and third sessions an inert treatment was
applied with verbal suggestion of improvement or worsening. During the
conditioning procedure a visual feedback (surreptitiously manipulated)
indicated the force level: in two groups the feedback manipulation was congruent with the verbal suggestion; while in other two groups it was incongruent. Results showed a strong decrease of force in the groups with negative verbal suggestion, independently of the conditioning. These groups
also showed a lower perception of force and a higher sense of effort at the
end of the procedure compared to the beginning. During the procedure,
TMS was applied over the primary motor cortex to investigate the excitability of the corticospinal system. Results showed a general shortening of
the cortical silent period in all the groups. These findings hint at a more
prominent role of verbal suggestion compared to conditioning, especially
during a nocebo procedure.

D143
PHASE LOCKING AS A NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL MARKER OF
MOVEMENT EXECUTION IN YOUNG AND ELDERLY SUBJECTS
Silvia Daun-Gruhn1,2, Nils Rosjat1,2, Svitlana Popovych1,2, Liqing Liu1,2, Azamat
Yeldesbay1,2, Bin Wang2, Rouhollah Abdollahi2, Shivakumar Viswanathan2,3,
Christian Grefkes2,3, Gereon Fink2,3; 1Heisenberg Research Group of Computational Biology, Department of Animal Physiology, Institute of Zoology, University
of Cologne, Germany, 2Cognitive Neuroscience, Institute of Neuroscience and
Medicine (INM-3), Research Centre Jülich, Germany, 3Department of Neurology,

Poster Session D
University of Cologne, Germany — Motor actions are generated by complex

interactions of various brain regions. The same brain regions can build various functional networks depending on the action. Identifying the neural
signals that encode an action’s component (selection, preparation, execution) remains a difficult task. In the current study, EEG data were recorded
continuously from 18 young (22-35 years) and 15 elderly (60-71 years) righthanded healthy subjects as they performed a simple motor task. The task
required participants to execute a left or right index finger tapping triggered by a visual cue or by an uncued voluntary choice. We found that voluntary and visually triggered movements exhibit significant phase locking
in the delta-theta frequency band (2-7 Hz) around movement onset both in
young and old subjects. However, significant differences in movement and
processing time between the two groups of subjects were observed as well.
Moreover, there was a negative correlation between the movement time
and the maximal value of the phase-locking index (PLI) in young subjects.
This indicates that the aforementioned changes in behavioral performance
result from a decrease of PLI in the respective motor regions. In summary,
we suggest that this enhanced intra-regional synchrony, which seems to be
impaired in the elderly, helps the simultaneously active pathways of distinct cortical networks that initiate voluntary and stimulus-triggered movements, converge to a common motor output and activate the appropriate
muscles to perform the movement. This mechanism may thus be regarded
as a prototype for organizing more complex motor activities.

D144
THE PRIMARY MOTOR CORTEX CONTRIBUTES TO MOTOR IMAGERY DURING MENTAL ROTATION OF HANDS: EVIDENCE FROM
TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION. Christian Hyde1, Ian

Fuelscher1, Jarrad Lum1, Peter Enticott1; 1Cognitive Neuroscience Unit, School
of Psychology, Deakin University — A strong body of evidence suggests that

mental simulation of movement (viz motor imagery- MI) activates similar neural networks to actual movement. Presently, however, evidence on
the contribution of the primary motor cortex to MI remains equivocal. We
sought to clarify debate using single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to the left primary motor cortex of neurotypical young adults
(18 to 35 years) during a novel yet highly controlled hand rotation task.
Participants made laterality decisions about single hand stimuli presented
at varying angular rotations. A TMS pulse was delivered to the left primary
motor cortex during each trial (with varying latencies), and motor evoked
potentials (MEP) were recorded from the right first dorsal interosseus
(FDI). In order to maintain the reliability of performance measurements
associated with manual responses yet control for associated motor effects,
participants responded visually via saccades to fixation points either side of
the stimulus, recorded using near infra-red eye -tracking. Consistent with
the use of MI strategy, response time data suggested the influence of biomechanical constraints of real movement on hand rotation performance as
indicated by slower response times for hands requiring lateral compared
to medial rotation. Importantly, MEP amplitudes were significantly larger
for biomechanically more difficult rotations (lateral) compared to easier
rotations (medial) following TMS at 50ms and 400ms post stimulus presentation; no differences were observed with stimulation at 650ms latency.
These results are consistent with the view that the left primary motor cortex
contributes to MI performance and that MI complexity may moderate activation levels.

D145
INCREASED CORTICOSPINAL ACTIVATION DURING IMPLICIT
MOTOR IMAGERY IS ASSOCIATED WITH IMPROVED MOTOR
IMAGERY ABILITY Ian Fuelscher1, Christian Hyde1, Jarrad Lum1, Peter G.
Enticott1; 1Deakin University — Recent evidence suggests that increased cor-

ticospinal excitability during motor imagery (MI) may be associated with
improved MI ability. However, no study to date has tested this assumption
empirically by investigating the association between corticospinal excitability and implicit MI ability using concurrent metrics from the same task. This
was the aim of the present study. Participants were healthy adults aged
18-35 years. MI ability was inferred from response efficiency on the hand
rotation task, an implicit MI paradigm commonly used in developmental
and clinical settings. To measure corticospinal excitability during the hand
rotation task, single pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) was
delivered to the left primary motor cortex at latencies of either 50ms, 400ms

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

179

Poster Session D	
or 650ms following stimulus onset. The amplitude of motor evoked potentials (MEP) was recorded from the right first dorsal interosseus muscle as
an index of corticospinal excitability. Regression analysis showed that,
after controlling for MEP amplitude at baseline, increased MEP amplitudes
during the hand rotation task were associated with improved MI performance when TMS was delivered either 50ms or 400ms following stimulus
presentation. This is the first study to provide critical empirical evidence
in support of the view that individual differences in corticospinal activation may underlie implicit MI ability. Implications of these findings for the
involvement of the motor cortex during implicit MI are discussed.

D146
MODULATION OF SENSORY-MOTOR CORTICAL NETWORK
USING TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION Pejman

Sehatpour1,2, Devin Adair1,2,3, Stephanie Rohrig1,2, Joanna DiCostanzo1,2, Daniel
Javitt1,2,3; 1Columbia University, 2Nathan Kline Institute, 3The City College of New
York of CUNY — Background: Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)

is a technique for modulating local brain function by applying constant low
(<2 mA) direct currents to corresponding regions of the scalp. It is noninvasive and can be repeated over time within the same subject, therefore representing a practical new neurocognitive investigation and treatment tool.
Our goal was to characterize the effects of tDCS on modulating the activity
in a critical cortical network engaged during a motor sequence task (MST).
Methods: Participants performed the MST (pressing four color-coded keys
according to a prompted sequence) under four tDCS conditions: anodal,
cathodal, sham and visual. Simultaneous EEG recordings were acquired
over all four sessions administered on different days. We employed a combination of tDCS, behavioral measures, EEG and fMRI data. Analyses of
variance were performed to assess the modulations in task-relevant EEG
and fMRI signals. Results: Time-frequency decomposition of the EEG data
revealed statistically significant effects of stimulation on task-relevant
frequency bands within specific cortical nodes verified independently by
fMRI. Conclusions: The present results indicate that tDCS brings about statistically significant modulations of the sensory-motor network involved in
performance of MST. Characterization of spatio-temporal effects of tDCS
on task-dependent cortical network activity greatly contributes to our
understanding of neurocognitive mechanisms.

D147
TIME COURSE CEREBELLAR ACTIVITY TRACKS SACCADE ADAPTATION BEHAVIOR Jason Fuller1, Alain Guillaume1, Clay Curtis1; 1New York
University — Sensorimotor adaptation is a learning process that serves

to continuously calibrate movements to evolving environmental conditions. When the world around us and/or our effectors change states (e.g.,
fatigue), we tend to produce larger than usual motor errors. These errors
gradually reduce over time as adaptation mechanisms learn to recalibrate
our movements to the new conditions. Recent animal neurophysiological
studies suggest that the cerebellum plays a critical role in sensorimotor
adaptation by generating an exafferent teaching signal which varies with
the size of motor errors over time. Analogous evidence of a similar process
in the human brain is lacking. To address this, we investigated if cerebellar
activity tracks the time course of adaptation behavior as measured through
trial-by-trial changes in movement error. We performed an fMRI study
of saccade adaptation in which we experimentally induced a discrepancy
between predicted and actual sensory feedback by consistently perturbing
a saccade target during mid-movement. Subjects initially made large errors
to the perturbed target but then adapted their saccades over the course of
50-100 trials, reducing errors close to pre-perturbation magnitudes. Trial-by-trial estimates of BOLD activity in the cerebellum correlated with
adaptive learning, reducing in amplitude as saccade errors decreased. This
finding is consistent with the notion that the cerebellum contributes to sensorimotor adaptation by computing an exafferent teaching signal capable
of adapting the motor system to ensure future movements remain in registry with new environmental conditions.

D148
IMITATIVE CONTROL OF ADOLESCENTS WITH DELINQUENT
BEHAVIOR Chia-Chi Chow1, Pasco Fearon1, James Sheffield1, Peter Fonagy1;
1

University College London — Introduction: Previous research has suggested
the functional-anatomical overlap between the capacity of imitation inhi-

180

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
bition and empathy. Recently, two ERP components, temporal-parietal
450 (TP450) and the late frontal slow wave (LFSW) are indicated to reflect
the shared neural processes and time course during imitative control and
empathy. Numerous studies have linked the lack of empathy with delinquent actions toward others. However, little work has investigated the
shared neural process of empathy and imitative control in adolescents with
delinquent behavior. Method: 19 clinical referred adolescents (8 females,
mean age =16.16±1.95) who reported a high occurrence of serious violence
(≥ 13) in the past 6 months on the Self-Reported Delinquency Scale were
recruited as participants. We used the imitation inhibition task and measured simultaneous high-density EEG. The interpersonal reactivity index
was also given to measure their empathy. Results: Repeated measure
ANOVA indicated that participants showed more activation at right temporal-parietal lobe for TP450 than at the left hemisphere. No main effect
of congruency or interaction effect was found. Regarding the LFSW, there
was a main effect of congruency. The mean amplitude of LFSW was larger
in congruent condition than in incongruent condition. No site or interaction
effect was found. Correlational analysis demonstrated that cognitive perspective ability was negatively correlated with mean amplitude of TP450
in the incongruent condition. Conclusion: Adolescents who were involved
with severe violence showed a different pattern of neural process during
imitative control. The implication will be discussed.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
D149
EMOTIONAL PERCEPTUAL TRAINING AS A TREATMENT FOR
SOCIAL ANXIETY: BEHAVIORAL AND MEG EVIDENCE Lucas Novak1,

Yuqi You1, Colin Humphries2, Wen Li1; 1Florida State University, 2Medical College
of Wisconsin — A characteristic of social anxiety is hypersensitivity to social

threat information, such that mildly negative or neutral facial expressions
may be perceived as threatening and cause distress. Current psychotherapy for social anxiety focuses on modifying prefrontal processing of
these cues via cognitive reappraisal or extinction learning; however, the
possibility of revising sensory encoding of facial emotion, thereby reducing perceptual biases and ameliorating symptoms, has not been thoroughly explored. Therefore, we implemented an emotional perceptual
training protocol where participants were trained to categorize faces with
anger intensity 15% and 5% above or below detection threshold as angry
or neutral faces, respectively. Reflecting improved distinction between
meaningful and insignificant anger, performance on an anger-detection
task (involving another set of face morphs) demonstrated reduced anger
detection at low anger intensities and increased detection at high intensities (p’s<.01). Importantly, two weeks after the training, social anxiety
decreased among these participants [T(18)=4.19, p=.001] while remaining
unchanged among a control group who performed gender judgments only
(p=.98). A magnetoencephalogram (MEG) study on an independent group
undergoing a similar training protocol replicated training-induced discrimination between meaningful and insignificant anger [T(16)=12.1, p<.001].
In parallel, we observed enhanced discrimination of faces with supra- and
sub-threshold anger intensities in fusiform face area at ~122ms poststimulus (Z=2.65, p<.05 SVC) and anterior fusiform at ~178ms (Z=2.69, p<.005).
In sum, our findings accentuate an emotional perceptual training protocol
that expands the boundary between threat and safety signals by altering
visual cortical encoding of these signals, thereby alleviating social anxiety.

D150
NATIVE READING DIRECTION AND DIFFERENCES IN LATERAL
BIASES DURING ARTWORK LIGHTING AND SPATIAL LOCATION
TASKS Austen Smith1, Kari Duerksen1, Carl Gutwin1, Lorin Elias1; 1University of
Saskatchewan — Most people demonstrate consistent leftward biases across

a variety of visuospatial tasks. However, some research examining rightto-left (RtoL) readers has found an attenuation of the leftward bias. The current study examined both left-to-right (LtoR) and bilingual RtoL readers in
two computerized free-viewing spatial tasks. First, in a spatial-location task
participants viewed a centred rectangle that had a portion of a circle overlapping it. The rectangle was unchanged while circles varied in size and
location between trials, only ever overlapping the rectangle from either the
left or right. Participants were instructed to estimate the centre of the circle

2016 Annual Meeting	
with a single mouse click. Analysis of lateral and vertical errors between
true and perceived centre revealed no significant differences between
LtoR and RtoL readers. Both groups demonstrated greater errors in lateral
dimensions than in vertical and when lateral errors were divided between
left and right significantly smaller errors were made for circles on the left.
For the second task, participants were presented with 20 images of abstract
paintings, in both their original orientation and flipped upside down, and
given a ‘virtual flashlight’ with the instructions to light the painting in a
way that is most aesthetically pleasing. Whereas LtoR readers made significantly more leftward final light placements, RtoL readers made nearly
equal placements. Additionally, LtoR participants’ average light placement
was significantly in the upper left quadrant. RtoL participants displayed
no significant lateral or vertical final light placement biases. These results
suggest leftward biases endure across spatial location but not aesthetic
preference tasks.

D151
CATEGORY BOUNDARIES AND TYPICALITY WARP THE NEURAL
REPRESENTATION SPACE OF REAL-WORLD OBJECT CATEGORIES Marius Cătălin Iordan1, Michelle R. Greene1, Diane M. Beck2, Li Fei-Fei1;
1

Stanford University, 2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Categories
create cognitively useful generalizations by leveraging the correlational
structure of the world. Although previous work has shown that object categories possess both hierarchical structure (entry-level effects, Rosch et al.,
1976) and typicality structure (Rosch, 1973), little is known about the neural
underpinnings of these processes. In this study, we leverage representational similarity analysis to understand how cognitively useful category
structure emerges in the human visual system. We performed a functional
neuroimaging (fMRI) experiment in which participants were shown photographs of 15 subordinate-level categories from each of two basic-level
categories (dogs and cars). Typicality for each subordinate within its basic
category was also assessed behaviorally. We computed the neural correlation distance between all pairs of subordinates in early visual areas (V1, V2,
V3v, hV4) and object-selective cortex (LOC). We found that as we move
from low-level visual areas to object-selective regions, neural distances are
compressed within categories and simultaneously expanded between categories. This effect arises gradually as we move up the ventral visual stream,
with a marked increase between hV4 and LOC. Furthermore, within each
basic category in LOC, typicality influences the organization of the neural
distance space: highly typical items are brought closer together, while distance between atypical exemplars grows. Taken together, our results suggest that as we move up the ventral visual stream, distances between neural
representations of real-world objects warp to facilitate categorical distinctions. Moreover, the nature of this warping may provide evidence for a
prototype-based representation that clusters highly typical subordinates
together in object-selective cortex.

D152
CHANGES IN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS INDUCED BY CATEGORY LEARNING Fernanda Perez Gay Juarez1,2,3, Daniel Rivas3, Hisham

Sabri3, Nicolas Botero4, Madeline Gregory4, Riona Morgan4, Stevan Harnad1,2,3;
1
Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill University, 2Center for Research
in Brain, Language and Music, 3NeuroUQAM, Université du Québec à Montréal,
4
Psychology and Cognitive Science departments, McGill University — We study

Categorical Perception (CP), a phenomenon in which our categories influence our perception, making members of the same category look more alike
(compression) and members of different categories look more different
(separation). Inborn CP effects (colors, phonemes) are well documented but
because most of our categories are learned rather than inborn, acquired CP
effects are of particular interest. To test for CP effects induced by learnings,
we trained subjects by trial and error with corrective feedback to sort samples of unfamiliar stimuli into two categories. Before training they rated
sample pairs of stimuli for similarity. Some were in the same category some
in different categories, but the subjects had not yet learned the categories.
Some succeeded in learning, some did not. After training, they again rated
the sample pairs for similarity. We recorded EEG during the training. There
were 4 levels of difficulty, 20 subjects per level. We compared early and
late Event Related Potential (ERP) in successful learners and non-learners
and their relation to their similarity ratings. The learners had significant

Poster Session D
differences in their late (450-600 ms) and early (160-200 ms) components,
comparing the trials after learning to the trials before learning. These effects
were absent in non-learners, comparing the first and second half of their
training trials. The results provide evidence for the emergence of CP effects
after learning a new category and thus support the existence of CP induced
by learning.

D153
AN EFFECT OF PRIOR ON SUBJECTIVE VISIBILITY JUDGMENTS

Jean-Rémi King1, Gabriela Meade2, Stanislas Dehaene3; 1New York University,
USA, 2San Diego State University & University of California, San Diego, USA, 3College de France, France — A growing body of evidence suggests that human

perceptual decision-making follows Bayesian principles. Indeed, subjects
appear to combine i) the likelihood and ii) the prior of incoming sensory
evidence to iii) generate their perceptual report posterior. However, the
neural mechanisms underlying these three computational elements remain
poorly understood. In the present study, we investigated each of these elements in a classic backward masking protocol using behavioral measures,
computational modeling and a combination of electro- and magneto-encephalography (M/EEG). We parametrically manipulated i) the likelihood
of the stimuli by varying the target-mask stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA)
and ii) the prior of the stimuli by varying the visibility of the preceding
trials, and iii) inferred subjects’ posteriors by using a continuous visibility
rating task. Behavioral results suggested that subjects’ visibility responses
varied as a function of both target likelihood and the visibility prior established by the preceding trials. MEG analyses further revealed that these
effects of target likelihood and visibility prior were correlated with multiple processing stages of the stimulus. The effect of visibility of the preceding trial was observed as early as 150 ms and was strongest around 200300 ms after target onset, importantly suggesting that priors can directly
impact low-level sensory processes. Paralleling the behavioral visibility
ratings, these effects of prior were strongest when likelihood was low (i.e.,
for shorter SOAs). By disentangling the dynamics of distinct computational
elements of perceptual decisions, this study paves the way to understanding the canonical algorithm of perceptual inferences.

D154
TMS TO PRIMARY OCCIPITAL CORTEX DECREASES FEATURE-SPECIFIC NEURAL ACTIVITY FOR ORIENTATION TUNING
Annelinde Vandenbroucke1, Dobromir Rahnev2, Mark D’Esposito1; 1University of
California, Berkeley, California, 2Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia
— Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) is widely used as a tool to ‘virtu-

ally lesion’ a specific brain area. However, this interpretation is challenged
by studies that found that even in simple visual acuity experiments, TMS
to occipital cortex can both positively (Thompson et al., 2008; Waterston
& Pack, 2010) and negatively (Antal et al., 2002; Kosslyn et al., 1999) affect
behavior. It has been proposed that TMS either decreases signal strength
(Harris et al., 2008; Rahnev et al., 2013) or adds neural noise to the system
(Ruzzoli et al., 2010; Schwarzkopf et al., 2011). Here we set to examine the
neural mechanism through which TMS affects visual stimulus processing.
We used functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to investigate the
effect of continuous Theta Burst Stimulation (cTBS) on the tuning curves in
primary occipital cortex. Participants participated in two sessions during
which cTBS was delivered to V1 and a control site (vertex) in a counterbalanced order. Before and after cTBS application, participants performed a
simple orientation discrimination task on oriented Gabor gratings during
fMRI scanning. We found that – compared to control cTBS – occipital cTBS
led to a decrease in orientation decoding in V1, and this effect diminished
in extrastriate cortex. Decreased orientation decoding was associated with
a decrease in tuning curve amplitude, whereas there was no overall loss
in neural signal. These findings suggest that cTBS affects feature-specific
neural activity, such that neural activity becomes less specifically tuned to
a preferred orientation.

D155
BOUNDARY ENHANCEMENT EFFECTS IN FMR ADAPTATION:
WARPING OF REPRESENTATIONAL SPACE OR HEIGHTENED
ATTENTION? Dmitrii Paniukov1, Darrell Worthy2, Tyler Davis1; 1Texas Tech

University, 2Texas A&M University — Category learning results in increased
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

181

Poster Session D	

2016 Annual Meeting

discriminability along stimulus dimensions that are relevant for distinguishing between categories. Such heightened discriminability is thought
to reflect a stretching of category representations along relevant dimensions. FMR adaptation is a measure of neural representation thought to
be sensitive to representational stretching and is based on the observation
that BOLD signal adapts (decreases) for sequentially presented stimuli as
a function of their similarity. Consistent with representational stretching
theories, studies using FMR adaptation have found that sequentially presented items that cross a previously learned boundary between categories
elicit reduced adaptation compared to equally spaced items along an irrelevant dimension. However, these results are not sufficient to establish a
true stretching effect because item pairs that cross a boundary are also associated with heightened attention due to previously being associated with
different behavioral responses. To compare accounts, we used a continuous
carry-over design in which we could test for representational stretching of
the distances between items that cross a category boundary while adjusting for the salience of different category labels. Consistent with previous
findings, sequentially presented items from different categories exhibited a
greater release from adaptation. However, when the categorical effect was
controlled, activation in ventral visual stream was negatively correlated
with distance between stimuli: the closer two stimuli in different categories
were, the greater the release from adaptation. These results suggest release
from adaptation for sequences of items crossing a boundary may be due to
attentional salience and not representational stretching.

cause, itself a function of top-down prior beliefs and bottom-up prediction
errors. Here we tested whether confidence can be functionally explained
according to these principles. Participants performed a psychophysical
perceptual detection task under fMRI in which prior predictions and attention were orthogonally manipulated and confidence ratings collected. We
found that high prediction error in right VLPFC related to low subjective
perceptual confidence. Additionally, the more prediction error discriminated between degrees of subjective confidence, the greater the V1 to right
VLPFC effective connectivity and the less the right OFC to right VLPFC
effective connectivity. Individual differences in the relative perceptual contributions of these components were reflected in individual differences in
occipital lobe and OFC white matter density. In summary, results support
the notion that subjective confidence, constructed in right VLPFC, is a combination of sensory prediction errors, originating in V1, and expected task
performance, represented in OFC. The balance of top-down and bottom-up
influences is instantiated in brain structure. Our results therefore reveal a
functional brain network underlying the construction of subjective confidence during visual perceptual decision. These findings extend predictive
accounts of perception to account for subjective aspects of perception and
their neural underpinnings.

D156
EARLY VISUAL CORTEX RESPONSES TO VIOLATIONS OF EMOTION-LOCATION ASSOCIATIONS Karsten Rauss1, Laura Herde1, Valen-

rick Khader1, Thorsten Pachur1, Lilian Weber2, Kerstin Jost3; 1Max Planck Institute
for Human Development, Berlin, Germany, 2University of Zurich and ETH Zurich,
Switzerland, 3University of the Federal Armed Forces, Hamburg, Germany —

tina Rossi2, Gilles Pourtois2; 1University of Tuebingen, Germany, 2Ghent University, Belgium — Over the last years, evidence has accumulated for an active

involvement of low-level sensory processing in higher cognitive functions.
Some of the modulations of early visual processing in particular suggest
that retinotopic visual cortex may be implementing active predictions of
upcoming stimuli. In the present study, our aim was to test this idea at
the earliest stages of visual processing that can be reliably detected using
non-invasive recordings in humans. Healthy participants learned to associate centrally presented images of human faces expressing different emotions with peripherally presented line-elements known to produce strong
responses in retinotopically organized brain areas. Different emotions
predicted upcoming stimuli in either the upper or the lower visual field
on frequent standard trials. On infrequent test trials, emotional faces were
followed by combined stimulation of upper and lower visual fields. Subtracting ERPs elicited by standard trials from those elicited in test trials
allowed us to compare visual cortex responses to the same physical stimulus elements under expected vs. unexpected conditions. We hypothesized
increased early visual cortex responses elicited by unexpected stimuli
compared to responses to expected ones, reflecting the mismatch between
expectation and perception. Our results show no such difference between
expected and unexpected stimuli at the level of the retinotopic C1 component. These findings indicate that the violation of emotion-location association is not detected at the level of early visual cortex. However, exploratory
comparisons between initial and later phases of the experiment suggest
an asymmetric adaptation of prediction-error signals, at least in the upper
visual field.

THINKING: Decision making
D158
A FUNCTIONAL NETWORK UNDERLYING THE CONSTRUCTION OF
SUBJECTIVE CONFIDENCE IN THE BAYESIAN BRAIN Maxine Sherman1,2, Anil Seth1,3, Ryota Kanai1,4; 1Sackler Centre for Consciousness Science,
University of Sussex, UK, 2School of Psychology, University of Sussex, UK, 3Department of Informatics, University of Sussex, UK, 4Department of Neuroinformatics,
Araya Brain Imaging, Japan — When making visual perceptual decisions, con-

scious visual experience is typically accompanied by a sense of confidence.
How subjective perceptual confidence arises at the neural level remains
unclear. ‘Predictive processing’ accounts propose that perceptual content
arises from inferring the causes of sensory signals, given prior expectations.
Confidence corresponds to the posterior probability of the inferred sensory

182

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

D159
NEURAL DYNAMICS OF CONTROLLED AND AUTOMATIC MEMORY
ACTIVATION DURING MEMORY-BASED DECISION-MAKING Pat-

When making decisions based on information stored in memory, people
often make use of strategies such as “take-the-best” (TTB), which processes
attribute information sequentially and stops search as soon as a given attribute allows making a decision. In a functional neuroimaging study, we
delineated the neural signatures of two fundamental aspects of memory
retrieval during decision-making with TTB: (1) automatic activation of all
attributes that had been associated with a decision option, and (2) controlled retrieval of individual task-relevant attributes. Participants decided,
based on previously learned attribute information, which of two companies would be more successful. To disentangle the relative contributions of
automatic and controlled retrieval processes, we manipulated the number
of attributes associated with each object (one, two, or three) and the number
of attributes that had to be retrieved according to TTB, respectively. The
results showed that the retrieval of knowledge—whether automatic or controlled—affected decision performance and activated attribute-specific posterior brain areas. Moreover, the two facets of memory retrieval were associated with distinct activation patterns within the fronto-parietal network
of memory control. Specifically, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex reflected
increasing retrieval effort during both automatic and controlled activation
of attributes. In contrast, the superior parietal cortex only responded to
controlled retrieval, arguably reflecting the sequential updating of attribute information in working memory. These findings demonstrate the usefulness of combining memory and decision-making research with neural
measures to construct models of the retrieval dynamics involved in memory-based decision-making.

D160
DECISIONS ABOUT WHEN: TRADING OFF INFORMATION AGAINST
REWARDS IN TIME IN A VISUO-MOTOR DECISION TASK Poa-Kai

Feng1, Shih-Wei Wu1,2; 1Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan, 2Brain Research Center, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei,
Taiwan — Information often comes at a cost: while more information is more

desirable under a variety of situations, it takes time to collect information.
How do humans trade off the benefit of time as a result of information gain
against the cost of time? In a visuo-motor task, subjects had to point to a
hidden target presented on a touch screen for a chance to receive monetary
reward. Noisy visual information about target location was presented in
the form of dots sampled from a bivariate Gaussian distribution around the
target center. Critically, the number of dots presented increased as a function of time so that the longer the subjects waited, the larger the sample size
and hence the higher the probability of hitting the hidden target. However,
upon dots presentation, the amount of reward for a hit started to decrease,
effectively acting as time cost. We found that subjects (n=16) traded off the

2016 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session D

probability of hitting the target against the rewards for hitting it by changing their response time. However, compared with an ideal decision maker
who optimally trades off information against time, subjects were optimal
when the rewards decreased at slower rates, but were slower than optimal
under faster decrease rates. This pattern was robust across trials where the
amount of potential reward at the start differed. Together, our results indicated that while humans clearly recognize and attempt to trade off information against time, the efficiency of such tradeoff critically depends on the
dynamics of cost structure in the environment.

corruption blocks. Taken together these findings suggest that medial prefrontal surprise signals do not naively reflect increased behavioral updating, but may be used adaptively to modulate learning in either direction.

D161
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL (ERP) SALIENCE AND VALUE REPRESENTATION OF PRIMARY REINFORCERS Emily Hird1, Deborah

– respectively model-free and model-based reinforcement learning algorithms – are commonly used to fit choice data but are usually oblivious
to the time needed to reach a decision. Here, we introduce a Model-Free
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) algorithm based on drift-diffusion models (DDM) to account for both accuracy and reaction time data
in behavior. We developed a novel task aimed at generating and testing
the presence of habitual behavior through formation of action sequences
and in which the time pressure changed over time. In this 2-step task, participants reported the side of a cued stimulus on the screen by a mouse
click with the corresponding hand (left or right). In the first step, the cued
stimulus was presented amongst 4 items while, at the second step, only
the 2 items which were selected at the first step were shown. The side of
cued stimulus presentation in each step varied with a certain predictability.
We found that participants learned this contingency and used it to concatenate single actions into action sequences. We compared our new DDMHRL algorithm to a more standard HRL algorithm based on the Softmax
function. We tested also how parameters of the DDM model were affected
by learning and variation in time pressure. We show that the DDM-HRL
model accounts better for key features of the task, and provides evidence
for larger bias and lower sensitivity to time pressure for the habitual than
for the goal-directed behavior.

Talmi1, Wael El-Deredy1; 1University of Manchester — To learn, prediction

error - the difference between expected and actual outcome - is signalled
by midbrain dopamine neurons. Most human studies investigate reward
prediction error, operationalised as the difference between unexpected
omission and delivery of reward. We investigated neural response to
reward prediction error and aversion prediction error, operationalised as
the difference between unexpected omission and delivery of an aversive
outcome. While most human studies use monetary reward, here we used
primary reinforcers to bridge the animal and human literatures. Twenty
participants received sweet and bitter tastes, signalled by a cue. Cues indicated likelihood of receiving a particular taste. We measured event-related
potentials (ERPs) to information about upcoming unexpected rewarding
and aversive taste. 290ms after participants received information on the
upcoming taste ERPs were more positive to unexpected delivery compared
to omission of both reward and aversion. This suggests within the time
window that corresponds to the Feedback-Related Negativity (FRN) ERP
neurons signal any unexpected salient event, regardless of whether it is
rewarding or aversive. This is surprising as the established assumption is
that the FRN signals valence to reinforce rewarding behaviour. At 350ms
the P3 differentiated outcome valence, responding positively to any worsethan-expected outcome (omission of sweet and delivery of bitter taste). This
suggests an attentional response to worse-than-expected outcomes due to
loss aversion. These results challenge current perspectives on mechanisms
of reinforcement learning. We show that the neural signalling of salience
(outcome delivery) is followed by attention to outcome valence across the
domains of reward and aversion.

D162
EXPECTATIONS ABOUT THE SOURCE OF SURPRISE DICTATE THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FEEDBACK-RELATED EEG SIGNALS
AND LEARNING. Matthew Nassar1, Rasmus Bruckner2, Michael J. Frank;
1

Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA, 2International Max Planck Research School LIFE,
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany — Successful

decision-making requires learning expectations based on experience. This
learning should be calibrated according to the surprise associated with each
outcome, but also to the most likely source of surprise. For example, when
occasional change points are expected, surprising outcomes render past
information irrelevant and demand increased learning. In contrast, when
signal corruption is expected to occur occasionally, surprising outcomes
can suggest a corrupt signal that should be ignored by learning systems. To
explore whether and how the brain contextualizes surprise signals to optimize learning, we collected EEG and behavioral data in a task that required
subjects to make inferences based on noisy observations of a process that
included either change points or signal corruption. In change point blocks
participants increased learning from surprising outcomes, whereas in the
signal corruption blocks participants decreased learning from surprising
outcomes. Thus the effects of surprise on learning depended on subjective
expectations about the source of the surprise. Despite this behavioral interaction, feedback-related EEG signals were agnostic to the source of surprise. A large positive medial prefrontal deflection peaking 350 ms after
outcome presentation was enhanced for surprising outcomes in both conditions equally. Computational fits to behavior showed that the impact of
this signal on learning differed across conditions: larger EEG deflections
predicted more learning in change point blocks but less learning in signal

D163
A HIERARCHICAL REINFORCEMENT LEARNING / DRIFT-DIFFUSION MODEL REVEALS KEY FEATURES OF HABITUAL DECISION MAKING Vincent Moens1, Alexandre Zenon1; 1Universite Catholique de
Louvain — Computational models of habitual and goal-directed behaviors

D164
A DISTINCT OSCILLATORY MECHANISM FOR METACOGNITION
DURING PERCEPTUAL DECISION-MAKING Martijn E. Wokke1,2, Axel

Cleeremans1, K. Richard Ridderinkhof2; 1Université Libre de Bruxelles, 2University
of Amsterdam — Decision-making is one of the most fundamental parts of

our daily life. Undoubtedly, when having to select a course of action reflective monitoring and control of our decision process (metacognition) is of
crucial importance. For instance, when a doctor has to make a medical decision, information from different sources are being accrued and combined to
form a diagnosis (e.g., information from MRI images and from the anamnesis), but when a doctor is uncertain about the quality of the decision additional tests can be considered. Despite the importance of metacognition for
effective decision-making, it remains unclear how metacognitive knowledge emerges. Here I will address how metacognition develops during
decision-making and how it relates to first order performance (task accuracy). We recorded EEG signals while participants were asked to make a
diagnosis after seeing a sample (a complex visual pattern) of fictive patient
data. This sample could either belong to a sick or to a healthy patient. Participants gradually learned to distinguish sick from healthy patterns, while
indicating on each occasion how they made their decision (i.e., guessing,
intuitive or rational choice and indicating their level of confidence). Single-trial EEG analyses demonstrate that although task accuracy is related
to occipital-parietal beta band activity, metacognition is specifically associated with late emerging (anterior) frontal theta band activity. These findings indicate that first order task performance and metacognition operate
via distinguishable oscillatory mechanisms.

D165
ASYMMETRY IN ATTENTION AND MEMORY WHILE LEARNING IN
GAIN VERSUS LOSS DOMAINS Kylie Fernandez1, Melissa Merz1, James
Ross1, Camelia Kuhnen2, Nichole Lighthall1; 1University of Central Florida, 2University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill — Consistent with well-known asym-

metries in economic behavior in the gain versus loss domain (Kahneman
& Tversky, 1979), recent research indicates people are more pessimistic
about the likelihood of relatively good probabilistic outcomes when losing
versus gaining money (Kuhnen, 2015). The mechanism of this valence effect
is unclear, but may be related to differences in the salience of positive and
negative information or the difficulty in evaluating smaller losses as rela-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

183

Poster Session D	
tively positive outcomes. To test these hypotheses, we examined how gain
and loss information affect attentional processing speed and incidental
encoding during an investment task. In separate gain and loss blocks, participants chose between stocks and bonds to earn cash payouts and learned
about the stock payoff probabilities with experience. After observing stock
payouts on each trial, participants estimated the likelihood that the current stock was “good” (better option than the bond). Processing speed was
assessed during the stock payout phase, and at the end of the session, participants completed a surprise memory test for outcome stimuli. Findings
replicated previous research, such that participants were overly pessimistic
in their assessment of the quality of stocks when learning in the loss domain
than when learning in the gain domain. Further, results indicated slower
processing for relatively good loss outcomes (small losses) and poorer
memory for stimuli presented with loss outcomes. These findings provide support for both hypotheses, suggesting that loss outcomes capture
more attention than gain outcomes, and additional cognitive resources are
required to interpret relatively small losses as positive events.

D166
COMMON AND DISTINCT NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF EFFORT
AND DELAY COSTS Vaida Rimeikyte1, Joshua Buckholtz2,3, Adam Anderson1;
1

Cornell University, 2Harvard University, 3Massachusetts General Hospital — The

ability to integrate costs and benefits to choose the optimal course of action
is an essential component of adaptive human behavior. Temporal delays
and effort requirements are two such costs, and there is a wealth of evidence that both serve to bias action selection by discounting the subjective
value of choice options. Lesion work in rodents and primates, as well as
human functional neuroimaging studies, suggest that delay and effort cost
representations are anatomically segregated. By the same token, other work
indicates that the cost-discounted subjective value of choice options is represented by striatal activity, irrespective of the specific cost. Here, we use
Activation Likelihood Estimation (ALE) meta-analysis to uncover common
and distinct neural representations of cost during effort-based decision-making and inter-temporal choice. We identified 14 studies of effortbased decision-making and 17 studies examining inter-temporal choice.
Contrast analyses showed that dorsolateral and ventromedial prefrontal
cortex preferentially encoded delay costs, while dorsal Anterior Cingulate
Cortex activity was selective for effort costs. Conjunction analysis identified dorsal striatum as being sensitive to both cost types, consistent with its
putative role in representing cost-discounted values to guide action selection. Together, these findings suggest that while cost representations may
be initially segregated according to specific cost type, these representations
converge in striatum to modulate the subjective value of choice options and
bias action selection.

THINKING: Problem solving
D167
HIGH CREATIVE INDIVIDUALS ARE MORE TOLERANT TO SEMANTIC DISTANCE THAN LOW CREATIVE INDIVIDUALS: AN ERP
STUDY Yoed Kenett1, David Anaki2, Miriam Faust2; 1Brown University, USA,
2

Bar-Ilan University, Israel — The associative theory of creativity posits that
high creative individuals have a more flexible semantic memory structure
that enables novel semantic combinations. However, this theory has been
empirically tested in only a few studies. We conducted an Evoked Response
Potentials (ERP) study to examine the effect of semantic distance on low
and high creative individuals. Both groups underwent a recently developed semantic relatedness judgment task. In this task, semantic distance is
operationalized as path length between words in a semantic network. Low
and high creative individuals judged whether word-pairs were related or
unrelated in six semantic distance conditions (three close/related and three
far/unrelated conditions), while their ERPs were being recorded. Specifically, we focused our analysis on the N400 component, the hallmark ERP
component for semantic processing. At the behavioral level, we found that
both low and high creative individuals are affected similarly by semantic
distance. Our findings only weakly indicate that high creative individual’s
judge weaker/farther semantic relations between words as more related,
compared to low creative individuals. However, at the electrophysiological
level we found that high creative individuals, compared to low creative

184

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
individuals, exert less integration efforts, as indicated by less negative N400
amplitudes. Finally, high creative individuals are more tolerant to semantic
distance, indicated by less modulation of the N400 amplitude by semantic
distance. Our results shed further neurocognitive light on the differences
between low and high creative individuals and relate to recent findings on
the importance of controlled retrieval from memory in the creative process.

D168
A MULTI-MODAL APPROACH TO DISENTANGLE UNDERLYING
MECHANISMS OF THE CLINICAL MEASURE: PROCESSING
SPEED Nicolas Langer1,2, Erica Ho1, Enitan Marcelle1, Lindsay Alexander1, Cam-

eron Craddock1, Kenneth Schuster1, Michael Milham1, Simon Kelly2; 1Child Mind
Institute, New York, USA, 2Department of Biomedical Engineering, City College
New York, New York, USA — Following a recently launched initiative (RDoC)

to develop reliable dimensions of observable behavior and neurobiological
measures for classification of mental disorders we have constructed a set of
new paradigms that provide objective, interpretable psychophysiological
phenotypic markers in children. From eighty children between 6 and 18,
neurophysiological activity measured with EEG, continuous eye-tracking
and behavioral responses were obtained during a processing speed test.
From the eye tracking data we calculated the number of saccade steps,
pupil size and protracted gaze dwell. This newly established inventory of
objective measures was complemented with topographic spatial and power
analyses of the concurrently acquired EEG data. The results demonstrated
that the performance in the symbol search task was positively correlated
with age of the subject. Further we found that higher the inattention score
correspond with low (age-corrected) processing speed score. Moreover, we
developed an objective eye-tracker based uncertainty measure, operationalized by the time spent for a trial, in which target was present vs. not present in the search group. The uncertainty measure significantly correlated
with anxiety measure (CTAS) obtained from questionnaire. The duration
of eye fixation on the target symbols explained most of the variance in the
processing speed performance. In addition, resting-state EEG revealed a
significant relationship between frontal theta power and the performance
in processing speed capacity. The present study demonstrates that a multimodal approach that combines observable behavior and neurobiological
measures improves the understanding of underlying mechanisms of low
performance in the processing speed task.

D169
WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY IN TOWER OF LONDON PERFORMANCE Adrian Paneto1, Steven Green, Ph.D.1, Sharlene Newman, Ph.D.1;
1

Indiana University-Bloomington — The Tower of London (ToL) has been used
extensively as a measure of high-order cognitive processes; mainly those
associated with problem solving and planning (Berg 2002). Not only is
neural activation important to cognition, but also structural white matter
integrity. For example, white matter integrity has been linked to executive
processes such as planning, shifting, and working memory, all of which are
related to ToL performance. In this study, we analyzed fractional anisotropy (FA) measured with diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to characterize the
white matter integrity linked to planning time and accuracy in the Tower
of London task. The included sample of twenty-five subjects (14 females),
completed six and seven-move ToL problems. The de-meaned values for
average planning time and percent accuracy were entered as regressors of
interest to identify voxels in which FA values were significantly correlated
with these behavioral measures across subjects. The results indicated that
FA positively (p<.05) correlated with planning time in the second superior
longitudinal fasciculus (SLF-II) which connects the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (dlPFC) to parietal areas. Furthermore, for accuracy was negatively
correlated with FA in the cerebellum and the parietal lobe which may be
due to the dorsal-ventral connections of the vertical occipital fasciculus
(VOF)(Yeatman, 2014). The identified white matter tracts that connect frontal and parietal cortical areas have been implicated in problem-solving so
using planning time and accuracy as behavioral correlates of FA indicates
that white matter integrity supports ToL performance.

2016 Annual Meeting	

D170
HOW SUBLIMINAL REWARD ENHANCES AHA! MOMENTS Carola

Salvi1,2, Irene Cristofori2,3, Mark Beeman1, Jordan Grafman3,4; 1Department of
Psychology, Northwestern University, Illinois, USA, 2Rehabilitation Institute of
Chicago, Illinois, USA, 3Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation,
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA,
4
Department of Neurology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA — Insight problem solving involves processing

below the threshold of awareness, perhaps supported by the integration
of weak associations. Recent research suggests that explicit reward cues, in
the absence of awareness, can enhance people’s reasoning and associative
learning. However, the effect of subliminal motivation on problem-solving strategies has not been explored yet. We hypothesized that subliminal
reward would enhance the integration of weak associations and insight
more than it would enhance analytic solving. Forty-one participants
attempted one hundred Compound Remote Associate (CRA) problems.
This task has been extensively used to study insight problem-solving (or
“Aha!” moment) in contrast to a deliberate, analytic strategy. At the beginning of each problem, a potential reward ($ 0.01 or $ 0.25) was displayed,
either subliminally (17 ms) or supraliminally (100 ms), and participants
earned the displayed reward if they solved the problem correctly. Forcedchoice responses to display indicated participants were at chance for subliminal displays. Participants solved more problems via insight following
high subliminal rewards, compared to low subliminal reward and to high
supraliminal reward, with no corresponding effect on analytic solving. Our
findings reveal that insight problem solving can be motivated by subliminal reward. We speculate that significant subliminal rewards activate the
dopamine system, enhancing and reinforcing integrative processes leading
to greater insight, primarily when presented below the threshold of awareness. On the other hand, rewards presented above the threshold of awareness have little effect on insight.

D171
BLOCKS ROCK! THE EFFECT OF BLOCK BUILDING ON MENTAL
ROTATION Mitchell Hansen1, Arianna Gutierrez1, Sharlene D. Newman1; 1Indi-

ana University, Bloomington — There is a growing issue of STEM (science,

technology, engineering, and math) in the United States. Performance wise,
US students have fallen behind and are not choosing majors or careers in
growing STEM fields. Solutions need to be found to reverse this troubling
trend that gets young Americans to choose STEM fields. Spatial thinking
can play an important role in mathematical and problem solving abilities.
Students with high scores on spatial tests in high school are more likely to
major in STEM disciplines and go into STEM careers than those with lower
scores (Newcombe, 2010). Additionally, spatial thinking can be improved
through training and is durable (Newcombe, 2010). Block building uses key
aspects of spatial thinking, such as spatial visualization and mental rotation (Casey et al, 2008). The fundamental question is whether implementing a training program that focuses on block building can increase spatial
thinking skills in children. We performed a pre-training and one post-training fMRI scan to examine spatial thinking via a mental rotation task. The
experimental group played a block building game, Blocks Rock!, while the
control group played Scrabble for 5 days. The experimental group showed
increased activation in left precentral cortex and medial temporal cortex
extending into the parahippocampus while the control group showed
increased activation in the left anterior insula after training indicating that
differential strategies were used. The results suggest that the block building
game encouraged the use of a holistic rotation strategy while the controls
used a more piecemeal comparison strategy.

THINKING: Reasoning
D172
FUNCTIONAL NETWORKS OF COUNTING ACQUISITION IN PRESCHOOL CHILDREN Alyssa Kersey1, Jessica Cantlon1; 1University of Rochester — Between 2 and 5 years of age, children undergo a change in numer-

ical reasoning that allows them to map symbols (e.g, number words) onto
their precise quantitative meanings. To date the only neural data examining
this learning process comes from single-cell recordings in monkeys who

Poster Session D
were trained to recognize Arabic numerals. These studies with monkeys
and some research in older children who had already learned to count
suggest that connectivity between the intraparietal sulci (IPS) and inferior
frontal cortex is important for symbolic number acquisition, but weakens
after numerical representations solidify. However, no one has tested the
predictions of this functional connectivity pruning model in children who
are in the process of learning to count (ages 3-5 years). Here we examine
functional connectivity in preschooler’s brains during natural viewing of
early childhood mathematics videos, using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI). We take a novel analytic approach to test for correlations
between individual differences in numerical knowledge and functional
connectivity with the IPS across the entire brain. Importantly, this approach
is unconstrained, which means that associations between counting knowledge and functional connectivity to the IPS could manifest anywhere in
the brain. We find that as children’s counting ability increases, functional
connectivity between the IPS and inferior frontal cortex decreases. These
data, obtained from unconstrained, whole-brain analyses provide strong
support for the functional connectivity pruning model of number word
acquisition, indicating that the acquisition of counting is associated with
decreased fronto-parietal connectivity in preschool children.

D173
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN SPATIAL REPRESENTATIONS OF
FRACTIONS RELATE TO FORMAL MATH ACHIEVEMENT Elizabeth

Y. Toomarian1, Edward M. Hubbard1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — Recent

studies have successfully linked cognitive numerical processes to formal
tests of mathematics achievement and other behavioral and neural measures. Specifically, fraction magnitude knowledge predicts individual
differences in both fraction arithmetic and standardized math test scores
(Siegler & Pyke, 2013), and individual differences in white matter correlate
with performance on a math aptitude test (Matejko et al., 2013). The present study investigated how individual spatial representations of fractions
are related to a range of outcomes, including an explicit measure of fraction knowledge. Adult participants completed a simple comparison task in
which they compared the magnitude of single digit, irreducible fractions
to ½, a task that has reliably produced a Spatial-Numerical Association of
Response Codes (SNARC) effect in our previous work. In the same session,
participants completed additional numerical tasks measuring explicit fraction knowledge, abstract/spatial problem solving, and general aptitude.
We observed a significant group-level SNARC effect based on overall fraction magnitude, but there was notable individual variability. While there
was no direct relationship between SNARC slopes and abstract problem
solving or overall intelligence, there was a weak but reliable correlation
between individual SNARC slopes and fraction knowledge- participants
who associated increasing fraction magnitude with the right side of space
had higher overall fraction test scores. These relationships not only further
characterize the nature of adults’ mental representations of fractions, but
also illuminate the nature of individual differences in spatial representations and formal math knowledge. These behavioral differences may be
supported by structural and functional differences in parietal regions.

D174
GENERATING A NOVEL REPRESENTATIONAL SPACE THROUGH
DEDUCTIVE REASONING Katherine Alfred1, Andrew C. Connolly1, David
J. M. Kraemer1; 1Dartmouth College — How does the brain generate a new-

ly-learned representational space? Representational similarity analysis
(RSA) has revealed the neural basis of common representational spaces
that are innate or learned early in development, such as those comprising
manmade artifacts and natural kinds. This study uses RSA to examine a
newly-learned representational space created through deductive reasoning. A stimulus set of to-be-learned individuals was generated by pairing
male names with unfamiliar photographs. Participants learned the relative
heights of pairs of individuals and used deductive reasoning to generate a
linear hierarchy of heights (e.g. Matthew is taller than Thomas; Thomas is
taller than Andrew; therefore Matthew is taller than Andrew). During fMRI,
participants recalled the approximate height of each individual relative to
the group, and judged whether that person was tall, average, or short. As
input for RSA, a model was generated based on the relative heights of the
individuals, forming a hierarchy from tallest to shortest. Patterns of neural
activity were then tested on an item-specific level for correlation with this

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

185

Poster Session D	
model. This analysis revealed that the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) encodes
the newly-learned representational space of individuals’ heights. Regions
of prefrontal cortex (PFC) were also correlated with the model. These findings are consistent with prior research that demonstrates involvement of
IPS and PFC in deductive reasoning tasks, as well as the role of IPS in judgments of spatial distance and magnitude. To our knowledge, this is the first
study to show the creation of representational spaces as they are used in
the reasoning process.

D175
THE ROLE OF MOTOR REGIONS IN REPRESENTING ENGINEERING CONCEPTS Joshua Cetron1, Andrew Connolly1, Solomon Diamond1, Vicki

May1, David Kraemer1; 1Dartmouth College — According to the sensorimotor

hypothesis of semantic knowledge, physical experience shapes conceptual
representations. Consistent with this hypothesis, neuroimaging research
demonstrates that motor regions support knowledge about tool use and
motor actions. However, few studies have examined whether abstract
concepts that may also be learned through experience are also rooted in
the sensorimotor systems of the brain. Here, we focus on the mechanical
engineering concept of static equilibrium. We aim to determine whether
advanced understanding learned, in part, through physical laboratory
experience leads to a neural representation of this concept in motor regions.
In order to test this hypothesis, students with no prior engineering training, and those who have completed one or more college lab-based courses
on structural engineering completed an fMRI task involving mechanical
analysis of structures. The task included a carefully chosen set of 24 photographs of real-world structures (e.g., streetlamp) each with one component
highlighted (e.g., vertical column). Specifically, some pairs of images were
matched on visual similarity (VS) but mismatched on mechanical similarity
(MS) whereas other pairs of items were matched on MS and mismatched
on VS. This design allowed for the dissociation of surface details (VS) from
deeper understanding of static equilibrium (MS). Results revealed that VS
correlated with activity in early visual cortex both for novices and for engineering students, whereas MS correlated with activity in motor regions but only for the engineering students. These results support the hypothesis
that some abstract concepts are also rooted in sensorimotor experience.

D176
OSCILLATORY CORRELATES OF BELIEF BIAS IN DEDUCTIVE
REASONING Vivek Nandur1, Chad Dubé1, Geoffrey Potts1; 1University of South
Florida — Modern theories of human reasoning assume two systems are

operative (Stanovich & West, 2000). System 1 is fast-acting, pre-attentive,
and driven by prior knowledge and beliefs. System 2 is slower, demanding
of visual attention, and resistant to belief-based errors. The belief bias task
(Evans, Barston, & Pollard, 1983) may be used to dissociate the systems’
contributions. Here, subjects evaluate the logical validity of syllogisms differing in their conclusions’ believability. Subjects tend to accept or reject
conclusions as “Valid” or “Invalid” depending on their consistency with
prior beliefs rather than their logical validity. Attention’s putative role in
System 2 processing suggests alpha-band desynchronization as a measure
of System 2’s contribution. Yet, of the handful of imaging studies of belief
bias (e.g., Goel & Dolan, 2003), none have considered the role of neural
oscillations in the effect. We measured electroencephalography while subjects evaluated the conclusions of abstract problems, following which we
administered the belief bias task. Spectral analysis revealed that individuals with higher levels of pre-stimulus alpha power in frontal and occipital
electrodes were more susceptible to the influence of prior beliefs. Interestingly, the correlation between alpha and reasoning success in belief-laden
stimuli was restricted to unbelievable arguments. A parallel effect was
found for the neutral arguments, suggesting a similar attentional signature
for reasoning with unbelievable and abstract content. These results suggest that the contribution of visual attention is reduced when reasoning
with believable conclusions, and that System 2’s involvement in overriding
belief bias is amplified in reasoning with unbelievable conclusions.

186

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E
ATTENTION: Spatial
E1
SPATIOTEMPORAL EXPECTATIONS IN COMPLEX SEQUENCES

Simone G. Heideman1,2, Anna C. Nobre1,2; 1Oxford Centre for Human Brain Activity, University of Oxford, 2Brain and Cognition Lab, University of Oxford — Many

studies investigating temporal orienting of attention look at simple, regular rhythms and probabilities, or use explicit cues to induce expectations
about when a target can be expected or when a response has to be made.
However, a lot of our behaviour entails more complex patterns of temporal information embedded in sequences of events, i.e. non-isochronous
rhythms. These types of temporal expectations are often acquired in a more
implicit manner, over longer periods of time. This study investigates the
implicit acquisition and learned performance of combined ordinal (spatial/
effector) and temporal sequences using magnetoencephalography (MEG)
and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). A modified version of
a serial reaction time task was used, in which not only the series of targets,
but also the series of intervals between subsequent targets was repeated.
Occasionally probe blocks were presented, where a new (unlearned) ordinal-temporal sequence was introduced. A previous behavioural study using
a similar task showed that adding the temporal sequence greatly facilitates
the learning of the ordinal sequence, but that temporal information is not
learned when presented in isolation. Our behavioural results show that
participants not only get faster over time, but that they are slower and less
accurate during probe blocks, indicating that they (implicitly) learned the
sequence information. The oscillatory signature of these combined ordinal
(spatial/effector) and temporal preparatory effects is shown for a range of
frequency bands, over motor and sensory areas. The fMRI localiser task
shows which areas are important in this process.

E2
SPATIO-TEMPORAL BRAIN DYNAMICS UNDERLYING ATTENTIONAL BIAS MODIFICATIONS Etienne Sallard1, Léa Hartmann1, Lucas
Spierer1; 1Neurology Unit, Medicine Department, Faculty of Sciences, University
of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland — Exaggerated attentional biases toward

specific elements of the environment have been advanced to characterize
and putatively participate in the maintenance of many psychiatric conditions, as e.g. emotionally negative faces in anxiety disorders. Although
recent literature demonstrates that attentional biases can be modified with
behavioral interventions, the underlying neurophysiological mechanisms
remain unclear. Healthy participants (n=24) performed a modified dotprobe task in which pair of cues (neutral, meaningless colored shapes) was
replaced by probes (horizontally or vertically aligned double-dots) that
participants were instructed to discriminate. To induce the development of
an attentional bias toward or away specific colors, the probes were systematically presented either at the same (Attend condition) or at the opposite
position (Avoid condition) of a given cue color. Half of the participants
developed a relative bias toward the Attend cue (‘approach’ bias: Toward
group) and half away from the Avoid cue (‘avoidance’ bias: Away group).
A three-way ANOVA on the electrical neuroimaging responses to the cues
with factors Group (Toward; Away); Cue (Attend; Avoid); and Session
(Beginning; End of the training), evidenced a significant triple interaction
between 50-84ms post cue onset within the left temporo-parieto-occipital
junction. This network was less activated at the end of the training in (i)
Attend condition for the Toward group and in (ii) Avoid condition for the
Away group. Our results suggest interindividual differences in the sensitivity to positive (approach) vs negative (avoidance) cue-probe associations
and that attentional bias modifications depend on changes at the level of
bottom-up saliency-related mechanisms.

E3
CROSS-FREQUENCY COUPLING BETWEEN ALPHA OSCILLATIONS AND SELECTIVE ENTRAINMENT: A CORRELATE OF SELECTIVE ATTENTION Tommy Wilson1, Sophie Molholm1, John J Foxe1,2; 1The Sheryl
and Daniel R. Tishman Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory (CNL) and Children’s Evaluation and Rehabilitation Center (CERC), Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, 2Ernest J. Del Monte Institute for Neuromedicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York — A crucial function of

attention is to select relevant inputs from an environment filled with multiple, competing sources of information. Oscillations in the alpha band (8-12
Hz) are hypothesized to index one potential stratagem for such selection;
specifically, they are thought to index suppression of irrelevant information
processing. Recently, another mechanism of selection has been discussed:
oscillatory entrainment to environmental rhythms. By syncing neural oscillations to environmental inputs, entrainment is thought to coordinate the
firing probabilities of large neuronal assemblies so as to ensure optimal
processing of pertinent information. One outstanding question then is to
what extent these two mechanisms interact. Our work pairs high-density
electroencephalography recordings with a continuous, visuospatial selective attention task to observe the time-course and topography of alpha
oscillations across the scalp. We then quantify cross-frequency coupling
(specifically phase-amplitude coupling) between oscillations entrained to
rhythmic stimuli presented in the delta frequency band (1-3 Hz) and ongoing power fluctuations in the alpha band. We observe that these two mechanisms of selective attention interact, such that attending to rhythmic environmental stimuli shapes the temporal profile of ongoing activity in the
alpha band over occipital electrodes. Cross-frequency coupling between
rhythmic environmental events and power in the alpha band constitutes a
novel, physiologically relevant mechanism for shaping the temporal profile
of visuospatial selective attention. Therefore, we posit that by leveraging
rhythmic information to shape alpha band power, the brain actively generates temporal predictions that are used to more effectively suppress irrelevant information processing.

E4
SPONTANEOUS ALPHA LATERALIZATION REVEALS A COVERT
ATTENTION STRATEGY IN AN UN-CUED DETECTION TASK Gonzalo
Boncompte1, Mario Villena-González1, Diego Cosmelli1,2; 1Universidad Católica
de Chile, Santiago, Chile, 2Centro Interdisciplinario de Neurociencias — Brain

oscillations in the alpha band range (8 - 12Hz) have a strong influence on
visual perception. Recent studies have shown that both the amplitude and
phase of ongoing alpha waves strongly predict the detection probability of
an upcoming stimulus. Moreover, when the side of presentation of a target
stimulus is cued, alpha amplitude over ipsilateral posterior areas increases.
This effect has been attributed to the focusing of covert attention guided
by the cue. Here we tested whether these two alpha band effects, general
amplitude modulation and lateralization, could be evoked and detected in
the absence of an explicit exogenous cue. To do this we registered EEG data
from subjects during a stimulus-detection paradigm in which the target
could appear either at the left or right of the screen but without any preceding cue. The number of distracters was manipulated to produce detection
rates of approximately 50%. We analyzed the induced alpha power across
ipsilateral and contralateral electrodes to where the target was presented.
We found that 1) pre-stimulus alpha amplitude was not different for seen
and unseen trials, but 2) pre-stimulus alpha band activity showed a lateralization effect towards the ipsilateral side to target presentation, which was
significantly higher different for detected and undetected trials. Although
subjects weren’t cued to a specific side, our results suggest that they unconsciously pre-allocated visual attention towards a particular side of their
visual field as a way to enhance their performance.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

187

Poster Session E	

E5
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN A DORSAL FRONTO-PARIETAL
NETWORK REFLECTS GOAL-DIRECTED ATTENTION IN NEGLECT
PATIENTS Julia Fellrath1,2, Anais Mottaz1, Adrian G. Guggisberg1,2, Radek
Ptak1,2,3; 1Laboratory of Cognitive Neurorehabilitation, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Geneva, Switzerland, 2Division of Neurorehabilitation, Department
of Clinical Neurosciences, University Hospitals Geneva, Switzerland, 3Faculty
of Psychology and Educational Sciences, University of Geneva, Switzerland —

Functional imaging studies with healthy subjects have identified a dorsal
fronto-parietal network that is involved in shifts of attention and whose
activity is sensitive to the behavioural relevance of stimuli. In patients with
severe deficits of spatial attention this network is often structurally preserved. Here, we show that diminished EEG functional connectivity in the
dorsal fronto-parietal attention network predicts impaired goal-directed
attention in stroke patients with spatial neglect. Eleven right-hemisphere
damaged patients with left neglect and sixteen age-matched healthy controls performed an attentional task in which they had to react to a central
target while ignoring task-relevant distracters presented left or right of the
upcoming central target. Unlike controls, neglect patients didn’t show an
effect of distracter relevance on manual reaction times to the central target.
Resting-state EEG was acquired in each participant with a 128 channel
system at 512 Hz during 15 min. Functional connectivity analyses revealed
in neglect patients a significant decrease in theta-band connectivity between
the right middle frontal and the right superior parietal regions as compared
to controls. Moreover, in both groups we observed a significant correlation
between fronto-parietal connectivity and the behavioural effect of distractor relevance. These findings indicate that fronto-parietal functional connectivity a) predicts effects of goal-relevant distractors on spatial attention
and b) is impaired in patients with spatial neglect. Functional connectivity
computed from resting-state EEG provides a promising approach to study
the function and organization of cortical networks in neglect patients.

E6
ZERO IN THE BRAIN Silvia Benavides-Varela1,2, Laura Passarini2, Brian But-

terworth3, Giuseppe Rolma1, Francesca Burgio1,2, Marco Pitteri2,4, Francesca
Meneghello2, Tim Shallice3,5, Carlo Semenza1,2,6; 1University of Padova, Italy,
2
IRCCS San Camillo Hospital Foundation, Lido-Venice, Italy, 3University College
London, United Kingdom, 4University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 5Scuola Internazionale Superiore di Studi Avanzati-SISSA, Trieste, Italy, 6Cognitive Neuroscience
Centre, Padova, Italy — Transcoding numerals containing zero is more prob-

lematic than transcoding numbers formed by non-zero digits. However,
it is currently unknown whether this is due to zeros requiring brain areas
other than those traditionally associated with number representation. We
hypothesized that transcoding zeros entails visuo-spatial and integrative
processes typically associated with the right hemisphere. The investigation involved 22 right-brain-damaged patients and 20 healthy controls
who completed tests of reading and writing Arabic numbers. As expected,
the most significant deficit among patients involved a failure to cope with
zeros. Moreover, a voxel-based lesion–symptom mapping analysis showed
that the most common zero-errors were maximally associated to the right
insula which was previously related to sensorimotor integration, attention,
and response selection, yet for the first time linked to transcoding processes. Error categories involving other digits corresponded to the so-called
Neglect errors, which however, constituted only about 10% of the total
reading and 3% of the writing mistakes made by the patients. We argue
that damage to the right hemisphere impairs the mechanism of parsing,
and the ability to set-up empty-slot structures required for processing zeros
in complex numbers; moreover, we suggest that the brain areas located in
proximity to the right insula play a role in the integration of the information
resulting from the temporary application of transcoding procedures.

E7
VENLAFAXINE REDUCES THE DEFICIT OF EXECUTIVE CONTROL
OF ATTENTION IN PATIENTS WITH MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER Yanghua Tian1, Jing Du1, Alfredo Spagna2, Melissa-Ann Mackie2, Jin

Fan2,3, Kai Wang1; 1the First Hospital of Anhui Medical University, China, 2Queens
College, USA, 3Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai — Attention plays

188

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
an essential role to support other cognitive functions and behavior, and
disturbance of attention is one of the most common symptoms in psychiatric disorders, including major depressive disorder (MDD). Although
treatment with antidepressants, such as venlafaxine, an effective treatment for MDD symptoms, has been shown to reduce deficits in cognition
and emotion regulation, it remains unclear whether venlafaxine improves
specific attentional functions. We used the attention network test to measure the attentional functions of alerting, orienting, and executive control
pre- and post-treatment with venlafaxine in patients with MDD (n = 34)
compared to the measures of the first and second test sessions of healthy
controls (HC, n = 30). The Hamilton rating scale for depression and the
Self-Rating Depression Scale were used to measure the severity of clinical
symptoms in the patient group. Pre-treatment, the MDD group showed a
selective impairment in alerting and executive control of attention, while
there were no significant group differences in the orienting function. After
treatment with venlafaxine, the performance of the MDD group on executive control of attention was not significant different to that of controls,
the interaction, i.e., the pre-treatment group difference compared to the
post-treatment group difference in executive control, was significant, and
symptoms reported were significantly reduced. There was no evidence of a
relationship between the improvement of executive control of attention and
symptom improvement. Treatment with venlafaxine selectively improves
the attentional functions and clinical symptoms in MDD.

E8
PUPILLOMETRY, SELECTIVE ATTENTION, AND THE RELATIONSHIP WITH THE BROADER AUTISM PHENOTYPE Antoinette Sabatino
DiCriscio1, Vanessa Troiani1; 1Geisinger Autism & Developmental Medicine Institute — Pupillometry measures changes in pupil dilation, which are tightly

linked with activity in the Locus Coeruleus (LC). The LC controls baseline
arousal as well as stimulus-locked, or “phasic”, responses that focus attention in response to environmental cues. One hypothesis suggests a ‘hyperphasic’ LC underlies enhanced visual search abilities in Autism Spectrum
Disorder (ASD) and the inflexibility and hyperfocused attention that leads
to restricted interests present in ASD. We measured task-evoked changes in
pupil diameter during a spatial attention task to investigate the relationship
between pupil response and quantitative traits associated with the Broader
Autism Phenotype (BAP). We designed a Navon Figures eyetracking paradigm (i.e. large letter composed of small letters), requiring an individual
to vary only the information attended to within an image. This controlled
for low-level visual features such as luminance that impact pupil changes.
Participants (N=49; mean age = 25.2) display larger changes in task evoked
pupil response when identifying local information (smaller letter) within
objects relative to global information (larger letter) (p<0.001). We also show
a relationship between relative change in pupil diameter (Local:Global
conditions) and behavioral measures associated with the BAP, specifically the rigidity subscale, which measures flexibility and preoccupation
with details (r=0.58, p<0.003). This effect was specific to stimulus-locked
(“phasic”) responses and was not linked to baseline pupil diameter. This
work represents the first characterization of the specificity in phasic pupil
response and the relationship with the BAP and suggests that mechanisms
that control the earliest parts of visual selection are associated with autism
traits.

E9
ATTENTIONAL LOAD EFFECTS ON NORMAL AND PATHOLOGICAL
SPATIAL PROCESSING Mario Bonato1, Elvio Blini2, Zaira Romeo2, Chiara

Spironelli2,3, Matteo Lisi4, Konstantinos Priftis2, Carlo Umiltà2, Marco Zorzi2,3,5;
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2University of Padova, Padua, Italy, 3Center
for Cognitive Neuroscience, Padua, Italy, 4Laboratoire Psychologie de la Perception, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 5IRCCS San Camillo Hospital, Lido Venice, Italy — Efficient spatial processing depends on a complex
1

interplay between spatial attention and awareness. This interplay can be
dramatically and asymmetrically hampered by a brain lesion as in the case
of Unilateral Spatial Neglect, which is now known to be strongly modulated by task demands. Nevertheless, spatial processing can also become
difficult for healthy participants when multiple features have to be processed in parallel. In six different studies (4 with brain-damaged patients
and 2 with healthy participants) we capitalized on a task recruiting both

2016 Annual Meeting	
lateralized and non-lateralized attention (i.e. load). Twenty stroke patients
with chronic brain damage (10 left and 10 right hemisphere damaged) but
with no clinical signs of neglect and 39 healthy participants completed a
computerized spatial monitoring test with and without a concurrent secondary task (visual or auditory). In patients, severe contralesional space
unawareness emerged in the computer-based task when attentional load
was increased by the concurrent task, whether visual or auditory. Strikingly, this pattern emerged also in patients with left brain damage and at
a temporal distance of several years from the brain insult. In healthy participants neurophysiological measures (ERPs and pupil dilation) were also
collected. ERPs revealed an early suppression of visual areas under load
while pupil dilation allowed to disentangle the load due to the focusing
on different features from the load due to their increased number. This
approach mimics everyday life requirements, maximally triggers competitive mechanisms and selectively exacerbates contralesional spatial deficits
after brain damage.

E10
INCREASING DISTRACTOR SET SIZE REDUCES CONCEPTUAL
INTERFERENCE DURING TARGET ENCODING Kate Nussenbaum1,

Julie Markant2, Dima Amso3; 1University of Oxford, 2Tulane University, 3Brown
University — Selective attention mechanisms support learning and memory

by suppressing distraction and enhancing target representations. But it is
unclear how varying levels of distraction differentially engage these mechanisms and affect learning. Here we investigated whether increasing visual
distraction would elicit stronger engagement of attentional control mechanisms during target selection and lead to better memory for targets encoded
in the context of greater distraction. Across two eye-tracking experiments,
participants identified and categorized a target image among zero, one or
three distractors, and then performed a subsequent recognition memory
test. In Experiment 1 (60 trials), participants (N = 62) demonstrated better
memory for images encoded in the Three Distractor relative to the One
Distractor condition (p = .002), despite the fact that their eye movement
latencies and response times were slower in the Three relative to the One
Distractor case (p’s < .001). In Experiment 2 (90 trials), the distractors were
manipulated such that they contained no meaningful information or category information that either conflicted with or matched that of the target.
Here, the number and content of the distractors interacted in their effects
on participants’ (N = 53) memory (p = .038), with distraction impairing
memory only in the One Distractor conflict condition, and not in any of the
Three Distractor conditions. These data suggest that increasing numbers
of distractors can benefit memory by triggering the engagement of suppressive mechanisms that prevent interference from distracting conceptual
information during encoding.

E11
ORIENTING ATTENTION BASED ON MEMORY FOR TARGET AND
DISTRACTOR LOCATIONS Nora Malika Roüast1,2, Eva Zita Patai1,2, Anna

Christina Nobre1,2; 1Brain and Cognition Lab, University of Oxford, 2Oxford Centre
for Human Brain Activity, University of Oxford — Long-term memory and spa-

tial attention are highly complex cognitive systems, which are known to
interact to bias and guide human perception. In the present study, a memory-guided visual search paradigm (Summerfield et al, 2006) was modified
to evaluate the behavioural and neural processing of irrelevant, distracting
information as well as that of relevant, target information. The study was
structured in three stages: A learning task to associate target and distractor
memory with spatial locations in natural scenes, followed by an attention
task (using either a cueing or change-detection task), and a direct recall
spatial memory task. We hypothesised that the presence of the distractor
would alter the bias of spatial attention towards the valid target location.
Further we predicted that the memory of the scene (and the target location
within it) would be distorted relative to the distractor location. Contrary to
what we predicted, the distractor had a clear attractor function, drawing
target memories towards the distractor location. Its presence appeared to
counteract the memory-based orienting effect at the behavioural level. Electroencephalography recordings during performance of the memory-based
orienting task enabled us to track how the presence of learned target and
learned distractor locations modulated perceptual and cognitive processes
in turn.

Poster Session E

E12
RIGHT POSTERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX IS CRUCIAL FOR ATTENTIONAL CONTROL OF EMOTIONAL TASK IRRELEVANT STIMULI: A
1 HZ REPETITIVE TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STUDY Manon Mulckhuyse1, Jan Engelmann1, Dennis Schutter1, Karin Roelofs1; 1Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour — The right posterior parietal cortex (PPC) is

proposed to constitute a central part of the fronto-parietal attention network
and has been implicated in both top-down and bottom-up driven attention
control. We investigated the causal role of the right PPC in attentional selection of task-irrelevant emotional stimuli. In a sham-controlled crossover
design inhibitory slow frequency repetitive magnetic transcranial stimulation (rTMS) was applied to the left and right PPC. Following 1 Hz rTMS,
participants performed a visual search task with a task irrelevant color
singleton distractor that was either threatening or non-threatening. Threat
was established using a fear-conditioning procedure in which one colored
distractor (CS+) was paired with an aversive stimulus (US), whereas the
other colored distractor (CS-) was not. Results showed the typical reaction
time costs of the distractor. That is, reaction time was increased when a distractor was present relative to absent. Exclusively after inhibitory rTMS to
the right PPC, reaction time costs were larger in the threatening distractor
condition than in the non-threatening distractor condition. Moreover, the
effect of right PPC stimulation was specific for the threatening distractor,
as mean reaction time significantly increased relative to the threatening
distractor condition in the sham stimulation. These findings suggest that
disrupting the right PPC reduces attentional control over task-irrelevant
emotional stimuli. We therefore propose that the right PPC is involved in
disengagement of attention from emotionally salient distractors in order to
re-orient attention voluntarily to task relevant stimuli that are central for
goal-directed behavior.

E13
DIFFERENTIAL MODULATION OF VISUAL RESPONSES BY DISTRACTOR OR TARGET PREDICTIONS? MaryAnn P Noonan1, Yannik
Bauer2, Alex H Von Lautz3, Chris Summerfield1, Mark S Stokes1; 1Department
of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK, 2International Max
Planck Research School, University of Tübingen, Germany, 3Bernstein Center for
Computational Neuroscience, Berlin, Germany — We have recently suggested

that flexible top-down mechanisms of cognitive control are specialised
for target-related attention, whereas distractor suppression only emerges
when the predictive information can be inferred directly from past experience. Specifically, we found that distractor cueing is only effective when
distractors repeat across a block of trials and not when distractor location
is cued on a trial-wise basis (Noonan et al., in press, JON). We now explore
how these expectations build up across trials as well as the time course and
neural components involved in distractor suppression. In a speeded target
discrimination task subjects are implicitly cued to the location of the target
or distractor via manipulations in the underlying predictability of the two
stimuli. In different sessions we collected EEG and MEG data from the same
subjects. Behaviourally, reaction times were reduced when either stimuli
was more spatially predictable. A reinforcement learning model generated
trial-wise estimates of the spatial priors for each location independently
for targets and distractors. This analysis revealed that learning rates were
higher for targets than distractors. Analysis of the EEG data replicated our
previous study showing a bilateral reduction in the amplitude of the P1
after distractor stimulus repetitions. This was mirrored by a trend towards
an increase in P1 amplitude after target stimulus repetitions in electrodes
contralateral to targets. Lateralized N2pc effects were also less pronounced
after distractor repetition than non-repetition trials. This is consistent with
a predictive coding model of expectation suppression that is selective for
task-irrelevant information.

E14
PRISM ADAPTATION ALTERS ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MARKERS OF ATTENTIONAL PROCESSES IN THE HEALTHY BRAIN Elisa

Martín-Arévalo1,2,3, Inga Laube1,2, Eric Koun1,2,4, Alessandro Farnè1,2,4, Karen T.
Reilly1,2, Laure Pisella1,2; 1ImpAct team, Lyon Neuroscience Research Center,
INSERM U1028, CRNS-UMR5292, 2Lyon 1 University, France, 3Mind, Brain, and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

189

Poster Session E	
Behavior Research Center (CIMCYC), University of Granada, Spain, 4Hospices
Civils de Lyon, Neuro-immersion & Mouvement et Handicap, France — Neglect

patients typically show a rightward attentional orienting bias and a strong
disengagement deficit, such that they are especially slow in responding to
left-sided targets after right-sided cues (Posner et al. 1984). Prism adaptation (PA) can reduce diverse neglect symptoms and it has been hypothesized that PA’s effects are so generalized that they might be mediated by
attentional mechanisms (Pisella et al. 2006; Redding and Wallace 2006).
In neglect patients, performance on spatial attention tasks improves after
rightward-deviating PA (Jacquin-Courtois et al. 2013). In contrast, in
healthy subjects, while there is evidence that leftward-deviating PA induces
neglect-like performance on some visuospatial tasks, behavioral studies of
spatial attention tasks have mostly yielded negative results (Morris et al.
2004; Bultitude et al. 2013). We hypothesized that these negative behavioral
findings might reflect the limitations of behavioral measures in healthy
subjects. Here we exploited the sensitivity of event-related potentials to test
the hypothesis that electrophysiological markers of attentional processes
in the healthy brain are affected by PA. Leftward-deviating PA generated
asymmetries in attentional orienting (reflected in the cue-locked N1) and
in attentional disengagement for invalidly cued left targets (reflected in the
target-locked P1). This is the first electrophysiological demonstration that
leftward-deviating PA in healthy subjects mimics attentional patterns typically seen in neglect patients.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
E15
DISSOCIATING EFFECTS OF INHERENT AND ASSOCIATED EMOTIONAL SALIENCE IN HUMAN FACE PROCESSING–AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Wiebke Hammerschmidt1, Annekathrin Schacht1;
1

University of Göttingen, Germany — Emotional and motivational factors have
been demonstrated to modulate stimulus processing at various stages,
ranging from initial perception to elaborate stimulus evaluation. The resulting processing advantage for stimuli of emotional/motivational relevance
is reflected at both behavioral and neural level. In the present study, we
aimed at dissociating effects of inherent emotional salience and associated
motivation-based salience in face processing by means of event-related
brain potentials (EPRs). During a learning session, participants (N = 24)
learned to associate faces with neutral expressions with monetary gain,
loss, or zero outcome. In a delayed test session, participants had to perform
a gender decision task on the previously learned faces and on unfamiliar faces showing happy, angry, or neutral expressions, while ERPs were
recorded. ERP effects of associated motivation-based salience differed from
those of inherent facial expressions of emotion in terms of both latency and
topography. Inherently neutral faces associated with reward elicited ERP
modulations starting as early as about 50 ms after stimulus onset while no
typical later ERP effects occurred. In contrast, facial expressions of emotion
elicited typical emotion-related ERP components at longer latencies (i.e.,
Early Posterior Negativity, Late Positive Complex), whereas earlier effects
were absent. Our findings indicate that salience based on learned associations shapes perceptual processing at very initial processing stages. Elaborate, sustained relevance processing, however, seems to be restricted to
biologically-determined emotional valence as in the case of inherent facial
expressions of emotion.

E16
COGNITIVE-EMOTIONAL AND INTOLERANCE OF UNCERTAINTY
TASKS CHARACTERIZING ANXIETY- AND PANIC-RELATED BRAIN
CIRCUITS YH Peterse1, VI Spoormaker1, PG Saemann1,2, M Czisch1,2; 1Max
Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany, 2Equal contributions — Within

the framework of an imaging genomics study inspired by single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with panic and anxiety phenotypes (Erhardt et al., Mol Psychiatry 2012;TMEM132D gene), 150 healthy
young participants were investigated using functional magnetic resonance
imaging during the rest state and five selected paradigms focusing on: (i)
fear learning and generalization, (ii) feedback processing during time-estimation, (iii) Emotional Face Matching (EFM), (iv) Color and Emotional

190

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
Stroop (ES), (v) Unpredictable Threat (UT), with tasks (I) and (v) involving
combined fMRI/neurophysiology. After accomplished data acquisition,
we report task main effects before genomic associations for the last three
tasks. During EFM, robust (de)activation differences were noted between
fearful and happy faces in the default mode network and frontoparietal
regions including the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), and weaker
in the amygdala. During the CES task, expected activation of the dACC
and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) was found in the conflict condition. Additionally, frontoparietal regions were differentially activated
depending on the affective word valence, with frontostriatal hyperactivation during negatively versus neutrally valenced words. The UT paradigm
revealed ventromedial PFC (including subgenual) and posterior cingulate
activation during the safety context, and increased insula and ventrolateral
PFC activation during both predictable and unpredictable threat contexts.
As the main effect of these tasks are in line with expectations from previous reports, future analyses will focus on analysis of all paradigms and on
examining differences in activation patterns in these tasks in relation with
SNPs in the TMEM132D gene.

E17
BEAUTY REQUIRES THOUGHT: THE EXPERIENCE OF BEAUTY IS
SELECTIVELY IMPAIRED BY A COGNITIVE TASK Aenne A. Brielmann1,
Denis G. Pelli1; 1New York University — People readily distinguish beauty expe-

riences from other mundane pleasures. This intuition is confirmed by fMRI
evidence that prefrontal regions involved in working memory and the
default mode network are selectively involved in experiencing beauty. This
suggests that Immanuel Kant’s notion that “beauty requires thought” may
apply to neural processes underlying the experience of beauty. Here we
experimentally test Kant’s hypothesis that beauty differs from “ordinary”
pleasures in requiring cognitive capacities. We manipulated cognitive
capacity by requiring participants to execute an auditory 2-back task in 50%
of trials. Participants were presented with beautiful images (self-selected or
experimenter-selected), ordinary pleasures (pretty image or eating candy),
or neutral images for 30 s each. During stimulus exposure and a further 60 s
after, participants continuously rated pleasure using a custom smartphone
app (EmotionTracker.com), which samples the distance between two fingers once per second and converts it to a numerical rating (1-10). At the
end of each trial, we asked participants if they felt beauty. Only for beautiful stimuli, continuous-pleasure and final beauty ratings were much lower
for trials with vs. without the 2-back task (maximum pleasure throughout
the trial: M=7.7 vs. 5.5 for self-selected images, and 7.3 vs. 5.4 for experimenter-selected, SE≈0.7). Pleasure and beauty ratings for all other stimuli
were unaffected. These results suggest that the process underlying a beauty
experience has specially high cognitive demands, and that the involvement
of the associated brain networks is not just correlative, but necessary.

E18
RESTLESSNESS IN PTSD: ABERRANT RESTING-STATE ALPHA
AND GAMMA OSCILLATION AND TOP-DOWN CAUSAL CONNECTIVITY Kevin Clancy1, Mingzhou Ding2, Edward Bernat3, Norman B. Schmidt1,

Wen Li1; 1Florida State University, 2University of Florida - Gainesville, 3University of Maryland — The pathophysiology of post-traumatic stress disorder

(PTSD) is characterized by prefrontal cortical hypo-activity and amygdala
hyper-reactivity. However, aberrant activity in the sensory brain, potentially responsible for sensory hypervigilance, a key symptom in PTSD, is
poorly understood. Using electroencephalogram (EEG) spectral analysis,
we evaluated visual cortical activity (reversely indexed by alpha power;
8-12Hz) and frontal cognitive control (indexed by gamma power; 30-50Hz)
during two behavioral states (resting state and passive picture viewing)
in PTSD vs. Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD) patients and healthy
controls (HC). A significant interaction effect between State and Group
[F(2,52)=6.43, p=.003] on occipitoparietal alpha power revealed decreased
resting alpha (i.e., heightened resting-state visual sensory activity) in PTSD
compared to HC and GAD (p’s< 0.05). In addition, a State-by-Group interaction in frontal gamma power [F(2,52)=4.66, p=0.01] demonstrated increased
frontal activity during resting (vs. picture viewing) in PTSD group only,
reflecting strong frontal inhibition to suppress hyperactive visual response
during rest. In support of this notion, fronto-occipital Granger causality
analysis showed heightened top-down drive in the alpha range during
resting (vs. viewing) in PTSD patients [t(17)=3.08, p=0.007; but not HC and

2016 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session E

GAD patients], suggesting enhanced inhibition from the frontal cortex to
the occipital visual cortex. These data thus implicate a hyperactive sensory
brain in PTSD accompanied by compensatory (albeit unsuccessful) frontal inhibition to downregulate sensory activity. Taken together, sensory
cortical hyperactivity combined with elevated frontal control load during
the resting state contributes to the pathophysiology of PTSD, potentially
accounting for symptoms of hypervigilance and cognitive deficits in this
disorder.

demonstrate neuronal alterations in female CD during emotion processing and regulation, which could support novel treatment development to
improve emotion regulation in CD.

E19
MOOD AND TWO TYPES OF IMPLICIT LEARNING Eileen C. Rasmus-

sity — Performance monitoring enables the swift evaluation of actions as

1,6

1,5

1

2,3,4

sen , Chelsea M. Stillman , Erica L. Rabinovich , James H. Howard Jr. , Darlene V. Howard1,2; 1Department of Psychology, Georgetown University, 2Center for
Brain Plasticity and Recovery, Georgetown University Medical Center, 3Department of Neurology, Georgetown University Medical Center, 4Department of Psychology, The Catholic University of America, 5Department of Psychiatry, University
of Pittsburgh, 6Department of Psychology, Brandeis University — Implicit learn-

ing underlies activities such as skill acquisition and language learning. The
effect of mood on explicit processes has been widely investigated, but its
effect on implicit learning (IL) remains unclear. Some research suggests
mood affects cortical-dependent explicit processes (e.g., MTL) more than it
affects implicit processes, which are often thought to be subcortical. However, both language IL and the early, but not later, stages of perceptual
IL have recently been found to be associated with MTL activation. This
study examined whether state mood related to two IL tasks. Participants
completed the Positive Affect Negative Affect Scale (PANAS) prior to 3
sessions of the Triplets Learning Task (TLT) tapping perceptual IL, as well
as a language IL task. During the TLT, participants viewed cue events and
responded to a third target in discrete, three-event sequences (called “triplets”). Unbeknownst to participants, the location of the first cue predicted
target location on 80% of trials (HP) and another location on the remaining trials (LP). Learning was assessed by the difference in RT between LP
and HP trials. During the language task, participants listened to streams of
sounds, unaware sounds were three-syllable words from an artificial language. During a subsequent test, participants rated the familiarity of full
and part words. Here, learning was assessed by mean familiarity ratings
for full- minus part-words. We found increased negative mood was significantly associated with lower overall language learning, and less learning
in TLT session 1. These findings suggest that mood influences IL processes
involving the MTL.

E20
NEURONAL CHARACTERISTICS OF EMOTION PROCESSING AND
REGULATION IN FEMALE ADOLESCENTS WITH AND WITHOUT
CONDUCT DISORDER Willeke Martine Menks1, Nora Maria Raschle1, Lynn

Valérie Fehlbaum1, Martin Prätzlich1, Linda Kersten1, Felix Euler1, Iyad El Qirinawi1, Sandra Mannstadt1, Christina Stadler1; 1Psychiatric University Clinics
Basel, Switzerland — Conduct disorder (CD) and predisposition for aggres-

sion are associated with deficient emotion processing and regulation. Neuroimaging studies in males link aggressive behavior with neuronal alterations during emotion processing in areas including limbic and prefrontal
cortices. Neuroimaging studies in female CD are scarce and thus we aim
to investigate neuronal characteristics during emotion regulation in girls
with and without CD. Whole brain functional magnetic resonance imaging
was conducted in 45 female adolescents. Participants had to either look at
or decrease feelings associated with emotional pictures presented (as indicated by cue), followed by self-report of negative-affect intensity through
button press. Contrasts of interest target emotional reactivity (neuronal
response to neutral/negative images) and emotion regulation (decrease vs.
look negative). Preliminary analysis in 18 CD and 18 control girls (15y) was
performed and in-scanner data indicates that controls are more successful
during emotion regulation (significantly lower affect ratings for ‘decrease’
vs. ’look’). Neuroimaging reveals significant differences for emotional
reactivity and regulation when comparing CD with controls. Control girls
display stronger emotional reactivity in areas including insula, amygdala,
anterior cingulate and prefrontal regions. During emotion regulation, CD
is characterized by hypoactivations in left prefrontal, inferior temporal and
limbic areas, whereas left inferior temporal and parietal areas are hyperactivated when compared to typically developing controls. Our results

E21
WHEN MORE IS LESS: EXCESSIVE ACTION MONITORING IN
WORRY IS ACCOMPANIED BY ABNORMAL AFFECTIVE PROCESSING OF ACTIONS Lien De Saedeleer1, Gilles Pourtois1; 1Ghent Univer-

correct/good or incorrect/bad. At the neurophysiological level, the error
related negativity (ERN/Ne) component arising from the rostral cingulate
zone is assumed to capture in part this evaluative process. Recently, worry
was found to alter/augment this ERP component even though its actual
impact on performance monitoring remains unclear (Moser et al., 2013).
In this study, we sought to assess whether worry could actually impair
the rapid processing of actions as good or bad at the ERN level. Fifteen
low trait worriers and 15 high trait worriers (as defined based on the Penn
State Worry Questionnaire) performed a speeded go/nogo task interleaved
with an emotional word discrimination task, while 128-channels EEG was
recorded concurrently. Unknown to the participants, actions made with the
former task served as primes for the subsequent emotion word discrimination task, such that negative words are usually judged faster than positive words following incorrect than correct actions made with the (preceding) speeded go/nogo task (Aarts et al., 2012). Our results show that this
evaluative priming effect was strongly reduced in high compared to low
worriers. Moreover, high worriers showed an enhanced ERN (as well as
correct-related negativity-CRN) component during the go/nogo task, suggesting that overactive action monitoring may actually reflect a lower evaluative processing of (self-generated) actions. We discuss these new findings
against theoretical models that postulate that worry can hijack important
processing resources during performance monitoring and thereby influence the way (self-generated) actions are eventually evaluated.

E22
EXAMINING THE IMPACT OF MOOD ON EXECUTIVE FUNCTION
USING A NOVEL MEASURE OF EMOTION REGULATION FLEXIBILITY Alexandra E. Fowler1, Evangelia G. Chrysikou1; 1University of Kansas — The

ability to regulate one’s emotional responses to different situations (emotion regulation, ER) has been at the center of much cognitive and affective
neuroscience research on frontal lobe function, due to the potential significance of different ER strategies for the treatment of different psychopathological disorders. Although past research has largely focused on the neural
correlates and efficacy of such regulatory strategies (e.g., expressive suppression, cognitive reappraisal), recent findings have shown that executive
function may also involve ER flexibility, namely, the ability to implement
ER strategies that match particular contextual demands. Despite extensive
research on cognitive flexibility (i.e., the regulation of cognitive strategies
depending on context) much less work has examined ER flexibility. The
aim of this study was to develop a novel measure of ER flexibility based on
the widely accepted measure of cognitive flexibility, the Wisconsin Card
Sorting Task (cWCST). We examined the strength of this new emotion regulation measure (eWCST) to capture ER flexibility in healthy adults and
depressed individuals who are characterized by cognitive and ER flexibility impairments. Behavioral and psychophysiological (facial electromyography) data showed that individuals with depression were less flexible on
emotional sorting in the eWCST relative to healthy controls, results that
mirrored their performance on the cWCST. These findings contribute to the
developing literature on ER flexibility, while allowing for novel comparisons between cognitive and emotion regulation domains.

E23
STRESS ATTENUATES VALENCE DRIVEN DEFICITS IN DECISION-MAKING Seth Koslov1, Vaibhav Sapuram1,2, Jessica Cooper1, Joanna
Capanzana1, Marissa Gorlick1, Todd Maddox1; 1University of Texas at Austin, 2University of North Carolina at Greensboro — Recent neuroscience research sug-

gests that emotion and cognition are subserved by overlapping neural systems, and that stress enhances striatally-mediated reflexive processing at
the expense of frontally-mediated reflective processing. However, this relationship has not been explored in decision-making. In the present study,
we examined the interactive effects of stress, feedback emotionality, and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

191

Poster Session E	
feedback valence on decision-making performance and strategy engagement. Each participant completed four reflexive-optimal decision-making
tasks under stress or control conditions. A cold pressor task was used to
induce stress. The underlying structure of the four tasks was identical, but
the four conditions were constructed from the factorial combination of
feedback type (emotional vs. non-emotional) and feedback valence (reward
vs. punishment). In both the emotional and non-emotional feedback conditions, participants performed worse when their task was to minimize
punishments relative to maximizing rewards. However, this deficit was
attenuated by stress, with punishment participants under stress performing better than punishment participants under no stress. To examine the
mechanism driving this effect, two computational models were fit to the
data: a simple reinforcement-learning model that captures reflexive processes, and a reflective (heuristic) win-stay lose-shift model. Under punishment-minimization conditions for both emotional and non-emotional
feedback, a higher proportion of participants in the stress condition than
control condition were best fit by the reinforcement-learning model. Under
reward-maximization conditions, stress had no effect on performance or
strategies relative to controls. These results indicate that stress attenuates
deficits in reflexive decision-making under punishment-minimization conditions through enhancement of striatally-mediated processing.

E24
HEART RATE VARIABILITY REVEALS BRAIN-BODY LOOPS IN THE
INSULAR CORTEX Ross Markello1, Amber W. Lockrow1, Wen-Ming Luh1, R.
Nathan Spreng1, Adam K. Anderson1; 1Cornell University — Heart rate variability

(HRV), the beat-to-beat modulation of heart rate, originates from the brain
and reflects central visceromotor regulation. Its high frequency component
is associated with parasympathetic regulation and is often considered to
reflect heart health. In addition to its relationship to longevity, HRV has
been associated with higher-level cognitive and affective regulatory capacities. While HRV is typically assessed as a stable, trait-based measure used
to examine differences reflecting between-individual variability, HRV also
indexes state-related shifts in how the brain regulates autonomic outflow
to the heart. In the current study we explored the neural bases of state-related variation in HRV within individuals. We analyzed resting state fMRI
and peripheral physiological data in a sample of 96 young adults to assess
the neural underpinnings of such variability. HRV was calculated via
finger pulse plethysmography as a sliding 15-second window of the root
mean square of successive differences. After controlling for respiratory frequency, beat-to-beat fluctuations in heart rate correlated with activity in
the putative primary interoceptive cortex—the mid to posterior insula—as
well as activity in the primary somatosensory cortex, primary visual cortex
in the calcarine sulcus, precuneus, and inferior frontal gyrus. Examinations
of BOLD response as an antecedent or consequent of HRV provide support for the insula as both primary interoceptive and primary visceromotor cortex. These results suggest the central regulatory origins of HRV are
related to attentional states in primary exteroceptive and interoceptive cortices and may originate from parasympathetic feedback loops regulating
the moment-to-moment state of the heart.

E25
THE EFFECTS OF ACUTE STRESS ON THE CALIBRATION OF PERSISTENCE Karolina M. Lempert1, Joseph T. McGuire2, Danielle B. Hazeltine1,
Joseph W. Kable3, Elizabeth A. Phelps1,4; 1New York University, 2Boston University,
3
University of Pennsylvania, 4Nathan Kline Institute — People often fail to wait

for delayed rewards, even after expressing a preference for them. While
this failure to persist is sometimes maladaptive, there are environments
in which limiting persistence is advantageous. Persistence should be calibrated to the statistics of delay times in a given environment. Previous work
has shown that individuals can calibrate how long to persist for delayed
rewards after experience with an environment, and optimal calibration
depends on a signal in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, which tracks
the subjective value of waiting over time. Since acute stress can impair
prefrontal cortex function, here we tested whether stress would impact the
calibration of persistence, in a between-subjects design (four groups; n =
30 each). Half the participants performed a task in which persistence was
optimal (high persistence, HP), either after an acute physiological stressor
or no stress. The other half performed a task in which it was optimal to
quit waiting for a reward soon after each trial began (limited-persistence,

192

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
LP), either under stress or no stress. There was no main effect of stress on
persistence, nor was there a stress x environment interaction. Thus, calibration of persistence is preserved under stress. However, among the stressed
participants, both the cortisol response to stress (β = 0.38; p = 0.01) and
baseline cortisol (β = 0.39; p = 0.01) independently predicted better calibration under stress (less waiting in LP, more waiting in HP). This suggests
that increased systemic cortisol output after stress predicts more optimal
behavior in this task.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding
E26
IMPACT OF EARLY LIFE STRESS ON NEURAL NETWORK DYSREGULATION AND MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER IN ADULTHOOD
Matthew Crain1, Erin Walsh2, Andrew Crowther2, Gabriel Dichter2, Moria Smoski1;
1
Duke University, 2University of North Carolina — Early life stress (ELS) during

childhood has been found to be directly associated with serious psychopathology in adults, which is often resistant to conventional treatment. There
is growing evidence that ELS is linked to dysregulation of functional neural
networks in adults. Specifically, previous studies of adults with ELS have
demonstrated altered activation among the default mode network (DMN),
executive control network (ECN), salience network (SN), and dorsal attention network (DAN), though findings have been inconsistent. The aim of
the current study was to examine the relationship between retrospective
self-reported ELS, including sexual, physical, and emotional abuse and
neglect, and the extent and nature of impaired connectivity among functional neural networks using a resting-state fMRI paradigm with 35 adult
outpatients diagnosed with major depressive disorder (MDD) and 20
non-depressed control participants. The degree of self-reported ELS was
significantly higher in the MDD group than in controls. Furthermore, MDD
was significantly associated with widespread hypo-connectivity between
the DMN and DAN and the ECN and SN as well as hyper-connectivity
within the DMN and DAN. Finally, ELS severity was associated with even
greater hyper-connectivity within the DMN for MDD patients. This functional neural network dysregulation, potentiated by ELS, may play a critical role in producing the more pervasive and serious emotional lability,
rumination, impaired self-reference, dysfunctional stress response, and
obsessions and compulsions seen in MDD and related psychopathology.
These findings suggest the importance of developing treatment methods
that directly restore healthy balance to these critical functional neural networks impacted by childhood trauma.

E27
LOSING TOUCH: CHRONIC DEPERSONALIZATION AND DEREALIZATION MAY BE INSTIGATED BY CANNABIS AND ANXIETY Sean

Madden1, Jeff Abugel, Patrick Einhorn1, Adam Benzekri1, Fahd Abdus-Sabur1;
1
Columbia University, Teachers College — The altered states of consciousness,

depersonalization (DP) and derealization (DR), are defined as sensations of
detachment from one’s body and surroundings, as well as feelings of unreality affecting a broad scope of perceptions such as that of one’s identity
or familiar places. DP and DR are often transient phenomena that follow
ordinary events like sleep deprivation. There is, however, a chronic form in
which these intrusions persist for years, causing individuals significant distress. Previous research implicates recreational drug use and anxiety in the
etiology of chronic DP/DR; unfortunately, efforts to understand this matter
have been scarce. The present study sought to identify potential causes of
chronic DP and/or DR in a sample of 71 chronically depersonalized and/
or derealized individuals. Participants were recruited from online forums
established for chronic DP and DR sufferers to complete a questionnaire.
The mean age among male and female respondents was 42.5 (SD = 40.31).
The majority of cases reported chronic DP and/or DR lasting for over 6
months (89%), 27% of whom indicated a duration in excess of 10 years (n
= 19). The two most common triggers were anxiety and recreational drug
use, the most common of which was cannabis (61.1%, n = 11). Other respondents noted stressful events and panic attacks as precursors to their symptoms. Thirteen percent of the sample, most of whom exhibited symptoms

2016 Annual Meeting	
the longest, could not attribute a cause responsible for symptom onset. Our
findings warrant further investigation of the etiology of chronic DP and
DR.

E28
FIGHTING BACK: NEUROENDOCRINE INFLUENCES ON WOMEN’S REACTIVE AGGRESSION. Macià Buades-Rotger1, Frederike Beyer2,

Christin Engelke1, Ulrike M. Krämer1; 1University of Lübeck, 2University College
London — Reactive aggression is a complex social behavior that arises in

response to an interpersonal provocation. In a previous functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study in men, we found that orbitofrontal
cortex (OFC) reactivity to angry faces was negatively related to aggression
in an interactive paradigm. Here, we sought to expand on our previous
findings by exploring the joint influence of testosterone, cortisol and neural
reactivity to anger on women’s reactive aggression. We employed a competitive reaction time task devised to elicit reactive aggression in the scanner: the Taylor Aggression Paradigm (TAP). In this version of the TAP,
the opponent displayed either an angry or a neutral face at the beginning
of each trial and behaved more aggressively over time, successfully provoking the participants. We measured participants’ cortisol and testosterone levels in saliva and blood, controlling for scanner novelty, menstrual
cycle, and contraceptive use. While we found no relationships between
OFC activation and aggressive behavior, reactivity to angry faces in the
left superior temporal gyrus (STG), right temporo-parietal junction (TPJ),
and bilateral amygdala were all positively related to aggression. Mediation
analyses revealed that salivary testosterone and STG activity fully and positively mediated the relationship between amygdala reactivity and reactive
aggression. Our results suggests a fine-tuned neural mechanism by which
threat signals processed in the amygdala can be modulated by the current
endocrine state and by other mentalizing areas in order to facilitate aggressive retaliation in women.

E29
THE INFLUENCE OF AFFECTIVE CONTEXT ON BRAIN AND BEHAVIORAL RESPONSES TO NEUTRAL STIMULI Chelsea Boccagno1, Bruce

Doré1, Damaris Fuster2, Tanya Singh2, Rhea Kotecha1, Jochen Weber1, Sadia
Chaudhury2, Barbara Stanley2, John Mann2, Kevin Ochsner1; 1Columbia University, 2New York State Psychiatric Institute — The context in which a stimulus

is presented can influence processing of the stimulus’s value. Though
functional neuroimaging studies have begun to assess general emotional
intensity (e.g., whether or not an emotion is elicited) in response to neutral images (e.g., in clinical populations; Lakis & Mendrek, 2013), little is
known about the influence of emotional context on the affective evaluation
of neutral stimuli. In order to assess whether emotional evaluation of neutral stimuli is affected by the context in which the stimuli are presented, the
current study examined brain and behavioral responses to neutral images
within a positive versus negative context in 19 healthy individuals (age:
18-65). While undergoing a functional magnetic resonance imaging scan,
participants viewed neutral images within blocks of either positive or negative International Affective Picture System images. Following each image,
participants were asked to rate their affect. Results indicate that neutral
images evoked a greater response in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(vmPFC)—a region involved in computing the value of emotional stimuli (Winecoff, 2013)—when intermixed with negative relative to positive
images. Furthermore, individuals who reported greater positive affect in
response to neutral images within a negative versus positive context also
showed increased vmPFC activity and more negative vmPFC-amygdala
connectivity. These analyses indicate that the context in which a neutral
stimulus is presented influences brain regions associated with evaluation
and positive value, and that the degree of this activation correlates with
positive affective response.

E30
CONTROL OVER AVERSIVE OUTCOMES IN HUMANS: EFFECTS
ON THREAT RESPONSES AND NEURAL MECHANISMS Emily A.
Boeke1, Justin M. Moscarello1, Joseph E. LeDoux1,2, Elizabeth A. Phelps1,2, Catherine A. Hartley3; 1New York University, 2Nathan Kline Institute, 3Sackler Institute
for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Cornell Medical College — Research in

rodents has indicated that instrumental control over an aversive outcome

Poster Session E
can result in reduced defensive Pavlovian reactions. We sought to investigate whether this phenomenon extends to humans and understand the
neural mechanisms underlying this effect. Subjects (N=48) underwent
a 2-day threat learning protocol in an fMRI scanner. On day 1, subjects
underwent the acquisition phase, in which they viewed a stimulus (CS+)
that coterminated with mild shock and a stimulus not paired with shock
(CS-). Next, subjects in the “Master” group underwent an avoidance phase
in which they learned an instrumental response to avoid the shock. “Yoke”
subjects underwent yoked extinction where they saw the same CSs and
received the same number and timing of shocks as a particular Master subject, but they had no control over the shock. On day 2, we assessed defensive Pavlovian responses during the recall and novel acquisition phases.
Our measure of threat responses was the conditioned response (CR, CS+
minus CS- skin conductance). Yokes showed the typical increase in CR
from safety learning to recall phases, while Masters did not. Master subjects also showed reduced CR during novel, compared to initial acquisition,
whereas Yoke subjects showed equivalent CR across the two days. Masters
showed decreased amygdala and increased vmPFC BOLD response, compared to Yokes, during the avoidance/extinction phase. The results suggest
that the effects of having control over an aversive outcome generalize to
new episodes of threat learning and highlight a potential behavioral and
neural pathway to resilience in humans.

E31
DELAYED ACQUISITION OF CONTEXTUAL FEAR IN HUMAN
CB1-POLYMORPHISM Dorothea Neueder1, Marta Andreatta1, Robert
Blum3, Jürgen Deckert2, Paul Pauli1; 1Department of Psychology I, Würzburg,
2
Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, Würzburg,
3
Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Würzburg — Sustained fear and fear gen-

eralization are two crucial mechanisms involved in the etiology and maintenance of anxiety disorders. Recent studies indicated interactions of the
cannabinoid receptor 1 gene (CNR1) and learning deficits in cued and
contextual fear conditioning. To investigate the impact of CNR1 variants
on contextual fear conditioning, participants were genotyped for the functional CNR1 rs2180619 polymorphism and underwent a conditioning and
generalization paradigm in virtual reality (VR). During two acquisition
phases (Day1), one virtual office (anxiety context, CTX+) was paired with
an unpredictable electric stimulus (unconditioned Stimulus, US), whereas
another virtual office (safety context, CTX-) was never paired with the US.
During two generalization phases (Day2), three additional generalization
contexts (G-CTX1: 75%; G-CTX2: 50%; G-CTX3: 25%) were presented, creating a continuum of similarity between the anxiety (100%) and the safety
(0%) context. We found successful context conditioning as indicated by
more negative valence, higher arousal, anxiety and contingency ratings for
the CTX+ as compared to the CTX-. However, homozygous for the A allele
(n=12) showed delayed acquisition of the conditioned anxiety (i.e., after
second acquisition phase) as compared to G-allele carriers (n=15). During
generalization test, ratings demonstrated a linearly declining generalization gradient as the presented office becomes less similar to the CTX+. This
effect was not modulated by genotype. Our results suggest slower acquisition of contextual anxiety in A/A homozygotes. This indicates a modulatory role of CNR1 gene variation in sustained anxiety responses to contextual information.

E32
NEURAL CORRELATES OF PROCESSING GENERAL THREAT-RELATED SCENES IN GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER RELATIVE TO PANIC DISORDER, SOCIAL PHOBIA AND NONANXIOUS
HEALTHY CONTROLS Christine Wilhelm1, Paula Neumeister1, Katharina
Feldker1, Carina Heitmann1, Thomas Straube1; 1University of Muenster — Gen-

eralized anxiety disorder (GAD) is characterized by chronic, excessive
and uncontrollable worry about a variety of topics. From a neurobiological perspective it is still poorly understood how patients process adverse
complex scenes. Here, we investigated brain activation to general threat-related and neutral scenes in GAD using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI). To particularly elucidate GAD-specific neural correlates,
brain response patterns were compared to healthy controls (HC) but also
to patients suffering from panic disorder (PD) or social phobia (SP). Rating
data revealed significantly increased anxiety to threat in GAD compared

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

193

Poster Session E	
to the other groups. FMRI results show common effects across all groups
in several regions, including amygdala, insula and frontal areas. However,
GAD as compared to the other groups showed additional hyperactivation
in left insula, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), mid cingulate cortex (MCC) and posterior cingulate
cortex (dPCC) to general threat-related versus neutral scenes. These activations suggest cortical regions, mainly in cingulate cortex, associated with
GAD specific abnormal processing of general threat.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
E33
EXPLORE THE CODING OF EMOTIONAL VALENCE OF FACES
USING MULTIVOXEL PATTERN ANALYSIS (MVPA) Maria Antonieta Bobes Leon1, Agustin Lage1, Marlis Ontiveiro1, Pedro Guerra2, Alicia Sanchez-Adam2, Jaime Vila2, Mitchell Valdes-Sosa1; 1Cuban Neuroscience Center,
Cuba, 2University of Granada, Spain — Interpersonal relationship modulate

the affective valence assigned to faces. On the other hand, valence for
unfamiliar faces can depend solely on physical appearance. It is not clear
if processing of affective valence of familiar faces implicates a specific
functional network, or if it relies on a more general face-emotional system,
which could also process attributes such as attractiveness or trustworthiness. Here we contrasted these two options by means of an fMRI MVPA
study. We obtained high spatial resolution fMRI responses to four face conditions, resulting from the crossing of two factors: familiarity (familiar vs.
unfamiliar) and emotional valence (agreeable vs. disagreeable). Peripheral
measures and subject’s ratings were used to validate the categorization of
the stimuli. MVPA was performed on functional ROIs that had been previously described to be part of the face processing networks. Results showed
that unfamiliar face valence was decoded in early visual areas and core face
areas (OFA, FFA and pSTS), whereas familiar faces valence was decoded in
areas within ventro-lateral frontal cortex and insula. The response-pattern
dissimilarity matrices analysis corroborated the presence of different types
of ROIs, those responding to all face stimuli, located in the occipito-toremporal lobes, those coding familiarity like CP, and those like AC and mOF,
which distinguishes familiarity, and valence of faces. Our findings suggest
that the valence associated to personal significance, and the valence associated to the physical appearance of faces, are processed in largely dissociable neural systems.

E34
FAMILIARITY FACILITATES FEATURE-BASED FACE PROCESSING Kelsey Wheeler1, Matteo Visconti di Oleggio Castello1, M. Ida Gobbini1,2;
1

Dartmouth College, 2University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy — Familiar faces are
processed more efficiently than unfamiliar faces. Extensive exposure to an
identity leads to the formation of a robust representation, facilitating faster
response times for those identities (Tong & Nakayama, 1999). Robust representations were also shown to mediate reliable and rapid choice saccades
to familiar faces with unfamiliar faces as distractors at a latency (180 ms)
that precedes any known neural response differentiating familiarity (Visconti di Oleggio Castello & Gobbini, 2015). We asked if feature-based face
processing could be driving these rapid responses for robustly represented
identities. Inversion has been shown to disrupt configural processing,
solicit feature-based processing and control for low-level confounds (Farah
et al., 1995). Thus, we tested how face inversion and personal familiarity
affected subject performance in a visual search paradigm. As expected, subjects responded more quickly to familiar targets than unfamiliar targets in
the upright condition. Interestingly, subjects were also faster to respond to
familiar faces than unfamiliar faces in the inverted condition. Additionally,
subjects were faster to indicate the target was absent when searching for a
familiar face relative to an unfamiliar face among identical sets of 2, 4, or 6
unfamiliar distractors. These results suggest that the processing mechanism
for robust representations is maintained across conditions, pointing to the
use of a feature-based processing system for efficient recognition of faces.

194

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

E35
FAMILIARITY AND RECOLLECTION OF OWN-RACE AND OTHER-RACE FACES MEASURED WITH AN OBJECTIVE MEMORY-JUDGMENT TASK Greta Minor1, Makenzie Adkins1, Grit Herzmann1; 1The

College of Wooster — People are better at memorizing and recognizing faces

from their own race as compared to faces from a different race. Research on
subjective memory judgments found that recollection but not familiarity is
enhanced for own-race faces. We used an objective memory-judgment task
and event-related potentials (ERPs) of memory encoding and retrieval. East
Asian and Caucasian subjects studied Chinese and Caucasian faces presented on different backgrounds. Subjects were asked to recognize the studied faces among novel faces. Only for “old” faces, subjects had to indicate
the color of the background on which the face appeared during study. Recollection was measured as correct face and background recognition. Familiarity was measured as correct face but incorrect background recognition.
Instead of using own-race and other-race groups as subject variables, social
contact was used as covariate in data analysis. No influence on familiarity
was found. Subjects reporting high contact with Chinese people recollected
Chinese faces more accurately. Study phase ERPs showed an increased recollection effect for Chinese faces in subjects with higher contact. At test,
subjects with higher contact to Chinese people showed smaller differences
between the ERP recollection and familiarity effects. This suggests that the
objective memory-judgment task caused subjects to encode all Chinese
faces deeply such that they subsequently possessed strong memory traces
whether or not the background was correctly recognized. Caucasian faces
did not show any differences which might be due to all subjects living in a
predominantly Caucasian environment. This study confirms previous predictions about memory for own-race and other-race faces.

E36
PATIENTS WITH CHRONIC FACIAL PALSY DISPLAY IMPAIRMENTS
IN EARLY ENCODING OF FACES: ERP SUPPORT FOR THE FACIAL
FEEDBACK HYPOTHESIS Christian Dobel1, Jessica Komes1, Helene Kreysa1,
Fabian Volk1, Holger Wiese2, Orlando Guntinas-Lichius1, Stefan Schweinberger1;
1
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, 2Durham University — Unilateral chronic

facial palsy is a neuromuscular disorder impairing facial movement. This
affects not only habitual tasks/requirements/occupations such as eye closure, eating and drinking, but also the display of emotional expressions.
To date, it is unclear whether the perception of emotions, as predicted by
the facial feedback hypothesis, is also altered in these patients. To this end,
we tested twenty patients suffering from chronic peripheral facial palsy,
(patients with central neurological defects were excluded) and an ageand gender-matched control group. Pictures of faces displaying happy,
surprised, angry, sad and neutral expressions were presented as stimuli.
Emotional expressions were shown with morphed emotion intensities of
50 and 100%. To create task demands, pictures of butterflies served as rare
filler items which had to be detected. Analyses of amplitudes and latencies
of event-related potentials revealed interactions of the factor group with
intensity and/or emotional expression for early components such as the P1
and, more strongly, the N170. Most importantly, patients displayed larger
amplitudes of the N170 to negative emotional expression, i.e. angry faces,
presented with an intensity of 50%. We interpret these results as the recruitment of attentional resources in order to clarify the ambiguous emotional
expression. Taken together, the study demonstrates that early encoding of
faces is altered in patients with facial paresis, providing support for the
facial feedback hypothesis.

E37
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GENDER, AUTISTIC TRAITS, AND
EYE MOVEMENT PATTERNS DURING MENTAL ROTATION AND
EMOTIONAL FACE PROCESSING IN COLLEGE STUDENTS Mary

Foggo1, Sarah Godfrey1, Brennan McFarland1, Tess Wiggin1, Jennifer Stevenson1;
1
Ursinus College — The current study explored accuracy, response time, and
eye movement patterns during mental rotation and emotional face tasks. It
was hypothesized that men would be more accurate and faster on mental
rotation whereas women would be more accurate and faster on the emotional face task, consistent with research on gender differences. This study
also hypothesized that adults with more autistic traits would perform better

2016 Annual Meeting	
on mental rotation than the emotional face task, consistent with the extreme
male brain theory of autism. Finally, it was hypothesized that adults with
more autistic traits would fixate more on the mouth region whereas adults
with fewer autistic traits would fixate more on the eye region. Ninety-seven
college students (38 males) viewed pairs of shapes and faces to determine
if these images were the same or different while their eye movements were
recorded. Participants also completed the Autism-Spectrum Quotient to
assess number of autistic traits. Men were more accurate, but not faster,
than women on mental rotation. However, there were no gender differences in accuracy or response time on the emotional face task. Furthermore,
participants spent more time fixating the mouth region than the eye region
and participants with more autistic traits tended to spend more time fixating both regions. Additional analyses will include eye movement patterns
during mental rotation. The extreme male brain theory was not supported,
but results suggest there are gender differences for mental rotation and different strategies of emotion processing for people with varying levels of
autistic traits.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring &
inhibitory control
E38
NEURAL EVIDENCE FOR RETRIEVAL ATTEMPTS AS AN EXPLANATION FOR THE DELAYED JOL EFFECT Timothy Kelley1, Debbie Magreehan1, Michael Serra1, Tyler Davis1; 1Texas Tech University — Research on the neu-

robiology of metacognition is sparse and has thus far focused primarily on
immediate judgments of learning (JOLs). When monitoring their learning
behavior, however, people often make delayed JOLs separated temporally
from their initial study. Research in the behavioral literature suggests that
delayed JOLs differ in notable ways from immediate JOLs, particularly in
the higher overall accuracy of delayed JOLs. There are several competing
theories of why delayed judgments are associated with higher accuracy,
the most prominent of which suggests that people make a retrieval attempt
when they make delayed JOLs. The current study used fMRI to provide
neural evidence to evaluate this account. Participants studied pairs of faces,
scenes, and objects. They made JOLs predicting their future memory for
each item either immediately or at a random delay from the study of an
item before completing a recognition memory test. fMRI analysis revealed
that during both immediate and delayed JOLs, category-specific regions
associated with perceiving these objects were reactivated. Reactivation was
greater during delayed JOLs compared to immediate JOLs, which suggests
that participants attempted to retrieve the response of a pair when making
their delayed JOLs, consistent with the retrieval-attempt account of the
delayed JOL effect.

E39
REACTIVATION STRENGTH UNDERLIES SUCCESSFUL STOPPING
IN SELF-PACED LEARNING Sean O’Bryan1, Eric Walden1, Michael J. Serra1,
Savana Gierstorfer1, Tyler Davis1; 1Texas Tech University — When weighing deci-

sion evidence, individuals are continually faced with the choice to gather
more information or to act on what they have already learned. The present experiment employed a self-paced category learning task using fMRI
to examine the neural indices of stopping behavior and how they vary as
a function of individual differences. Participants learned to classify image
triads as belonging to one of two categories via feedback. The triads consisted of face, object, and scene cues presented simultaneously. Only one
class of cue was predictive of category membership, and subjects were
tasked with solving this category rule. After each trial, participants were
given the option to explicitly solve the rule (indicating whether faces,
objects, or scenes were predictive) or to continue learning. Once a subject
opted to solve, both the rule and accompanying stimuli were randomly
reset. Behaviorally, subjects displayed substantial variability in both frequency of solving (stopping) and response accuracy. Analysis of the fMRI
data revealed widespread activation centered in medial prefrontal cortex
for opting to solve compared with opting to continue. Higher accuracy on
the task was associated with activation of object selective ventral occipitotemporal cortex when subjects chose to solve the rule, despite no images
being present on the screen at this time. Accuracy was also predictive of
increased signal in medial prefrontal cortex. Together, these findings sug-

Poster Session E
gest that reactivating the information associated with a rule when deciding whether to stop may be a strategy that increases accuracy in stopping
behavior.

E40
P3B AND PE AS NEURAL INDICES OF CONFIDENCE Paul J. Beatty1,

George A. Buzzell1, Daniel M. Roberts1, Craig G. McDonald1; 1George Mason University — Previous work investigating the neural basis of performance mon-

itoring has identified several event-related potential (ERP) components
that have been linked to confidence judgments. Recent work suggests that
the error positivity (Pe) and P3b component (P300) may provide a graded
index of subjective confidence during decision-making tasks. However,
most studies that have investigated the relationship between these components and confidence have not severely taxed perceptual discrimination
processes. In the present experiment, EEG was recorded while participants
performed a difficult visual discrimination task and reported their subjective certainty of response on a trial-by-trial basis. We investigated the electrophysiological correlates of perceptual confidence by comparing Pe, P3b,
and ERN/CRN amplitude for subjectively-reported sure and unsure trials.
Analysis revealed that, during a difficult stimulus discrimination paradigm, although variations in ERN/CRN amplitude did not predict changes
in confidence, both the Pe and P3b provided a graded index of decision
confidence, irrespective of trial accuracy. Our findings provide support for
the notion that the Pe and P3b are sensitive indices of confidence, even in
situations where the ability to monitor objective performance is severely
constrained by task difficulty. These findings reinforce the notion that the
P3b and Pe can be used as a robust index of confidence in studies where it
may not be possible to assess a direct subjective report of confidence.

E42
COGNITIVE CONTROL AND PTSD SYMPTOMS AS INDEPENDENT
PREDICTORS OF OPIATE USE DISORDERS AMONG ACTIVE DRUG
USERS IN BALTIMORE, MD Tabitha E H Moses1, Pia M Mauro2, Jonathan
J Rose1, William W Latimer1; 1School of Health Sciences, Human Services and
Nursing, Lehman College, City University of New York, Bronx, NY, 2Columbia
University Mailman School of Public Health, New York, NY — Background: Indi-

viduals with lower cognitive control and those with trauma exposure are
more likely to meet substance use disorder criteria. We assess whether
trauma exposure moderated the relationship between opiate use disorder (OUD) and cognitive control in a community sample of active drug
users. Methods: Data were obtained from 260 drug-using adults ages 18-59
(mean=41.5, SD=9.9) in a randomized controlled trial in Baltimore, MD;
43.4% were male and 68.1% were non-white. Interviews assessed substance
use, trauma, and neuropsychological function. Separate logistic regressions measured the association between lifetime OUD and Stroop interference t-score quartiles, as well as Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
symptoms (mean=4.59, SD=3.41), adjusting for age, gender, and race. We
assessed whether trauma exposure moderated the relationship between
OUD and Stroop interference. Results: 60.8% met OUD criteria. Relative
to the lowest interference quartile, the third quartile was associated with
increased odds of OUD (odds ratio (OR)=2.65, 95% confidence interval (CI)
1.25-5.62, p=0.011), as was the highest quartile (OR=3.22, 95% CI=1.53-6.81,
p=0.002). Reporting more PTSD symptoms was associated with increased
odds of OUD (OR=1.10, 95% CI 1.02-1.19 p=0.014); however, PTSD symptom count did not moderate the OUD-interference relationship. Conclusions: Higher trauma and lower cognitive control independently increased
likelihood of OUD among active drug users. Interventions targeting cognitive control to reduce OUD could have attenuated effects unless concurrently addressing PTSD symptoms.

E43
MONITORING AND ACCUMULATION MECHANISMS IN ACTION
VOLITION Holly Phillips1,2, Laura Hughes1,2, Jiaxiang Zhang2,3, James Rowe1,2;

1

University of Cambridge, 2MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, 3University
of Cardiff — We can choose whether, when or what action to make. Whilst

there is evidence for accumulation-to-threshold mechanisms underlying
many different types of decision making process, few studies have investigated the accumulation-to-threshold mechanisms underlying voluntary
action. FMRI studies suggest the presence of accumulators in pre-supple-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

195

Poster Session E	
mentary motor areas and premotor cortex, and distinguished these from a
monitoring role associated with the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vPFC).
The vPFC has been suggested to inhibit motor accumulators in premotor
regions, with the effect of reducing repetition of voluntary action choices.
Here, we investigated action decisions using direct electrophysiological
recordings, exploiting the greater temporal resolution. Synchronous neural
activities were recorded using magnetoencephalography, while participants either pressed a specified button or were given choice of which
button to press (with no overt rewards or external cuing between possible
responses). Behavioural data were fitted using linear ballistic accumulators,
with model fitting and selection of free parameters by BIC. Model parameters were used to interrogate the M/EEG data, with the predicted accumulator activity to correlate with the envelope of beta and gamma power.
We found evidence for activity accumulation in medial frontal cortex (cf
the fMRI studies), and evidence for the monitoring role of the vPFC during
choice. Using an evoked dynamic causal modelling of connectivity in the
extended motor system, we observed modulated connections from vPFC
to parietal and premotor areas. Our findings confirmed the central role of
medial frontal cortex in evidence accumulation, and provide new evidence
for the vPFC’s monitoring and modulatory role in action selection.

E44
TDCS OVER PREFRONTAL CORTEX PREVENTS TASK-RELEVANT
INHIBITION IN AN UNCOMMON ENDING SENTENCE COMPLETION TASK Emilio R. Tamez1, David S. Rosen2, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill1;
1

The University of Pennsylvania, 2Drexel University — The left inferior frontal
gyrus’ (LIFG) role in inhibitory cognitive control is well characterized.
Previous work has indicated that decreases in cognitive control might
improve subjects’ ability to generate uncommon uses for familiar objects.
Here, we explore the effects of varying levels of cognitive control on creative language production via anodal or cathodal transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) over the LIFG. Our sample (N=46) was roughly
balanced between stimulation conditions, gender, and age. Stimuli were
grammatical sentences with cloze probabilities for completion between
0.7-0.9. Subjects completed an FAS phonemic fluency task (FAS), a reading
span test, and a short practice before stimulation. We stimulated at 1.5mA
over F7 (mastoid reference) for 17min (30s sham), with 180s fixation pretask. Participants were given 5s per sentence to generate an “uncommon”
ending as quickly as possible. Response times (RT) were collected. Semantic similarity of responses to cloze completions was assessed using Latent
Semantic Analysis (LSA). Analysis of RTs and LSA was done using linear
mixed-effects regression, while logistic mixed-effects regression was used
on accidental cloze responses (errors). We found no effect of stimulation
on RTs or LSA relative to sham. However, anodal stimulation doubled the
odds of error relative to sham (odds ratio=2.03, p=0.026, Wald test). Cathodal had no effect relative to sham. These results suggest that the LIFG may
be responsible for selecting a non-cloze response over the cloze response,
though more analyses are necessary to determine the region’s specific contributions to task performance.

E45
PREPARING FOR HARD TIMES – SCALP AND INTRA-CRANIAL
PHYSIOLOGICAL RECORDINGS SHOW PREPARATION FOR HARD
MENTAL CALCULATIONS Clio Janssens1, Eliana Vassena1, Leen De Taeye2,
Alfred Meurs2, Dirk Van Roost2, Robrecht Raedt2, Paul Boon2, Gilles Pourtois1,
Tom Verguts1; 1Ghent University, 2Ghent University Hospital — Investing mental

effort is sometimes necessary but also costly. Cognitive control is needed
to regulate effort investment based on predictive information regarding
task difficulty and potential reward. fMRI studies show that both types of
information lead to similar preparatory brain activity. In EEG, preparation
between cue and target is reflected in the contingent negative variation
(CNV), with increased CNV amplitude when reward is predicted compared to no reward. Comparable preparation might be expected following
cues predicting difficulty, but for now there is little evidence for this. In the
current study we investigate the CNV in a mental arithmetic task. In contrast to previous studies, here an immediate motor response following the
preparation was avoided, eliminating motor preparation from the CNV.
A difficulty cue (3000 ms) was followed by two consecutive arithmetic
operations to be performed. After the calculations, a choice had to be made
between two possible outcomes. Results showed a more negative ampli-

196

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
tude for the CNV following ‘hard’ than ‘easy’ cues, indicating increased
mental preparation to invest effort. The CNV amplitude was also correlated
to behavioral accuracy, supporting the fact that preparation reflected in the
CNV aids task performance. Importantly, such modulation was recorded
in absence of a motor preparation, thus showing that mental preparation
alone affects the CNV. Intracranial recordings from anterior insula (AI) in
a refractory epileptic patient, using the same paradigm, reveal a cue-locked
negative wave (similar to the scalp CNV) affected by difficulty information,
suggesting contribution from AI to signal the need for effort investment.

E46
IMPLICIT LEARNING FACILITATES COGNITIVE CONTROL IN A
RESPONSE SWITCHING TASK Silvia Isabella1, Charline Urbain1, J. Allan
Cheyne2, Douglas O. Cheyne1; 1University of Toronto and Hospital for Sick Children, 2University of Waterloo — In previous work we demonstrated that per-

formance during rapid choice response tasks correlated with cortical oscillations in specific brain regions (Isabella et al., 2015). The primary objective
of this study was to determine whether performance can be facilitated by
implicit learning of stimulus sequences with the overarching goal of identifying brain activity underlying corresponding changes in cognitive control.
Seven subjects performed seven blocks of a go/switch task, where digits
‘1’, ‘2’ and ‘4’ required a right index finger button press (Go), and ‘3’ a left
index finger press (Switch). Unbeknownst to the subjects, the stimuli were
presented in a repeating 8-trial semi-probabilistic pattern (3-1-4-3-2-4-1-2),
known to induce implicit learning in a serial reaction time task (Gabriel
et al., 2011). To assess sequence learning, 90% of trials presented the same
pattern (probable), whereas 10% of trials presented a deviation from the
pattern (improbable). Reaction times (RT) for improbable Switches (‘3’
stimulus, pattern deviation) were longer than probable Switches (‘3’ stimulus, intact pattern; p = 0.01). Additionally, RT for improbable Go trials in
place of Switches (i.e. the pattern called for ‘3’) were longer than probable
Go trials (p < 0.001). Longer RT following improbable stimuli over probable
stimuli demonstrates that subjects implicitly learned to anticipate Switch
trials and subsequently improved performance on the cognitive control
task. This provides a novel paradigm for studying neural activity accompanying implicit learning in a repetitive motor response task, which may
underlie the development of automatic control of goal-directed actions.

E47
ADOLESCENT RISKY DECISION-MAKING: IMPULSIVE ACTION
OR MOTIVATED CHOICE? Diane Goldenberg1, Adriana Galvan1; 1Univer-

sity of California, Los Angeles — Adolescence is characterized by increased

risk-taking, potentially related to immature inhibitory control. Recent
work has begun illuminating adolescent decision-making as motivated
and goal-directed; however, the extent to which adolescent risk-taking is
a product of motivated choice or impulsive action is unclear. The present
study used a task designed to examine the neural correlates of inhibitory
control and motivated choice within a single paradigm. Thirty-five adolescents (ages 15-18 years; 59% female) underwent functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) while performing the Driving Game, which
was adapted from the Stoplight Task (Chein et al., 2011). In the Stoplight Task, individuals can stop (cautious choice) or go (risky choice) at
yellow lights in pursuit of monetary reward. The Driving Game includes
an inhibition component that requires individuals to stop for unexpected
red lights. In this way, yellow lights represent motivated risky choice and
red lights represent inhibition. During red lights, participants successfully
inhibited 94.91% of trials (SD=10.57) with a mean response time of 535.90
ms (SD=72.44 ms). During yellow lights, participants made a risky choice
37.53% of the time (SD=27.87). Mean response time for cautious trials was
599.70 ms (SD=90.37). Main effects during inhibition revealed significant
activation in regions involved in cognitive control (e.g. right inferior frontal
gyrus) and reward (e.g. caudate). Decision-making evoked activation in the
anterior cingulate. Receipt of reward elicited response in the caudate and
medial prefrontal cortex, implicated in reward-guided learning. Findings
suggest that adolescent risky decision-making is, in part, a deliberative process guided by evaluation of outcomes.

2016 Annual Meeting	

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Other
E48
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY CHANGES REFLECT SYSTEM INTERACTIONS DURING DIFFERENT STAGES OF CUED TASK TRIALS
Haoxin Sun1, Caterina Gratton1, Timothy Laumann1, Babatunde Adeyemo1,
Steven Petersen1; 1Washington University in St. Louis — Goal directed attention

tasks involve activity of top-down control and bottom-up sensory systems.
However, how and when these systems interact remains unclear. Here, we
used a cue-target paradigm to compare changes in functional connectivity
(FC) between control (e.g., frontoparietal and dorsal attention) and processing (e.g. visual and motor regions) systems during cue and target portions
of a Posner task. We used predefined gray-matter regions for all FC analyses. To diminish influences from frank evoked activity, time-series correlations following regression of a mixed block/event-related GLM were used
to calculate FC related to rest, cue, and target periods. Overall, FC changed
significantly across different portions of the task. Cue-related FC showed
primarily integration of control systems with both sensory and other control regions. Compared to cue, frontoparietal and ventral attention regions
showed right-lateralized FC increases with visual regions and bilateral FC
increases with dorsal attention regions. FC within specific control systems
increased as well. Moreover, target-related FC showed primarily separation of systems. Compared to cue, between-system FC among dorsal attention, ventral attention, and cingulo-opercular control systems decreased
towards rest. Additionally, frontoparietal regions showed right-lateralized
FC decreases with visual regions and bilateral decreases with motor regions.
Lastly, compared to rest, target-related FC showed further increases within
cingulo-opercular, visual, and motor systems. Our results exhibited complex and dynamic relationships among functional systems, even during a
single trial. The cue-driven integration and target processing-driven separation of control and processing systems suggest control systems mostly
need to modulate down-stream processes early in a goal-directed context.

E49
NEURAL SYSTEMS THAT UNDERLIE CLINICAL DECISION MAKING:
AN ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC INVESTIGATION Chad Williams1,

Mike Paget2, Sylvain Coderre2, Kelly Burak2, Bruce Wright3, Olave Krigolson1;
1
Neuroeconomics Laboratory, University of Victoria, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, 3Division of Medical Science, University of Victoria — Clinicians

face a difficult task – faced with an abundance of information, sometimes
conflicting - they have to make decisions about the diagnoses of clinical
cases. Typically, clinical decisions are framed within a conceptual framework that posits the existence of two decision systems – a Type I system
that reflects fast, “gut hunch” decisions and a Type II system that reflects a
slower, more analytical decision process. In the present experiment we utilized electroencephalography (EEG) to examine the neural processes that
play as participants learned to make clinical decisions. Using the “CARDS”
paradigm developed at the University of Calgary, we had participants
with no medical training learn to diagnose clinical cases using a trial and
error reinforcement learning process while EEG data was recorded. Our
behavioural data indicated that undergraduate students with no medical
training were able to learn to diagnose clinical cases. Interestingly, feedback
evaluation by participants was associated with medial-frontal neural activity. Specifically, feedback stimuli evoked a reward positivity – a component
of the human event-related brain potential associated with a reinforcement
learning system within the medial-frontal cortex. Further, we observed
increased theta activity when participants deliberated clinical decisions to a
greater extent than when they made rapid judgments – a result in line with
previous work from our laboratory relating medial-frontal theta activity to
Type II decision processes. In sum, our results demonstrate that the same
cognitive processes that play a role in learning and decision-making within
a general context also underlie clinical decision-making.

E50
EXECUTIVE FUNCTION PREDICTS READING AND SOCIO-EMOTIONAL OUTCOMES IN CHILDREN WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA Caoilainn Doyle1, Lorraine Boran1, Alan Smeaton2, Geraldine Scanlon3;
1

School of Nursing and Human Sciences, Dublin City University, 2INSIGHT and

Poster Session E
School of Computing, Dublin City University, 3School of Education Studies, Dublin
City University — Dyslexia is characterized by a difficulty in developing

reading skills despite adequate instruction and intellectual ability. Also,
socio-emotional control difficulties are associated with dyslexia. Despite
extensive research, there remains little consensus on the neuro-cognitive
underpinnings of dyslexia and associated behaviors. Executive function
(EF) is a candidate factor for explaining both reading and socio-emotional
difficulties in dyslexia. Addressing methodological issues from previous
EF profiling studies, this study aims to (1) examine EF in dyslexia using
Miyake’s 3 factor model, and (2) examine the predictive relationship of
EF with reading and socio-emotional control difficulties in dyslexia. Fifty
five children (27 dyslexia, 28 control) aged 10-12 years completed a battery of executive function (inhibition, updating, and switching), reading
and socio-emotional (parent rating scale) measures. Children with dyslexia
made significantly more errors compared to controls on all measures of
executive function (inhibition: F(1,52)=6.78, p<.05; updating: F(1,53)=20.54,
p<.001; and switching F(1,53)=11.57, p<.01), reading ability (F(1,53)=64.46,
p<.001) and socio-emotional behaviour (U=132.5, p<.001). Switching ability predicted severity of reading impairment in dyslexia (R2 =.47, p<.001),
while inhibition predicted severity of social control problems in dyslexia
(R2 =.28, p=<.01). Results suggest that EF may be implicated in the symptom expression of dyslexia and may be a candidate cognitive training intervention for children with dyslexia.

E51
EXERCISE INDUCED CHANGES IN HIPPOCAMPAL FUNCTION
FOR SPATIAL NAVIGATION Andreas Becke1,2, Alondra Chaire1, David

Berron1,2, Thomas Wolbers1, Emrah Düzel1,2; 1German Center for Neurgodegenerative Diseases, Magdeburg, 2Institute of Cognitive Neurology and Dementia
Research, Otto-von-Guericke-University, Magdeburg — Recent studies revealed

the positive impact of aerobic exercise on memory function. Animal studies suggest that aerobic exercise is the critical factor for hippocampal (HC)
neurogenesis and spatial navigation learning, a HC-specific function. In the
current study, we implemented a 4-month exercise training program with
sedentary young adults, and examined whether aerobic exercise resulted
in improved spatial navigation learning and structural changes within the
medial temporal lobe. 42 sedentary subjects (19-34y) were assigned to either
an aerobic exercise training group (TG) or a control group (CG). The TG
exercised 45-75 minutes, three times a week, at 70-90% of their maximum
heartrate (CG walked 15 minutes twice a week at 50% HRmax). Before
and after the intervention, individual fitness was examined via VO2-consumption in an incremental treadmill walking test. 7T-MRI was used for
the aquisition of ultra-high resolution (0.4x0.4x1.0mm) T2-weighted images
orthogonal to HC. Participants’ spatial navigation abilities, were tested
using a virtual environment comprising a 4-way intersection, which they
learned from an egocentric perspective. When approaching the intersection
from a different direction they had to indicate the initial starting position.
We observed improvements in behavioral performance on the navigation
task as a effect of aerobic exercise. Specifically, the TG’s reaction times were
significantly faster than the CGs. Furthermore, correlation analysis showed
that subjects with greater increase in fitness (more VO2 at respiratory compensation) improved more in reaction times during the navigation task
and that these effects correlate specificly with volumetric changes in HC
regions.

E52
THE EFFECTS OF CONCUSSIONS ON INHIBITION AND ATTENTION Jon Sigurjonsson1, Nishanthi Anthonipillai1,2, Mohibur Rahman1, Nicole

Begani1, Ashley Kurian1, Diego Zarate1, Christopher Polidura1; 1The City College
of New York, 2NYU Langone Medical Center — Researchers suspect that concus-

sions are underreported due to various factors. This has increased the need
for more objective tests for concussions such as EEG markers. Various EEG
markers for concussion have been proposed, the P3 has been reported to
be the most consistent indicator of attentional problems following a concussive event. Sixty three males, aged 18-28 from athletic and non-athletic
backgrounds, were recruited to estimate their awareness of their concussion history, and the effects of concussions to their cognitive function. Participants completed the Think First concussion questionnaire, Trail Making
Test (TMT), the Mismatched Negativity Task (MMN), and the SART attention and inhibition task. 10 participants reported diagnosed concussions

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

197

Poster Session E	
while an additional 21 participants reported other symptoms of concussions after receiving blows to the head, indicating a possible concussive
episode. Differences in completion time on part B of the TMT and the SART
were found between the concussed and non-concussed participants. Morlet
wavelet analysis was used to analyze brain activity 300 milliseconds after
the onset of the N stimulus in the MMN task. Frontal and posterior activity
bursts were diminished in the concussed compared to the non-concussed
group. The non-concussed group also displayed activity in the beta frequency in the DLPFC but this burst minimal in the experimental group. The
results indicate a lack of awareness of concussions, that few blows to the
head can cause a disruption of cognitive and electrophysiological activity,
which in turn highlights the need for objective physiologically based tests
for the symptoms of concussions.

E53
PRELIMINARY RESULTS FOR A DISSOCIATION BETWEEN PTSD
AND MTBI USING ERPS Heather E. Soder1, Taylor K. Haggerty1, Patricia L.
Johnson1, Cynthia R. Cimino1, Geoffrey F. Potts1; 1University of South Florida —

Symptoms of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and mild Traumatic
Brain Injury (mTBI) overlap, but impact different neurocognitive systems.
Event-related potentials (ERPs) provide a sensitive assessment of cognitive
function, thus may distinguish between these diagnoses. This study examined student veterans returning from Operation Iraqi Freedom/Operation
Enduring Freedom diagnosed with PTSD, mTBI, or neither (veteran controls), and a group of healthy non-veteran students (non-veteran controls).
P300 data were collected with visual oddball and color Stroop tasks. Neuropsychological tests were also administered, including the Continuous Performance Task (CPT). The PTSD group displayed a reduced P300 in both
ERP tasks, while the mTBI group was similar to both control groups on the
oddball but had a reduced Stroop P300. Veterans with mTBI had slower
reaction times on both ERP tasks, suggesting the impairment may be motor
related rather than perceptual. Less attentiveness on the CPT (assessed by
individual variation) was associated with a reduced P300 on the oddball;
however, there were no group differences on the CPT. These results suggest veterans with PTSD may have general cognitive efficiency impairment
(reduced P300), while veterans with mTBI are only impaired when the task
is cognitively challenging (the Stroop is more cognitively demanding).
These results suggest a potential dissociation between veterans with PTSD
and those with mTBI using ERPs.

E54
COGNITIVE CHANGES AFTER REASONING TRAINING IN INDIVIDUALS WITH BIPOLAR DISORDER Erin Venza1, Jeffrey Spence1, Sandra
Bond Chapman1; 1The University of Texas at Dallas — This study examined the

benefits of a gist-based reasoning training program on measures of executive control in adults with bipolar disorder. Although a substantial amount
of literature has examined both manic and depressive states in bipolar
disorder, there is relatively little information about the cognitive functioning of bipolar patients when they are in a euthymic or stable state, and
even less research is available on the potential benefit of cognitive training in this population. We hypothesized that gist-based reasoning training would show generalized gains to untrained domains of executive control in memory, inhibition, switching, fluency, and nonverbal reasoning.
Twenty-seven participants (11 male, 16 female), aged 21 to 75 years old,
completed the study. Participants completed cognitive testing before their
training, eight hours (2 hours/week) of gist-based training in small groups,
and then underwent post-testing using the same pre-training measures. The
training taught information processing strategies that were implemented
and practiced through a variety of daily living contexts. Each strategy built
upon previous strategies to transform the concrete meaning into abstracted
gist-based meanings through reasoning and inferencing. Results indicated
that participants showed significant gains in the trained domain of abstract
reasoning (p < 0.05). Benefits of training extended to untrained domains of
inhibition (Color-Word Interference Test), mental flexibility (DKEFS Card
Sorting Test), and memory (Rey-Osterrieth Auditory Verbal Learning Test)
(p < .05). This current study provides preliminary evidence that 8 hours of
gist-based reasoning training can enhance cognitive performance in adults
with Bipolar Disorder.

198

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
E55
THALAMIC ACTIVITY MODULATES CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN
PREFRONTAL AND PARIETAL CORTICES DURING WORKING
MEMORY Anna Huang1, Hoi-Chung Leung1; 1Stony Brook University — Lesion
and electrophysiological studies indicate that the thalamus plays an important role in working memory. While it is well established that working
memory involves a network of regions that include the prefrontal and posterior parietal cortex, how the thalamus interacts with these regions during
working memory is not clear. Studies of nonhuman primates suggest that
the thalamus has a role in mediating information transfer between the prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices. This fMRI study seeks to examine
this issue in human subjects by analyzing the influence of thalamic activity
on prefrontal and posterior parietal connectivity during a working memory
task. FMRI data were collected from a group of 40 adult subjects during a
working memory task (1-back) using face and scene stimuli. We identified
a region within the thalamus using resting state fMRI data that showed
significant connectivity to both prefrontal and parietal cortices. We then
examined changes in the connectivity strength between the prefrontal and
parietal cortices during working memory when thalamic activity is taken
into account. We found that regressing out thalamic connectivity weakened
connectivity between the prefrontal and parietal cortices during working
memory. This suggests that the thalamus is an important node within the
network of regions involved in working memory, and that it enhances prefrontal-parietal connectivity during working memory.

E56
EXPECTATIONS AND NON-INVASIVE BRAIN STIMULATION: DO
THEY INFLUENCE COGNITION? Sheida Rabipour1, Allan D. Wu2, Marco

Iacoboni2, Patrick S. R. Davidson1; 1University of Ottawa, 2University of California,
Los Angeles — Researchers, clinicians, and commercial interests have advo-

cated for transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) as a safe method for
improving executive functions, including attention and memory. Nevertheless, inadequate study designs have led to unsuccessful replications and
obscured the mechanism(s) through which tDCS may influence cognition
and behavior. Notably, studies of tDCS rarely account for psychological
factors such as expectations of outcomes, which may influence response to
tDCS through placebo-like effects. We assessed expectations of tDCS outcomes in 51 healthy young adults (31 women; 18-27 years of age) on three
occasions: i) at baseline; ii) after reading information implying either high or
low effectiveness of stimulation; and iii) after a single-session of sham-controlled anodal tDCS applied to the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, with
online working memory training. Participants were randomly assigned to
the information (implying high or low effectiveness) and stimulation (active
or sham) conditions. We observed high expectations of the effectiveness of
stimulation in improving cognitive function at baseline, as well as a significant change in these expectations after reading the information provided.
Ratings nevertheless decreased significantly across all groups following
the intervention. Similarly, despite trends towards a stronger influence of
expectation over stimulation on performance, behavioral results suggested
no significant effect of baseline expectations, information, stimulation, or
individual characteristics on measures of working memory, executive function, and verbal fluency, regardless of whether these cognitive functions
were evaluated individually or as a composite score.

E57
NEUROPLASTICITY IN THE CONGENITALLY BLIND: LARGE-SCALE
INTERACTIONS DURING WORKING MEMORY PROCESSING AND
TRAINING Johanna Rimmele1,2, Helene Gudi-Mindermann3, Guido Nolte1, Brigitte Röder3, Andreas K. Engel1; 1University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany, 3University of Hamburg, Germany — In visually deprived humans,
task-dependent networks might be reorganized due to neuroplasticity, particularly resulting in the integration of the visual cortex into existing networks. In a working memory (WM) training paradigm, we found that train-

2016 Annual Meeting	
ing strengthened theta-band networks in sighted and beta-band networks,
including visual cortex, in congenitally blind participants. Here, we investigated whether differences in WM networks already existed prior to the
training, or whether new functional connections were established during
the training. Magnetoencephalography was recorded in congenitally blind
(n=27) and sighted (n=27) participants during resting state (RS) and while
participants performed a two-back WM task with voices prior to a four-day
WM training. Overall, the congenitally blind compared to the sighted participants showed reduced beta-band power in visual cortex during the WM
task. Beta-band connectivity (imaginary coherency) within visual cortex
was reduced in congenitally blind compared to sighted participants. When
the neural activity recorded during the WM task was baseline corrected
(i.e. contrasted with the RS data), congenitally blind and sighted participants showed no differences in power. However, in congenitally blind participants theta-band connectivity between areas involved in auditory WM
was reduced compared to sighted participants. In summary, differences in
theta-band WM networks existed between congenitally blind and sighted
participants prior to WM training, while we found no differences in betaband networks during task-performance. Together with the WM training
findings, these findings suggest that besides strengthening existing connections, WM training resulted in establishing new connections.

E58
“PINGING THE BRAIN” TO REVEAL LATENT WORKING MEMORY
STATES Michael Wolff1,2, Janina Jochim2, Elkan Akyürek1, Mark Stokes2; 1University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
— It has been proposed that information in working memory (WM) can be

maintained in an “activity-silent” neural state. We recently developed an
approach that is analogous to echolocation to reveal hidden neural states
in electroencephalography (EEG). Participants performed a simple visual
WM task while EEG was recorded. A task-irrelevant “impulse” stimulus
was presented during the memory delay period. The impulse response
could be used to decode the orientation of the maintained memory item.
While this provides some promising evidence that otherwise hidden neural
states can be revealed by driving brain activity with a visual stimulus, it
remained unclear whether this effect is specific to WM. Therefore, we
have conducted a follow-up EEG experiment to dissociate stimulus- from
WM-driven effects. Participants memorized two simultaneously presented
grating stimuli at the beginning of each trial. Subsequently, a visual cue
indicated which of the two items would later be tested. In the following
delay a high contrast irrelevant visual “impulse” stimulus was presented.
The orientations of both items could be decoded from the posterior EEG
channels during and shortly after initial presentation, though not towards
the end of the first delay. However, the visual evoked potential of the
impulse enabled us to decode the cued memory item, but not the uncued
item. These results provide clear evidence that the decodable signal from
the irrelevant stimulus is specific to information held in WM.

E59
MULTIVARIATE ANALYSES OF PRIMATE PREFRONTAL CORTEX
ACTIVITY REVEAL SIMULTANEOUSLY STABLE AND DYNAMIC
CODING FOR WORKING MEMORY Eelke Spaak1, Kei Watanabe1, Shintaro
Funahashi2, Mark Stokes1; 1University of Oxford, 2Kyoto University — Influential

theories typically assume that visual working memory (WM) depends on
the persistence of stable neural representations. However, recent advances
in decoding neural signals with high temporal resolution have yielded evidence which suggests that neural states are highly dynamic. We applied
several types of multivariate pattern analysis to explore the population
dynamics of primate lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) during the execution of
multiple variations of classic working memory tasks: the memory-guided
saccade and stimulus change detection. We observed dynamic coding even
when the cognitive state remained stable. Dynamic coding could be characterized by two distinct processes. A rapid cascade of cell involvement
during memory processing resulted in an early dynamic trajectory (i.e., a
temporally dynamic population), whereas changing per-cell selectivity to
task conditions contributed to time-varying coding over longer time scales
(i.e., dynamic selectivity). Crucially, the representational geometry of the
neural population remained remarkably constant over time, indicating a
flexible mapping between the PFC dynamic neural code and the mnemonic
state. Taken together, these results indicate that even in a task requiring

Poster Session E
very little cognitive manipulation like the classic memory-guided saccade
task, PFC neurons display a dynamic population code, which can be maintained in the absence of above-baseline firing, and which supports a stable
representational geometry coding for WM contents.

E60
SPATIAL CODING OF ORDINAL INFORMATION IN VERBAL WORKING MEMORY AS REVEALED IN UNILATERAL SPATIAL NEGLECT

Sophie Antoine1, Mariagrazia Ranzini1, Hichem Slama1,2, Ann Tousch1, Mario
Bonato3, Jean-Philippe van Dijck3, Jean-Christophe Bier2, Wim Gevers1; 1Université Libre de Bruxelles, 2Erasme University Hospital, 3Ghent University — Work-

ing memory refers to our ability to actively maintain and process a limited
amount of information during a brief period of time. Often, not only the
information itself but also its serial order is crucial for adapted task performance. However, the nature of ordinal information remains unclear.
Recently, Abrahamse et al. (2014) proposed that ordinal information in
working memory is spatially represented, with attention shifts occurring
when searching through the memorized sequence. Here, we assessed
verbal working memory performance of a group of right brain-damaged
patients with spatial attention deficits (unilateral spatial neglect). Participants memorized sequences of consonants at span level and had to judge
whether a target consonant belonged to the memorized sequence (item
task) or whether a pair of consonants were presented in the same order
as in the memorized sequence (order task). We observed that, while item
processing was spared, order processing was specifically impaired in these
patients as compared to healthy controls. On top of that, performance of
patients with spatial neglect in the order task correlated with neglect severity. These results support the item-order dissociation (e.g. Majerus et al.,
2006) and the recent hypothesis that spatial attention is crucially involved
in order processing. Importantly, these results are also of clinical relevance:
despite the fact that serial order coding in working memory is a fundamental component of many other cognitive domains (e.g. reading and reasoning), this ability is not typically investigated in neglect patients.

E61
AGING REDUCES THE BENEFIT OF SPATIAL RETROCUEING ON
VSTM FOR COMPLEX OBJECTS Lauren Morgan1, Jonathan Strunk1,
Audrey Duarte1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology — Previous evidence sug-

gests that spatially informative retrospective attentional cues can increase
VSTM performance in young adults to a greater extent than in older adults.
However, factors including interference resulting from stimulus repetition
and cue expectancy might have influenced previous findings. In the current event-related potential (ERP) study, we measured the effect of retrocueing on VSTM performance and the contralateral delay activity (CDA)
index of VSTM maintenance in the young and old. Arrays of trial-unique
real world objects were used in conjunction with trial-by-trial randomized
cueing. Although response times were faster following retrocues for both
age groups, only young adults showed retrocue benefits in VSTM accuracy.
ERP results showed equivalent CDA effects for young and older adults
prior to cue onset, however, the CDA was greatly diminished following cue
offset in older adults. These results suggest that older adults may be less
able to use retrospective attention to enhance VSTM performance due to
disrupted maintenance of memory representations resulting from cue-related perceptual interference.

E62
THE FUNCTIONAL ROLE OF FRONTAL THETA BAND ACTIVITY IN
VISUOSPATIAL WORKING MEMORY Janina Jochim1, Lisa Lin2, Mark
Stokes1; 1University of Oxford, 2University of California, San Francisco — Work-

ing memory (WM) is fundamental for flexible adaptive cognition. Previous research suggests that neural oscillations in the theta band (4-7 Hz) are
involved in active maintenance and recall of working memory representations. In electroencephalography (EEG), frontal midline theta measured
during the delay period of a working memory task increases with increasing memory load for serially presented working memory items. Intracranial recordings also implicate theta oscillations in working memory in serial
presentation working memory tasks. In the present study, we developed
a novel visuospatial working memory task to optimally drive hippocampal theta, and correspondingly, theta in the frontal midline scalp record-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

199

Poster Session E	

2016 Annual Meeting

ings. Recording extracranial EEG during the an extended memory delay
period, we observed a significance effect of memory load in midline theta
(F1,Fz,F2). Theta power was higher for a high memory load (4 items) relative to low memory load (2 items). This provides important evidence that
visuospatial working memory also elicits load-dependent theta oscillation
in prefrontal cortex. We consider the potential relationship to hippocampal
theta observed in comparable visuospatial working memory paradigms.

erties of the brain. They also point to individual differences in linguistic and
non-linguistic performance that can be captured by cognitive abilities and
brain correlates.

LANGUAGE: Other

Guigelaar1, John Drury1; 1Stony Brook University — ERP studies of prosodi-

E63
ALTERED NEURAL CIRCUITS DURING NARRATIVE COMPREHENSION IN CHILDREN WITH READING DIFFICULTIES: AN FMRI
STUDY Tzipi Horowitz-Kraus1,2, Catherine Buck1, Mark DiFrancesco1, Jen Vannest1; 1Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, 2Technion — The goal

of the current study is to define the neural circuitry involved in a narrative-comprehension task in 8-12 year-old children with reading-difficulties
(RD) compared to typical-readers (TRs). Method Ten children with RD
and nine TRs (mean age = 9.91 years, SD = 0.08) were scanned during a
5-minute narrative-comprehension task (story-listening). Imaging data
were analyzed using SPM12 and the CONN functional-connectivity toolbox. Results In addition to low reading scores [phonological-processing
scores: t(18)=-6.836, P<0.001], children with RD demonstrated low narrative-comprehension scores compared to TRs [t(18)=-4.260, P<0.001].
Whereas TRs demonstrated the typical bilateral temporal activation while
listening to stories, RDs showed more diffused frontal, occipital, and temporal activation. Regions of interest for the functional connectivity analysis were chosen based on the activation map (Brodmann Areas). Stronger
left-lateralized functional connectivity (nodal global efficiency) was found
in children with RD. Overall global efficiency scores among all brain nodes
in both RDs and TRs were positively correlated with phonological-processing scores (r=-0.511, P<0.05). Conclusions 1)Children with RD may suffer
from narrative-comprehension difficulties due to diffuse activation of language areas (compared to TRs) observed during a narrative-comprehension task. The diffuse activation may reflect more engagement of frontal
executive regions, i.e. they may require more effort to discern mistakes and
monitor outcomes. 2)Greater integration in the right hemisphere may necessary for phonological processing 3)Accommodations given to children
with RD for reading aloud in the classroom may need to be revised due to
the observed difficulty in this domain

E64
STRUCTURAL BRAIN CORRELATES OF MATHEMATICAL PROCESSING IN BILINGUALS Jennifer Legault1, Kaitlyn A. Litcofsky1, Shin-Yi
Fang1, Ping Li1; 1The Pennsylvania State University — Bilinguals must manage

distinct representational systems for processing arithmetics in each language. We conducted a study to examine the processing of easy or hard
arithmetic equations in the first (L1) and second (L2) languages in 24 Chinese-English bilinguals. While equations in both L1 and L2 recruited mathematical processing regions (horizontal segment of the intraparietal sulcus,
posterior superior parietal lobule), equations in L1 additionally recruited
areas relating to calculation and verbal coding strategies (precentral gyrus,
superior frontal gyrus). We also ask whether neural structure, specifically
gray matter volume (GMV), is correlated with abilities of mathematical processing in bilinguals’ two languages. Preliminary results indicate (1) better
math performance during an off-line basic math ability task was associated
with increased GMV in the left precuneus and fusiform gyrus, suggesting the importance of memory and visual processing for mathematics; (2)
higher scores on Chinese hard math questions were positively correlated
with GMV in the right supramarginal gyrus, an area implicated in functions concerning both language and mathematical equations; (3) positive
correlations for working memory (assessed by a letter number sequencing
task) performance and GMV in the right parahippocampus; and (4) positive correlations for English language performance (as assessed by the
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Task) and GMV in the right inferior frontal
gyrus. These findings suggest strong relations between multi-modal, crossmodal representation and processing with structural and functional prop-

200

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

E65
PROSODIC INFLUENCES ON QUESTION/ANSWER FOCUS
IN ENGLISH DITRANSITIVES: AN AUDITORY ERP STUDY Ellen
cally marked focus have yielded a diversity of brain response patterns (see
Wang et al. 2006 review). However, some common findings include a broad
positivity for appropriately accented focus and a negative-going response
when focused elements are unaccented. The present study employed question/answer prosodic mismatches in English ditransitives. Answers were
stressed/accented on either the direct or indirect object (e.g., “Steve only
gave [BORIS] [the bulldog]”/”Steve only gave [Boris] [the BULLDOG]”).
Collapsing over dative and double object constructions, we examine the
contrast between ACCENT on the first versus the second object in a 2x2
design with FOCUS on OBJ1/OBJ2 determined by lead-in questions.
These questions rendered the answer felicitous (e.g., Q:”Who did Steve
give the bulldog to?” A:”Steve only gave [BORIS] [the bulldog]”), or not
(e.g., A:”Steve only gave [Boris] [the BULLDOG]”). We also included cases
where unaccented/unfocused (old/topic) information mismatched with
the lead-in question (e.g., Q:”Who did Steve give the bulldog to?” A:”Steve
only gave [BORIS] [the #mermaid]”). Native English speakers (N=16) listened to these question/answer pairs and performed match/mismatch
judgments. Our results revealed main effects of Focus (broad negativity),
Accent (central positivity), and Focus x Accent interactions. Accent on an
unfocused object yielded an early posterior positivity; unaccented focus
yielded a broad negativity. Accented objects also elicited Closure Positive
Shift (CPS) effects (Hruska et al. 2001). Mismatches involving irrelevant
old/topic information yielded an N400/P600 pattern. We argue these findings shed light on which ERP response patterns are reliable markers of the
processing mechanisms of interest.

E66
HEMODYNAMIC RESPONSES DURING ORAL AND SILENT READING Allison S. Hancock1, Nicholas J. A. Wan1, Vicki Simionsmeier1, Ronald B.
Gillam1; 1Utah State University — Researchers have claimed that one advan-

tage of functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) is that the measures
of cortical hemodynamics are less susceptible to motion artifacts than other
neuroimaging techniques. This study was designed to test the extent to
which fNIRS measures of oxygenated (HbO) and deoxygenated (HbR)
values differ during oral reading, mouthing (with no voicing) or silent reading with no oral movement. We predicted greater concentrations in HbO in
motor areas (but not in language areas) for reading aloud as compared to
silent mouthing or silent reading with no mouth movements. Fifteen typically developing adults were instructed to read 3 paragraphs: each one
aloud, silent mouthing, and silently with no mouth movements. Conditions
were counterbalanced and pseudorandomized. HbO and HbR were examined in 5 regions of interest (ROI’s): inferior parietal lobule (IPL), pre-motor area (PMA), primary motor cortex (MOT), inferior frontal gyrus (IFG),
and superior temporal gyrus (STG). We found a main effect for condition,
indicating greater HbO values during oral reading as compared to silent
mouthing and silent reading. Contrary to our original prediction, there was
not a Condition x ROI interaction. The pattern for increased concentration
values during oral reading held for all ROIs. We used a subtraction method
to control for mouth movement during oral reading tasks, which yielded
oral reading concentration values in language areas that were similar to the
concentration values for silent reading. These findings suggest claims about
fNIRS readings being minimally affected by motion artifacts are overstated,
especially for tasks requiring speaking.

E67
TALKER LEARNING EFFECTS OBSERVED IN EARLY, PREATTENTIVE ACOUSTIC PROCESSING: A MISMATCH NEGATIVITY STUDY
Alexis R. Johns1, Emily B. Myers1,2; 1University of Connecticut, 2Haskins Laboratories — Listeners adjust to talker-specific idiosyncratic speech, resulting

in phonetic category boundary shifts to accommodate unusual phonetic
tokens. Adaptation to new talkers is fast, stable, relies on word knowledge
(e.g. Kraljic, Samuel, & Brenan, 2008; Jesse & McQueen, 2011), and recruits

2016 Annual Meeting	
right-lateralized frontal and temporal brain areas (Myers & Mesite, 2014).
However it is unclear whether shifts in phonetic categorization that result
from talker learning influence early, preattentive stages of processing. We
used the mismatch negativity event-related component and tested whether
phonetic category boundary shifts that are conditioned by exposure to a
particular talker modulate early acoustic-phonetic processing. During
exposure, listeners performed a lexical decision task on a series of words,
among which were words that contained ‘s’ and ‘sh’ sounds. Crucially,
in one group of participants, ‘s’ words contained ambiguous s/sh blends
(denoted ‘?’, e.g., ‘epi?ode’), whereas the other group instead heard ambiguous ‘sh’ sounds (e.g., ‘flouri?ing’). A subsequent passive auditory oddball
paradigm measured contrasts for different combinations of points from a
synthetic s-sh continuum (asi-ashi). Results: As expected, the endpoint-endpoint pair elicited an MMN response for both groups. Furthermore, different MMNs for each group emerged consistent with the talker-conditioned
shift in phonetic category boundary. Specifically, for the ambiguous ‘a?i’
standard, an MMN emerged to a deviant token that was a more canonical
phonetic category member. The exposure-related MMNs also patterned
with subsequent behavioral phoneme identification scores for the same asiashi points. Conclusion: Phonetic adaptation to novel talkers affects even
early stages of preattentive acoustic processing.

E68
THE EFFECT OF LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT ON NONVERBAL
COUNTING TASKS John Verbos1, Sarah Wallace1, Alexander Kranjec1;
1

Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, PA — What is the effect of language impairment on individuals’ ability to represent non-symbolic exact quantities?
Recent research (Everett & Madora, 2012; Frank, Fedorenko, Lai, Saxe, &
Gibson, 2012) found that both English-speakers whose access to language
for number is artificially compromised by verbal interference and the Pirahã
(an Amazonian tribe without exact number words) rely on analog magnitude estimation when asked to represent non-symbolic exact quantities
greater than 3. In this study, participants with aphasia resulting from stroke
(n=9; 3 Wernicke’s, 2 Broca’s, 2 Conduction, 2 Anomic) performed the same
5 tasks from previous studies: a one-to-one matching task, a “chunked”
matching task, an orthogonal matching task, a hidden matching task, and
a “nuts-in-a-can” task. Participants managed 79% correct responses across
tasks, performing poorest on tasks where targets are not visible during
response (task 4, 69% correct; task 5, 68%) and best when targets are presented as “subitizable” groups of 2 and 3 (task 2, 98%). Significant correlations were found between error rates and target magnitude (r=0.97) and
target magnitude and magnitude of error (r=0.94). Participants’ overall
Aphasia Quotient (AQ) on the Western Aphasia Battery-Revised (WAB-R)
was predictive of task performance across tasks (r=0.59), and performance
on individual tasks (e.g., task 1, r=0.56; task 5, r=0.75). WAB-R subtests were
also reliably correlated with overall performance across tasks (Spontaneous
Speech, r=0.62; Naming and Word Finding, r=0.65), and with performance
on several individual tasks. These results can help us better understand the
relationship between particular language impairments and non-symbolic
exact quantity representation.

E69
NEURAL CORRELATES OF READING COMPREHENSION IN
STRUGGLING AND TYPICAL READERS Mary Abbe Roe1, Lauren
Deschner1, Joel E. Martinez2, Jeanette A. Mumford3, Dana M. DeMaster4, Jenifer
J. Juranek4, Jessica A. Church1; 1The University of Texas at Austin, 2Princeton
University, 3The University of Wisconsin-Madison, 4The University of Texas Health
Science Center at Houston — A multi-city, in-school 4th grade reading inter-

vention project aimed to assess the role of attention and executive function
in reading comprehension. Participants completed an fMRI visit and a battery of reading performance measures before and after a one-year in-school
intervention. Data from 21 non-struggling, 29 pre-intervention, and 28
post-intervention struggling readers passed quality control measures, and
were investigated with regions derived from the reading and task control
literature. Behavioral analyses of a sentence comprehension task found that
struggling readers were slower and less accurate than typical readers; accuracy, but not response time, improved after the intervention year. Regions
of difference between struggling and non-struggling readers before intervention included left occipitotemporal, supramarginal, and frontal control
regions. Regions of difference post-intervention included the same left

Poster Session E
frontal and supramarginal regions, and also left mouth motor and superior temporal cortex. Additionally, the struggling readers were subgrouped
based on their improvement in standard scores on a battery of reading
tests. Before intervention, “low-improvement” struggling readers had significantly greater activity in left mouth motor cortex than non-struggling
readers, while “high-improvers” differed from non-struggling readers in
bilateral occipitotemporal and left frontal control regions. After reading
intervention, “high-improvers” and “low-improvers” had significantly
different activity from non-struggling readers in a right occipitotemporal
region, but only “high-improvers” differed from non-struggling readers
in left frontal and mouth motor regions. Our results highlight regions of
plasticity and stability in struggling readers over time, and examine how
functional differences from non-struggling readers might correspond to
reading improvement.

E70
EXAMINING EFFECTS OF FAMILY SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS AND
BILINGUALISM ON BRAIN STRUCTURE AND COGNITIVE SKILLS
DURING EARLY CHILDHOOD Natalie Brito1, Maritza Morales2, Kimberly

Noble2; 1Columbia University Medical Center, 2Teachers College Columbia University — Family socioeconomic status (SES) is strongly associated with

children’s cognitive development (Brooks-Gunn & Duncan, 1997). Past
studies have reported socioeconomic disparities in both neurocognitive
skills (Noble et al., 20007) and brain structure (Noble et al., 2015) across
childhood. In other studies, bilingualism has been associated with cognitive advantages during early childhood (Carlson & Meltzoff, 2008) and
differences in brain structure during adulthood (Olsen et al., 2015). The
aim of the current study is to examine the joint and independent effects of
family SES and bilingualism on brain structure and cognitive skills during
early childhood. A subset of data from the Pediatric Imaging, Neurocognition and Genetics (PING) study was analyzed – propensity score matching
established an equal sample (N = 150) of monolinguals and bilinguals with
similar socio-demographic characteristics (M age = 6.6, SD = 1.5, Range =
3-9 years). Differences in cortical surface area (SA), but not cortical thickness (CT), were observed in relation to SES (F(1, 142) = 6.06, p = .02), with
higher SES children having increased SA. Examining bilingualism, differences in both SA (F(1, 142) = 9.17, p = .003) and CT (F(1, 142) = 3.83, p = .05)
were found, with monolinguals having increased SA, but no interactions
were observed between SES and bilingualism (p = .21) Additionally, bilingualism was not related to any of the cognitive assessments and did not
moderate the association between SES and cognitive skills. These results
suggest independent effects of both SES and bilingualism on early brain
development. NIH Grant RC2DA029475.

E71
BILINGUAL ADVANTAGE IN LEARNING TO DETECT HIDDEN
OBJECTS IN A COMPLEX VISUAL ENVIRONMENT Angela Combs1,

Aaron P. Jones1, Michael C. Trumbo1, Michael A. Hunter1, Charles S. Robinson1,
Kinsey Steueterman1, Vickey Massey1, Brian A. Coffman2, Vincent P. Clark1; 1University of New Mexico, 2University of Pittsburgh — The theory of linguistic rel-

ativism suggests that language shapes perspective (Greiffenhagen & Sharrock). Thus, multilingual fluency may facilitate multiple perspectives for
the same stimuli. Based on this theory and evidence that bilingual individuals perform better on spatial (Pederson, 2012) and working memory tasks
(Adesope, 2010), it was hypothesized that bilinguists would perform better
at an object detection task than monolinguists. Our goal was to evaluate the
effect of prior language learning when learning to identify hidden objects in
a complex visual environment. Sixty-six participants (16 bilingual) received
active (2.0 mA, anode over cerebellum or F10, cathode on left arm) or sham
(0.1 mA) transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) while training to
detect hidden objects. Learning scores were calculated as post-training
minus baseline pre-training test performance. A two-way analysis of covariance with stimulation condition and language acquisition (monolingual,
bilingual) as independent variables was performed controlling for age
and gender. Main effects of tDCS and language acquisition were observed
(F(1,60)=4.578, p=0.036, tDCS condition; F(1,60)=5.008, p=0.029, language
acquisition) with no interaction. This showed a significant advantage for
bilinguists over monolinguists (improvement for monolinguists =19.10%,
12.02% standard deviation, bilinguists = 27.10%, 12.40% standard devia-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

201

Poster Session E	

2016 Annual Meeting

tion). These findings support the theory of linguistic relativism and suggest
that bilingualism provides an advantage over monolingualism in performing complex visual search tasks.

training influences semantic aspects of language processing in adults, and
these results open novel perspectives for applications of music training in
the domain of second language learning.

LANGUAGE: Semantic

E74
THE ROLE OF SEMANTIC FEATURES IN PROCESSING BASICLEVEL CONCEPTS IN MANDARIN CHINESE: AN ERP STUDY

E72
TASK AND TRAIT INFLUENCES ON WORD COMPREHENSION

Cybelle Smith1, Kara D. Federmeier1; 1Department of Psychology, University of
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign — Mental processes engaged during word read-

ing vary as a function of our goals and cognitive tendencies. To assess how
semantic subprocesses, e.g. mental image generation, are employed differentially across tasks and individuals, we examined the Event Related
Potential (ERP) response to 124 concrete and 124 abstract nouns (length,
frequency, familiarity, and N matched) presented singly (27 subjects) or as
the second word of a sentence read for comprehension (32 subjects). In the
single word task, subjects indicated whether a subsequent probe was a synonym. Nouns high in familiarity/frequency elicited a sustained fronto-central negativity when compared to low familiarity/frequency nouns in the
synonym judgment task, but not during sentence comprehension, suggesting the synonym judgment task may have elicited an active search for
semantic associates. The ERP concreteness effect, which canonically consists
of an N400 modulation and a sustained frontal negativity, appeared similarly across tasks. Subjects’ tendency to form vivid mental images, assessed
using the object-spatial imagery questionnaire (Blajenkova et al. 2006), predicted the size of individual concreteness effects at frontal and central sites
300-500 ms after noun onset (p < .1), and at frontal sites at 500-900 ms (p
< .05). High vividness subjects may thus differentially engage controlled
processes associated with mental image generation when reading for comprehension. Our results are consistent with linking the sustained frontal
portion of the ERP concreteness effect to mental imagery, as had previously
been posited on the basis of task manipulations (West & Holcomb 2000,
Gullick et al. 2013).

E73
PROFESSIONAL MUSIC TRAINING AND WORD MEANING ACQUISITION: FROM FASTER SEMANTIC ENCODING TO LONGER-LASTING WORD REPRESENTATIONS Eva Dittinger1,2,3, Mylène Barbaroux1,2,

Mariapaola D’Imperio2,3,4, Lutz Jäncke5, Stefan Elmer5, Mireille Besson1,2; 1CNRS
& Aix-Marseille Université, Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives (LNCUMR 7291), 13331, Marseille, France, 2Brain and Language Research Institute
(BLRI), 13100, Aix-en-Provence, France, 3CNRS & Aix-Marseille Université, Laboratoire Parole et Langage (LPL-UMR 7309), 13100, Aix-en-Provence, France,
4
Institut Universitaire de France (IUF), Paris, France, 5Auditory Research Group
Zurich (ARGZ), Division Neuropsychology, Institute of Psychology, University
of Zurich, Switzerland — Word learning, possibly one of the most complex
and uniquely human abilities, is a multifaceted task clearly requiring both
perceptive and cognitive functions. Nowadays, there is growing evidence
that professional music training not only shapes the functional-structural
architecture of the auditory system, but also influences a variety of cognitive functions, like attention, memory, and executive functions that are
involved in word learning. Here we tested the hypothesis that adult musicians would learn the meaning of novel words through picture-word associations more efficiently than non-musicians. In addition, we expected that
musicians would demonstrate faster brain plasticity than non-musicians,
as mainly reflected by a differential modulation of the N400 component
of Event-Related Potentials (ERPs). In line with our hypothesis, musicians
outperformed non-musicians in the most difficult semantic task that tested
for generalization of word learning. Moreover, changes in the spatio-temporal dynamics of brain activity developed faster in musicians than in
non-musicians, as reflected by the emergence of an N400 after only a few
minutes of training and by a rapid fronto-parietal shift in scalp distribution. Finally, musicians showed evidence for faster integration of the novel
words’ meanings into semantic networks and for better long-term memory
for novel learned words five months after the main experimental session.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report showing that music

Keng-Yu Lin1, Shiao-hui Chan1; 1National Taiwan Normal University — The senso-

ry-functional theory claims that different semantic feature types have different impact on processing various semantic categories: perceptual features
are more important for natural categories and functional features, artifacts
(Warrington & McCarthy, 1983; Warrington & Shallice, 1984). However,
most studies supporting the theory did not control the relatedness between
semantic features and categories. The current ERP study thus examined this
theory by controlling the relatedness between semantic features and categories in Mandarin Chinese. A semantic priming paradigm was adopted,
with semantic categories (natural category/artifact) being primed by
semantic features (perceptual/functional), yielding a 2 x 2 factorial design.
The word frequency, word length, word class, and, most importantly, relatedness between primes and targets were controlled. Twenty-four righthanded subjects (mean age=23.8, Male=7) were recruited to judge whether
the prime was a characteristic of the target by button pushing. The analysis
on N400 (300ms–450ms) and LPC (500ms–700ms) amplitudes revealed no
main effects or interaction; however, the fractional area latency analysis
showed a marginal interaction between semantic features and categories
in the LPC time window. Follow-up analysis showed that the LPC latency
was longer when artifacts were primed by perceptual features than functional features. This finding partly supported the sensory-functional theory
even when the relatedness between semantic features and categories were
controlled. Since this interaction between semantic feature and category
was found only in the LPC latency but not in N400, we argued that the
various impact of perceptual/functional features on natural categories/
artifacts might not be an automatic process, but a controlled one.

E75
ESTIMATING SUBJECTIVE MENTAL CONTENTS DURING LISTENING TO A NARRATED STORY IN FMRI SCANNER Satu Saalasti1, Minna

Kauppila1, Jussi Alho1, Moshe Bar2, Mikko Sams1, Jääskeläinen Iiro1; 1Aalto University School of Science, Finland, 2Bar-Ilan University, Israel — Our momentary

“mental content” depends on the external environment as well as on personal history, mood, and goals. Estimating the variation of mental content
of individuals processing everyday-like stimuli such as narrated stories
– increasingly used in neuroimaging – is crucial for better understanding
of the neural basis of subjective experiences. We have developed behavioral methodology to estimate subjective experiences during listening to
a narrative. Healthy subjects (N=12) listened to an 8-min long narrative
during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Following the fMRI
session, the subjects were presented the narrative again, this time in consecutive 128 short segments, and were instructed to generate words (within
20-30s) that best describe what came to their mind when they had heard
each segment originally. This way, we obtained estimates of the subjects’
mental content during to the story. We used latent semantic analysis (LSA)
to obtain between-subjects similarity measures for each word list during
each segment. The results show that when individuals listened to the same
narrative, they produced words that were contextually related and in most
instances relatively close in semantics. However, some variation in mental
contents across subjects became evident, as some subjects produced words
that were semantically more distant from others. Furthermore, the number
of produced words varied greatly. Our next step is to include the estimate
of the mental content in the analysis of fMRI data, in addition to information of the stimulus, with the aim of gaining insight into the neural basis of
subjective experiences.

E76
SEMANTIC ACTIVATION AND CONNECTIVITY IN POOR COMPREHENDERS ACROSS MODALITY AND PROCESSING LEVEL Kayleigh
Ryherd1, Yi-Hui Hung2, Emily Baron2, Kaja Jasinska2, Einar Mencl2, Nicole Landi1,2;
1
University of Connecticut, 2Haskins Laboratories — Recent research has identi-

fied a population of children (~10% of a typical 5th grade classroom) who

202

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting	
exhibit poor reading comprehension despite intact word reading, phonological processing, and cognitive skills, called poor comprehenders (PCs;
Landi, 2010). Previous research suggests PCs have executive dysfunction,
such as poor planning (Locascio et al., 2010). Other research indicates a
primary semantic deficit (Nation & Snowling, 1999). One neurobiological
investigation showed abnormal connectivity in these PCs between left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) and parahippocampal regions for low-frequency
words, interpreted as reliance on episodic rather than semantic memory
(Cutting et al., 2013). However, this study focused only on processing at
the word level. The current study looks at written and spoken comprehension at both word and passage levels to try to understand PCs’ specific
comprehension deficit. Adolescent participants viewed or heard words and
passages in a passive fMRI task. We used behavioral Partial Least Squares
(PLS) to explore how experimental conditions (modality: spoken vs. written; level of processing: word vs. passage) interact with behavioral measures of comprehension skill. PCs show less middle temporal gyrus (MTG)
and LIFG activation than better comprehenders regardless of processing
level (word vs. passage) and modality (spoken vs. written) and more activation of networks involved in effortful processing, attention and executive
function. These results suggest that both semantic processing and executive
processes contribute to deficits observed in PCs. We also present results
from functional connectivity analyses that further clarify the relationship
between executive function and semantic networks in PCs.

E77
THE PRIMING OF BASIC COMBINATORY RESPONSES IN MEG

Esti Blanco-Elorrieta1,5, Victor S. Ferreira2, Paul Del Prato3, Liina Pylkkänen1,4,5;
1
NYUAD Institute, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, P.O. Box 129188,
UAE, 2Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0109, USA, 3Department of Neurology, New York University, NYU Langone
Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA, 4Department of Linguistics, New York
University, New York, NY 10003, USA, 5Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA — While behavioral research has demonstrated

that the processing of syntactic structures can be primed, the computational
level of this priming is still unknown. The present work took advantage of
recent progress on the neurobiology of basic phrase building and tested
whether the brain activities implicated for the simple composition of two
words could be primed. In two experiments, magnetoencephalography
(MEG) was recorded during a picture naming task where the prime trials
were designed to replicate previously reported combinatory effects and the
target trials to test whether those combinatory effects could be primed. The
manipulation of the primes was successful in eliciting larger activity for
adjective-noun combinations than single nouns in the left anterior temporal lobe (LATL) and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), replicating
prior MEG studies on similar contrasts. Priming of similarly timed activity
was observed during target trials in the LATL, but only when the prime
and target shared an adjective. No LATL priming was observed for single
word repetition and two control tasks also showed that the priming effect
was not elicited if the prime pictures were simply viewed but not named.
In sum, this work revealed that basic combinatory responses in MEG can
indeed be primed, though some lexical overlap between prime and target
is necessary, suggesting combinatory conceptual, as opposed to syntactic
processing. Both our combinatory and priming effects were early, onsetting
between 100 and 150ms after picture onset and thus are likely to reflect the
very earliest planning stages of a combinatory message.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory
E78
LANGUAGE FACILITATES TACTILE DISCRIMINATION Natalie McCor-

mick Miller1,2, Timo Torsten Schmidt1,3, Felix Blankenburg1,2, Friedemann Pulvermüller1,2; 1Freie Universität Berlin, 2Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, 3Bernstein
Center for Computational Neuroscience Berlin — Linguistic relativity posits

that language builds and shapes cognition and perception. Previous work
suggested that speakers of languages that include specific verbal labels
indexing perceptual features are more efficient in making the congruent
perceptual discrimination. However, perceptual differences noted when
testing people who speak different languages and who were raised in dif-

Poster Session E
ferent cultural backgrounds can hardly be attributed uniquely to the structure of their first language. To adequately test whether perceptual discrimination is facilitated by the availability of concordant verbal distinctions, we
trained subjects over the course of 1 week to discriminate fine-grained and
minimally different vibro-tactile stimulus patterns. These patterns were
either correlated with specific novel meaningless spoken pseudowords or
they were paired randomly with such pseudowords. Before and after learning, subjects were tested on their ability to discriminate between vibro-tactile pattern pairs (without auditory stimuli accompaniment). Compared
with their performance before training, subjects showed an improvement
of pattern discrimination performance for patterns consistently paired with
verbal labels, but not for patterns that were randomly paired with language
stimuli (significant interaction prepost x consistency). These results demonstrate that consistent verbal labelling of a sensory difference facilitates the
perceptual discrimination learning of that same difference. These results
constitute strong experimental evidence for Whorfian top-down effects of
language on somatosensory perceptual learning.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
E79
AMODAL REFERENCE RESOLUTION IN MEDIAL PARIETAL
CORTEX Christian Brodbeck1, Laura Gwilliams1, Liina Pylkkänen1; 1New York
University and NYUAD Institute — A fundamental component of language

comprehension is referential processing: linking linguistic expressions
with the cognitive representations of the entities they refer to. Previous
eye tracking and EEG research suggests that resolving reference in a previously seen visual display involves access to modality-specific visual representations, possibly associated with the use of visual short term memory.
In this study we asked whether there is a common substrate for reference
resolution across visual and auditory referential domains, as opposed to
the possibility that reference resolution consists solely in accessing an item
in a modality-specific representation. We constructed referential domains
in visual and auditory modalities: visual displays containing three objects
each, and auditory stimuli consisting of three sounds played sequentially.
In each trial, participants were presented with a referential domain, followed by a question about it, presented visually word by word, such as:
“Was the grunt in the middle long?”. Target words differed in whether
they resolved reference or not (“grunt” after a domain with a single grunt
vs. two grunts). Source localized MEG responses indicated increased activation for reference-resolving words as compared to their non-resolving
counterparts, after both visual and auditory referential domains, in overlapping areas of the medial parietal lobe. The latency of the effect differed
somewhat between conditions, with an onset between 375 and 485 ms. Our
findings demonstrate that medial parietal cortex is involved in reference
resolution regardless of the modality of the referential domain, suggesting
a connection between episodic memory and referential language processing.

E80
SEMANTIC ATTRIBUTES AND MATHEMATICAL VALUES IN THE
PROCESSING OF CHINESE CLASSIFIERS AND MEASURE
WORDS Ying-Chun Chen1, One-Soon Her1, Denise H. Wu2, Nai-Shing Yen1;
1

National Chengchi University, 2National Central University — The element
between a numeral and a noun in Chinese is either a classifier (C) or a measure word (M). Linguistic theories have suggested that C and M not only
categorize nouns based on semantic attributes but also denote quantities
with a certain mathematical value, e.g., san wei laoshi (three C-human
teacher) indicates precisely [3×1 teacher]. However, the cognitive processing and neural mechanism underlying C/M’s semantic and mathematical
functions remain unclear. This study investigated the effects of semantic
attributes and mathematical values on C/M processing with a semantic
distance comparison task where participants had to choose between two
phrases the one that was closer to the target. In Experiment 1 (N=20), we
used two types of [one C/M] phrases, i.e., numerical vs. non-numerical
C/Ms. Results showed, for both types of C/Ms, participants favored the
C/M with comparable semantic attributes over the one with similar mathematical values. In Experiment 2 (N=20), to control semantic attributes, we
used two C/Ms as options in a minimal pair of [one C/M noun] phrases
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

203

Poster Session E	
with the same noun. To understand C/M processing in terms of mathematical values, we manipulated two types of mathematical information among
C/Ms, numerical vs. non-numerical and fixed vs. variable value. For both
numerical and non-numerical C/Ms, participants made better judgments
for C/Ms with fixed rather than variable values. Our behavioral findings
demonstrated that semantic attributes and mathematical values both play
an important role in C/M processing. Future studies can further investigate neural correlates underpinning quantity processing of C/M with fixed
values.

LANGUAGE: Syntax
E81
EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIALS DISSOCIATE CUE-BASED
RETRIEVAL INTERFERENCE AND REANALYSIS DURING SENTENCE COMPREHENSION Darren Tanner1, Sarah E. Grey2, Erika L. Exton2,
Janet van Hell2; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Pennsylvania State
University — Language comprehension requires the ability to construct rela-

tionships between words that are not always adjacent to each other. Among
the processes contributing to the successful formation of linguistic dependencies is cue-based memory retrieval (Van Dyke & Johns, 2012). Retrievals, however, are sometimes subject to interference from competing items
held in memory. Such interference gives rise to “agreement attraction” such
as “The key to the cabinets were…” where the verb agrees with the intervening noun rather than with the subject. Electrophysiological evidence
has shown that in such cases the P600 effect elicited by the ungrammatical verb is significantly reduced, relative to cases without an intervening
noun (Tanner et al., 2014). A crucial question is whether this reduced P600
reflects the retrieval interference itself, or a depletion of cognitive resources
which results in reduced engagement of sentence reanalysis processes.
To test this, we recorded ERPs during sentence reading, and modulated
the amount of cognitive resources available for reanalysis by varying the
stimulus-onset asynchrony in a word by word reading task. Participants
(n=118) read grammatical and ungrammatical sentences (i.e., subject-verb
number agreement violations) with and without attraction interference
in one of three SOA conditions: 233ms, 450ms or 650ms. Results showed
standard P600 effects for ungrammatical sentences, which were reduced
when a plural attractor intervened. SOA additionally modulated P600 magnitude: amplitudes decreased approximately linearly with faster SOAs.
Importantly, the attraction effect showed no interaction with SOA. This
indicates that although reanalysis processes may reflect interference in
retrieval, these two processes are highly independent.

E82
THE BILINGUAL’S MENTAL GRAMMAR SYSTEM: LANGUAGE-SPECIFIC SYNTAX IS SHARED BY BOTH LANGUAGES Eve Higby1,2, Ibana

Vargas1,3, Stephanie Perez1, Wendy Ramirez1,2, Erika Varela1,2, Gabriel Campoverde1,4, Eva Fernandez1,2, Valerie L. Shafer1, Loraine K. Obler1; 1The Graduate Center of the City University of New York, 2Queens College, City University
of New York, 3St. John’s University, 4Hunter College, City University of New York
— Research on syntactic processing in bilingualism suggests that similar

syntactic constructions in the bilingual’s two languages have overlapping representations (e.g., Hartsuiker, Pickering, & Veltkamp, 2004). It
is not known, however, whether language-specific constructions are also
shared or whether they are tied to one language. In the current study, we
investigated whether bilinguals can use syntactic structures from their
second language to interpret novel (ungrammatical) sentences in the first
language. The construction we used was the induced motion causative,
grammatical in English but ungrammatical in Spanish (e.g., John ran the
mouse around the maze; Juan corrió el raton por el laberinto). Electrophysiology (ERPs) and acceptability judgments were used to determine whether
native Spanish speakers who know English can process these sentences
by comparing the results to constructions that are ungrammatical in both
languages (pseudo-causatives). If bilinguals only use their knowledge of
Spanish syntax to interpret the sentences, responses for both conditions
should consist of low acceptability judgments and an N400 effect, showing
difficulty interpreting the sentences. Our preliminary data showed higher
acceptability judgments for causatives (scale 1-5, m=3.19, sd=1.58) than

204

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
pseudo-causatives (m=1.86, sd=1.33). In the ERPs, we observed an N400 for
the pseudo-causatives (peak 454 ms, m=-2.15 μV, sd=1.70), but no N400 for
causatives (m=0.34 μV, sd=1.69). This suggests that the bilinguals are carrying over knowledge of English syntax to interpret these never-before-heard
sentences. We are testing more bilinguals and will compare their results to
a group of Spanish monolinguals.

E83
RIGHT HEMISPHERE EFFECTS OF GRAMMATICALITY AND PROBABILITY: AN ERP INVESTIGATION Michelle Leckey1, Kara D. Federmeier1;
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — The capabilities of the right hemisphere (RH) for syntactic processing are poorly understood. Research in the
area has led to contradictory findings ranging from a complete lack of RH
involvement to an RH only contribution in some cases. Recent work using
event-related potentials (ERPs) alongside the visual half-field paradigm
(VF) has helped to provide a clearer picture. Here it was found that the
RH was capable of eliciting a P600 response but whether or not it did was
influenced by familial sinistrality. Participants who did not have a history
of familial sinistrality (FS-) showed a left hemisphere (LH) P600 response
alongside a RH N400 response whereas those who did (FS+) showed a P600
in both the LH and the RH. Using the same paradigm with older adults
revealed that FS- individuals did not retain this asymmetric pattern but
rather the P600 response became bilateral with age. This leads to the question of whether the RH of the FS- young adult group can elicit a P600 in any
circumstance. The present experiment presented 48 young adults (24 FS-,
24 FS+) with sentences containing lexically marked morphosyntactic violations, the probability of which was manipulated across blocks. Unlike the
previous experiment, the FS- group showed a bilateral P600 response that
also remained in the FS+ group and both groups showed bilateral sensitivity to the probability of the violation. These findings suggest that the RH of
the FS- group is sensitive to some forms of syntactic violations.

E84
WHO’S SURFING THE SAME (BRAIN)WAVES? ERP INTERFERENCE PATTERNS ACROSS MUSIC, LANGUAGE, ARITHMETIC,
AND VISUAL NARRATIVE Nicole E. Calma1, Thomas Li2, Neil Cohn3, John
E. Drury1; 1Stony Brook University, 2Ward Melville High School, 3University of
California at San Diego — ERP studies investigating language, music, math,

and visual narrative separately have shown similar response patterns
linked to combinatorial processing across domains. Further, language/
music interference studies have revealed ERP interaction patterns argued
to be consistent with shared underlying neurocognitive mechanisms. We
extended this approach in a within-participants study of cross-domain
interactions between music and arithmetic, language, and visual narratives (comics). Participants listened to musical chord progressions, half
of which contained incongruent continuations, while concurrently viewing visually-presented sequences consisting of words, numbers, or comic
panels. Half of the language sequences (sentences) contained verb-inflection errors (“They always *bakes…”). Number sequences obeyed a +/-4
rule, with equal numbers of ascending(+4)/descending(-4) sequences, half
of which contained violations (+/-2). Comics contrasted coherent narrative
climaxes with anomalous panels. This yielded a 2x2 design for each domain
(language/math/comics): visual(correct/violation) x auditory(correct/
violation). Participants (N=16) performed acceptability judgments on the
visual stimuli only. Violations in the visual sequences replicated previous
findings for each domain: biphasic negative/positive patterns for language
(LAN-P600) and arithmetic, and a fronto-central negativity for the comics
violations. The different types of visual sequences influenced music-syntactic violation responses: with language, previously reported negativities
(RAN/N500) and positivities (P600s) were evident, but for math/comics
only negativities emerged. Interactions/interference manifested for all
three visual domains (e.g., non-additive ERP responses for double-violations) but in ways that differed across domains in topography/timing and
the affected components. We argue these findings inform our understanding of the functional significance of ERP components as well as the domain
specificity/generality of the underlying neurocognitive mechanisms they
reflect.

2016 Annual Meeting	

E85
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF RHYTHM AND
SYNTAX IN MUSIC AND LANGAUGE Harim Jung1, Cameron Arkin1,
Psyche Loui1; 1Wesleyan University — Music and language are human cogni-

tive and neural functions that have been shown to share neural resources
in syntax processing (Patel, 2003) as well as temporal processing (Large
& Jones, 1999). Although recent studies have investigated the sharing of
neural resources for music and language, little is known about how music
and language processing might interact as syntax unfolds over time. The
current electroencephalography (EEG) study investigates the relationship
between rhythmic expectancy and musical and linguistic syntax by presenting sentences, broken down into segments, paired with musical chords
(adapted from Slevc et al., 2009). Linguistic syntax violations appeared in
a garden-path design, and musical expectation violations, presented as
out-of-key chords, and rhythmic expectancy violations, through early and
late temporal perturbations, were manipulated at the critical region. Participants read sentence segments and listened to the musical chords, and
answered questions about the sentences while their EEGs were recorded.
Results show that musically irregular chords elicited an early anterior negativity (EAN), whereas linguistically unexpected garden path sentences
elicited a late positive complex (P600). Results also show that the N400
decreases in amplitude between pre-critical, critical, and post-critical time
regions, suggesting re-analysis of semantic content throughout the course
of reading sentence segments. Together, results suggest that the interaction
of music and language syntax processing depends on rhythmic expectancy,
which in turn affects attentional entrainment.

E86
WHAT’S IN A P600? SOMETIMES A LOT OF N400. IDENTIFYING
ANTECEDENTS OF ERP RESPONSE VARIABILITY IN GRAMMATICAL AGREEMENT PROCESSING. Kailen Shantz1, Nyssa Z. Bulkes1, Chase
Krebs1, Amalia Reyes1, Andrew Armstrong1, Darren Tanner1; 1University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign — Although ERP studies of morphosyntactic agree-

ment have traditionally elicited either P600 or biphasic LAN-P600 effects,
more recent research shows that there is substantial individual variation
in the quality of brain response elicited by agreement anomalies. Specifically, individuals’ ERP responses may vary along a continuum between
N400 and P600 dominance (Tanner & Van Hell, 2014). The present study
investigated linguistic factors related to the prevalence of N400 versus P600
effects across individuals, as some have suggested that agreement violations marked with lexical alternations (e.g., “was” versus “were”) may
elicit more N400 than violations marked morphologically (e.g., “walk”
versus “walks”: Molinaro et al., 2015; Tanner & Van Hell, 2014). To directly
investigate this hypothesis, we recorded ERPs while participants read sentences where agreement anomalies were signaled either lexically (“The
roses are/*is…”) or morphologically (“The roses grow/*grows…”). Grand
mean results showed reliable P600 effects elicited by both types of agreement violations, preceded by an N400-like negativity. Additionally, the
P600 elicited by anomalous auxiliary verbs (is/are) was significantly larger
than that elicited by anomalous agreement affixes. Individual difference
results showed a similar N400/P600 response dominance continuum as
reported by Tanner & Van Hell for both types of agreement violations, with
a greater proportion of N400-dominant responses found in the morphological than lexical condition. These findings suggest that instances of N400
effects for agreement violations are not limited to anomalies signaled lexically, and importantly, that individual variability in ERP response quality
is a hallmark of morphosyntactic processing more generally.

E87
INTERACTION OF PROSODIC AND PLAUSIBILITY CUES DURING
SENTENCE PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM ERPS Shannon Sheppard1,2, Katherine J. Midgley1, Tracy Love1,2, Lewis P. Shapiro1, Phillip J. Holcomb1;
1
San Diego State University, 2University of California, San Diego — We examined

how prosody and plausibility affect the processing of temporary syntactic
ambiguities in neurologically healthy adult participants. Consider: 1. While
the band played the song pleased all the customers. Here it is initially
unclear whether the NP the song is the direct object (DO) of played (incorrect) or the subject of the main clause (correct). The addition of a pause
after the verb “played” and pitch contour over the verb can potentially dis-

Poster Session E
ambiguate the structure. Plausibility cues may also interact with syntactic
structure building. When the ambiguous NP “the song” is replaced with an
NP that is an implausible DO for “played” the listener could use this cue
to predict the correct structure. EEG was recorded from 32 scalp sites in 25
college-age adults who listened to sentences where prosody was manipulated to facilitate (2a & 2b) or disrupt (2c & 2d) syntactic processing. Plausibility between the verb (“played”) and the ambiguous NP (“song/beer”)
was also manipulated. 2a. [While the band played] the song pleased all the
customers. 2b. [While the band played] the beer pleased all the customers.
2c. [While the band played the song] pleased all the customers. 2d. [While
the band played the beer] pleased all the customers. The prosodic manipulation resulted in an N400-P600 complex at the disambiguation point
(“pleased”) when comparing both 2a & 2c, and 2b & 2d. Yet the P600 effect
was significantly smaller in the comparison with the implausible DO (2b
& 2d), suggesting listeners use plausibility to predict syntactic structure.

E88
HEMISPHERIC DIFFERENCES IN PROCESSING SYNTACTIC CATEGORY INFORMATION IN SECOND LANGUAGE Po-Heng Chen1, MinHsin Chen1, Chiarung Lu1, Shu-Kai Hsieh1, Tai-Li Chou1, Lily I-wen Su1, Chia-Lin
Lee1; 1National Taiwan University — Prior research indicates important right

hemisphere (RH) involvement in second language (L2) processing, especially before native-like proficiency is obtained. To investigate the manner(s) in which RH contributes to L2 processing, we combined a split visual-field design with Event-Related Potential (ERP) measures to examine the
hemispheric differences in processing syntactic category information in L2
learners. Intermediate to advanced English-speaking learners of Chinese
and native Chinese speakers were recruited. Participants read one-word
syntactic cues (either a classifier or an adverb) that were presented centrally
to create a syntactic category expectancy that was matched or mismatched
by subsequent lateralized nouns and verbs, and judged the grammaticality of the phrase with a button-press response. ERPs to correct trials and
trials rated as familiar after the ERP session were analyzed. Native Chinese
speakers showed an N400 grammaticality effect with both visual-field presentations, but a P600 grammaticality effect predominantly with right-visual-field (RVF) presentation. English-speaking learners of Chinese as a group
showed a P600 effect with RVF presentation and an N400 effect with left-visual-field (LVF) presentation. However, there was greater diversity among
Chinese learners’ brain responses with right than left visual-field presentation in that while almost all learners showed the LVF N400 effect, only
half of the learners showed the RVF P600 effect. Our results thus suggest
that during second language learning, the right hemisphere is more likely
to achieve native-like response patterns than does the left hemisphere, and
may consequently play a larger role in second language processing before
second language mastery is achieved.

E89
MUSIC SYNTACTIC PROCESSING IS INFLUENCED BY INTEGRATION OF LOCAL AND GLOBAL HARMONIC STRUCTURES: AN ERP
STUDY Iran Roman1, Takako Fujioka1; 1Stanford University — In listening to

Western tonal music, an unexpected out-of-key chord is known to elicit
an ERP component called Early Right Anterior Negativity (ERAN) at right
frontal electrodes compared to a standard in-key-chord. However, in more
realistic musical pieces, a sense of key can constantly move from a key to
another closely-related one. Such movements typically follow the global
rule called ‘circle of 5ths’, which describes the relationship between two
keys sharing most chords and scale tones. We recorded EEG from 12 participants to examine whether the ERAN to the out-of-key chord is reduced
when preceding local patterns follow the global rule. We examined three
conditions: Control (as in previous ERAN studies), Sequential, and Non-Sequential, all of which contained the same out-of-key chord, preceded by
different chord patterns. The Sequential condition presented three repetitions of a local pattern including the out-of-key chord, while moving
through different keys following the global rule. In contrast, the Non-Sequential condition presented the same local pattern three times without
following the global rule; this created jumps across unrelated keys. Compared to the Control condition, the ERAN in the Sequential condition was
left-lateralized and delayed about 50ms. This suggests that the integration
of local and global information for successful key motions may require left
frontal neural resources, compared to simple processing of an out-of-key

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

205

Poster Session E	
chord. Furthermore, a right-frontal positivity with latency around 365ms
was found in the Non-Sequential condition, perhaps more related to local
pattern violation rather than syntax processing.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Development &
aging
E90
EXAMINING THE EFFECTS OF INTERFERENCE ON SPATIAL RECOGNITION MEMORY IN YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS Shannon Y.

DeJesus1, Nicole E. DeFord1, Heather M. Holden2, Lisa V. Graves2, Francesca V.
Lopez1, Carina N. Hartley1, Kyle Scroggins1, Paul E. Gilbert1,2; 1San Diego State
University, San Diego, CA, 2SDSU-UCSD Joint Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology, San Diego, CA — Age-related declines in spatial memory are well

documented. Spatial memory may be adversely affected in older adults
when interference is increased, possibly due to less efficient pattern separation. We assessed spatial recognition memory using a new test hypothesized to tax pattern separation. On the study phase, healthy young (n=40)
and older (n=30) adults remembered the location of a circle on a computer
screen. On the test phase, a circle appeared either in the same or a different
location separated by distances of 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, or 2.0 cm. Participants indicated whether the circle was in the “same” or a “different” location. Smaller
spatial separations (0.5 and 1.0 cm) on “different” trials were hypothesized
to result in higher interference than larger separations (1.5 and 2.0 cm),
placing greater demands on pattern separation. The “same” trials assessed
spatial recognition memory. We found that young adults outperformed
older adults on “same” trials at the trend level (p = .06), associated with a
moderate effect size d = .46. Older adults were significantly impaired relative to young adults on “different” trials (p < .01); however, both groups
performed significantly better on low interference trials compared to high
interference trials (p < .01). Group differences were associated with a 31%
larger effect size on low interference trials. The findings indicate that spatial
recognition memory improves in young adults, and to a lesser extent in
older adults, when interference is reduced. The age-related differences may
stem from less efficient pattern separation in older adults.

E91
RECOGNITION MEMORY CONTEXT EFFECTS IN AGING Ashley Lawrence1, Lee Ryan1; 1University of Arizona — Research suggests that recognition

memory performance declines with age (Yassa et al., 2011). However,
recent work in our laboratory indicates that although older adults perform
more poorly at object recognition, their recognition is boosted to the same
degree as younger adults when the object is presented in the same context
at study and test. Older adults may be using relatively spared scene recognition processing to boost recognition of objects presented in a scene. We
predicted that older adults will be impaired at object recognition, relatively
intact in scene recognition, and that when identifying objects in scenes they
will be able to utilize the scene to boost performance. Young adults (n=15,
mean age=19) and older adults (n=15, mean age= 71) were given three
continuous recognition tasks consisting of objects, scenes, and objects in
scenes. Participants indicated whether each image in the series was either
the same as, similar to, or different from an image they had seen previously.
Older adults performed more poorly on all three continuous recognition
tasks (t= -2.584, p< .01). However, there were no differences in older adult’s
performance across tasks (n.s.). Interestingly, individual differences in performance on the scenes only recognition task were related to false positive
errors on the objects in scenes recognition task for both younger and older
adults (t=2.47, p< .05). This suggests that individuals who are better at recognizing scenes may be biased by scene information to falsely recognize an
object presented in a scene.

E92
PATTERN SEPARATION AND HUMAN HIPPOCAMPAL SUBFIELDS

Demitra Tsivos1, Serena Dillon2, Bryony Wood2, Michael Knight2, Margaret
Newson1,2, Risto Kauppinen2, Elizabeth Coulthard1,2; 1North Bristol NHS Trust,
2
The University of Bristol — In order to improve early detection of Alzheimer’s
Disease (AD) we must improve clinical tools used in diagnosis. To this end

206

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
there has been widespread research investigating the structural and functional changes that occur in hippocampal subfields as a result of natural
ageing and early AD pathology. Based on previous animal and human
studies we hypothesize that the Dentate Gyrus (DG) and CA3 regions of the
hippocampus are preferentially involved in pattern separation. Thirty-Five
cognitively normal adults and 18 cognitively impaired adults with diagnosis of Mild Cognitive Impairment or AD underwent 3T MRI of the hippocampus and completed an episodic memory task probing both pattern
separation and pattern completion. A manual segmentation protocol was
used to calculate total volumes of the CA1, CA2, CA3, DG, Subiculum and
lumped Stratum Lacunosum + Stratum Moleculare + Stratum Radiatum
(SRSLSM). Pattern separation in controls was significantly correlated with
DG volume r= .44, p <0.5 but not CA3 (p= .20). While pattern completion
in the cognitively impaired group was significantly correlated with CA1
volume r= .52, p <.05 as well as SRSLSM volume r= .53, p <.05 and Subiculum volume r=.65, p <.001. Previous research in humans has not clearly distinguished DG and CA3, whereas our segmentation protocol allows for distinction between the DG and CA3 regions. Consequently we propose that
perhaps the DG rather than CA3 is critical for human pattern separation.

E93
HOW SCHOOLING INFLUENCES CHILDREN’S MEMORY: THE
EFFECTS OF ACQUIRED SCHEMAS Garvin Brod1, Yee Lee Shing1,2; 1Max
Planck Institute for Human Development, 2University of Stirling — Memory per-

formance increases dramatically during childhood. One important reason
for this is an increase in knowledge. Prior knowledge is assumed to provide the learner with a schema that helps to incorporate new, related information into existing neocortical networks. The ventromedial prefrontal
cortex (vmPFC) has been shown to mediate the influence of a schema on
memory in young adults, but whether it serves a similar role in children is
as yet unknown. A common way to measure this influence is to compare
memory for schema-congruent and schema-incongruent new information
(i.e. congruency effect). We compared children (average age 6.5 years) with
one year of school experience (n=18) with kindergarten children (n=28) of
similar age on an object-scene memory task. The study phase took place in
the MRI scanner, which allowed us to determine areas associated with successful memory encoding (i.e. subsequent memory effects). Objects were
either congruent or incongruent to the scenes. Critically, objects and scenes
were related to the 1st grade curriculum, which allowed us to look at the
effects of schooling (mediated by increased knowledge) on memory. First
graders showed a significantly stronger congruency effect as compared to
the kindergarten children and this was linked to enhanced vmPFC activation in the school children (Group x Congruency x Memory interaction).
These results suggest that one year of schooling can lead to changes in the
neural mechanisms supporting episodic memory, and highlight the role of
the vmPFC in mediating the influence of prior knowledge on memory formation already in young children.

E94
SPACING, CONTEXT & MEMORY IN YOUNGER & OLDER ADULTS

Matthew Bell1, Katherine Bercovitz2, Patricia Simone1; 1Santa Clara University,
2
Harvard — We examined the importance of contextual consistency in the

spacing benefit in younger (YA) and older adults (OA). We previously
found that both age groups benefitted from a 24-hr spacing period, even
though younger adults outperformed older adults in all phases of the
study. Because spacing may rely on context to cue recall and older adults
may not use contextual cues efficiently, we hypothesized that contextual
inconsistency would not negatively impact OA performance, however, YA
performance should suffer. English-Swahili word-pairs were encoded in
one session and practiced in either massed or spaced (24 hours) condition
in same or different room. Final recall was 10 days after this practice. OA
underperform on all aspects of the study. They took significantly longer to
learn the word-pairs (a mean difference of 30-trials) and recalled a significantly smaller proportion of words at the test (M = .42, SD = .21 versus M
= .60, SD = .21 for YA, p < .001). Additional analyses lead to three important findings. 1) Context matters. OA are at a disadvantage when the room
changed, suggesting they use contextual cues. 2) However, when evaluating relative performance across sessions, both YA and OA performance
declines at the same rate over the 10 day period. 3) YA are sensitive to room

2016 Annual Meeting	
change, but in the opposite direction: the room change improved recall of
massed words (but not to the same level as spaced words). Thus, context
and spacing appear to interact differently across age groups.

E95
ANNUAL CHANGES IN DTI METRICS CORRELATE WITH MMSE
SCORE DECLINE IN THE ELDERLY Artemis Zavaliangos-Petropulu1, Neda

Jahanshad1, Talia Nir1, Clifford Jack2, Michael Weiner3, Matthew Bernstein2,
Paul Thompson1; 1University of Southern California Imaging Genetics Center,
2
Mayo Clinic, 3UCSF School of Medicine — Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is

a non-invasive neuroimaging method used to study white matter microstructure, a potentially powerful biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
DTI measures are strongly correlated with cognitive assessments such as
the mini-mental state exam (MMSE), but it is unknown how changes in DTI
measures correspond with cognitive impairment. Using longitudinal data
from 158 participants in ADNI (Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; mean age: 72.9±7.2; 101M/57F; 49 controls, 51 early- and 30 late- mild
cognitive impairment, 28 AD), we compared changes in DTI measures of
fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) to changes in MMSE
score over a one year interval. FA and MD in 56 white matter regions were
extracted using ADNI DTI processing protocols1. We used multiple linear
regressions, controlling for age, sex, and diagnosis to run comparisons of
percent change in FA and MD to percent change in MMSE. The false discovery rate method (FDR) was used to account for multiple comparisons.
Change in both MD and FA in the left superior longitudinal fasciculus was
significantly correlated with change in MMSE. For FA, p=8.9x10-6, β=0.12.
This directionality is expected as a greater loss of FA (or loss in white matter
integrity), corresponds to a greater decrease in MMSE (greater memory
impairment). MD increases with neurodegeneration, as reflected in the
results, as p=1.4x10-4 and β=-0.08. This study indicates the potential value
of DTI for Alzheimer’s disease research, and helps reveal noninvasive biomarkers that offer added information on the neurobiological correlates of
cognitive deterioration.

E96
THE INFLUENCE OF DISTINCTIVENESS AND SEMANTIC RELATEDNESS ON EMOTIONAL MEMORY IN YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS
Kylee T. Ramdeen1,2, Alexandrine Morand2, Nadia Genty2, Patrick S. R. Davidson1,
Pascal Hot2; 1University of Ottawa, 2Université Savoie Mont Blanc, France — The

emotional enhancement of memory (EEM) effect is the robust finding that
memory is superior for emotionally salient versus neutral stimuli. Previous studies suggest that EEM in young adults (YA) may be influenced by
distinctiveness (i.e., the degree to which a stimulus stands out, relative to
others) and by semantic relatedness (i.e., the associations between stimuli). Given that EEM has been shown to vary with age, distinctiveness and
semantic relatedness may differentially influence the EEM effect in older
adults (OA). Thirty-eight YAs and 29 OAs studied 64 pictures (16 negative,
16 positive, 32 neutral) either in blocked sets (i.e., by valence) or in mixed
sets. The mixed sets rendered the emotional stimuli more salient than in the
blocked sets by making each of the emotional pictures stand out relative to
the neutral pictures. The level of semantic relatedness between stimuli was
manipulated within-subject: half of the neutral stimuli had a low-level of
relatedness (similar to the neutral stimuli most commonly used in previous
studies), whereas the other half had a high-level of relatedness (similar to
that of the emotional stimuli). A mixed ANOVA on immediate free recall
performance revealed significant main effects of age, distinctiveness, and
relatedness, with an interaction among the three factors. Increased semantic relatedness led to superior recall in both groups, whereas an increase in
distinctiveness led to superior recall in OAs only. This suggests that semantic relatedness influences EEM regardless of age, whereas distinctiveness is
differently influential on each age group.

E97
SEMANTIC RELATEDNESS OF THE MEMORANDA PREVENTS
OLDER ADULTS FROM BENEFITTING FROM UNITIZATION Emma

Delhaye1, Roni Tibon2, Nurit Gronau3, Daniel Levy4, Christine Bastin1; 1Cyclotron Research Center, University of Liege, Belgium, 2MRC Cognition and Brain
Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, 3Open University of Israel, Israel, 4School of Psy-

Poster Session E
chology and Sagol Unit for Applied Neuroscience, The Interdisciplinary Center,
Herzliya, Israel — Aging is accompanied by a decline in associative memory.

However, the age-related associative memory deficit can be alleviated
when the components of the association are unitized (i.e. considered as a
unique entity). In this case, age-invariant familiarity can contribute to the
recognition of unitized associations. Here, we investigated the possibility
that semantic relatedness between items could lead to their unitization and
favour the use of familiarity at retrieval, thus improving older adults’ associative memory. 24 young and 24 older participants studied pairs of object
pictures that were either semantically related (e.g. a knife and a cucumber)
or unrelated (e.g. an egg and a shoe). At test, participants discriminated
between intact, recombined and new pairs. Contributions of recollection
and familiarity were estimated with the Remember/Know/Guess (RKG)
paradigm. Older adults showed less correct identifications of recombined
pairs and more false recognitions to these pairs than young adults. Both
groups had poor performance for recombined pairs, particularly when
pairs were semantically related. RKG data showed a difference in the use
of “know” responses in the false recognitions, with more false recognitions
based on familiarity in older adults and for recombined pairs, particularly when those were semantically related. False recognitions for recombined pairs were also accompanied by more “remember” responses than
new pairs. Altogether, these results suggest that a semantic relationship
between items induced an enhancement of the absolute familiarity in both
groups, prevented older participants from using a recall-to-reject strategy,
and did not improve the age-related associative deficit.

E98
MAPPING PREFRONTAL CORTEX CONTRIBUTION TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF MEMORY FORMATION Lingfei Tang1, Andrea Shafer1, Qijing

Yu1, Ryan Liddane1, William Angell1, Noa Ofen1; 1Institute of Gerontology, Psychology Department, Wayne State University — The prefrontal cortex (PFC) is

involved in memory formation; both activation and deactivation in this
region support memory formation in adults. PFC shows protracted maturation and age-related increase in activation supporting memory formation. Little is known, however, about possible age effects in the magnitude
of PFC deactivation, or the age effects in functional connectivity of PFC
with other memory-related brain regions. We tested age effects in PFC activation and connectivity that supported subsequent memory of scenes in
83 participants (ages 8-25 years). Consistent with prior research, we found
an age-related increase in subsequent memory activation within the dorsal
lateral PFC. In addition, we found an age-related increase in subsequent
memory deactivation in rostral lateral and superior regions of the PFC.
Interestingly, individual differences in subsequent memory deactivation
in the superior PFC mediated the age-related improvement in memory
performance. We further investigated age effects in the functional connectivity patterns of PFC regions. The functional connectivity between dorsal
lateral PFC and regions in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) was positive
and increased with age, whereas the functional connectivity between the
superior PFC and MTL was negative and increased with age, suggesting
that an age-related increase in the level of anticorrelation between MTL
and PFC supports improvement in memory functioning across age. Taken
together, these findings demonstrate differential age effects in the contribution of PFC regions to memory formation and underscore the notion that
protracted development of the PFC is a key factor in age-related increases
in memory functioning from childhood to adulthood.

E99
DISCOVERING THE ROLE OF ABO BLOOD TYPE IN RISK FOR ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Brandalyn Riedel1,2, Roberta Brinton1,3, Paul Thomp-

son1,2; 1University of Southern California, 2Stevens Neuroimaging and Informatics Institute, 3The Kenneth T. and Eileen L. Norris Laboratory for Neuroscience
Research, USC School of Pharmacy, University of Southern California — Cardiovascular disease (CVD) and cognitive impairment share an overlapping
etiology. The H antigen, epistatic to the ABO locus, is located on the same
chromosome as APOE, a key protein in the regulation of lipid homeostasis,
and the greatest genetic risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Despite
evidence for ABO in CVD, its role in AD risk is just emerging. Recently it
was reported that adult O carriers may have reduced risk for AD due to
greater cerebellar and hippocampal volume, and reduced risk for cognitive
decline. We report the first study of ABO effects in older adults (N=1152,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

207

Poster Session E	
mean age:74.1 ± 7; 499 women, 653 men), recruited in ADNI. We analyzed
MRI brain scans from these individuals (N=864) and performed region
of interest (ROI) analysis. A linear model tested for associations between
ICV-normalized ROI volumes and blood type, (controlling for age, sex,
education, APOE-ε4 allele number, and baseline diagnosis). Multiple comparisons were adjusted using Bonferroni’s correction. Relative risk of progressing to Alzheimer’s was calculated for cognitively normal (N=338) and
mild cognitive impairment (N=588) individuals. We found O blood type
individuals had the greatest risk at 1.16, carriers of the B blood type had
the lowest risk at 0.8. ROI analysis found carriers of the AB blood type had
increased volume in the left and right entorhinal cortex and the right hippocampus; B carriers had increased volume in the corpus callosum. Contrary
to results in a younger cohort, O carriers had significantly reduced right
cerebellar volume.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
E100
FUNCTIONAL AND STRUCTURAL CORRELATES OF THE TESTING
EFFECT Jaione Arnaez-Telleria1, Garikoitz Lerma-Usabiaga1, Manuel Carreiras1,2,3, Pedro M. Paz-Alonso1; 1BCBL. Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and
Language, Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain, 2IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation
for Science, Bilbao, Spain, 3Departmento de Lengua Vasca y Comunicación,
UPV/EHU, Bilbao, Spain — The way we encode information into long-term

memory is crucial for its retention. Learning strategies based on repeated
retrieval are efficient in creating more durable episodic memories relative
to strategies based on repeated study. This is known as the testing effect,
which has been extensively demonstrated in behavioral research. However,
the neural mechanisms underlying this effect are still unknown. This study
was aimed at investigating the functional and structural correlates underlying episodic memory retrieval for information learned via repeated study
or repeated retrieval. Thirty-seven young adults studied 100 Swahili-Spanish word pairs (rafiki-amigo) under repeated retrieval or repeated study
conditions and underwent MRI scanning right after initial encoding and
also 48 hours later. At the scanner, participants performed cued-recall tasks
on studied and non-studied items. Behavioral results confirmed long-term
memory benefits of repeated retrieval compared to repeated study. Neuroimaging data revealed stronger hippocampal engagement for successfully
remembered items studied under repeated study versus repeated retrieval,
and stronger lateral prefrontal cortex (lPFC) recruitment for remembered
items learned under repeated retrieval versus repeated study. Functional
connectivity analyses revealed tighter coupling among distributed hippocampal-PFC regions for items studied under repeated retrieval versus
repeated study, as well as stronger connectivity among hippocampal
regions for items studied under repeated study versus repeated retrieval.
Structural analyses showed differences in the contribution of white-matter
pathways connecting hippocampal and lPFC structures to these effects. Our
results suggest that retrieval practice facilitates the engagement of additional routes to trace back information from long-term memory, making
this information less hippocampal dependent.

E101
COLLABORATIVE PAIRED-ASSOCIATE LEARNING ENGAGES
MULTIPLE MEMORY SYSTEMS Flora Vanlangendonck1,2, Atsuko

Takashima3, Roel Willems1,4,5, Peter Hagoort1,4; 1Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2International Max Planck Research School for Language Sciences, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands, 3Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, The
Netherlands, 4Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 5Centre for Language Studies, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands — Although patients with hippocampal amnesia are unable to learn

arbitrary relations in paired-associate learning, they can successfully learn
novel, self-generated picture labels across a series of communicative interactions (Duff et al., 2006). Here, we investigated whether different strategies
to learn paired picture-label associations would lead to differential neural
representations, and whether collaborative learning benefits later performance. Healthy participants (n = 35) learnt labels for sets of abstract shapes
in three different tasks. They came up with labels with another person in a

208

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
collaborative communication task (collaborative self-generated condition),
by themselves (individual self-generated condition), or were given pre-determined unrelated labels to learn (individual arbitrary condition). Immediately after learning, participants produced the labels aloud in the MRI
scanner when cued with the shapes. Our behavioral results show that the
collaboratively generated labels were remembered faster and more accurately than the other labels, even though they were longer. The fMRI results
show that while the retrieval of arbitrary labels relied on the hippocampus,
the retrieval of self-generated labels activated the semantic memory network (left angular gyrus and temporal poles). The direct comparison of the
collaborative with the individual self-generated conditions revealed a set
of brain regions involved in autobiographical memory and Theory of Mind
(retrosplenial cortex, precuneus, medial prefrontal cortex and temporo-parietal junction), and the striatum. Our findings show that the retrieval of
labels generated collaboratively during social interaction engages semantic,
autobiographical and mentalizing processes. These results provide interesting insights into the memory benefit of novel labels generated through
social interactions.

E102
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL RETRIEVAL REVEALED IN THE EYES OF
THE NARRATOR: DYNAMIC CHANGES IN PUPILLOMETRY Aoxiang
Xu1, Bauer Patricia1; 1Department of Psychology, Emory University — Autobi-

ographical memory (AM) refers to memory for personally significant
events and experiences. Though the products of autobiographical memory
retrieval (e.g., narratives) have been well researched, the dynamic processes involved in search and access and subsequent elaboration of autobiographical memories are only beginning to be explored. Moreover, it is
unclear how factors such as gender and emotion influence the AM retrieval
process. In the present study, we developed a novel method using pupillometry to examine effects of gender and emotion as participants retrieved
and narratively described emotional autobiographical events. 22 undergraduates (11 females) were recruited as participants. Pupillary responses
were recorded while participants typed narrative descriptions of positive,
negative, and neutral autobiographical memories. Participants produced
more words and had a longer duration of typing for emotional narratives
than non-emotional narratives; females used more words and typed for
longer relative to males. A longitudinal analysis applied to the pupil dilation curve revealed no gender differences at the beginning of narrative production; gender differences emerged over time. For males only, pupil size
was positively correlated to the number of evaluation words in narratives
about negative events, and negatively correlated to the number of emotional words in negative event narratives. Our study confirmed the promising application of pupillometry to the study of AM retrieval, and further
explored the temporal process of the effects of gender and emotion on AM
retrieval.

E103
EXPLORING THE FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION OF THE HIPPOCAMPUS WITH A CATEGORY FLUENCY TASK Signy Sheldon1, Mary Pat

McAndrews2, Morris Moscovitch3; 1McGill University, 2Toronto Western Hospital,
3
University of Toronto — Emerging neuroimaging evidence has confirmed

functionally distinct contributions of the anterior and posterior hippocampus to episodic memory retrieval. One view of this functional distinction
is that the anterior and posterior hippocampus preferentially process conceptually versus perceptually based information, respectively. Whether
this distinction extends beyond traditional episodic memory scenarios is
unclear. In this study, we examined anterior and posterior hippocampal
contributions to a standard semantic retrieval measure, category fluency.
While in an MRI scanner, young healthy participants generated items to
categories that were based on personal conceptual (autobiographical categories – ‘movies that you have seen’) or perceptual (spatial categories –
‘items in a kitchen’) information. We found that the conceptually based
autobiographical categories preferentially recruited the anterior hippocampus whereas the perceptually based spatial categories preferentially
recruited the posterior hippocampus. These differences were also evident
when we examined how the hippocampus interacted with other cortical
regions during item generation. The reported findings extend functional
organization models of the hippocampus that are based on conceptual and
perceptual retrieval demands to outside the domain of episodic memory.

2016 Annual Meeting	

E104
INVESTIGATING THE NEURAL UNDERPINNINGS OF PRECISION
IN LONG-TERM MEMORY RETRIEVAL Franziska R. Richter1, Rose A.
Cooper1, Paul M. Bays1, Jon S. Simons1; 1University of Cambridge — Remember-

ing previous experiences in a detailed manner is one of the hallmarks of
episodic memory. The current experiment aims to extend our understanding of recollection by directly contrasting retrieval accuracy and retrieval
precision, both behaviourally and neurally. In the fMRI scanner, participants encoded a series of stimulus displays, each consisting of a unique
background scene with three superimposed objects that varied randomly
in three features: colour, orientation, and location. In a subsequent test
phase (also scanned) participants’ memory for these features was tested
by having them recreate the appearance of the objects using a continuous
circular dial. First we assessed how ‘accurately’ participants remembered
these features, by determining the percentage of responses that fell within a
pre-specified interval around the original feature value. For trials classified
as accurate, we additionally assessed how ‘precisely’ participants remembered the different object features by measuring the absolute distance
from their recreated response to the original colour, orientation, and location values. Precision and accuracy were dissociable behaviourally using
model-based analyses, with accurate memories associated with a range of
precision levels. This distinction was also reflected in the neural data with
different regions responding to accuracy and precision. When directly contrasting accuracy with precision, accuracy was associated with increased
activity in inferior parietal, inferior frontal, and occipito-temporal regions,
whereas precision scaled with activity in posterior parietal regions (angular
gyrus), the posterior cingulate, and medial frontal areas. Our results highlight a distinct set of neurocognitive processes that determine the precision
with which we can recollect previous experiences.

E105
AN INFORMATION PROCESSING STREAM FROM MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE FOR MEMORY-GUIDED VISUAL BEHAVIOR Kelly
Shen1, Gleb Bezgin1, Rajajee Selvam1, Anthony R. McIntosh1,2, Jennifer D.
Ryan1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, 2University of Toronto — Visual

behavior is guided by memories from previous experience and knowledge
of the visual scene. For example, saccadic eye movements reveal memory
for the relations among items (Hannula et al., 2012). Amnesic cases, those
with damage to the medial temporal lobe (MTL) and specifically the hippocampus, do not exhibit effects of memory in their visual behavior. These
previous findings suggest that MTL memory representations can bias the
selection of saccades. However, no direct connections are known to exist
between MTL and oculomotor control areas, and how memory representations from the MTL influence the oculomotor system remains unknown.
Using network analysis, we examined the neuroanatomical basis for the
routing of memory information to oculomotor structures. We derived a
connectivity matrix from a database of macaque axonal tract tracing studies that included 74 cortical and subcortical ROIs from the visual, oculomotor and memory systems. Using a data-driven iterative force-directed
layout procedure, we detected two distinct processing streams that each
represented the visuo-oculomotor and memory systems. We identified a
putative set of hub regions that densely interconnect the oculomotor and
memory streams. These hubs included the ventro- and dorso-lateral prefrontal cortices, the posterior cingulate, the inferior parietal lobule, the parahippocampal cortex and the supplementary eye field. Interestingly, the
frontal eye field also emerged as a hub, suggesting that it is well positioned
to directly integrate memory information into the guidance and control of
saccades. Our findings reveal a network of hubs that together may mediate
the moment-to-moment influence of memory on visual behavior.

E106
TEMPORAL AND ORDINAL MEMORY FOR EVENTS IN LARGESCALE VIRTUAL NAVIGATION Iva Brunec1,2, Jason Ozubko3, Morgan
Barense1,2, Morris Moscovitch1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research
Institute, Baycrest, 3State University of New York at Geneseo — The location

and temporal order of individual events are thought to be encoded by the
hippocampus and provide a spatiotemporal context used in the disambiguation of events comprising a longer sequence. Little is known, however,
about how the duration of a particular event is encoded into this contex-

Poster Session E
tual representation and how recollection and familiarity are related to it. In
order to investigate the recollection/familiarity distinction in memory for
ordinal position and duration, we used a novel naturalistic virtual reality
navigation paradigm based on Google Street View where periods of navigation were interspersed with pauses of different durations. In a series of
experiments, we found that participants were able to distinguish reliably
only the durations of events that were subjectively recollected, but not of
those that were familiar. This effect was unique to duration and was not
found in ordinal judgments. We further found that active interaction with
the environment enhances recollection, highlighting the importance of
idiothetic cues and perceptual feedback in subjective timekeeping and temporal encoding. We suggest that time appears to be represented in episodic
memory in a manner akin to space, and that the hippocampally-supported
ability to recollect or re-experience an event enables the reinstantiation of
its temporal and spatial context in order to distinguish it from other events
in a sequence.

E107
“BRAIN: THE INSIDE STORY”: AGING AND RECOGNITION
MEMORY FOR A REAL WORLD MUSEUM EXHIBIT Nick Diamond1,2,

Kristoffer Romero2, Nivethika Jeyakumar2, Brian Levine1,2; 1University of Toronto,
2
Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Health Sciences — Re-experiencing and

spatiotemporal context retrieval are hallmarks of episodic memory function. Accordingly, there has been increasing interest in developing more
immersive and naturalistic experimental encoding contexts. Temporal
order memory is a sensitive measure of episodic memory ability, yet little
is known about memory for the temporal structure of complex real-world
experiences involving self-initiated movement, navigation and volitional
control – factors found to modulate mechanisms underlying episodic
memory encoding. We used an exhibit at the Ontario Science Centre (“Brain:
The Inside Story”) with a track-like layout as a dynamic and large-scale
naturalistic encoding event. 172 healthy adult visitors (M = 41.41 years, SD
= 14.29) to the exhibit completed a brief scavenger hunt exercise as part of
their museum visit. Approximately three months later (range: 74-133 days),
they completed an online test of temporal order memory for photographs
of the target exhibit items. Estimates of item and associative memory processes were derived using the process dissociation procedure. Contrary
to the classic finding of disproportionate associative memory decline but
spared item memory with advancing age on lab-based tasks, we found an
age-related reduction in both item and associative components of temporal
order memory when controlling for remoteness. Age was selectively associated with decreased temporal order memory for long versus short lag item
pairs. These findings suggest that, relative to lab-based stimuli, there may
be greater overlap in the neurocognitive processes recruited by item and
associative measures of memory for intrinsically context-bound real-world
experiences.

E108
MULTIVOXEL PATTERN SIMILARITY PREDICTS SUBSEQUENT
RECOLLECTION FOR SCENES REPEATED ACROSS DIFFERENT
ENCODING CONTEXTS Jong-rok Do1, Sunyoung Park1, Yoonjung Lee1, Kyeo-

ngjin Tark1, Minjeong Jeon2, Do-Joon Yi1; 1Yonsei University, 2Ohio State University — The previous studies demonstrated that the similarity, not variabil-

ity, of multivoxel patterns for repeated items is associated with durable
memory retention (Xue et al., 2010; Ward et al., 2013). The current study
attempted to replicate the previous findings with important modifications
to the methods: items were repeated across different encoding contexts
and subsequently tested for episodic recollection. These modifications
might reveal mnemonic benefits of neural variability in repeated learning
(Wirebring et al., 2015). In the scanner, 22 participants incidentally learned
a number of scenes while judging the easiness of drawing each scene in a
painting (‘painter task’) or evaluating the composition of each scene as a
photo (‘photographer task’). Eighty critical scenes appeared in both tasks
while the other scenes appeared once in either task. In the surprise posttest outside the scanner, participants decided if the scene presented in each
trial had appeared during both tasks, either one task, or neither of the two
tasks. A sequential linear mixed effect modeling was used to analyze the
relationship between the pattern similarity for the repeated scenes in 20
encoding-related regions. As results, we found in most regions of interest that the repeated scenes subsequently endorsed to both tasks produced

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

209

Poster Session E	
greater pattern similarity than those endorsed to a single task (i.e., partially forgotten). The latter also produced greater pattern similarity than
those endorsed to neither tasks (i.e., completely forgotten). These findings
suggest that repeated learning could strengthen memory representations
through reactivation regardless of context variability of learning episodes.

E109
DISSOCIATING THE EFFECTS OF PRE-EXPERIMENTAL VS.
INTRA-EXPERIMENTAL FAMILIARITY ON SOURCE MEMORY: AN
FMRI STUDY Sunyoung Park1, Jong-rok Do1, Hongmi Lee2, Kyeongjin Tark1,

Kyungmi Kim3, Minjeong Jeon4, Do-Joon Yi1; 1Yonsei University, 2New York University, 3Wesleyan University, 4Ohio State University — Objects and events that

we experience everyday have different degrees of familiarity. How does
such difference in familiarity influence memory? Previous studies have
reported inconsistent results; familiarity enhances source memory in some
cases, but impairs it in other cases (Kim et al., 2011; Poppenk et al., 2010).
Our own previous study suggested that the type of familiarity matters.
Specifically, intra-experimental familiarity (i.e., repetition) is beneficial
for the source memory of pre-experimentally unfamiliar (i.e., unknown)
faces, whereas it is detrimental for that of pre-experimentally familiar
(i.e., famous) ones (Lee et. al., 2010). Here, we replicated and extended our
findings using fMRI. Twenty-four participants performed a three-phase
experiment. The first phase presented a set of famous or unknown faces 10
times to increase their intra-experimental familiarity. In the second phase,
the repeated face set and a new set of famous and unknown faces were
randomly presented in one of four screen quadrants. The last phase tested
if participants correctly remembered in which quadrant each face appeared
during the second phase. The source memory performance replicated our
previous results. In addition, a generalized linear mixed effect modeling
revealed that the activity in encoding-related regions such as hippocampus,
amygdala, ventral temporal and frontal cortices significantly increases the
goodness of fit of a model that predicts subsequent source memory performance. Together, our results suggest that pre-experimental familiarity can
be a potential modulator of intra-experimental familiarity effects on source
memory.

E110
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SUCCESSFUL MEMORY ENCODING
AND RECOGNITION: DIFFERENT ROLES FOR ERP SIMILARITY
ACROSS MULTIPLE STIMULUS PRESENTATIONS IN N400 AND
LPC Carolin Sievers1, Patrick Davidson2, Levente Orban3, Vincent Calcagno4,
Paniz Tavakoli2, Kenneth Campbell2, Morris Moscovitch5,6, Brian Levine5,6, Louis
Renoult1; 1University of East Anglia, UK, 2University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada,
3
Kwantlen Polytechnic University, Richmond, British Columbia, Canada, 4French
Institute for Agricultural Research (INRA), Sophia Antipolis, France, 5Rotman
Research Institute, Baycrest, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 6University of Toronto,
Ontario, Canada — The present study employed the subsequent memory

paradigm and representational similarity analysis (RSA) to investigate ERP
similarity patterns across 1) multiple encoding episodes and 2) between
encoding and correct recognition. Nineteen adult participants performed
a categorization task in which each stimulus was presented four times,
followed by a recognition memory task. We hypothesized that the N400
component, associated with retrieval from semantic memory, would show
more similar amplitudes across the 4 encoding presentations (encoding
pattern similarity) for subsequently remembered than forgotten stimuli. On
the other hand, we predicted that for the late positive component (LPC),
associated with episodic recollection, ERP amplitudes would be less similar
across presentations compared to N400 similarity (encoding pattern distinctiveness). We also predicted higher similarity between encoding and
correct recognition (i.e., hits) for LPC than N400, consistent with reinstatement of initial encoding patterns. In line with these hypotheses, neural similarity among the 4 encoding presentations was higher for the N400 than for
the LPC. Moreover, when comparing similarity between each of the encoding conditions with each other (encoding similarity) and between each with
recognition (encoding-recognition similarity), it was found that the degree
of similarity in LPC amplitudes was higher between encoding and recognition than across the 4 encoding presentations, while the opposite pattern
was observed for the N400. This finding illustrates that semantic memory is

210

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
biased towards pattern similarity during encoding, while episodic memory
is biased towards pattern distinctiveness. In contrast, encoding-recognition
similarity is higher for episodic than semantic memory, consistent with the
processes of reinstatement.

E111
SCHEMA-CONSISTENCY MODULATES POST-ENCODING NEURAL
CONNECTIVITY IN THE HIPPOCAMPUS AND CORTICAL REGIONS
Niv Reggev1, Alexa Tompary2, Amnon Yacoby1, Oded Bein2, Lila Davachi2, Anat
Maril1; 1Hebrew University, Jerusalem, 2NYU — Schemas play a pivotal role in

memory by promoting the processing of to-be-remembered schema-consistent events. Here we address for the first time the role a schema plays
at the time period immediately following the presentation of schema-consistent or inconsistent events. While much recent evidence suggests that
processes taking place during post-encoding offline periods play a major
role in mnemonic performance, previous schema studies focused on online
processing. These studies showed that schema supported (or unsupported) information was associated with neural activity in the Hippocampus (HC), medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and left inferior frontal cortex
(LIFC) was functionally relevant to the processing of schema supported
or unsupported information. To address the contribution of offline processing to schema-dependent memory, participants incidentally encoded
verbal stimuli displayed in a schema-consistent or inconsistent context
while being scanned; of interest were the post-encoding rest periods which
followed each encoding block. Memory was assessed by item-recognition
and cued-recall tests. Results indicate the existence of two global patterns:
while connectivity within lateral cortical regions is enhanced at offline periods following the processing of schema-consistent information, the offline
connectivity between these regions and the mPFC and HC is enhanced
following the processing of schema-inconsistent information. Moreover,
mPFC-HC connectivity was associated with across-participants subsequent
memory, such that the more correlation these regions displayed following
schema-inconsistent information, the more schema-inconsistent information was remembered. These results show that post-encoding offline neural
operations provide a unique contribution to understanding the processing
and subsequent memory of schema-related information.

E112
COGNITIVE ENDOPHENOTYPES INFORM GENOME-WIDE
EXPRESSION PROFILING IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Amanda Zheutlin1,

Rachael W Viehman2, Rebecca Fortgang1, Jacqueline Borg3, Desmond J Smith2,
Jaana Suvisaari4, Sebastian Therman4, Christina M Hultman3, Tyrone D Cannon1;
1
Yale University, 2University of California Los Angeles, 3Karolinska Institutet,
4
National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland — OBJECTIVE:

Genes affecting schizophrenia, a highly genetic disorder, likely confer risk
via affecting systems underlying cognitive processes, accounting for the
profound cognitive impairment characteristic of the disease. We performed
a whole-genome expression study to clarify the nature of the biological processes mediating between inherited genetic variations and verbal memory
dysfunction in schizophrenia. METHOD: Gene expression was assayed
from peripheral blood mononuclear cells using Illumina Human WG6 v3.0
chips in twins discordant for schizophrenia or bipolar disorder and control
twins. After quality control, expression levels of 18,559 genes were screened
for association with California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT) performance,
and any memory-related probes were then evaluated for variation by
diagnostic status in the discovery sample (N=190), and in an independent
replication sample (N=73). Heritability of gene expression using the twin
design was also assessed. RESULTS: After Bonferroni correction (p < 2.69
x 10-6), CVLT performance was significantly related to expression levels
for 76 genes, 43 of which were differentially expressed in schizophrenia
patients, with comparable effect sizes in the same direction in the replication sample. For 41 of these 43 transcripts, expression levels were heritable.
Nearly all identified genes contain common or de novo mutations associated with schizophrenia in prior studies. CONCLUSION: Genes increasing risk for schizophrenia appear to do so in part via effects on signaling
cascades influencing memory. The genes implicated in these processes are
enriched for those related to RNA processing and DNA replication and
include genes influencing G-protein coupled signal transduction, cytokine
signaling, and oligodendrocyte function.

2016 Annual Meeting	

E113
ESTROGEN EFFECTS ON HIPPOCAMPAL MEMORY IN WOMEN

Soniya Assudani Patel1, Emily Errante1, Rachel Niezrecki1, Lauren Masayda1,
Stephen Friedland1, Franchesca Kuhney1, Ambica Mehndiratta1, Adriana Racki1,
Karyn M. Frick2, Paul Newhouse3, Robert Astur1; 1University of Connecticut,
2
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 3Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
— Estrogen is generally associated with female sexual development and

reproduction, but it also has a critical role in neuronal function and learning and memory. Low levels of estrogen have been associated with dementia, anxiety, and depression (Contreras et al., 2000; Maki, 2001; Young et
al., 2001). Additionally, studies have shown that women with high estrogen levels outperform women who have low levels on various memory
tasks (Graham & Milad, 2013; Hampson & Morley, 2013). Hormonal contraceptives (HCs) work by decreasing estrogen levels, thereby inhibiting
ovulation. Whereas HCs work well for birth control, it is unclear how this
artificial lowering of estrogen affects memory relative to naturally cycling
(NC) females. A total of 120 women completed a virtual Morris water task
(MWT) and radial arm maze (RAM) over two consecutive days. These tasks
are known to be sensitive to hippocampus function. Saliva samples were
collected for estrogen assays. Performance on the MWT indicated that on
day 2, the HC group showed worse spatial memory than the NC group by
having significantly longer distances to the goal platform and less of a preference for the platform quadrant during a no-platform probe trial. Additionally, the HC group made significantly more errors than the NC groups
on day 2 of the RAM. Overall, the results indicate that women on HCs
perform worse than NC women on hippocampal sensitive tasks. Comparisons between low and high estrogen NC women are also presented. These
experiments provide insight into the role of estrogen in memory function.

E114
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF RELATED LURE INTERFERENCE
ON CORRECT RECOGNITION AND FALSE MEMORY SUPPRESSION Shalome Sine1, Caitlin Bowman1,2, Nancy Dennis1; 1Pennsylvania State
University, 2University of Oregon — Successful memory retrieval requires one

to distinguish between old and new information. This is often difficult
when new information is closely related to old information and thus causes
interference at the time of the retrieval decision. In order to investigate the
neural basis of these interference effects, we presented individuals with a
retrieval test in which lures were perceptually similar to targets and counterbalanced the order in which the target and corresponding related lure
were presented. Results showed that when the related lure came first (as
opposed to when the related lure was preceded by the target), the lure
caused interference not only on that trial, also on the following target
presentation. Specifically, when the related lure was presented prior to
the target, increased activity was observed in frontal and parietal regions
(reflecting increased evaluation) as well as inferior and middle occipital
gyri and fusiform gyrus (reflecting increased visual inspection necessary
to resolve interference) for both items. When the target preceded the lure,
results revealed a much more limited neural network for both target acceptance and lure rejection. These results suggest that the presentation of a
related lure generates interference that then requires heightened attentional
processing and evaluation of item details for both the current and future
memory decisions. In contrast, when the target is presented first, and interference from the related lure is diminished, correct recognition and correct
rejection processing operates much more efficiently.

E115
CAN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS AT ENCODING PREDICT
WHETHER SUBSEQUENT RECOGNITION IS BASED ON FAMILIARITY OR RECOLLECTION? Michael Weigl1, Aline Ehritt1, Axel Mecklinger1,
Timm Rosburg1,2; 1Saarland University, 2University Psychiatric Clinics Basel —

The isolation (von Restorff) effect refers to the phenomenon that memory
is enhanced for events that are physically or semantically isolated in their
study context. Isolated events typically elicit a P300 in the event-related
potential (ERP) and semantic isolates additionally elicit an N400. Memory
studies with free recall generally report that P300, but not N400, amplitude
predicts subsequent memory performance. However, some recent evidence
indicates that N400 amplitude at study co-varies with familiarity-based rec-

Poster Session E
ognition. Thus, we hypothesized that N400 is related to familiarity-based
recognition and that P300 is linked to recollection-based recognition, which
shares some similarities with free recall. We recorded ERPs to physical
and semantic isolates and control items at encoding and tested whether
these items were later recognized on the basis of recollection or familiarity
using the remember/know procedure. At encoding, physical and semantic isolates elicited, as expected, a P300 and semantic isolates elicited an
N400. Whereas the P300 amplitude at encoding was significantly larger
for remembered than for known and forgotten items, N400 did not differ
between items subsequently remembered, known or forgotten. Unexpectedly, memory for physical and semantic isolates was not enhanced relative to control items. However, high overall memory performance might
explain the absence of an isolation effect. The ERP results support the view
that P300 activity at encoding is linked to subsequent recollection-based
recognition, whereas the hypothesis that N400 at encoding is related to
familiarity-based recognition was not supported. Thus, recollection, but
not familiarity, seems to depend crucially on the encoding context.

E116
CURIOSITY SWITCHES THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN HIPPOCAMPUS ACTIVATION AND MEMORY SUCCESS Mai-Anh Vu1, Jessica

Stanek1, Laura Lerebours1, Tobias Egner1, R Alison Adcock1; 1Duke University
— High levels of curiosity, like high reward, facilitate increased memory

encoding success. Cues predicting high-curiosity outcomes elicit activation in mesolimbic dopamine circuitry supporting memory. Specifically, in
the hippocampus, it has been shown that activation at cue predicts subsequent memory success for high- but not low-curiosity information. However, engagement of mesolimbic circuitry is highly dynamic with distinct
responses to reward cue, anticipation, and outcome events. Thus, we were
interested in investigating whether the relationship between hippocampus
activation and memory success is similarly dynamic, and how this relationship is modulated by curiosity. To this end, we designed an fMRI study in
which we used trivia questions to manipulate cue-evoked curiosity, presented participants with an anticipatory delay period, and then delivered
the trivia answer at outcome. We examined how hippocampus activation
over time predicted memory for the answer in either a high- or low-curiosity state. Analyses dissociated event-related hippocampus activation
in response to the cue and outcome, as well as the background activation
during anticipation. Our findings replicated previous work at cue, showing
that the hippocampus only predicted memory success for high-curiosity
information. This relationship also held at outcome, such that the hippocampus again predicted memory success for high-curiosity information.
However, in the absence of high-curiosity information, both during anticipation and during low-curiosity outcomes, hippocampus activation instead
predicted memory failure. Thus, we found that high- versus low-curiosity states inverted the relationship between hippocampus activation and
memory encoding success.

E117
INTEGRATION REDUCES INTERFERENCE BETWEEN OVERLAPPING MEMORIES Avi J H Chanales1, Franziska R Ricther2, Brice A Kuhl3; 1New
York University, 2University of Cambridge, 3University of Oregon — Memories for

past events will often share overlapping features. This overlap can lead to
interference during memory retrieval, which has long been established as
a powerful contributor to forgetting. Here, we tested whether behavioral
and neural factors that promote across-event ‘integration’ during encoding actively reduce interference during subsequent retrieval. To this end,
we first developed a behavioral paradigm to measure the degree to which
overlapping events interfere with one another during memory retrieval. In
our paradigm, participants initially learned to associate words with pictures (A-B learning). During a subsequent learning phase (A-C learning),
all of the previously learned words (A) were paired with new pictures (C).
Memory for the new associations (A-C) was then tested in the presence or
absence of an explicit reminder of the B image. We found that reminding
participants of the B image (i.e., an overlapping memory) interferes with
retrieval of the C associate as reflected by reduced recall accuracy and
longer reaction times, relative to control conditions. We then ran a modified version of the paradigm to test whether reminding subjects of the
A-B association during A-C learning would influence interference effects
at retrieval. Indeed, this manipulation, which putatively increased integra-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

211

Poster Session E	
tion during encoding, eliminated the interference cost associated with presenting the B item during A-C retrieval. Finally, we ran an fMRI study and
found that trial-level neural estimates of integrative processing during A-C
learning predicted whether subsequent reminders of the old associations
would interfere with retrieval of the new associations.

METHODS: Electrophysiology
E118
THE ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY OF LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION: A
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL MODEL Harm Brouwer1, Noortje Venhuizen1,
Matthew Crocker1; 1Saarland University — We present a neurocomputational

model of the electrophysiology of language processing. Our model is
explicit about its architecture and the computational principles and representations involved. It is effectively a recurrent neural network (of the
‘Elman’-type; [1]) that constructs a situation model of the state-of-the-affairs described by a sentence on a word-by-word basis. Each word leads to
a processing cycle centred around two core operations. First, the meaning
of an incoming word is retrieved/activated, the ease of which is reflected in
N400 amplitude. Next, this retrieved word meaning is integrated with the
current situation model into an updated situation model, which provides
a context for both the retrieval and integration of the next word. The effort
involved in situation model updating is indexed by P600 amplitude. We
demonstrate how the model accounts for patterns of N400 and P600 modulations observed for a range of signature processing phenomena, including
semantic anomaly, semantic expectancy (on nouns and articles), syntactic
violations, and garden-paths. Crucially, the model also captures the much
debated ‘semantic P600’-phenomenon [see 2,4,5]. The implications of our
model will be outlined, and we will argue that explicit computational
models and quantitative simulations are generally superior to verbal ‘boxand-arrow’ accounts, and necessary for settling theoretical debates, such as
the one concerning the ‘semantic P600’-phenomenon. [1] Elman (1990); [2]
Brouwer et al. (2012); [4] Kuperberg (2007); [5] Bornkessel-Schlesewsky and
Schlesewsky (2008)

E119
COMBINING TIME-FREQUENCY ANALYSIS AND INVERSE SOLUTIONS TO ASSESS FOR PRESERVED COGNITIVE PROCESSING IN
CRITICALLY ILL PATIENTS Adianes Herrera-Díaz1, Valia Rodriguez1, Adonisbel Valero1; 1Cuban Neuroscience Center — Deciding whether a patient with a

disorder of consciousness -DOC- is in a vegetative or a minimal conscious
state is challenging. Lack of sensitive and objective diagnostic techniques
determines that about 40% of cases are misdiagnosed. The situation is more
complicated in intensive care environment where a wrong diagnosis could
affect the quality of treatment. In this study as part of a protocol that aim to
standardize the cognitive assessment of critically ill patients we carried out
combined time-frequency -TF- and inverse solution -IS- analyses to explore
differences between patients with and without DOC in intensive care unit
-ICU. The patient’s own name uttered by a familiar -ONF- and unfamiliar
-ONUF- voice and the ON played in reverse were used as deviants and
standard stimuli respectively in an oddball paradigm during passive listening. The results showed that ONF and ONUF in conscious patients and in
a patient with locked-in-syndrome elicited similar event-related potentials
with a MMN and a P300 components that were characterized by a synchronization in theta range between 300-700 ms in the time-frequency analysis. IS modeled with LORETA evinced neural generators with maxima in
bilateral anterior frontal regions as well as in parietoccipital and temporal
areas. However patients in minimal conscious state and in vegetative state
differed in the absence of theta synchronization and of bilateral frontal and
parietooccipital involvement. Even when our results are preliminary they
suggest that TF and IS applied to ERP data could have enough sensitivity
to detect preserved cognitive processing in ICU.

E120
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL TOPOGRAPHY OF THE SUBTHALAMIC
NUCLEUS IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE McKenzie Winter1, Aviva Abosch1,
John Thompson1; 1University of Colorado School of Medicine — We used elec-

trophysiological data from Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) targeting the
Subthalamic Nucleus (STN) of Parkinson’s Disease (PD) patients to create

212

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
an anatomical map of neurons, enabling identification of the STN during
surgery as well as contributing to our ever-expanding knowledge of neuroanatomy. In this study, we examined the anonymized single unit recordings
from 20 PD subjects collected during the standard-of-care intraoperative,
electrophysiological mapping during DBS lead placement. To ensure accurate identification of single neurons, we clustered spike waveform features
(e.g., valley, peak, energy, PC1 and PC2) with the program Offline Sorter
(Plexon) using a combination of automated clustering algorithms (e.g.,
k-means, valley-search) and subjective refinement with inspection of waveforms in Matlab (Mathworks). Putative single neurons were rejected based
on cluster quality metrics and interspike interval (ISI) violations. Well-isolated single STN neurons were analyzed for firing rate, bursting and tremor-related activity. Anatomically, the electrode positions were derived from
the postoperative MRI in conjunction with recording depths collected from
the microelectrodes during DBS surgery. Calculated neuronal locations
were then transposed onto pre-operative 3T T2 MRI scans (used for targeting). MRI scans were analyzed using the anatomical programs, ITK-Snap
and Mango. For our study we sought to characterize whether the dorsal
and ventral borders of STN could be differentiated by firing properties of
single units, including firing rate and bursting activity. Transposing these
electrophysiology recordings to MRI scans of DBS patients will enhance
understanding of DBS and the treatment of PD via STN stimulation by creating an anatomical map of neuron waveforms.

E121
THE IMPACT OF LATENCY JITTER ON THE USE OF P300 IN THE
ASSESSMENT OF COGNITIVE FUNCTION Xiaoqian Yu1, Chad Dube1,
Jordy Roque1, Emanuel Donchin1; 1University of South Florida — Verleger et al

(2014) reported that the amplitude of the P300 is reduced when the task
requires the subject to choose among responses. This is considered supportive of a model of the P300 that emphasizes the decision requirements. However, an examination of its waveforms suggests that the P300 amplitude is
reduced because in that particular condition the P300 is subject to considerable latency jitter. That is, the latency of the P300 varies substantially across
trials due to the difficult judgements required on different trials. As has
been shown by Kutas et al (1977) such variance in amplitude can be eliminated by applying latency jitter adjustment to the P300. The current study
replicated experiment 1 in Verleger et al (2014) to explore latency jitter
issue. In the oddball task, ancillary stimuli were added to frequent and rare
targets, either X or U is framed by a blue or yellow rectangle. In a simple
condition, subjects evaluate either letter or color to respond; in the hard
condition, both letter and color have to be evaluated in order to respond
correctly. With latency jitter correction (woody filter) in the data from 16
subjects, we observed an increased P300 in hard condition, suggesting that
the reduced P300 is due to latency jitter. This supports the stimulus evaluation hypothesis that response difficulty does not impact P300 amplitude.

OTHER
E122
ARE POSITIVE OR NEGATIVE REINFORCERS MORE EFFECTIVE IN
EEG-NEUROFEEDBACK APPLIED TO LEARNING DISABLED (LD)
CHILDREN WITH EEG MATURATIONAL LAG? Thalia Fernandez1, Maria

del Carmen Rodriguez2, Fabiola Garcia2, Judith Becerra2, Maria Isabel Caballero2, Thalia Harmony1, Gloria Otero3; 1Instituto de NeurobiologIa, Universidad
Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 2Facultad de Psicologia, Universidad Autonoma
de Queretaro, 3Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autonoma del Estado de
Mexico — EEG-Neurofeedback (NFB) is an operant conditioning procedure,

whereby an individual can learn to modify the electrical activity of his/her
own brain. Frequently, the EEG of LD children is characterized by excess of
theta and deficit of alpha activity. NFB reinforcement decreases the theta/
alpha quotient by using a positive auditory reinforce, which is a useful tool
to treat LD children. Aim: To optimize the procedure by exploring positive and negative reinforcers. Sixteen LD children with abnormally higher
theta/alpha ratio were randomly assigned to an R+ group where a positive
reward was given when the value of theta/alpha ratio was reduced or an
R- group where a punishment was delivered when the value increased.
Positive or negative reward was a tone of 500 Hz. The reduction of theta/

2016 Annual Meeting	
alpha ratio supports the theory of faster learning in the R- group. NFB treatment was not compatible with extinction for either group. IQs improved
in both groups, showing more improvement in R- than in R+, with higher
differences between groups as time went by; also ADHD score from TOVA
and writing improved in both groups, without differences between groups.
Both groups showed EEG changes compatible with EEG maturation. In
conclusion, NFB applied with either positive or negative reinforcement is
useful for the treatment of LD children; however, NFB applied with a negative reward induces a greater and quicker improvement in behavior and
EEG values than NFB applied with positive reward, that was not extinguished in either group. Acknowledgements: Héctor Belmont, Susana Castro-Chavira, and PAPIIT (IN204613).

METHODS: Electrophysiology
E123
THE CORTEX DISPLAYS REGIONAL INTRINSIC FREQUENCY
BIASES Monika Mellem1, Sophie Wohltjen1, Avniel Ghuman2, Alex Martin1;
1

National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, 2University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center — Recent findings in monkeys suggest that intrin-

sic periodic spiking activity in selective cortical areas occurs at timescales
mirroring the anatomical hierarchy: activity in sensory areas is faster while
activity in higher-order areas is slower. It is not yet known if a similar
timescale hierarchy is present in humans. Additionally, these measures
in the monkey studies have not addressed the fact that periodic activity
within a brain area can occur at multiple frequencies. We wanted to investigate in humans if regions may be biased towards particular frequencies of
intrinsic activity, and if a full cortical mapping still reveals an organization
that follows the anatomical hierarchy. We examined the spectral power in
multiple frequency bands from task-independent data using magnetoencephalography (MEG). Neuromagnetic responses were recorded from 13
subjects at 600 Hz using a 275 channel whole-head MEG system while subjects fixated for five minutes. Structural MRIs were collected for each subject, dense cortical grids were created with Freesurfer, and the MEG signal
was source localized using the minimum norm estimate inverse solution.
The Destrieux atlas parcellation was used to calculate spectral power estimates within each gyral/sulcal region over 1-50Hz, and a novel frequency
bias index was used to calculate the dominant frequency band for a given
region. Results demonstrated biases towards higher frequencies (alpha/
beta) in some sensory regions, but a mix of lower and higher frequencies
in higher-order regions. Thus they suggest a more complex organization
across the cortex that does not simply follow the anatomical hierarchy.

E124
BIPHASIC ERP RESPONSES ARE NOT JUST FILTER ARTIFACTS
Phillip M. Alday1, Sabine Frenzel2, Matthias Schlesewsky1, Ina Bornkessel-Schlesewsky1; 1University of South Australia, 2University of Marburg — Filtering

remains a poorly understood preprocessing step in studying event-related
potentials (ERPs). Several recent papers have highlighted the distortions
that filtering can introduce into ERP timecourses. Disconcertingly, Tanner
et al. (2015) have demonstrated that high-pass filtering can introduce spurious components before a real effect, e.g. an N400 before a P600. Given
that filtering traditions vary between workgroups, this raises the question
whether the different component patterns observed across languages for
the same manipulation are an artifact. Here, we sought to examine the stability across filters of the biphasic N400-P600 pattern often observed in German-language data. Reanalyzing data from Roehm et al. (2013), we looked
at the impact of bandpass filtering with both infinite impulse-response (IIR)
and finite impulse-response (FIR) filters. The upper edge of the passband
was held constant (30Hz), while the lower edge was varied across 0.16, 0.2
and 0.3 Hz with a left transition-band width of 0.15 Hz. Using mixed-effects
models, we examined the interaction of the experimental manipulation
with passband and response type. Across filters, the previously observed
biphasic pattern was preserved. Additionally, we observed an effect for
both passband and response type. Visually, the later components seemed to
influence earlier components more with the IIR vs the FIR filter. The biphasic pattern is not an artifact of the choice of passband. Moreover, the choice

Poster Session E
of filter involves much more than the selection of the passband. Filter selection involves many tradeoffs and there is no one universal filter applicable
to all (EEG) data.

E125
INFLUENCE OF TRANSCRANIAL ALTERNATING CURRENT STIMULATION ON BRAIN OSCILLATIONS:AN EEG BASED STUDY
Davide Cappon1, Anahita Goljahani1, Patrizia Bisiacchi1; 1University of Padova —

Recently transcranial alternating current stimulation ( tACS ) has emerged
as a new technique of non-invasive brain stimulation able to interact with
neuronal oscillations. A growing number of studies showing the effectiveness of tACS activity in modulating sensory, motor and even higher cognitive processing. However, the neurophysiological mechanisms of tACS are
still poorly understood . Given the known electroencephalographic (EEG)
correlations with clinical conditions , motor processes, cognitive performance , processing of stimuli , etc.,this study aims to investigate the interactions between tACS and rhythmic EEG activities by measuring the frequencies involved, changes of power and of their location on the scalp. Based
on our prior study, stimulation was delivered at alpha (10 Hz) and beta (20
Hz) frequency over the area of the scalp corresponding to the electrodes
Fz , F2 , FCZ , FC2 and C3 , C5 , CP5 , CP3. Immediately before and after
the stimulation EEG data were collected by 52 active electrodes. EEG data
were analyzed by recent approach Channel Reactivity Based ( CRB ) and
established techniques of quantification of changes in power , eg , the Event
- Realated Synchronization / desynchronization ( ERS / ERD ). Preliminary
results revealed, significant, frequency-dependent changes of power: 10 Hz
stimulation specifically increases alpha power t(51)=27,47,p<0.001 but no
significant changes in beta and theta power. 20Hz stimulation specifically
increases beta power t(51)=2.89,p=0.005,decreases alpha power t(51)=2.22,p=0.03 no significant changes in theta power. Examination in terms
of spatial diffusion is forthcoming.The results provide information on the
spectrum of action of the specific stimulation frequencies used.

E126
AFFECTIVE STARTLE MODULATION FOLLOWING A COGNITIVE
TRAINING INTERVENTION FOR MOOD AND ANXIETY DISORDERS Divya J. Duraiswami1, Jessica S. Ellis1, Matthew Bachman1, Lisa M.

McTeague2, Brad Schmidt3, Edward M. Bernat1; 1University of Maryland, Collge
Park, Department of Psychology, Clinical and Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory,
2
The Medical University of South Carolina, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 3Florida State University, Department of Psychology, Anxiety and
Behavioral Health Clinic — Startle reflex modulation during aversive picture

viewing has been a reliable index of defense activation and affective dysregulation in anxiety and depressive disorders. However, there is little
treatment data on pre/post changes in peripheral startle modulation. The
current study assessed changes in startle reflex magnitude before and after
a cognitive training treatment intervention. Subjects (N=22) participated
in a 4-week long intervention designed to assess the neurophysiological
modulation of anxiety and depression symptoms. The treatment condition
(N=12) combined top-down and bottom-up cognitive bias interventions
including Cognitive Anxiety Sensitivity Treatment (CAST) and Cognitive
Bias Modification- Interpretation (CBM-I). Subjects in the control condition
(N=10) had repeated contact with an experimenter, but did not undergo
any treatment. All subjects completed an emotion regulation task that
included viewing pleasant, unpleasant, and neutral IAPS images. The magnitude of startle reflex to acoustic startle probes administered during picture viewing was scored from the ongoing orbicularis oculi electromyography and analyzed for pre/post treatment differences in peak amplitude.
As a function of intervention condition (active versus control), subjects
showed different patterns of startle modulation over time (condition*time,
F=5.66, p=0.027). Those patients in the control condition maintained their
level of fear potentiation to aversive relative to neutral pictures (t=0.76, ns).
In contrast, the treatment group demonstrated a significant reduction in
fear potentiation from pre- to post-treatment (t=2.69, p=.014). These results
provide additional evidence for modulation of fear responding after a cognitive intervention, and new evidence that startle reflex can be sensitive to
such changes.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

213

Poster Session E	

E127
DECOMPOSING ERPS FROM 3 HZ AFFECTIVE PICTURE PRESENTATIONS Stephen Semick1, Matthew Bachman1, Edward Bernat1; 1University
of Maryland, College Park — Fast picture presentation tasks with ERP mea-

sures have provided important information about affective and visual processing (e.g. Junghofer, et al. 2003). The goal of the current study was to
apply time-frequency (TF) analysis, a more comprehensive measurement
approach, to separate multiple overlapping activations occurring due to the
rapid presentations. A primary aim was to assess the late positive potential (LPP) component during the fast picture presentations. The second aim
was to characterize regional brain activity using TF amplitude and intertrial phase-synchrony (ITPS). The third aim was to assess functional connectivity using TF interchannel phase-synchrony (ICPS) measures, focused
on the occipital areas driven by the fast presentations. Participants (N=120)
completed a fast picture viewing task in which the entire IAPS picture set
was presented at 3 Hz (3 per second), 819 pictures, in randomized order.
First, the time-domain LPP was extracted, which replicated previous work
showing an increase for pleasant and unpleasant stimuli relative to neutral
400-700 ms post-stimulus. Next, TF-PCA was used to extract an occipital
3 Hz steady-state principal component (PC) that reflected the rate of stimuli presentation. This PC was found to be sensitive to affective conditions
(pleasant and unpleasant) relative to neutral, with significant effects in
both amplitude and ITPS. Significant dynamic functional connectivity was
found between occipital and other areas, including right temporal-parietal
regions. The present findings support the view that multiple overlapping
processes are sensitive to affective processing during fast picture viewing,
and suggests that TF approach are useful for separating and indexing such
processes.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other
E128
DIFFERENT TIMING OF FACILITATORY AND INHIBITORY CONTEXTUAL EFFECTS ON MOTOR RESONANCE: A TMS STUDY Lucia
Amoruso1, Alessandra Finisguerra1, Cosimo Urgesi1,2,3; 1Laboratory of Cognitive
Neuroscience, University of Udine, 2Scientific Institute (IRCCS) Eugenio Medea,
3
School of Psychology, Bangor University — Converging neuroimaging evi-

dence indicates that inferring the intentions and goals underlying other people’s actions is a context-sensitive process. However, little is known about
the possible role of context in shaping lower-levels of action coding such as
reading action kinematics and simulating muscular activity. Furthermore,
evidence regarding the time-course and the neural mechanisms subserving
this modulation is still sparse. Here, we combined single-pulse TMS and
motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) recording to: i) explore whether top-down
contextual information is capable of modulating low-level motor representations and, ii) track changes in MEPs amplitude over time. We recorded
MEPs from forearm and hand muscles while participants watched videos
about everyday actions embedded in congruent, incongruent or ambiguous contexts. In addition, we delivered TMS pulses at different delays:
80ms, 240ms and 400ms after action onset. Videos were interrupted before
action ending, and participants were requested to predict the unfolding
of the action. We found that top-down contextual information modulated
lower-level aspects of motor resonance with a different engagement of M1
at early (facilitation ~240ms) and later phases (inhibition ~400ms) of action
processing, depending on the (in)congruency of the information among
hierarchical levels. The different time-course of these effects suggests that
they stem from partially independent mechanisms. The early facilitatory
effect may directly involve M1, while the later inhibitory one is likely to
be mediated by high-level structures that modulate motor representation.

E129
THE TEMPORAL PROCESSING OF GUSTATORY QUALITY, INTENSITY AND HEDONICITY Moon Wilton1, Andrej Stancak1, Patricia Bulsing2,

Alexis Makin1, Timo Giesbrecht3, Anna Thomas3, Tim Kirkham1; 1University of
Liverpool, 2The Hague University of Applied Sciences, 3Unilever R&D Vlaardingen
— The perception of taste is instrumental in food selection and information
about the quality, intensity and hedonicity of tastants aids ingestive decisions. To investigate the differential temporal processing of these separate

214

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
characteristics of taste, we used an automated gustometer apparatus to control the presentation of taste stimuli, and evaluated EEG responses to salt,
bitter and sweet taste qualities (as well as a distilled water control) varying
in intensity and pleasantness. Using a 64 channel BIOSEMI EEG system, we
found that intensity was represented in earlier processing stages (around
100 ms and 300 ms) across right parietal and frontal regions, whereby water
(and near isotonic) solutions evoked minimal cortical responses compared
to other tastes. Quality was encoded slightly later (around 500 ms) in parietal regions, with salt, bitter and water tastes showing differences in amplitude. Hedonicity was coded fronto-centrally in later stages (around 1250
ms) with water showing weaker amplitude compared with both hedonically positive and negative solutions. The results suggest that the brain
encodes distinct tastes similarly over time, and that the profile of activity
observed primarily reflects greater neural engagement when a tastant is
discernibly different from water.

E130
DECEPTIVE INTENTION AND KINEMATIC ALTERATION OF AN
OBSERVED ACTION AFFECT THE MOTOR SYSTEM VIA DISSOCIABLE PROCESSES Alessandra Finisguerra1, Lucia Amoruso1, Stegios Makris2,
Cosimo Urgesi1,3; 1University of Udine, Italy, 2Edge Hill University, United Kingdom, 3Bangor University, United Kingdom — Social interaction often requires

reading others’ intentions by observing their movements. Previous work
showed that action simulation is crucial in detecting others’ deceptive
intent: the observation of deceptive actions facilitates the observers’ motor
activity more than seeing him acting truthfully, suggesting that motor resonance is sensitive to deceptive intentions. However, an alternative explanation is that this facilitation mirrors the kinematic alteration necessary
to attain deceptive vs. truthful actions. Here, we tested these alternative
hypotheses by using transcranial magnetic stimulation to measure corticospinal excitability (CSE) from hand and forearm muscles. Participants
watched videos of an actor lifting a cube and judged whether the cube
was heavy or light. The videos were taken in three conditions where the
actor was asked to lift the cube after receiving truthful information on the
object weight and being asked to provide either i) truthful (true condition)
or ii) deceptive (deceptive condition) cues to the observers or iii) after
receiving fooling information and being asked to provide truthful cues to
the observer (deceived condition). Thus, we independently manipulated
actor’s intention and kinematics alterations. According to previous studies, CSE increased during the observation of deceptive actions; however, a
decrease of CSE occurred in the deceived vs. the true and deceptive conditions. Importantly, while deceptive actions enhanced CSE for both muscles,
perceiving kinematic alterations affected CSE in a muscle-specific manner.
This suggests that deceptive intention is actually coded by the observer’s
motor system and different hierarchical levels of action representation may
modulate its activity via dissociable processes.

E131
CEREBELLAR TDCS DURING SPEECH PERCEPTUAL LEARNING
DISSOCIATES THE TIMING OF PERCEPTUAL DECISIONS FROM
PERCEPTUAL CHANGE Daniel Lametti1,3, Leonie Oostwoud Wijdenes2,
James Bonaiuto3, Sven Bestmann3, John Rothwell3; 1Department of Experimental Psychology, The University of Oxford, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition
and Behaviour, Radbound University, 3Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, University College London — Speech perception

is remarkably malleable yet there have been few causal investigations of
the brain regions involved in speech perceptual learning. Recent neuroimaging studies suggest that the cerebellum might play a role in non-motor
functions, including perception and perceptual learning. Here we test this
idea directly using transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) in combination with a speech perceptual learning task. In the experiments, participants experienced a series of speech perceptual tests designed to measure
and then manipulate their perception of the phonetic contrast between
the words “head” and “had”. One group received tDCS to the cerebellum
during speech perceptual learning and a different group received “sham”
tDCS during the same task. Both groups showed similar learning-related
changes in speech perception; these changes transferred to a different phonetic contrast (“head-to-“hid”) and lasted for up to a week. For both trained
and untrained speech sounds, cerebellar tDCS significantly increased the

2016 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session E

time it took participants to indicate their perceptual decisions with a button
press. By analyzing perceptual responses indicated using both hands, we
suggest that cerebellar tDCS disrupted processes related to the timing of
speech perceptual decisions. The experiments provide initial evidence that
the cerebellum critically contributes to the timing of perceptual behaviour,
a result that mirrors one of its known roles in the motor domain.

E134
NON-BAYESIAN WEIGHTING OF IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT INFORMATION IN A MOTION DISCRIMINATION TASK Andrea Alamia1, Eti-

E132
THE POLYMODAL ROLE OF CONSCIOUSNESS IN ADAPTIVE
ACTION SELECTION: A PARADIGM FOR NEUROIMAGING Donish

drive our behavior. In the current study we investigated how unconscious
associative learning affects decision making in a motion discrimination
task. We replicated an experimental design used in a previous study and
that leads to robust unconscious learning of supraliminal stimuli association. Two groups of subjects participated in the experiment. The first group
(implicit group, n=20) was unaware of the color-motion association while
the second one (explicit group, n=20) was fully aware of it. In the first part
of the experiment, participants had to report the motion direction of a patch
of dots of three possible colors. Unbeknownst to the participants, two colors
were always associated with the same direction/response, while the other
color was uninformative. In the second part of the experiment, participants
had to perform the same task, while the motion coherence varied between
trials. Drift diffusion models (DDM) were used to fit the data. Preliminary
results suggest that the explicit group weights the sensory information in
accordance with Bayesian cue integration: they used the color information
more when the motion signal strength was lower. In contrast, in the implicit
group, the participants seemed to give constant weight to the color information, irrespective of the motion coherence. Interestingly, the DDM analysis
suggested that the color information biased both the strength of the motion
signal and the response choice. These findings suggest that the combination
of unconscious and conscious information for decision making does not
follow Bayesian principles of optimal cue integration.

Cushing1, Ezequiel Morsella1,2; 1Department of Psychology, San Francisco State
University, 2Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco —

Recent developments have led to the proposal that the primary function of
conscious processing is to render adaptive what in everyday life is called
“voluntary” action, a complex form of action involving skeletal muscle.
From this standpoint, the conscious field permits otherwise independent
outputs engendered by “encapsulated,” modularized systems (e.g., color
perception versus olfactory perception) to influence (skeletomotor) action
selection collectively. This occurs in “integrated actions” (e.g., holding
one’s breath while underwater). The outputs, which come from a wide
variety of systems including low-level systems (e.g., smoke detection) and
high-level systems (e.g., subvocalization), could be memory-based or perception-based, or be intentional or unintentional. We designed a task that
allows one to investigate this polymodal, multifaceted phenomenon in a
manner amenable to neuroimaging technologies. Participants (n = 9) were
presented with visual objects and instructed to not think of the names of
these objects. If an unintentional subvocalization of the object name arose
(which occurred on 88.7% of the trials), participants were instructed to
make a special button press if the subvocalization rhymed with a word held
in prospective memory and if there was a visual “go” cue onscreen. Despite
the many contingencies and modalities involved, participants were accurate in carrying out this special button press: Accuracy was 83.1%, which is
higher than what would be expected by chance, t(8) = 12.11, p < .001. Coupled with neuroimaging technologies, this paradigm could illuminate the
neural bases of the polymodal role of conscious states in action selection.

E133
THE NEURAL RESPONSE TO SOMATOSENSORY STIMULATION
IN SENSORY PROCESSING DISORDER (SPD): A HIGH DENSITY
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY STUDY Sydney Jacobs1, John J. Foxe1,2, Gregory
Peters1, Sophie Molholm1; 1Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 2University of
Rochester Medical Center — Atypical and maladaptive responses to the sen-

sory environment are seen in many neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD).
The neural basis of these aberrant reactions, however, remains largely
unknown. When sensory reactivity is severe enough to impact everyday functioning and observed in the absence of an NDD such as autism
or attention deficit disorder, the individual may be given a diagnosis of
Sensory Processing Disorder (SPD). Here we examined brain responses
of children with an SPD, autism, or neurotypical development to somatosensory inputs. We sought to determine whether differences in the initial
registration and processing of sensory inputs might account, in part, for
aberrant reactions to the sensory environment. 13 children with SPD (5.3 15.2 years), children with autism, and neurotypical controls were presented
with vibrotactile stimulation over the median nerve region of the right wrist
at five different presentation rates (ISIs: 150ms, 250ms, 350ms, 550ms, and
1050ms), while high-density EEG was recorded. Somatosensory evoked
potentials (SEPs) were robust and highly similar in their temporal and spatial properties across the groups. Clear differences in SEP amplitude as a
function of stimulation rate were observed exclusively for the SPD group.
Response amplitude as a function of ISI suggested a steeper slope for the
SPD group, due to greater increase in response amplitude with increasing
ISI, a difference that was most apparent during later sensory processing
(130-195ms). These findings suggest a potential neural mechanism, with
possible clinical group specificity, underlying the increased reactivity to
environmental stimulation in SPD.

enne Olivier1, Alexandre Zénon1; 1Université catholique de Louvain, Bruxelles,
Belgium — Alongside conscious decision making, unconscious factors also

E135
RESPONSE SELECTION IN TOOL ACTION AND COMMON COMPETITION TASKS DRAWS UPON SHARED AND DISTINCT BRAIN
REGIONS Louisa L. Smith1, Christine E. Watson1, Laurel J. Buxbaum1; 1Moss
Rehabilitation Research Institute — The need to select between competing

responses according to task goals is a fundamental challenge across many
cognitive domains. Recently, we identified a left hemisphere network
including the supramarginal gyrus (SMG), inferior frontal gyrus (IFG)/
anterior insula, and superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF) as critical for
selecting actions during tool use in the face of competition from task-inappropriate actions. Here, we assessed whether tool action selection depends
upon the same neuroanatomic network as other well-studied measures of
response competition and selection. We administered a competition-inducing Tool Action task as well as spatial Stroop and Flanker tasks to 35 chronic
left-hemisphere stroke patients. In each task, competition was indexed by
the reaction time cost for high-conflict versus low-conflict stimuli. Voxel-based lesion symptom mapping and tractographic overlap analyses
revealed distinct and shared brain regions critical for performance across
tasks. Lesioned voxels in IFG and insula were associated with poor performance on both the Stroop and Tool Action tasks, while lesioned voxels
in SMG and superior parietal lobule/posterior intraparietal sulcus were
associated with specific impairments in the Tool Action and Flanker tasks,
respectively. Additionally, lesioned voxels associated with poor performance across all three tasks overlapped with the known location of a portion of the external capsule undercutting the IFG as well as the putamen.
Our results suggest that tool action selection is supported by a distributed
network comprising an anterior parietal region unique to tool actions as
well as prefrontal, insular, and subcortical components that mediate competition irrespective of cognitive domain.

E136
EXPERIENCE TRANSFORMS THE CONJUNCTIVE REPRESENTATIONS OF OBJECT FEATURES IN THE VENTRAL VISUAL STREAM
Jackson Liang1, Jonathan Erez1, Felicia Zhang2, Rhodri Cusack3, Morgan Barense1;
1
University of Toronto, 2Princeton University, 3University of Western Ontario — The

perception of a discrete object critically relies upon the integration of that
object’s individual features into a coherent whole. Yet, how the visual
system accomplishes this transformation is still unknown. The representational hierarchical model predicts that perirhinal cortex (PRC), which sits
at the apex of the object processing stream, should be sensitive to specific
conjunctions of features but not the component features themselves. To test

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

215

Poster Session E	
this possibility, we recently conducted an fMRI experiment in which participants were scanned while viewing various features and feature conjunctions. Activity in PRC and lateral occipital cortex (LOC) was shown to code
object feature conjunctions that were distinct from the summed activations
to the individual features themselves. Here, we extended these findings
along two lines of investigation. First, how do the representations of individual features and feature conjunctions change with experience? Second,
do conjunctive representations promote the reactivation of individual features – or vice versa – through connectivity between ventral visual stream
(VVS) structures? Following the initial experiment, participants returned
and were extensively trained to distinguish the individual features of each
object. They were scanned a second time to measure their brain responses
to conjunctions of trained and novel features. Univariate analyses revealed
increased engagement of V1 and LOC during the presentation of trained
features compared to novel features. Moreover, patterns of activity in posterior VVS consistently coded the unique conjunctions of trained features
but not conjunctions of novel features. These results point to complementary roles for anterior and posterior VVS before and after learning respectively.

E137
BIASES IN TACTILE LOCALIZATION SUBSEQUENT TO CORTICAL
DAMAGE Michael Grzenda1, Jared Medina1; 1University of Delaware — Damage

in primary somatosensory cortex (S1) can result in hemianaesthesia, or
plastic changes resulting in the re-emergence of the damaged representations in neighboring cortical areas. Although the topography of these
reorganized maps has been studied in non-human primates, little is known
about the relationship between cortical damage and tactile localization.
To examine the relationship between impaired tactile detection and error
patterns in tactile localization, we examined tactile performance in over
50 brain-damaged individuals. Tactile detection thresholds were assessed
using an adaptive staircase procedure with Semmes-Weinstein monofilaments. Tactile localization was assessed by asking participants to localize
(via pointing movements) suprathreshold stimuli presented to 22 locations
on the dorsal surface of their hand (Rapp, Hendel & Medina, 2002). We
used linear mixed models to examine the relationship between detection
thresholds and spatial patterns in tactile localization bias. We found a significant relationship between higher detection thresholds and shifts in tactile localization towards the center of the hand. We discuss two possible
interpretations of the data. First, consistent distortions in mapping from
reorganized S1 representations to higher-order representations of body size
and shape necessary for tactile localization may result in the observed error
patterns. A second explanation is that general biases toward the center of a
categorical space (prototype) when stimulus location is uncertain results in
the observed pattern of performance.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
E138
SCENE SELECTIVITY AND RETINOTOPY IN MEDIAL PARIETAL
CORTEX Edward Silson1, Adam Steel1,2, Chris Baker; 11. Laboratory of Brain &

Cognition, National institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 20892, USA,
2
2. Physiological Imaging Group, FMRIB Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK — Functional imaging studies in human reliably

identify a trio of scene-selective regions, one on each of the lateral (occipital
place area, OPA), ventral (parahippocampal place araea, PPA) and medial
(commonly referred to as retrosplenial complex, RSC) cortical surfaces.
Recently, we demonstrated differential retinotopic biases for the contralateral lower and upper visual fields within TOS and PPA, respectively. Here,
using fMRI, we combine detailed mapping of both population receptive
fields (pRF) and category-selectivity, with independently acquired resting-state functional connectivity, to examine retinotopic sensitivity within
medial scene-selective cortex across a large number of participants (n=16).
Consistent with previous work, we identify the medial scene-selective area,
which was largely contained within the posterior bank of the parieto-occipital sulcus (POS) and did not extend into restrosplenial cortex, suggesting
the use of RSC as a label for this region is potentially misleading. Interestingly, this same region was identifiable solely on the basis of responses
to our retinotopic mapping stimuli with a striking degree of spatial consistency. Our analyses not only demonstrate a high degree of retinotopic

216

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
sensitivity, but also highlight a significant contralateral visual field bias
coupled with very large pRF sizes within this region. Unlike, its scene-selective counterparts TOS and PPA, this medial scene-selective region did
not show a consistent bias to either the contralateral lower or upper visual
fields. This retinotopy was also evident in fMRI patterns acquired during
rest. Taken together the retinotopic profile of medial scene-selective cortex
suggests a prominent role in mediating scene related visual information
between TOS and PPA.

E139
PHASE DEPENDENT TARGET DETECTION DURING RHYTHMIC
VISUAL 10HZ STIMULATION REVEALS ENTRAINMENT Annika Not-

bohm1, Christoph Herrmann1,2; 1Experimental Psychology Lab, Department of
Psychology, European Medical School, Carl von Ossietzky Universität, Oldenburg,
Germany, 2Research Center Neurosensory Science, University of Oldenburg —

The perception of brief visual stimuli has been shown to correlate with the
phase of the intrinsic alpha oscillations in parieto-occipital areas. To investigate whether these correlative observations reflect a causal relationship,
modulation of alpha oscillations is broadly applied via rhythmic sensory
stimulation (i.e. entrainment). It is, however, subject of open debate whether
the thereby produced steady-state visual evoked potential (SSVEP) can be
explained by entrainment or rather reflects a sequence of independent
ERPs (event-related potentials). In this experiment, we presented a brief
light flash of various brightnesses at two opposite phase angles of an ongoing visual stimulation train with 10 entrainer- flashes per second to healthy
young adults. We hypothesized, that detection thresholds for the two phase
conditions would differ during a rhythmic but not during an arrhythmic
stimulation train. The SSVEP was recorded via EEG. Our results show that
the ratio of the detection thresholds at opposite phase angles during rhythmic ongoing visual stimulation is significantly increased as compared to
the arrhythmic condition (t-test, p<0.05), which shows ratios closer to 1. In
conclusion, we could demonstrate that a rhythmic visual stimulation can
alter detection thresholds in a phase dependent manner, suggesting intrinsic oscillations to be synchronized with the external, rhythmic stimulation.
If, on the contrary, rhythmic stimulation would cause a series of independent ERPs, the ratios would be expected to be independent of rhythmicity. This finding paves the way for further applications of entrainment as
a means to investigate the causal relation between brain oscillations and
brain functions.

E140
NEURAL CORRELATES OF GRADED VISUAL AWARENESS: AN
ERP STUDY Chiara Francesca Tagliabue1, Chiara Mazzi1, Chiara Bagattini2,

Silvia Savazzi1; 1University of Verona, Italy, 2IRCCS Centro San Giovanni di Dio
Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy — The debate on consciousness is focused on

two major topics: the search for the neural correlates of visual awareness
and the graded vs dichotomous nature of conscious experience. This project aims at searching for the possible neural correlates of different grades of
visual awareness by investigating the ERPs to reduced contrast visual stimuli. The hypothesis is that different grades of awareness may be reflected
by different amplitudes of the components related to conscious perception. The experiment includes two consecutive sessions. The first one is
a threshold assessment, to find two individual luminance values (lighter
and darker) at which subjects (N=12) are aware of about 50% of the stimuli. In the second stage (EEG experiment) subjects are presented with the
same two luminance values and required to judge the brightness of the
stimulus (lighter/darker) and then to rate the clarity of their perception on
the Perceptual Awareness Scale (no experience, brief glimpse, almost clear
experience, clear experience). ERP analyses reveal a left centro-parietal
negative deflection peaking at 280-320 ms from stimulus onset, probably
related to phenomenal awareness of the stimulus (the actual content), followed by a bilateral positive deflection peaking at 500-600ms over almost
all electrodes, probably reflecting access to such content. Interestingly, both
deflections show a reliable (p<0.05) linear amplitude modulation related to
the level of awareness: as visual awareness increases also the amplitude of
the components increases. It thus seems that visual conscious experience is
characterized by a gradual increase of perceived clarity at both behavioural
and neural level.

2016 Annual Meeting	

E141
RECONSTRUCTING TOP-DOWN WORKING MEMORY SIGNALS
FROM POPULATION ACTIVITY IN EARLY VISUAL CORTEX Masih

Rahmati1, Golbarg Saber1, Clayton E. Curtis1; 1New York University — Top-down

signals modulate neural population activity in early sensory areas during
working memory. Here, we aim to 1) reconstruct the neural population
dynamics and working memory content during a retention interval in early
visual areas, 2) isolate the dynamics due to top-down signals, and 3) identify the sources of the top-down signals. Using fMRI, we measured neural
activity in retinotopic visual areas while subjects maintained a planned
saccade directed to or away from the location of a briefly presented visual
target. We developed a forward encoding model to reconstruct the neural
population dynamics in visual areas. In the model, we used a linear combination of outputs from a number of information channels to estimate
each voxel’s response to targets at various positions in the visual field. To
validate the model, we successfully reconstructed the locations of targets
during visual encoding. We then showed that the model could reconstruct
the locations of targets from activity late in the retention interval. Critically,
we could reconstruct the saccade goal even on trials in which participants
planned anti-saccades to positions in the visual field that were not visually
stimulated, and thus, can only be attributed to the effects of a top-down
signal. Finally, we searched for brain areas in frontal and parietal cortex
whose delay period activity moderated the dynamics captured by our
model. By reconstructing the locations of maintained representations, we
demonstrated that population activity in early visual areas are sculpted by
top-down signals.

E142
EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN OFA AND FFA DURING FACE
PERCEPTION AND REPETITION: DYNAMIC CASUAL MODELLING
OF EVOKED MEG, EEG AND FMRI Roni Tibon1, Daniel Wakeman2, Richard Henson1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, 2Athinoula A. Martinos
Center for Biomedical Imaging — Repetition suppression (RS) refers to the

reduction in neural activation following repeated presentation of a stimulus, and is frequently used to investigate the role of face-selective regions
in human visual cortex. A common assumption is that RS reflects localized,
“within-region” changes, such as neuronal fatigue. In contrast, predictive
coding theories characterize RS as a consequence of top-down changes in
between-region modulation. We applied Bayesian model comparison of
families of Dynamic Causal Models (DCM) with different directed graphs
between 4 regions of interest (left and right OFA and FFA) to fit evoked
responses measured by fMRI and by MEG and EEG, in order to study bottom-up and top-down mechanisms underlying RS effects. Nineteen participants made 2 visits to the lab, during which data were acquired from
either a Siemens 3T MRI system or an Elekta Neuroimag MEG system. Participants made left-right symmetry judgments on a random sequence of
faces and phase-scrambled faces. After initial presentation, each stimulus
was repeated again. Group-level analyses revealed increased activation for
Faces versus Scrambled Faces and for Initial versus Repeated presentation
in all four ROIs. Preliminary DCM results reveal that driving input of Faces
and Scrambled Faces versus baseline enters the network at both the OFA
and the FFA. Furthermore, repetition of Faces modulated forward and
backword connections between OFA and FFA, as well as self-connections.
The results suggest that repetition affects both within-region dynamics and
across-region connectivity.

E143
CAPACITY LIMITATIONS OF HUMAN VISUAL SYSTEM REVEALED
WITH RESPONSE PRIMING Bella Matias1, Marjan Persuh1; 1Borough

Manhattan Community College, City University of New York — Most researchers

regard visual working memory as a conscious memory system and it is
well established that visual working memory is strictly limited in capacity. Similarly, humans are able to track only a few individual items at the
time. Some recent evidence suggests that such capacity limitations originate at the encoding stages of processing. We hypothesized that encoding
capacity limitations are a general property of the visual system. We tested
our prediction using a response priming paradigm. Evidence suggests
that response priming requires intact retinogeniculostriate pathway. We
hypothesized that priming is also limited by the representation of visual

Poster Session E
information at the encoding stage. Participants made speeded responses to
horizontal and vertical bars displayed at the center of the display. Prior to
target presentation, a prime, horizontal or vertical bar was presented at one
of the eight positions around the imaginary circle. We varied the number
of items on the screen by presenting a single prime together with distractor bars of a different orientation. Priming effects were the strongest for a
single prime, presented in isolation. As the number of distractors increased,
priming effects become progressively weaker and with the set size of
six, were completely eliminated. These results suggest that the capacity
of visual system to represent individual objects for priming is similar to
restrictions previously demonstrated for working memory. Furthermore,
because response priming is independent of visual awareness, our results
indicate that capacity limitations of our visual systems are not restricted to
conscious vision.

E144
STRONG VISUAL CONTEXTUAL ASSOCIATIONS ENHANCE
SEMANTIC PROCESSING: AN EEG INVESTIGATION Maximilien Chau-

mon1,2, Niko, A Busch1,2; 1Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany, 2Charité Universitätsmedizin, Germany — Context shapes the way we perceive the world.

In the visual domain in particular, it was proposed that context guides
perception via associative predictions generated from prior experience
of visual objects in context. Recently, it has been shown that the strength
with which a given object is associated with its usual context rapidly influences how the object is processed in visual areas. Here, we further explore
whether the strength of visual contextual associations also changes semantic processing as indexed by the N400 component of the EEG. In particular,
we used the fact that the N400 amplitude is influenced by the semantic
relatedness between a stimulus and the context it is presented in. We thus
introduce a metric of contextual strength for visual objects and use this
metric in a classical N400 paradigm to examine whether the N400 response
is affected by the contextual strength of the eliciting stimuli. As expected,
we found a classical N400 effect when comparing semantically related and
unrelated target objects. Furthermore, we show that the magnitude of the
N400 effect was unaffected by the prime objects’ contextual strength. By
contrast, the N400 effect was enhanced when the target object was contextually strong. We conclude that the strength of contextual associations
borne by visual objects readily affects their ability to disturb previously set
contextual expectations but seems not to affect their ability to establish new
contextual associations.

E145
THE INFLUENCE OF DISTRACTORS ON FAST-REACHING MOVEMENTS Emily Prentiss1, Jimena Jaramillo1, Quanjing Chen1, Bradford Z.
Mahon1; 1University of Rochester — Speeded reaches to a visual target are sub-

ject to distortion effects when distractors are presented spatially adjacent
to the target. Understanding the spatial and temporal constraints to which
visuomotor updating is subject is central for understanding how the dorsal
visual pathway functions, as well as the sensitivity of this pathway to certain classes of stimuli. Prior work has tested the effects of introducing a
wide array of visual distractors, which act to temporarily displace the target
location during the reach. There is some discrepancy in prior work, with
some studies observing that distractors attract reach trajectories toward
the location of the distractor, and other studies finding that distractors
repel reach trajectories. Here we systematically varied the location, size,
and duration of transient distractors in order to probe the constraints on
fast visuomotor updating. Participants were asked to fixate on a target presented in 1 of 5 possible locations (1 center, 4 peripheral). Upon fixation of
the target and initiation of the reach, a distractor was presented in an adjacent location for a brief period (< 200 ms). Participants were asked to move
as quickly as possible to touch the original target location, resulting in an
average total movement time of about 350ms per trial. Overall, we observe
that reach trajectories are biased toward the distractor when the task constraints are such that distractors appear at possible target locations. These
data elucidate the role of high-level, and potentially consciously available,
strategies on how distractors affect rapid target reaches.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

217

Poster Session E	

E146
NEURAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING VISUOSPATIAL ABILITIES:
AN ADAPTED WECHSLER BLOCK DESIGN TASK Veronique D.Therien1,

David Luck2, Isabelle Soulières1; 1University of Quebec at Montreal, 2University
of Montreal — Block design tasks, such as the one included in the Wechsler

intelligence scales, assess visual problem solving and reasoning. The tasks
traditionally require assembling a larger target figure with small blocks.
Increasing the perceptual cohesiveness of the figure to be reproduced is
detrimental to accuracy and response times in such tasks. Important individual differences in visuospatial abilities may be associated with underlying differences in neural mechanisms. Aims: Our goal was to uncover the
neural network involved in visuospatial abilities and expertise, and more
specifically in the Block Design Task. Methods: In an adaptation of the original Block Design Task suitable for presentation in the MRI scanner, the
participants’ task was to identify which type of block would go in a given
position in the target design shown. Perceptual cohesiveness of the target
design was parametrically varied across the 90 trials. Participants also completed the Raven’s Progressive Matrices and a mental rotation task. Results
and discussion: Increasing perceptual cohesiveness significantly reduced
accuracy and increased response times. Performance in the adapted Block
Design task also correlated significantly with performance on the Raven’s
Matrices and the mental rotation task, confirming the validity of our task
to assess visuospatial abilities. At the cerebral level, contrasting high versus
low perceptual coherence trials revealed specific activity mainly in bilateral
inferior parietal lobule and in the right superior and middle frontal gyrus.
Increasing visuospatial task difficulty is associated with increased activity
in this fronto-parietal network, and with performance in visuospatial reasoning.

E147
THE ROLE OF RIGHT EXECUTIVE MOTOR CONTROL REGIONS
IN MENTAL ROTATION Levan Bokeria1, Kyle F. Shattuck1, John W. VanMeter1; 1Georgetown University — The specific roles of parietal and motor cor-

tices in mental rotation tasks have been long debated in the literature. A
meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies suggests that brain activation patterns depend on the particular experimental setup, use of different baseline
conditions, and possible use of different strategies by the subjects during
the task. However, another factor that may impact results is the degree to
which inherent visuospatial abilities influence the regions recruited. In the
current fMRI study, 42 right-handed subjects performed a 3D Rotation task
adapted from the Harvard Geospatial Battery of tests developed by Stephen Kosslyn. A novel control condition was used to test the specificity of
brain activation during mental rotation. Subjects’ visual perceptual ability
and visual abstract processing were assessed using the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence Performance IQ (PIQ) measure, which was
entered as a covariate of interest in a regression analysis with task-related
BOLD signal increase. After controlling for accuracy and reaction time, the
following areas showed increased activity during task performance: bilateral precuneuous, right superior parietal lobule, left superior frontal gyrus,
and bilateral precentral gyrus. After controlling for sex, a positive correlation between PIQ and task-related activation was found in the right precentral gyrus as well as the right inferior orbito-frontal gyrus. These findings
provide evidence that a right hemispheric cortical network is recruited to
a greater extent by individuals with greater visuospatial ability during
mental rotation.

E148
PHYSICAL SIZE AND SPATIOTOPIC CUES MODULATE INVERTED
FACE REPRESENTATION James Brown1, Anthony Cate1; 1Virginia Tech —

Recent neuroimaging findings indicate that the real-world size of objects
is spatially represented along the ventral temporal lobe of the brain. Additionally, behavioral studies involving mental rotation and spatial navigation tasks performed on screens of varying size suggest that task performance is improved when viewers perform the task on a large visual display
compared to a small visual display even when visual angle is held constant. Given these findings, the present study investigated the interaction
between real-world size and perceived size on holistic processing using
fMRI. Subjects were shown images of upright faces and inverted faces, as
well contours whose forms were comprised of local and globally aligned

218

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
elements or global only aligned elements. These stimuli were chosen
because of their known differences in holistic representation. In order to
manipulate perceived size, subjects were shown small and large images
that were either near or far to the scanner and during perceived size conditions retinal image size was held constant. It was hypothesized that cortical activations elicited in response to the face and contour stimuli would
change as a function of their perceived sizes. Further, changes would represent alterations in the representations of the face and contour stimuli in way
related to their holism. GLM analysis from 17 young, healthy participants
indicated significant effects in the left and right anterior calcarine sulcus
and left fusiform gyrus. Interestingly, these effects were significantly less
present for smaller real-world size images of inverted faces, which suggests
an effect of perceived size.

THINKING: Decision making
E149
PROBABILITY CONTEXTS MODULATE MEDIOFRONTAL PREDICTION ERROR SIGNALS IN RESPONSE TO GAINS AND LOSSES
Pablo Morales1, Atsushi Kikumoto1, Jason Hubbard1, Ulrich Mayr1; 1University
of Oregon — Previous research has interpreted electrophysiological indi-

ces related to unexpected negative outcomes such as the feedback-related
negativity (FRN) as a reflection of a midbrain-generated prediction error,
not necessarily of a negative event per se. Recent research has additionally
demonstrated that the FRN may also be sensitive to unexpected positive
outcomes. What remains unknown is how the degree of outcome expectancy may differentially modulate responses to positive and negative
events. To better understand the role of outcome expectancies in generating these electrophysiological signals, the current work employed a twoarmed bandit task where probabilities of monetary gains and losses were
manipulated and explicitly cued on a trial-by-trial basis between 30% and
70%. Participant behavior was sensitive to the probability manipulation,
showing betting choices that scaled with the degree of outcome expectancy.
Overall FRNs were significantly larger following losses when compared
to gains, and the probability manipulation did not affect the amplitude of
these signals overall. However, loss-gain difference waves scaled nearly
linearly with outcome expectancy where more unexpected outcomes
were characterized by smaller differences between losses and gains, and
expected outcomes showed the opposite pattern. Spectral power of low
frequency oscillations in the delta (1-3 Hz) and theta (4-7 Hz) bands was
also modulated following gains and losses. These results suggest that electrophysiological signals such as the FRN may not be uniquely sensitive to
expectancy alone, and may instead reflect the combination of both outcome
expectancy and valence.

E150
STRIATAL DOPAMINE AND EXTERNALIZING BEHAVIOR: EFFECTS
ON REWARD WANTING, LEARNING, AND HABIT FORMATION Kaileigh Byrne1, Christopher J. Patrick2, Bo Pang1, Darrell A. Worthy1; 1Texas A&M
University, 2Florida State University — The dopaminergic system plays a crit-

ical role in the neural circuitry underlying reward wanting, learning, and
habit formation. Furthermore, externalizing behavior has been linked to
impairments in reward processing and decision-making. Given the relationship between the dopaminergic system and externalizing behavior,
we examined whether striatal dopamine moderates the impact of externalizing proneness on reward-based decision-making. In Study 1 (N=93),
participants completed disinhibition and substance abuse subscales of the
brief form Externalizing Spectrum Inventory, and then performed a delay
discounting task to assess preference for immediate rewards along with
a dynamic decision-making task that assessed long-term reward learning.
Striatal tonic dopamine levels were operationalized using spontaneous
eyeblink rate. Regression analyses revealed that high disinhibition predicted greater delay discounting among participants with lower levels of
striatal dopamine only, while substance abuse was associated with poorer
long-term learning among individuals with lower levels of striatal dopamine, but better long-term learning in those with higher levels of striatal
dopamine. In Study 2 (N=67), we extended this procedure to a two-stage
devaluation task to assess reward-based habit formation. Results demonstrated that substance use predicted less devaluation sensitivity and thus

2016 Annual Meeting	
more habit-based behavior, but this relationship was not moderated by
striatal dopamine. These results suggest that disinhibition is more strongly
associated with the wanting component of reward-based decision-making,
whereas substance abuse behavior is associated more with learning of longterm action-reward contingencies and reward-based habit formation.

E151
DUAL SYSTEMS OF CATEGORY LEARNING: EFFECTS OF TRANSCRANIAL INFRARED LASER STIMULATION Nathaniel Blanco1,
Francisco Gonzalez-Lima1, Todd Maddox1; 1University of Texas at Austin — Tran-

scranial infrared laser stimulation involves using infrared light to enhance
neurobiological functions. It is a new non-invasive form of low-level light
therapy (LLLT) that shows promise for wide-ranging experimental and
clinical applications. LLLT has been shown to enhance cellular respiration
and energy metabolism (ATP production) through photobiomodulation of
the enzyme cytochrome oxidase. Applications of LLLT in humans in vivo
are novel, but preliminary research indicates it may have a broad range of
uses. Previous research suggests that LLLT aimed at the prefrontal cortex
can improve sustained attention and short-term memory. We recently
showed that LLLT enhances performance on the Wisconsin Card Sorting
Task, the gold standard of executive function in neuropsychology. Here
we directly investigated the influence of transcranial laser stimulation on
two neurobiologically dissociable systems of category learning: a frontal
cortex mediated hypothesis-testing system that learns categories using
explicit, verbalizable rules and a striatally mediated procedural learning
system that learns categories through gradual dopamine-driven reinforcement learning. Participants received either active or placebo transcranial
laser stimulation targeted at lateral prefrontal cortex, and then learned one
of two category structures—a rule-based (RB) structure optimally learned
by the frontal system, or an information-integration (II) structure optimally
learned by the striatal system. We found enhanced RB and II learning after
active laser stimulation. Computational modeling results indicate that RB
learning is enhanced by accelerating the switch from simple to more complex verbal rules whereas II learning is enhanced by accelerating the switch
from rule use to adopting the optimal, implicit strategy.

E152
NEURAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING SATISFICING DECISION
MAKING UNDER TIME PRESSURE Hanna Oh1, Jefferey Beck1, Silvia
Ferrari2, Marc Sommer1, Tobias Egner1; 1Duke University, 2Cornell University —

Real-life decision making is often beset by difficulties due to the uncertain
nature of decision-relevant information, and the limited time and cognitive
resources available to analyze that information. It is thought that humans
overcome these challenges through satisficing, heuristic decision making
that prioritizes some sources of information while ignoring others, thereby
providing solutions that are not necessarily optimal but fast and “goodenough”. However, how we adopt decision making under uncertainty and
time pressure remains poorly understood. Here, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine how people solve a multi-cue
probabilistic classification task under changing time pressure. On each trial,
participants were presented with two compound stimuli composed of four
different visual features (cues) associated with fixed outcome probabilities
(weights) that had to be learned via probabilistic feedback. Following an
initial learning period, participants were scanned while performing two
successive post-learning task phases, a low and a high time pressure phase
(1500ms vs. 500ms response window). We employed variational Bayesian inference to derive subjects’ decision strategies, revealing that under
high time pressure, subjects dropped the weakest cue from their decision
making process. We then used uni- and multi-variate fMRI analyses to
characterize neural cue processing during the different task phases. Results
show that decision difficulty consistently scaled with activity in orbitofrontal and parietal cortices, regardless of task phase. By contrast, changes in
decision strategies under high time pressure were characterized by differential multivoxel pattern signatures in the dorsolateral frontal, parietal and
visual cortices.

Poster Session E

E154
A BRIEF INTERVENTION ALTERS THE USE OF MODEL-BASED
VS. MODEL-FREE DECISION STRATEGIES Maria K. Eckstein1,2, Silvia
A. Bunge1, Klaus Wunderlich2; 1UC Berkeley, 2Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitaet,
Munich — In this study, we sought to test whether we could alter partic-

ipants’ decision-making towards model-based or model-free decision
strategies on a task that has been shown to elicit a mixture of these two
strategies (2-step task), by manipulating the type of tasks presented beforehand. In model-based decision-making, an internal representation of the
problem structure is used to select actions; model-based decision-making
has been linked to prefrontal-dorsal striatum systems. Model-free decision-making involves habitual learning of action-outcome associations,
and has been linked to the ventral striatum. We hypothesized that completing brief tasks involving planning or associative learning immediately
prior to performing the two-step task would lead to a higher proportion of
model-based and model-free judgments, respectively. 32 adults performed
the planning tasks in one session and the associative-learning tasks in a
second session two weeks later, or vice versa. We fit a hybrid reinforcement-learning model to each participant’s data, computing several parameters including the relative weight between model-based and model-free
strategy use w. We found a significant group-by-session interaction in w
(χ2(7)=7.9, p=0.005), wherein participants who had performed the planning
tasks in session 1 increased their use of a model-based strategy in session 2
(t(14)=1.9, p=0.04), whereas those who had performed the association tasks
in session 1 increased their use of a model-free strategy (t(16)=2.2, p=0.02).
This study shows that even a brief intervention can lead individuals to base
their decisions either on a representation of task structure or on more rapid
but less flexible associative learning.

OTHER
E155
BRIDGES AND COMMUNITIES: THE IMPACT OF SHARED CONCEPTS IN COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE Jonathan Morgan1, Natasha
Sakraney1, James Moody1, Scott Huettel1, Achim Edelmann1, Greg Appelbaum1;
1
Duke University — Cognitive neuroscience is a multidisciplinary field aimed

at understanding how neural structures and processes shape behavior.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging is a key measurement approach
used in this effort and has been the source of empirical data in thousands
of published articles. In this research, we take these articles as our data in
order to understand how the structure of cognitive neuroscience influences
the dissemination and recognition of new knowledge in the discipline.
Using a combination of text and social network analysis techniques, we capture the effects both of an article’s Scientometric characteristics (e.g., length,
publication year, number of authors and references) and of its content (e.g.,
concepts and brain regions studied) upon its subsequent impact. Analyzing 2,365 articles from five of the discipline’s most prominent journals for
the years 2004-2010, we map connections between the articles through
the psychological concepts and neuroanatomical terms that they share in
their abstracts and titles. We identify communities of articles defined by
common ideas, and show through a set of regression models that articles
that bridge communities are more influential, leading to greater subsequent
citations. For example, our analysis indicates that articles connecting work
in visual processing, social neuroscience, emotion management, and facial
recognition made significant contributions during this period, leading to an
increasing emphasis on emotion management and spectrum disorders later
in the period. We believe this approach offers a general platform to explore
questions concerning the evolution of sub-disciplinary boundaries, and the
role of collaboration in the generation of new knowledge.

THINKING: Other
E156
LARGE-SCALE RESTING-STATE NETWORK CORRELATIONS PREDICT MIND WANDERING TENDENCIES Christine A. Godwin1, Michael A.

Hunter2, Matthew A. Bezdek1, Gregory Lieberman2, Katie Witkiewitz2, Vincent P.
Clark2, Eric H. Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2University of New
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

219

Poster Session E	
Mexico — Mind wandering (MW) is frequently associated with increased

activation in default mode network (DMN; Andrews-Hanna et al., 2010).
Most fMRI studies use experience sampling or post-study questionnaires to
measure MW during a scan. Here we build on this research by examining
the extent that trait mind wandering is related to the functional connectivity (FC) between the DMN and an intrinsic task positive network (TPN)
during rest. Resting-state fMRI scans (5.5 min) from 112 participants were
decomposed into seven components using group independent component
analysis (ICA). Each participant completed the Mind Wandering Questionnaire (MWQ; Mrazek et al., 2013) to measure levels of task-unrelated
thought tendencies. ICA was used to define the DMN and TPN, and the
average DMN and TPN signals were extracted for each individual. Each
participant’s DMN and TPN signal were correlated to obtain a measure
of the DMN/TPN static FC, which was compared to MWQ scores using
Pearson correlation. We found a statistically significant positive correlation
between DMN/TPN FC and tendency to mind wander, r(110) = .25, p =
.008. Previous research has demonstrated that increased coactivation of
the DMN and TPN is detrimental to task performance, and increased anticorrelation is associated with more efficient behavioral performance (e.g.,
Thompson et al., 2013). The positive correlation between MW and FC supports and extends these findings. A stability between these networks can be
observed in resting state as well, and may be related to a general tendency
to experience task-unrelated thoughts.

E157
THE EFFECTS OF NICOTINE ON CONDITIONING, EXTINCTION,
AND REINSTATEMENT Alexandra Palmisano1, Eleanor Hudd1, Courtney

McQuade1, Dr. Harriet de Wit2, Dr. Robert Astur1; 1The University of Connecticut,
2
The University of Chicago — One view in addiction research is that nicotine

dependence develops due to the reinforcing properties of nicotine, related
to euphoria or anxiety relief. Another recent view, derived from animal
models, suggests that nicotine can also enhance the reinforcing, motivating
functions of non-nicotine related rewards. Few studies have examined the
ability of nicotine to enhance reinforcement from stimuli unrelated to smoking in humans. Here, we aimed to determine whether nicotine enhances
reinforcement of an M&M food reward in a virtual reality environment
using a 2-day conditioned place preference paradigm. On the first day, subjects explored two virtual rooms where they received M&M rewards in one
room, and no rewards in the other. On the second day, subjects received no
M&Ms in either room to test for extinction. After several sessions, participants received M&Ms in a novel context and were tested for reinstatement.
On each day, half the subjects ingested nicotine (4 mg/kg) and half received
placebo. Participants who ingested nicotine before training rated the previously-paired M&M room significantly more favorably on Day 1 test day
than did subjects in the placebo group (p < 0.05). Also, the nicotine-treated
group spent significantly more time in the previously-paired M&M room
than did the placebo group on Day 2 (p < 0.05). Our results indicate that
nicotine may delay the rate of extinction and promote reinstatement. Thus,
these data provide key information for understanding how conditioning
paradigms can provide insight into treating addictions.

E158
TASK-SPECIFIC PROCESSING OF ARABIC DIGITS IN THE LEFT
ANGULAR GYRUS Eric Wilkey1, Gavin R Price1; 1Peabody College, Vanderbilt

University — Previous research suggests the left inferior parietal lobe, spe-

cifically the left angular gyrus (AG) is preferentially associated with the
processing of symbolic numbers (i.e. Arabic digits), relative to nonsymbolic numerical processing (i.e. sets of dots). The present study investigates
whether such preferential processing is influenced by task demands by
contrasting neural activation during symbolic vs nonsymbolic number processing in two tasks using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
at 7 Tesla. Using numerosities 2, 4, 6, & 8, presented as Arabic digits or
sets of dots, participants were required on one task to indicate whether a
presented numerosity was smaller or larger than 5 (i.e. compare), while in
the second task they were required to identify the exact numerosity of the
presented stimulus (i.e. identify). We conducted a whole-brain analysis of
variance testing for a task by format interaction. Results indicated significant interactions in 5 clusters (p<.001 uncorrected, p<.05 cluster corrected).
In the left prefrontal, anterior cingulate, and right insula, this interaction
was characterized by greater activation for identify vs compare in the non-

220

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
symbolic format only. The posterior cingulate cortex interaction was characterized by greater activation for symbolic vs nonsymbolic in the identify
condition only. Finally, the left angular gyrus interaction was characterized
by greater activation for symbolic vs nonsymbolic in the identify condition
only. These results indicate that the preferential processing of Arabic digits
in the left AG is influenced by task demands, suggesting a role for both topdown and stimulus driven processes in the neural processing of numerical
symbols.

E159
CLASSIFYING COGNITIVE SUBGROUPS OF PARKINSON’S DISEASE BASED ON RESTING-STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
PATTERNS. Suhnyoung Jun1, Na-Young Shin2, Seung-Koo Lee3, Sanghoon
Han1; 1Yonsei University, 2Ewha University School of Medicine, 3Yonsei University
College of Medicine — Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging

(fcMRI) studies have reported reliable changes in intrinsic connectivity of
human brain over various clinical disorders. To explore the potential of
fcMRI data to classify cognitive subgroups of Parkinson’s disease patients
(PD) with various level of cognitive status such as subjective cognitive
impairment (PD-SCI), mild cognitive impairment (PD-MCI), and dementia
(PDD), and to elucidate the relation between resting-state networks and
inter-regional connectivity patterns leading to decent classification performance, 44 patients with PD-SCI, 125 patients with PD-MCI and 44 patients
with PDD were recruited. The present study show that the use of 16,110
connectivity features, composed by cross-correlating the first and second
eigenvector resting signals from principal component analysis of every 90
Automated Anatomical Labeling regions, allowed prediction of Parkinson’s disease cognitive status using linear support vector machine-based
multivariate pattern analysis. Features were ranked according to F-score
and included accumulatively during the analysis. The resultant accuracy
curve showed that using approximately 100 features was sufficient enough
to discriminate the cognitive subgroups of PD with more than 80% of accuracy. We further found several resting-state networks playing a major role
in group discrimination: visuospatial network including bilateral superior
frontal gyrus, executive control network including bilateral middle and
inferior frontal gyrus, dorsla default mode network and anterior salience
network. These findings suggest that inter-functional-connectivity patterns
of brain regions can be used to classify subjects with PDD, PD-MCI, and
PD-SCI and that the key features which yielded high accuracy were mostly
within core resting-state networks.

E160
SPONTANEOUS INTEGRATION BETWEEN THE REPRESENTATION
OF NON-SYMBOLIC AND SYMBOLIC NUMBERS Ruizhe Liu1,2,3, Alli-

son Liu1,2, Christian Schunn1,2, Julie Fiez1,2,3, Melissa Libertus1,2,3; 1University of
Pittsburgh, 2Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh,
3
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA — Edu-

cated adults are able to represent numerical information in a non-symbolic and a symbolic format and flexibly switch between the two. Yet, it
is unclear how these formats are integrated in the human brain. Previous
studies have shown that a positive event-related potential (ERP) component peaking around 200 ms over posterior scalp sites, also called the P2p,
is sensitive to ratio differences in both numerical formats. Here, we examined adults’ neural activity (N=25), measured via ERPs, when they were
passively viewing non-symbolic and symbolic numbers simultaneously.
Each stimulus consisted of an Arabic numeral overlaid on a cloud of dots.
The dot quantity either matched or mismatched with the Arabic numeral.
Comparing ERPs to matched and mismatched trials yielded no differences
on the P2p. However, we also asked each participant to explicitly estimate
dot quantities in a separate behavioral task and observed that participants
tended to significantly underestimate the actual dot quantities that were
shown. After adjusting the dot quantities in the EEG experiment for this
underestimation bias, participants showed greater P2p amplitudes in the
adjusted mismatch condition than in the adjusted match condition. These
findings support the notion that adults spontaneously integrate non-symbolic and symbolic number formats, but that such integration is only visible
when the perceived quantity is considered.

2016 Annual Meeting	

E161
DOUBLE DISSOCIATION OF VALENCE AND VIVIDNESS DURING
IMAGINATION Trishala Parthasarathi1, Joseph W. Kable1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Recent work has shown that the default mode network (DMN)

is activated when imagining the future. However, it is unknown whether
different aspects of imagination engage different nodes of the DMN. Here,
we test how the vividness, valence, and temporal distance of an imagined
event differentially modulates BOLD activity. Twenty-four people were
scanned using fMRI while imagining scenarios manipulated for vividness,
valence, and temporal distance. Subjects rated each scenario for vividness
and valence. We analyzed our neuroimaging data using the general linear
model; during the imagination period, we included separate regressors for
comparing scenarios that were high versus low in vividness, high versus
low in valence, and high versus low in temporal distance. A region-of-interest analysis was also conducted using ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(vmPFC) and ventral striatum (VS) masks obtained from a previous
meta-analysis, as well as anatomically defined Left and Right hippocampus. At the whole brain level, we found increased BOLD activity in the
vmPFC, VS, and medial temporal regions when participants were imagining. Precuneus and hippocampus had increased activity for more vivid scenarios compared to less vivid scenarios, and greater activity was seen in the
vmPFC and VS for positive scenarios compared to negative scenarios. ROI
results confirmed that valence modulates activity in the vmPFC and VS, but
not hippocampus, while vividness modulates activity in the hippocampus,
but not vmPFC or VS. These results show that different aspects of imagination differentially modulate separate nodes of the default mode network.

OTHER
E162
THE SEMANTICS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE: MAPPING
STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION Natasha J Sakraney1, Jonathan H. Morgan1,

Scott Huettel1, Jim Moody1, Achim Edelmann1, Greg Appelbaum1; 1Duke University — As cognitive neuroscience research continues to proliferate, it

generates new knowledge about the linking between brain and behavior.
The primary units of such research are peer-reviewed articles that express
results of individual experimental studies. In the current project, we apply
network analysis techniques to the text of thousands of articles that report
findings from fMRI studies of human cognition in order to create, visualize,
and quantify the interrelations between anatomical and conceptual terms
that constitute the foundation of the discipline of cognitive neuroscience.
We compute statistical measures of the average path length, network density, and clustering coefficients to explore the semantic structure of the discipline and the evolution of the topics studied in this literature over time.
Two-year sliding window networks between 2004 and 2010 reveal distinct
trends wherein the average path length decreased, while density and clustering coefficient increased. These relationships indicate that the network
of terms is becoming more connected over time, but that this connectivity is not uniform over all areas of study with greater clustering in some
domains, such as social and visual neuroscience, reflecting increased specialization. Additional analysis of the specific shared terms in these clusters
at different times indicates that subdisciplines within cognitive neuroscience are becoming differentiated; they are changing from being flexible
parts of a larger literature into stabilized and distinct communities. This
meta-analysis therefore quantitatively demonstrates how the field of cognitive neuroscience is changing and can identify longitudinal trends and gaps
to be filled, while also suggesting profitable directions for future research.

THINKING: Other
E163
THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN INTROSPECTIVE AWARENESS AND
ACTIVITIES OF THE SEMANTIC SYSTEM Xu Xu1, Chunyan Kang2, Kaia
Sword1, Taomei Guo2; 1Penn State University at Harrisburg, 2Beijing Normal University — The primary goal of the present study was to determine whether

an individual’s level of introspective awareness, based on self-assessment,
relates to activities of the semantic system as evaluated by electrophysi-

Poster Session E
ological measures. In addition, the study investigated whether subjective
awareness report may demonstrate differential relations with the processing of different semantic categories. Thirty-five university students provided self-assessment on their levels of introspective awareness. Their brain
electrophysiological responses were recorded during performance on a
lexical decision task. Word stimuli included two different semantic categories: mental verbs, representing mental events and processes, and physical
verbs, representing physical actions and movements. Data analysis focused
on the N400 time window where individual differences in level of ERP
activities are considered representing differences in level of semantic activations. The results revealed close associations between awareness self-ratings and the N400 amplitudes. However, these observed associations did
not show substantial differences between mental and physical verb conditions. Furthermore, prominent gender differences emerged in the associations. For men, the associations showed a left hemisphere prominence;
for women, the associations displayed a bilateral pattern. These findings
indicate that the semantic system plays an important role in the mechanism
of higher-order conscious awareness, different domains of semantic knowledge may be equally involved in introspective awareness, and there may
be pronounced gender differences in the neurobiological basis of conscious
awareness. Further, the observed associations between the self-report and
the electrophysiological measures lend support to the validity of subjective
awareness and assessment of higher-order mental functioning.

NEUROANATOMY
E164
DEEP GRAY MATTER CHANGES IN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS Jonn
Kmech1, Esther Fujiwara1, Dana Cobzas1, Gregg Blevins1, Hongfu Sun1, Alan
Wilman1; 1University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada — In addition to inflamma-

tory and demyelinating processes, elevated iron levels in deep gray matter
structures (basal ganglia, thalamus) are increasingly recognized in multiple
sclerosis (MS). The functional significance of subcortical iron accumulation
vis-à-vis known MS-related atrophic changes remains to be determined. We
investigated sub-cortical changes (iron accumulation, atrophy) in MS-patients using quantitative MRI measures at very high field, and to relate
these to disease characteristics (disability, disease duration), demographics (age, gender), and cognitive performance. A total of 41 MS-patients (16
relapsing-remitting, 15 secondary progressive, 10 primary progressive) and
29 non-MS controls were assessed with 4.7 T magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) and the Brief Repeatable Battery of Neuropsychological Tests (BRBN). Regional volumes, transverse relaxation rates (R2*), and quantitative
susceptibility mapping (QSM) were assessed for four basal ganglia nuclei
and thalamus. Parameters in MS-patients were compared to those in controls and correlated with clinical, demographic and cognitive scores. Subcortical volumes were reduced in MS patients, with largest differences
in the thalamus of progressive MS patients. Iron accumulation measures
(R2*/QSM) showed more selective effects, limited to the putamen in progressive MS-patients. In the BRB-N, patients showed typical reductions in
memory and processing speed. Age and disability (EDSS) were negatively
correlated to subcortical volumes, and positively correlated to iron measures. In MS-patients, especially in those with the progressive subtype of
MS, cognition was related to thalamus volumes; thalamic and globus pallidus iron related to cognition, esp. delayed memory. In addition to atrophy,
iron changes in MS patients’ deep gray matter structures are functionally
relevant.

E165
DIFFERENTIAL AGING AND BLOOD PRESSURE EFFECTS ACROSS
CORPUS CALLOSUM SUBREGIONS: A LIFESPAN DTI STUDY

Stephanie Matijevic1, David Hoagey1, Karen Rodrigue1, Kristen Kennedy1; 1University of Texas at Dallas — Previous research indicates that callosal micro-

structural integrity is negatively impacted by aging in even healthy adults.
However, the regional specificity of those effects is less clear. The corpus
callosum is composed of several functionally distinct subregions, varying
in axonal composition and cortical projections, which may show differential
selectivity to aging. Elevated blood pressure may exert further detrimental
effects on white matter health and may influence estimates of aging effects
on brain structure. Thus, in the present study we used diffusion tensor

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

221

Poster Session E	
imaging to examine the effects of aging and pulse pressure across regional
callosal microstructure in 179 healthy individuals across the adult lifespan
(20–94 years of age). Region-of-interest guided deterministic tractography
was utilized to estimate fractional anisotropy (FA), radial diffusivity (RD)
and axial diffusivity (AD) within five callosal subregions: genu, anterior
midbody, posterior midbody, isthmus, and splenium. We found an Age x
Subregion interaction on FA, RD, and AD, where significant detrimental
effects of age were found on all regions (for FA, RD, and all but splenium
for AD); however aging effects were regionally differential, exhibiting an
anterior-to-posterior gradient of aging. Additionally, we found Age x Pulse
Pressure interactions on RD and AD, with higher pulse pressure associated
with poorer RD and AD in all callosal subregions, without regional specificity. These results suggest that callosal microstructure ages differentially
in an anterior-to-posterior gradient and that elevated blood pressure may
have a more global negative effect across all the subregions, eliminating
the relative preservation of posterior areas. Support: NIA grants AG-36848,
AG-36818

E166
DECREASES IN WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY LINKED TO PTSD IN
MILD TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Theresa Teslovich1, Ping-Hong Yeh1,

Priya Santhanam1, Mark Varvaris1, Terry R Oakes1, Gerard Riedy1,2, Lindell K
Weaver3,4; 1National Intrepid Center of Excellence (NICoE), Bethesda, MD, USA,
2
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA,
3
Intermountain LDS Hospital and Intermountain Medical Center, Salt Lake City,
UT, USA, 4University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA — Posttraumatic stress dis-

order (PTSD) is a disabling psychiatric condition affecting roughly 6.8%
of adults in the US. Among service members, rates of PTSD have been
estimated at up to 12-18%; often this risk is increased in the presence of
traumatic brain injury (TBI). This study investigates the relationship
between white matter (WM) integrity and PTSD in male service members
and veterans with mild TBI (mTBI). The group was subdivided into those
with (n=34, mean age=35.7(6.6)) and without (n=35, mean age=30.7(7.1))
a diagnosis of PTSD. Global probabilistic tractography of diffusion tensor
imaging (DTI) was performed using TRACULA to reconstruct the neural
WM tracts. Preprocessing included intra-subject registration of individual
diffusion-weighted images to the structural T1w image and then a common
template space, creation of cortical and WM masks from FreeSurfer reconstructions, and extraction of standard DTI metrics. Group analyses were
conducted using a linear mixed model to investigate the role of PTSD
and age within each tensor-based measure. A significant group effect was
seen in the right uncinate fasciculus (t(65)=3.31, corrected p=0.027), with
decreased fractional anisotropy (FA) in the comorbid PTSD mTBI group,
relative to the non-PTSD mTBI group. This decrease in FA was paired with
an increase in radial diffusivity (t(65)=-3.00, uncorrected p=0.004), indicative of regional de-myelination. These findings suggest the right uncinate
fasciculus plays an important role in the pathogenesis of PTSD in mTBI.
Abnormalities in this tract could result in the disruption of prefrontal
modulation of the limbic system (i.e. amygdala, hippocampus), potentially
manifesting as symptoms of PTSD.

E167
FOCAL TEMPORAL POLE ATROPHY AND NETWORK DEGENERATION IN SEMANTIC VARIANT PRIMARY PROGRESSIVE APHASIA
Jessica Collins1,2, Victor Montal3, Bradford Dickerson1,2; 1Massachusetts General
Hospital, 2Harvard Medical School, 3Sant Pau-Hospital — The Semantic Variant

of Primary Progressive Aphasia (svPPA) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease characterized by the progressive loss of semantic memory.
Despite a wealth of neuroimaging research that has associated svPPA with
a distributed pattern of cortical atrophy that is most prominent in the left
anterior temporal pole, there is little consensus regarding which region
within this heterogeneous structure is most damaged, which may indicate
the putative origin of neurodegeneration. In this study, we localized the
most consistent region of atrophy in svPPA using cortical thickness analysis and surface-based inter-subject registration in two independent patient
samples. Across both samples the point of maximal cortical atrophy was
located in same region of the left dorsolateral temporal pole. Individual
subject analyses localized the point of maximal atrophy for 100% of patients
in both svPPA samples to the same temporopolar region. Using resting

222

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
state functional connectivity (rs-fcMRI) we showed that the focal atrophy
point anchored a large-scale network in healthy young adults that closely
resembled the distributed atrophy pattern in svPPA and included several
brain regions that are commonly implicated in semantic memory. In both
patient samples, the magnitude of atrophy within a brain region was predicted by that region’s strength of functional connectivity to the focal atrophy point in healthy adults. These findings suggest that cortical atrophy
in svPPA may follow connectional pathways within a large-scale semantic
network that converges on the temporal pole.

E168
FRONTAL CORTICAL THICKNESS ASYMMETRY DIFFERENCES
IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER Hakeem Brooks1, Tracey A. Knaus2,
Helen Tager-Flusberg3, Jeremy D. Cohen1; 1Xavier University of Louisiana, 2Brain
and Behavior Program at Children’s Hospital, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, 3Boston University School of Medicine — Autism Spectrum

Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by verbal
and nonverbal communication deficits and repetitive behaviors. Numerous
studies have used voxel-based morphometry (VBM), a coordinate-based
methodology, to assess localized neuroanatomical differences in ASD.
Previous studies noted differences in brain regions implicated with social
cognition and behavior (medial orbitofrontal region, fusiform gyrus, and
frontal pole), language and communication (pars opercularis), and repetitive behaviors (medial orbitofrontal region and anterior cingulate cortex).
Surface-based morphometry (SBM), however, provides measurements of
surface area, cortical thickness, curvature, and cortical folding. The current
study investigated cortical thickness differences in males ASD (N=19) compared to controls (N=20) using FreeSurfer, a semi-automated image processing application that provides SBM measures. Based on previous anatomical
findings, it was hypothesized that cortical thickness would be different
in the pars triangularis, pars opercularis, medial orbitofrontal cortex, and
frontal pole between ASD and controls. After controlling for total brain
volume (TBV), no significant differences in cortical thickness were found in
any region-of-interest (ROI) between the two groups. However, significant
interactions were found among left-right asymmetry, group and TBV for
cortical thickness in the frontal pole and pars opercularis. There was also
a significant asymmetry by group by age interaction for cortical thickness
in pars opercularis. Connected brain networks function efficiently when
each connected region has the appropriate proportionality with the rest of
the brain. Therefore, the significant group differences in cortical thickness
asymmetry that vary with TBV suggest that there are broad network-based
changes of brain organizational structure in children with ASD.

E169
META-ANALYSIS OF PET IMAGING STUDIES OF ADULT AGE DIFFERENCES IN THE DOPAMINE SYSTEM Teresa Karrer1,2, Anika Josef3,

Rui Mata4, Evan Morris1, Gregory Samanez-Larkin1; 1Yale University, 2Technische
Universitaet Dresden, 3Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin,
4
University of Basel — Selective, qualitative summaries of the Positron Emis-

sion Tomography (PET) literature have described a strong negative relationship between age and dopamine function overall, but there are often
overlooked inconsistencies in the size of the effects. The goal of this study
was to perform a systematic meta-analysis of PET studies examining adult
age differences in dopamine synthesis capacity, receptors, and transporters
to yield quantitative measures of average effect sizes as well as examination
of variation in effects across studies. We identified candidate studies by first
(1) searching PubMed on the basis of defined MeSH terms (combinations of
”aging”, “PET”, and dopamine markers) and then by (2) searching the references within the papers from the PubMed search that met our inclusion
criteria. We included studies with healthy subjects and a minimum adult
age range of 30 years. We converted all reported main effects of age to correlation coefficients and then used these values in a random-effects model
to quantify the mean size of the age effect on dopamine synthesis capacity,
receptors (D1-like, D2-like), and transporters across studies. Our meta-analytic results yielded moderate to large, negative mean correlations between
age and both striatal and frontal cortical dopamine receptors and striatal
dopamine transporters. In contrast, there was much smaller (close to zero)
effect of age on synthesis capacity. This study more precisely quantifies

2016 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session E

prior claims of reduced dopamine functionality in age while also exploring the factors that account for variance in effects sizes – especially for D2
receptors (e.g., scanner resolution, ligands, study sample characteristics).

E170
SPECIFICITY IN LOCATION OF FACE- AND FOOD- SELECTIVE
ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX VALUE SIGNALS AND THEIR RELATIONSHIP TO INDIVIDUALIZED SULCOGYRAL ANATOMY Marisa
Patti1,2, Carly Hyde1,2, Kayleigh Adamson2, Hyden Zhang3, Sara Deitrick2, Vanessa
Troiani2; 1Bucknell University, 2Geisinger Autism and Developmental Medicine
Institute, 3Temple University — The orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) has an import-

ant function in codifying individual motivational behaviors. Here we characterized two types of motivational brain responses, food and social. First,
we identified the location of value signals in OFC for each individual in
our college student sample (N=28). Value signals were determined for each
individual by contrasting faces or food with all other objects using a variant
of a standard fMRI face localizer task that included faces, food, scenes, and
objects. Based on previous literature, we anticipated value signals for faces
to be medial and value signals for food to be lateral. Consistent with our
hypothesis, we found that medial value signals were more often associated
with faces (27/28 subjects), while only 14 subjects had medial food value
signals. Lateral value signals were found for both faces and food (27/28 for
food; 26/28 for faces). While lateral value signals were consistently present
for both faces and food, these were found in distinct sulcogyral locations
within lateral OFC. In a second analysis, we characterized the OFC sulcogyral pattern type bilaterally and found that individuals with the Type
II pattern (known to increase risk for schizophrenia; Lavoie et al. 2014)
were more likely to have atypical value signal locations. Atypical organization of the OFC architecture has been linked to psychiatric disorders and
more recently with quantitative traits that are associated with subclinical
manifestations of psychiatric illness. This suggests a possible link between
abnormal locations of value signals, uncommon sulcogyral anatomy, and
social and motivational behavior.

E171
SEROTONIN NEURONS EXPRESSING VESICULAR GLUTAMATE
TRANSPORTER-3 IN THE CAUDAL DORSAL RAPHE NUCLEUS
SHOW ENHANCED ACTIVITY IN DEPRESSIVE-LIKE BEHAVIOR
Jarret Williams1, Maria A. Mucci1, Martine M. Mirrione1; 1Quinnipiac University
— Previous studies have shown there is increased serotonergic neuronal

activity and serotonin (5-HT) release in the caudal dorsal raphe nucleus
(DRN) when animals are exposed to uncontrollable stress. Potentiated
caudal DRN 5-HT release appears necessary for the development of
depressive-like behavior in the learned helplessness (LH) model, though
the cellular mechanisms driving this release remains unclear. Vesicular glutamate transporter 3 (VGlut3) co-expression in serotoninergic neurons has
been shown to enhance 5-HT vesicular packaging. Therefore in this study,
we tested whether activation of neurons with co-expression of VGlut3 and
5-HT correlated with depressive-like behavior. Quantitative immunofluorescence of c-fos expressing 5-HT/VGlut3 neurons in the caudal DRN
revealed a statistically significant increase in activation of these co-expressing neurons in LH compared to resilience (p<0.05), specifically driven by
neurons in the far-caudal raphe region (-9.12 mm from bregma). Interestingly, the percentage of activated 5-HT non-VGlut3 neurons in the caudal
DRN was not significantly different between LH and resilience. Reduced
GABAergic regulation onto 5-HT/VGlut3 neurons during stress may promote vulnerability to behavioral helplessness and suggests blockade of
VGlut3 in the dorsal raphe may attenuate the overactive stress response
leading to depressive behavior.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

223

Poster Session F
ATTENTION: Other
F1
THE FUNCTION OF IGNORING A DISTRACTOR UNDER STRESS Rit-

suko Nishimura1; 1Aichi Shukutoku University — Stress in daily life is negative

experience and impairs cognitive performance (Staal, 2004). The present
study examined the function of ignoring a distractor under a stressful condition, using the Flanker task. This task requires participants to identify a
target while ignoring peripheral distractors. If they can ignore distractors
efficiently, the error rate will be same for the compatible and incompatible conditions. However, if they cannot, the error rate will be higher in
the incompatible condition than the compatible condition. Half of in the
participants were assigned to the stress group where they were instructed
that they had to speak for 3 minutes front of an audience and video camera
after the Flanker task. Participants in the non-stress were instructed they
had to perform a verbal frequency task without an audience and camera
after the Flanker task. Results showed that only the stress group showed
a higher error rate in the incompatible condition (F (1, 25) = 7.83, p = .009).
That is, the function of ignoring a distractor can be impaired by stress. This
function is known to be related to executive resources (Lavie, 2010). These
resources are depleted by anxiety and threatening situations (Johns et al.,
2008). Accordingly, an interpretation of the present results is that in stressful situations, executive resources are depleted because of anxiety, and this
leads to impairments in our ability to focus on the main task while ignoring
distractors.

F2
FOOD TYPE AND ERPS TO DIFFERENT KINDS OF FOODS: EVIDENCE FOR DISSOCIATION OF THE N2 AND P3 COMPONENTS
IN A GO/NO-GO TASK Frank DePalma1, Natalie Ceballos1, Rebecca Lopas1,
Andrew Vasquez1, Roger Samson1, Allison Zborowski1, Reiko Graham1; 1Texas
State University — Behavioral inhibition has been linked to impulsivity,

which is associated with negative health behaviors such as over-eating.
Event-related potential studies examining neural responses to foods vs.
nonfoods have demonstrated larger N2 and P3 components to foods. The
current study examined whether food type and/or preferences play a role in
these effects, as well as the role of variables such as body mass index (BMI)
or hunger. Nineteen healthy females (mean age = 23.2 years) completed
go/no-go tasks with either high calorie sweet or high calorie savory foods
as targets (counterbalanced). Self-reported BMI, food preferences, hunger,
restrained eating, and state/trait cravings were also assessed. Behavioral
analyses revealed greater accuracy for go relative to no-go trials, with no
differences for sweet or savory foods. N2 amplitudes over frontocentral
areas were largest for sweet foods, regardless of preferences; the N2 was
not sensitive to inhibitory processes. In contrast, P3 amplitudes were sensitive to go/no-go status but not to food type, being larger for no-go trials
especially over frontocentral areas. Correlational analyses of peak amplitudes and self-report variables revealed that amplitudes were not related
to self-report variables, with the exception of trait craving, which was negatively associated with P3 amplitudes. Overall, results suggest that the N2
and P3 elicited by food stimuli in a go/no-go task index separate processes.
The N2 was enhanced to sweet foods, converging with eye-tracking studies showing that females orient most quickly to sweet foods, regardless of
preferences. In contrast, the P3 was sensitive to processes associated with
behavioral inhibition.

F3
VALENCE OR SALIENCE? DIFFERENCES IN THE NEURAL SIGNATURE OF REWARD AND PUNISHMENT IN VISUAL ENCODING
Ludwig Barbaro1, Marius Peelen1, Clayton Hickey1; 1University of Trento, Italy —

Humans preferentially select reward-associated visual stimuli. However,
it is unclear whether this reflects a low-level bias toward reward cues or a
broader strategic propensity toward objects providing outcome-predictive
information. Here we test these valence and salience hypotheses. Partici-

224

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

pants were cued to detect examples of object categories – cars, trees, houses,
people – presented in scenes. For each category, detection resulted in either
cash reward, monetary loss, or neutral outcome. Importantly, errors in
critical conditions had a static cost (ie. +150 vs. +50 in positive condition,
-50 vs. -150 in negative condition). As such, participants were always motivated to respond correctly. We had two expectations: if selection is driven
by the value of prior outcome, participants should preferentially select and
encode reward-associated stimuli (valence model). However, if resources
are deployed to stimuli that are motivationally relevant, reward-predictive
and loss-predictive stimuli should be equally salient (salience model). In a
behavioural experiment performance closely followed the valence model:
accuracy was high when targets predicted positive outcome and low when
targets predicted negative outcome. Moreover, reward-predictive stimuli
disrupted search when they acted as distractors but loss-predictive stimuli were easy to ignore. In a second fMRI experiment we found the same
pattern in the encoding of stimuli representations in ventral visual cortex,
revealed using multivoxel pattern analysis. Moreover, stimulus-evoked
activity in the dopaminergic midbrain predicted the quality of these representations. The association of reward to a category of stimuli thus appears
to have a unique effect on selection that is independent of the drive to seek
information.

F4
THE EXISTENCE OF A PARTNER MODULATES COGNITIVE CONTROL Yumi Kimura1, Kazuhito Yoshizaki1; 1Aichi Shukutoku University — The

congruency effect observed in a stimulus-response compatibility paradigm is modulated by the proportion of the congruent trials in a given
block, which is termed the proportion congruency (PC) effect. The present
study examined the effect of task relevancy in the social context, on the PC
effect, using a go/no-go Flanker task. The participants completed a go/
no-go Flanker task, in which they were assigned two of four targets and
required to identify the two targets. In Experiment 1, we manipulated the
PC for assigned targets and no-go targets. The results showed the PC effect
depending on the PC of assigned targets. Experiment 2 demonstrated that
the PC effect did not appear when participants were informed that no-go
targets were assigned to another partner. Experiment 3 was conducted
that while the PC of targets assigned to participants was constant, the PC
of no-go targets assigned to a partner was manipulated by high and low
PC. The results showed the congruency effect was modulated by the PC
of the no-go targets. Experiment 4 was identical to Experiment 3, except
that participants were not informed of the existence of a partner assigned
to the no-go targets. The results showed that the congruency effect was not
modulated by the PC of the no-go targets. Taken together, when the task
relevancy of no-go targets is enhanced, visual selectivity inferred from congruency effect is modulated by the PC of a partner assigned to no-go targets
as well as the PC of his/her own targets.

F5
THE DE-CAFF STUDY: THE AFFECT OF CAFFEINE ON ATTENTION

Kanchan Sharma1, Scott Ankrett1, Thomas Davis1, Elizabeth Coulthard1; 1University of Bristol, England — Caffeine is the most frequently consumed stimu-

lant worldwide. However its potential to ameliorate attention impairment
in healthy ageing and conditions such as Dementia with Lewy Bodies is
unknown. We used a blinded, placebo-controlled, cross-over design to
explore whether caffeinated, compared to decaffeinated coffee, would
improve performance on experimental and real-world tasks of attention in
healthy older people. We assessed three broad areas of attention: alerting
(simple, choice and cognitive reaction times), orienting (rapid serial visual
presentation (RSVP) paradigm) and the executive network (Stroop task).
Digit span and walking while talking (WWT) tasks represented functional
measures of attention. 20 healthy older participants performed tests over a
nine day period with baseline testing on day 1 followed by caffeine abstinence. On Day 8 participants were provided with a caffeinated or de-caffeinated drink 1 hour prior to testing. On Day 9 the alternate drink was
received. The full paradigm was performed at both 62 and 100 mg caffeine
doses. Data from twenty healthy elderly participants demonstrates that at

2016 Annual Meeting	
low dose in fact caffeine only reduces (impairs) reliable digit span (p=0.04)
whereas at higher doses caffeine improves cognitive reaction time (p=0.01).
There was no difference on RSVP, Stroop task, digit span or WWT. This
suggests the effects of caffeine are dose dependent, benefits require a
higher dose and are specific to the alerting network. Future work will use
this paradigm to establish any potential for caffeine to provide meaningful
improvement in quality of life in neurological illnesses including Dementia
with Lewy Bodies.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
F6
SAME/OTHER SEX ATTRACTIVENESS IN FEMALE HETEROSEXUALS: AN EYE-TRACKING STUDY Tisha Dudley1, Judith Easton1, Natalie
Ceballos1, Nina Rodriguez1, Roger Samson1, John Treffalls1, Reiko Graham1;
1
Department of Psychology, Texas State University — Research suggests that

female judgments of male attractiveness involve attention to body regions
that provide biologically-relevant information about mate fitness, which
vary depending on body composition (e.g., musculature, body fat). Less is
known about how women make judgments about other women. The current study used eye-tracking to examine gaze patterns (e.g., duration to
first fixation, total fixation duration) while heterosexual women (N = 25,
Mage = 21.7 years) made attractiveness judgments about muscular, lean,
overweight, and normal weight male (M) and female (F) bodies. Ratings
varied as a function of body type and sex, with normal weight bodies rated
highest (M = F), followed by muscular bodies (M > F), lean bodies (M < F),
and overweight bodies (M < F). Comparison of gaze metrics across body
types revealed that eye movements also varied as a function of body type
and sex, especially fixation patterns across body regions. Exploratory correlations between ratings and metrics for the different body types revealed
that eye movements to male bodies (except heavier bodies) were more
likely to be correlated with attractiveness. In comparison, participant body
mass was more likely to be related to ratings of female bodies (except lean
and muscular bodies). Overall, results suggest that appraisals of attractiveness differ depending on the sex of the object; male attractiveness is associated to attention to specific body areas, while female attractiveness is more
self-referential. Results are discussed in the context of evolutionary theories
of attraction/competition.

ATTENTION: Other
F7
A WANDERING MIND DOESN’T LEARN Judy Xu1, Janet Metcalfe1, David
Friedman1,2; 1Columbia University, 2New York State Psychiatric Institute — Pre-

vious studies with event-related potentials (ERPs) have shown that mind
wandering is associated with attenuated sensory and cognitive processing.
Mind wandering has also been associated with poorer learning. However,
to date investigators have not assessed the relation between mind wandering and learning-related processing. In our experiment, while recording
ERPs, we randomly probed participants for their attentional state (‘on task’
or ‘mind wandering’) while they studied a series of English-Spanish word
pairs. At the end, participants were tested on their learning. There was no
difference in early sensory ERP components between on-task and mind
wandering states at parietal-occipital sites. However, there was a significant difference in a late slow wave from 300-650ms, such that, relative to
on-task trials, mind wandering was associated with attenuated processing.
Further, processing during mind wandering was not significantly different
from baseline (or 0). When we categorized the same events by final test
accuracy, a very similar pattern emerged: ERPs to incorrect, relative to
correct, items showed a significantly attenuated slow wave. This suggests
that the slow wave might index of encoding-relating processing. As the
mind wandering ERPs were very similar to those for inaccurate word pairs,
these data identify a potential mechanism for why learning suffers when
the mind goes offline: namely that there is no substantive encoding-related
processing, which would then result in poorer performance.

Poster Session F

F8
FOOD PREFERENCES AND GAZE PATTERNS TO COMPLEX FOOD
IMAGES Allison Zborowski1, Oleg Komogortsev2, Natalie Ceballos1, John
Traffalls1, Reiko Graham1; 1Department of Psychology, Texas State University,
2
Department of Computer Science, Texas State University — Research has

shown that in females, attentional biases to foods vary as a function of
body mass index (BMI) and food type. The current study examined eye
gaze to different foods when multiple images competed for attention. Gaze
patterns were monitored while women (N = 58) viewed 2 x 3 arrays of different food images (high calorie sweet, high calorie savory, and low calorie
foods) and ranked them in terms of preferences. Estimates of attentional
orienting (duration to first fixation) and maintenance (total fixation duration) to the different image types were derived, as well as BMI, hunger,
cravings, and restrained eating. Preferences for savory foods were higher
than those for sweet and low calorie foods; however, with respect to attentional capture, they were looked at last. In contrast, total fixation durations
were more similar to preferences: women looked longer at savory foods,
followed by sweet, then low calorie foods. Follow-up correlational analyses
confirmed that preferences were highly related to fixation times across all
food groups; higher preferences were associated with longer fixations to
those foods, while duration to first fixation was unrelated to preferences.
Finer grained analyses of most preferred foods across the arrays confirmed
that most preferred foods were looked at longer than other foods, with
heavier participants fixating longer on savory foods relative to their lighter
counterparts. Overall, results suggest that the ability of a certain food to
initially capture attention is less important in predicting preferences than
its ability to maintain attention over time.

F9
A COMPARISON OF ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS IN
WORKING MEMORY-GUIDED ATTENTION, EXOGENOUS ATTENTION, AND ENDOGENOUS ATTENTION Caiqi Chen1, Guifang Fu2, Tian

Hong1; 1South China Normal University, 2Guangdong University of Foreign Studies
— Using a spatial cuing paradigm, with abstract symmetrical image stimuli,
the present study conducted two experiments examining the differences
between electrophysiological mechanisms of working memory-guided
attention (WMA), exogenous attention, and endogenous attention. Experiment 1 investigated the relationship between WMA and exogenous attention in four conditions: 1) a WMA condition, in which the target was cued
only by working memory content without peripheral cuing; 2) a peripheral cuing condition, where the target was cued solely by a peripheral
cue; 3) a WMA+ peripheral cuing condition, in which the target was preceded by both cues in order to examine a possible coordination effect; and
a 4) WMA/ peripheral cuing condition, where two target locations were
cued by WMA and peripheral cuing respectively to examine competition
between cues. Experiment 2 was identical to experiment 1, except that the
peripheral cue was replaced with a central cue. Behavioral data showed
typical cuing effects for the three attentional orienting categories as well as
a competitive effect, but no coordinating effect. ERP results for the WMA
condition showed a robust P2 component at anterior scalp sites, a less positive P300 compared to exogenous attention conditions, and a more positive P300 compared to endogenous attention at posterior electrodes. These
results suggest that WMA involves electrophysiological mechanisms distinct from exogenous and endogenous attention, supporting the selection
history accounts of attention, which emphasize that priority is determined
by more than just goal and stimulus-driven selection, suggesting that a topdown versus bottom-up dichotomy is an inadequate taxonomy of attentional control.

ATTENTION: Spatial
F10
WHITE MATTER DAMAGE AND VISUOSPATIAL IMPAIRMENT
AFTER TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY. Meghan D. Caulfield1, Kimberly

Hreha1,2,3, Peii Chen1; 1Kessler Foundation, West Orange NJ, USA, 2Kessler
Institute for Rehabilitation, West Orange NJ, USA, 3Teachers College Columbia
University, New York NY, USA — Cognitive deficits, including visuospatial
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

225

Poster Session F	
impairment, occur after traumatic brain injury (TBI). However, one particular disorder of spatial attention has been under-investigated in TBI. This
disorder, called spatial neglect, is characterized by a failure or slowness to
respond, orient, or initiate action towards one side of space. Spatial neglect
often occurs after unilateral stroke. Recently, we found it is also common
following TBI in inpatient rehabilitation. This study explores whether the
neural networks critical for neglect in stroke are also critical for neglect in
TBI. We examined 4 individuals with TBI (2 male, 2 female; M=67 years; 2
with neglect) in an inpatient rehabilitation facility, using behavioral measures of spatial neglect and diffusion MRI. Given that lesions involving the
superior temporal gyrus (STG) and superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF)
are critical for spatial neglect after stroke, we seeded in the STG (10 mm
radius), along the SLF to examine this tract. In the TBI patients with neglect
symptoms, the SLF was disconnected between the temporal lobe and the
parietal lobe. This tract remained intact in the other two patients who
showed no neglect-related deficits. We also compared fractional anisotropy
(FA) of the STG using a ratio of right to left STG. The non-neglect patients
had similar FA in both hemispheres (1.00) while the neglect patients had
reduced FA in the right compared to left STG (0.77). These results suggest
there are similar underlying neural mechanisms for spatial neglect after TBI
as previously reported after stroke.

F11
CAUSAL REGIONAL CONTRIBUTIONS IN VISUOSPATIAL NEGLECT
DERIVED FROM GAME-THEORETICAL LESION INFERENCE Monica

N. Toba1,2, Melissa Zavaglia3,4, Federica Rastelli1, Pascale Pradat-Diehl5, Antoni
Valero-Cabre1, Claus C. Hilgetag3; 1Cerebral Dynamics, Plasticity and Rehabilitation Group, Frontlab, Brain and Spine Institute, Paris, France, ICM, CNRS
UMR7225, Inserm U1127 - UPMC-P6 UMR S 1127 , 2Laboratory of Functional
Neurosciences (EA 4559), University Hospital of Amiens and University of Picardy
Jules Verne, 3Department of Computational Neuroscience, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 4School of Engineering and Science, Jacobs University Bremen, Germany, 5Service de Rééducation et Medicine
Physique, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP — Right brain damaged patients

with visuospatial neglect fail to orient and respond to stimuli situated on
the left side of space. Anatomical correlates of this clinical condition are
debated with recent studies showing the role of a complex fronto-parietal
network. In the present study, we used a game-theoretical lesion analysis
approach in order to investigate causal regional contributions and interactions between nodes of the attentional orienting networks in 25 patients
presenting neglect as assessed with a task battery including line bisection,
bells and letter cancellation. We selected several regions of interest (ROIs)
identified in studies investigating attentional orienting: frontal eye fields
(FEF), intraparietal sulcus (IPS), inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), temporo-parietal junction (TPJ) and the inferior occipital gyrus. For each ROI in each
patient, we quantified the number of lesioned voxels. For each behavioural
task, functional contributions were computed with a multi-perturbation
Shapley value Analysis (MSA) (Keinan et al. 2004), which allows to infer
causal regional contributions from behavioural performance after multiple
lesions, treating brain regions as players in a coalition game. The highest
causal contributions were observed for the IPS and TPJ. Functional interactions derived from MSA revealed synergisms between IPS and TPJ (for
bells cancellation and line bisection) and between TPJ and IFG (for bells
and letter cancellation). By using a game-theory-based method, we could
infer causal contributions and functional interactions of specific anatomical
regions in neglect. The present findings may aid the design of rehabilitation
programmes.

F12
SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL FEATURES OF THE FORMATION OF
LONG-TERM MEMORY BIASES AND THE EFFECTS ON SUBSEQUENT PERCEPTION Andrew Quinn1, Eva Zita Patai1, Kate Watkins2, Mark
Woolrich1, Anna Christina Nobre1; 1Oxford Centre for Human Brain Activity, University of Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Department of Experimental Psychology,
University of Oxford, United Kingdom — Spatial and contextual associations in

long-term memory are known to guide attention through top-down biasing of sensory processing. The underlying neural network is thought to be
centered around the hippocampus, and theta-band activity has been impli-

226

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
cated in the integration of information across brain areas. We were interested in how the encoding of spatial locations of objects in complex scenes
would develop across learning, and how this would relate to deployment
of attention to those spatial locations in a subsequent memory-guided
attention paradigm. In this study, we used magnetoencephalography
(MEG) and complementary functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
in order to reveal the spatial and temporal dynamics of the brain areas
involved during the incremental learning of spatial contextual associations,
and how this relates to neural and behavioural signatures of memory-based
perceptual facilitation. We found increases of activation in the network of
brain regions implicated in forming spatial contextual memories, involving hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, and precuneus, as well as intraparietal
sulcus and frontal eye-fields. Cross-frequency coupling of theta phase and
gamma power was found to increase with contextual learning across this
network. Brain activity in the theta band implicated in learning correlated
with behavioral benefits of memory-guided attention in a subsequent attention-orienting task. Our results reveal co-activation of traditionally segregated memory and attention networks within different frequency bands,
which interact during encoding, as well as predict the strength of memory-based attentional bias.

F13
MAPPING HUMAN FRONTAL AND PARIETAL CORTEX FOR ATTENTION, SACCADES, AND HAND MOVEMENTS USING 7 TESLA
FMRI Trenton Jerde1, Philip Burton2, Malin Björnsdotter3, James Hedges1; 1New
York University, 2University of Minnesota, 3Linköping University, Sweden — Fron-

toparietal cortex contains topographic maps that prioritize goal-relevant
information in space. We tested the hypothesis that priority maps selectively communicate a goal state to the different effector systems. To identify
brain regions for saccades, subjects made saccades to targets in one of 12
locations around a central fixation. To identify maps of covert attention,
subjects systematically shifted their covert attention around 12 locations in
the visual periphery. These brain areas were then investigated further in
two event-related fMRI studies with the following three epochs in which:
(i) an effector-free directional cue appeared in one of the four visual quadrants, prioritizing that location in space; (ii) a centrally presented ‘e’ or
‘h’ prioritized an eye or hand movement on a trial; and (iii) a perceptual
decision task was followed by an immediate movement. The latter two
tasks differed in that the direction of movement may or may not have been
known before the third epoch. Saccades and fixation were quantified by
eye tracking in the scanner, and hand movements were measured using a
joystick. Images were collected using 7 Tesla multiband EPI of the whole
brain with a 1.6 mm voxel resolution. We found activation in frontoparietal
cortex that was saccade-dominant, attention-dominant, or overlapping. We
also found subregions selective for the direction of an upcoming eye or
hand movement. These results show that the prioritization of eye and hand
movements differs in frontoparietal cortex, and that its subregions are differentially involved in the transient dynamics of attention and action.

F14
HOME-BASED ON-LINE WORKING MEMORY TRAINING AND
ATTENTION TRAINING FOLLOWING STROKE. SPECIFIC COGNITIVE EFFECTS AND GENERALIZED BENEFITS. Tom Manly1, Polly

Peers1, John Duncan1, Adam Hampshire2, Duncan Astle1; 1Medical Research
Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, 2Imperial College, London
— Cognitive impairments are common following stroke and associated with

poor outcomes. Here we describe a study in which 20 stroke survivors were
allocated to home-based progressive Working Memory Training (Cogmed)
or a similar, novel on-line training battery that emphasised attention to
onscreen information rather than retention of a sequence. Participants completed approximately 20 minutes training a day over 2-weeks. Performance
on the training tasks improved steadily in both conditions and, compared
with a no-treatment, both were associated with significant gains in participants’ self-reported cognition and mood function. Training was also associated with gains on untrained outcome measures. Attention training was
followed by significant reductions in spatial bias and increased capacity
to take in information at a glance. In contrast, Working Memory Training
gains were greatest on untrained spatial recall tasks. Crucially, most participants were able to self-administer the training effectively, and reported
subjectiv- benefits. The results are an encouraging indication that inexpen-

2016 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session F

sive home-based computerised training may be well-tolerated and lead to
specific and generalised improvements in function and mood following
stroke. Further work is required to replicate and examine long-term benefits and dose-related effects.

F15
MODELING AUDITORY SPATIAL ATTENTION WITH AI CONSTRAINT-BASED APPROACHES Maxwell T. Anderson1, Jaelle Scheuerman1, Jesse A. Benzell1, K.B. Venable1, Edward J. Golob1; 1Tulane University —

It is well-established that spatial attention can be allocated as a gradient
that diminishes from a central focus. Our recent auditory spatial attention
experiments showed that reaction time as a function of distance from the
attended location had an inverted u-shaped curve. This pattern of reaction time suggests a more complex gradient that is well-fit by quadratic
functions, suggesting two variables. This project modeled reaction time in
four experiments (n=83) to inform basic characteristics of a computational
model of auditory spatial attention. Our model uses basic ideas of topdown and bottom-up attentional control from verbal models (Baddeley &
Hitch, 1974; Cowan, 1988). There are three main components of our computational model: goal map, saliency map, and priority map. Each unidimensional map contains a semicircular vector quantifying attentional bias
across the horizontal plane (180°). The priority map is comprised of the goal
and saliency maps representing top-down and bottom-up spatial attention.
In a subsequent study, differences in saliency map standard deviations,
corresponding to breadth of attentional bias, modeled the pattern of reaction times with excellent (-90° r2=.93; 0° r2=.98) or good (+90°, r2=.48) fits. It
was observed that obtaining good fit required the peak bias for the saliency
map to be less than half that of the goal map. AI methods were used to further refine this fit. Overfitting was avoided by constraining model parameters with values from previous experiments. Beyond predicting results,
changes in the maps made by AI constraints provided insights into general
attentional dynamics.

F16
ATTENTION EFFECTS IN EARLY VISUAL CORTEX RELATED TO
CONFLICT ADAPTATION Rebecca Waugh1, Jennifer Barredo1,2, Kerstin
1

1 1

2

Unger , Michael Worden ; Brown University, Providence VA Medical Center —

Behavioral responses to visual stimuli become slower and less accurate
when they are presented amongst incompatible stimuli. This stimulus
compatibility effect is reduced when the previous trial was incompatible.
This observation, termed the congruency sequence effect (CSE), is thought
to emerge from adjustments in selective attention in response to previous
incompatibility. However, the specific attentional mechanisms underlying the CSE and the stages of perceptual processing involved are unclear.
Some evidence indicates that conflict adaptation is limited to excitatory
attentional modulations (enhancement of task-relevant features) later in
visual processing, while other evidence suggests the involvement of early
visual mechanisms. We investigated whether conflict-driven spatial attention alters processing in early visual regions and whether such modulations include both enhancement of task-relevant signals and suppression
of task-irrelevant signals. In an fMRI experiment, participants performed
a spatial flanker task in which we manipulated levels of prior conflict. For
each participant, we defined regions of interest within primary visual cortex
corresponding to the spatial locations of the central target and peripheral
distractors. Behavioral results showed that the stimulus compatibility effect
was smaller after incompatible than compatible trials. Imaging data suggest that modulation associated with conflict adaptation occurred in central
target but not peripheral distractor regions. The target response was amplified following incompatible trials but diminished after compatible trials.
The effects depended on the number of compatible/incompatible trials
preceding the current trial. These preliminary findings are consistent with
earlier work suggesting that conflict-induced spatial attention mechanisms
modulate processing as early as in primary visual cortex.

F17
MEMORY AND ATTENTION FIELDS IN THE HUMAN VISUAL
SYSTEM Anne Martin1, Liang Wang1,2, Yuri Saalmann1,3, Avgusta Shestyuk4,

Nathan Crone5, Josef Parvisi6, Robert Knight4, Sabine Kastner1; 1Princeton University, 2Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3University of Wisconsin, Madison, 4Uni-

versity of California, Berkeley, 5The Johns Hopkins Hospital, 6Stanford University
— Visual processing has traditionally been thought to occur along a ventral

“what” and a dorsal “where” pathway. However, human functional brain
imaging studies suggest that the ventral stream carries spatial information
in addition to coding for objects, and the dorsal stream serves not only spatial cognition but also object vision. Detailed electrophysiological data on
spatial selectivity across the visual hierarchy have not been reported thus
far. Here, we analyzed ECoG signals from 6 epilepsy patients performing
an Eriksen flanker task variant. Following a spatial cue and variable delay
interval, subjects differentiated between two shapes at the cued location in
an array of distracters. Using our probabilistic atlas of the human visual
system we found that about half of the electrodes located in visual areas
had spatially selective cue-elicited activity, or “response fields”. High
frequency broadband enhancement and alpha suppression continued to
signal the location of the up-coming target during the cue-target delay
when no visual stimulation was present, a “memory field” maintaining an
internal representation of space. Attention-related, spatially specific modulation persisted in response to the target in the form of an “attention field”.
Memory and attention fields were found throughout the dorsal and ventral
visual pathways, with strongest signals in the areas most closely associated
with object and shape processing, i.e. posterior-parietal cortex and the lateral occipital complex. The representation of space across the visual hierarchy in both low and high frequency bands suggests a parallel functionality
of processing that may integrate information transfer across these disparate
cortical areas.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Development &
aging
F18
MOTIVATION AND LEARNING SYSTEMS IN THE ADOLESCENT
BRAIN Samantha DePasque1, Adriana Galvan1; 1University of California, Los
Angeles — Adolescents exhibit a peak in reward sensitivity relative to chil-

dren and adults. This phenomenon is due to a developmental imbalance
between the more rapidly developing affective systems (e.g., the striatum
and amygdala) versus the relatively immature cognitive control systems
(e.g., prefrontal cortex) of the adolescent brain. This hyper-sensitivity to
rewards is thought to drive adolescents’ heightened propensity for riskand reward-seeking; however, the same network that is responsible for this
heightened reward sensitivity is also known to be heavily implicated in
feedback-based learning. The present study sought to determine whether
ontogenetic changes in this system may also influence adolescents’ ability
to learn from performance-related feedback. Early- to mid-adolescents and
adults completed a learning task to assess developmental differences in
feedback-based learning. Adolescents and adults both exhibited an ability
to learn from feedback, and feedback engaged a similar network in both
age groups, encompassing the dorsal and ventral striatum, medial prefrontal cortex, and posterior cingulate cortex. Consistent with the observation
of heightened striatal sensitivity during adolescence, we found evidence
of exaggerated responses to feedback valence in the adolescent striatum.
Furthermore, in the amygdala, the threat of evaluation more strongly influenced feedback responses for adolescents than for adults, suggesting that
developmental factors may also render adolescents more susceptible to the
effects of motivational context on learning.

F19
INTEROCEPTIVE SENSITIVITY FACILITATES EMOTION REGULATION AMONG OLDER ADULTS Kameko Halfmann1, Marcus Haustein2,
Natalie Denburg2; 1Saint Norbert College, 2University of Iowa — Although aware-

ness of bodily feedback (i.e., interoceptive sensitivity) declines with natural aging, a growing body of research suggests that emotional functions
are preserved, and may even improve with age. However, most research
focuses on emotional experience and well-being rather than the successful
use of emotions to promote adaptive behavior. Successful emotion regulation is vital for emotions to be an asset to social and cognitive functions,
rather than a detriment. We aimed to examine the relationship between
interoceptive awareness (i.e., awareness of one’s visceral and bodily states)
and emotion regulation among older adults. We show that individual differences in interoceptive sensitivity (IS) relate to successful emotion regula-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

227

Poster Session F	
tion. We used a heartbeat detection task to measure IS and had three central
results. First, older adults with higher IS reported greater use of regulation
strategies, such as emotion suppression and cognitive reappraisal. Second,
older adults with higher IS were more successful at reducing negative emotions using cognitive reappraisal. Third, older adults with higher IS were
more likely to engage the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, a cognitive control
region, when using cognitive reappraisal. Taken together, these results suggest that IS facilitates emotion regulation among older adults. IS may serve
as a marker of successful emotional aging. Also, training older adults to
develop IS may improve emotion regulation and cognitive functions that
rely on emotion regulation, such as decision-making.

F20
THE NOISY, SOCIAL BRAIN: MULTIVARIATE PATTERNS OF BOLD
VARIANCE PREDICT AUTISTIC SPECTRUM PHENOTYPES AND
EPIGENETIC VARIABILITY ON THE OXYTOCIN RECEPTOR GENE

Tyler Santander1, Jessica J. Connelly1, James P. Morris1; 1University of Virginia
— The human brain is a complex, hierarchical dynamical system whose

micro- and macroscale components interact to produce myriad mental
states. In this study, we sought to model spatially-distributed cortical networks related to social perception in addition to biochemical markers—
namely, DNA methylation on the oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR)—thought
to mediate social behavior. Toward that end, healthy young adults underwent resting-state fMRI and provided blood samples for epigenotyping.
They additionally completed the Autism-Spectrum Quotient (AQ) to determine how these macroscale-neural and microscale-molecular factors relate
to the broad autism phenotype (BAP). Resting fMRI data were extensively
processed to correct for head motion; we then computed both temporal and
spectral measures of BOLD variability for each individual in a voxelwise
fashion. Finally, using Bayesian relevance vector regression, we attempted
to decode BAP and OXTR methylation levels from multivariate patterns
of BOLD variability in the anterior salience network (aSN) and dorsal
default mode network (dDMN). Results show that temporal and spectral
BOLD variance in the aSN significantly predict individual differences in
both OXTR methylation and BAP-related traits; however, BOLD variability in the dorsal DMN is only predictive of OXTR methylation, suggesting
that DMN function may be regulated by these molecular factors without
directly contributing to behavioral outcomes. Together, these findings may
provide support for “noisy brain” hypotheses of autistic spectrum phenotypes. Moreover, they bolster recent hypotheses regarding the role of oxytocin in autistic spectrum behaviors, suggesting that these traits result from
deficits in oxytocin’s ability to modulate the salience of social information.

F21
TOWARD A HEDONIC THEORY OF EXERCISE BEHAVIORS: ACUTE
EXERCISE SELECTIVELY INCREASES THE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF REWARD AND AFFECTIVE BRAIN SYSTEMS IN OLDER
ADULTS Timothy B. Weng1, Gary L. Pierce1, Warren G. Darling1, Derik Falk1,
Vincent A. Magnotta1, Michelle W. Voss1; 1The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA —

Older adults represent the highest proportion of sedentary adults, despite
their knowledge of the health benefits associated with physical activity and
exercise or their intentions to engage in such behaviors. Recent evidence
suggests that self-reported affective responses during exercise are important predictors of future exercise initiation and maintenance. How are these
affective signals represented in the brain? In the current study, we tested
the hypothesis that an acute exercise session selectively targets a network
of brain regions that are involved in reward-based decision making and
affect processing. We assessed functional changes among these regions by
collecting resting-state fMRI before and immediately after 13 older participants completed two within-subjects exercise conditions during separate
counter-balanced sessions. During the active condition, participants cycled
at a moderate intensity, and during the passive condition, their legs were
moved by motorized pedals on the same machine and at the same pedal
rate as in the active condition. We found that active exercise increased
the functional connectivity (FC) within the reward and affective network
(p<0.01), whereas passive exercise by the same subjects yielded no significant changes. In comparison, neither condition produced changes in FC
among a network of primary sensory regions. We interpret these findings
as evidence that active exercise can elicit an affective brain representation
that may serve to bias behavioral actions when individuals are later faced

228

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
with the decision to exercise. This suggests that the acute brain response
to exercise may help to prospectively predict changes in future physical
activity and exercise behaviors.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
F22
NEGATIVE AFFECT ENHANCES COGNITIVE CONTROL Andrea A

Mueller1, James F Cavanagh1; 1University of New Mexico — Pavlovian biases

affect learning and behavior due to an innate pairing of reward seeking
with action invigoration and punishment avoidance with action suppression. We sought to explain how emotional events affect Pavlovian biases,
and how cognitive control can be used to overcome them. Our task presented negative and positive emotion-inducing pictures prior to imperative
cues with orthogonalized action / outcome pairings. We defined Pavlovian
congruent conditions as action- outcome congruence (go-to-win, nogo-toavoid) whereas Pavlovian conflict conditions were those in which action
and outcome contrast (go-to-avoid, nogo-to-win). Prior work has indicated
that good performance in conflict conditions is associated with the application of cognitive control (defined by frontal midline theta power in the
EEG). Behavioral results revealed that negative images boosted cognitive
control, as measured by better accuracy in conflict conditions. Time-frequency analyses indicated that stimuli primed by negative images were
associated with a stronger correlation between mid-frontal theta power and
behavioral accuracy in avoidance conditions (go-to-avoid, nogo-to-avoid).
These findings suggest that negative emotions may incidentally induce topdown control. Collectively, these findings bolster claims of domain general
operations of midcingulate cortex which is thought to integrate both negative affect and control.

F23
REWARD DISTRACTERS AND WORKING MEMORY FILTERING
Tara Miskovich1, Kenneth Bennett1, Daniel Stout1, Christine Larson1; 1University
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee — Reward stimuli capture attention involuntarily,

much like other motivationally relevant or salient stimuli (e.g., threat), even
when they are task-irrelevant (Anderson et al., 2011). Moreover, affective
distracters have preferential access to working memory (WM; Stout et al.,
2013). The current study assessed the ability to efficiently filter reward-distracters from WM using an event related component, contralateral delay
activity (CDA), which indexes items held in WM (Vogel & Machizawa,
2004). Participants completed a WM change detection task with distracters
that were previously associated, but no longer associated with monetary
reward. Although we predicted participants would demonstrate greater
CDA amplitude when distracters were of high versus low reward, results
indicate that previously high-rewarded distracters did not impact filtering
efficiency compared to low-rewarded (p > 0.9) and neutral distracters (p >
0.9), keeping with a previous report (Gong et al., 2014). In early trials of the
change detection task, we found evidence that WM capacity was impaired
compared to the no distracter condition when previously rewarded distracters were present (ps < 0.03), an effect not seen with neutral distracters present. However, there was no difference between reward distracters
(high and low), suggesting this may be due to contingent capture from
previously studied targets. Results may indicate that attentional capture
by irrelevant reward has a limited impact on WM compared to emotionally-neutral distracters.

F24
EEG Β ENHANCEMENT AND SUPPRESSION REFLECT PERSONAL
VERSUS VICARIOUS EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCE Taylar Grossman1,
Barbera Dylan1, C. Chad Woodruff1; 1Northern Arizona University — EEG β (14-

30Hz) rhythms have been found variously to increase (β enhancement) or
decrease (β suppression) in power. β enhancement/suppression may reflect
first-person versus vicarious experience of emotion, respectively. Similarly
to ų suppression (8-13Hz), β suppression may relate to mirror processing.
Given studies that show self-other differences in mu suppression relate to
self-reported perspective-taking (PT), we investigated whether self-other
differences in the β range relate to self-reported empathy. We presented

2016 Annual Meeting	
participants with videos (motion) and photographs (static) of emotional
faces during an emotion judgment task. Half the faces displayed were the
participant’s face (self) while the other half were faces of strangers (other),
displaying one of four emotions: happy, sad, angry, neutral. Participants
also completed the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI) and the Empathy Quotient (EQ). A 2 × 2 × 3 RM ANOVA (image type (video, photo),
task (self, other), electrode (F3, Fz, F4) revealed significant differences in
β power between self and other stimuli in response to static (p<.05) but
not in response to moving faces (video; p>.05). Negative correlations were
seen between PT and frontal electrode amplitude (F3, Fz) in the other task.
Additionally, a positive correlation obtained between PT and self-other
differences in F3 power response to static stimuli. Additional correlations
between power and various subscales of the IRI (e.g personal distress and
empathic concern) also obtained. These data replicate previous research
demonstrating dissociations between β enhancement and suppression and
they further characterize the relationship between the EEG β-range and
empathy.

F25
NEURAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING REWARD CIRCUITRY IN
POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER Sarah Boukezzi1, Pierre-François

Rousseau1, Bruno Nazarian1, Valérie Guyon2, Zendjidjian Xavier2, Hialaveran
Paul3, Florian Nicolas4, Christelle Baunez1, Eric Guedj1, Stéphanie Khalfa1;
1
Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone, CNRS-UMR 7289, Marseille, France,
2
APHM, Conception, CUMP, Marseille, France, 3Service de psychiatrie de l’Hôpital d’Instruction des Armées, Alphonse Lavéran, Marseille, France, 4Service de
psychiatrie de l’Hôpital d’Instruction des Armées, Sainte Anne, Marseille, France
— Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) is an anxiety disorder that can

develop after experiencing or witnessing a traumatic event. Anhedonia,
or diminished interest in, and inability to experience pleasure are a key
feature of PTSD. It has been recently suggested that this may result from
deficits in reward mechanisms. However, the question of whether PTSD is
associated with a dysfunctional reward processing remains largely unexplored and little is known regarding the underlying neural networks. The
present study aimed at investigating the expectancy and outcome phases
of reward processing in PTSD patients. Participants with PTSD and healthy
matched controls underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging while
performing a monetary incentive delay task. During the task, participants
were cued to anticipate and to respond to a rapidly presented target to
gain or avoid losing varying amounts of money. The preliminary results
indicated that during the anticipation and the gain outcomes phases, PTSD
participants showed a reduced activation in the basal ganglia relative to
healthy matched controls. Conversely, that was not the case during the loss
anticipation phase, in which the PTSD participants showed an increased
activation in the basal ganglia relative to healthy matched controls. These
findings suggest that dysfunctional reward-related activations may be
associated with dysfunctions in the reward pathway on PTSD patients.
Specifically, and in agreement with the persistence of anhedonia in PTSD,
these preliminary findings imply that PTSD symptoms may promote the
inhibition of brain areas involved in the processing of positive cues.

F26
BODY POSTURE AND THE REPRESENTATION OF “ABSTRACT”
CONCEPTS Gitte Joergensen1, Rebecca Welles1, Kagnica Seng1, Julia Ryan1,
Patrick Orvis1, Eiling Yee1; 1University of Connecticut — Sensorimotor-based

(“embodied”) theories of semantic memory posit that brain regions that
are active when an object is perceived and/or interacted with are the same
regions that represent that object. While such accounts make clear predictions about how we represent object concepts, e.g., “dog”, it is not obvious how they can accommodate concepts for which there is no obvious
external sensory input, such as “joy” or “power”. There is evidence that
the representations of affect-related concepts are based in emotional states
(Vigliocco et al., 2009). If true, body posture (due to its association with
emotional state) may also be involved in the representations of such concepts. We examined whether body posture affects processing for words
related to affect and/or dominance. Participants were randomly assigned
to hold expansive or contractive postures (cf. “power posing”) under the
guise that this would affect their heart rate. Subsequently, they completed a
semantic categorization task that included words that varied in valence and

Poster Session F
dominance. Next, they completed free recall and old/new recognition tasks
for the previously categorized words. There were no reliable relationships
between posture and performance on semantic categorization or free recall.
However, there was a significant interaction between posture and RTs in
old/new recognition: Participants who had held the expansive, but not the
contractive postures responded to positive valence and high dominance
words faster than to negative valence and low dominance words. These
findings suggest that, like for object concepts, bodily experience plays a role
in the representation of affective and dominance-related concepts.

F27
DANCE EXPERTISE INCREASES AFFECTIVE SENSITIVITY Julia F

Christensen1,2, Sebastian B. Gaigg2, Antoni Gomila3, Beatriz Calvo-Merino1;
1
Cognitive Neuroscience Research Unit, Department of Psychology, City University London, UK, 2Autism Research Group, Department of Psychology, City
University London, UK, 3Department of Psychology, University of the Balearic
Islands, Spain — The present study shows how motor expertise increases

sensitivity to affective body movement at the behavioural and physiological level. Nineteen affective movement experts (professional ballet dancers)
and twenty-four controls watched 96 video clips of emotionally expressive
body movements while they performed an affect rating task (subjective
response) and their galvanic skin response was recorded (psychophysiological response). The movements in the clips were either sad or happy, and
in half of the trials movements were played in the order in which they are
learned (forward presentation), and in the other half, backwards (control
condition). Results showed that motor expertise in affective body movement specifically modulated both behavioural and physiological sensitivity
to others’ affective body movement, and that this sensitivity is particularly
strong when movements are shown in the way they are learnt (forward
presentation). The evidence is discussed within current theories of proprioceptive arousal feedback and motor simulation accounts.

F28
DISTINCT PATTERNS OF INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY ARE ASSOCIATED WITH DISPOSITIONAL AGGRESSION AND
EXPERIENCED ANGER Raluca Petrican1, Saman Sarraf1, Cheryl Grady1,2;
1

Rotman Research Institute, 2University of Toronto — Despite their importance for optimal functioning, the distinct neural mechanisms underlying a chronic behavioral inclination versus a present inner readiness to
act aggressively are still poorly understood. To address this question, we
capitalized on existing evidence that dispositional aggression is linked to
heightened threat reactivity and impaired executive control-based regulation of responses to stressors. Anger, as one affective response to an immediate threat, increases readiness to aggress by heightening the internal
accessibility of relevant thoughts and motor behaviors. To test the implications of these proposals with respect to the underlying neural mechanisms,
we used resting state fMRI data from 279 (117 males) younger adults from
the Human Connectome Project. We measured the functional interactions
between the periaqueductal gray [PAG], the core neural region underlying
reactively aggressive responses to environmental stressors (Gregg & Siegel,
2001; Panksepp, 1998), and networks involved in behavioral control versus
internal thinking. Dispositional aggression was linked to greater connectivity between the PAG and networks involved in environmentally, rather
than internally, driven control of behavior. Complementarily, particularly
among males, currently experienced anger was linked to stronger connectivity between the PAG and networks involved in present-, rather than
past- or future-, oriented self-referential thinking, which implied greater
self-referential focus on aggression-related behaviors in the context of the
here-and-now. These findings provide evidence on the dissociable neural
signature of a chronic tendency versus a present readiness to aggress and,
as such, have the potential to aid in the design of interventions targeting
external versus internal contributors to malign interpersonal dynamics.

F29
THE EFFECTS OF ACUTE STRESS ON MOTIVATED AND TASKBASED ATTENTION Natalie Hansen1, Molly O’Hagan1, Chris Caracciolo1,
Vladimir Miskovic1; 1SUNY Binghamton — Acute stress exerts a strong influ-

ence over the brain’s attentional systems by prioritizing the processing of
cues rich in motivational significance. A rapid functional consequence of

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

229

Poster Session F	
stress involves a shift in the balance of neural activity away from a task-directed prefrontal cortex (PFC) mode to a sensory-vigilance mode. Here, we
used event-related potentials to examine the consequences of acute stress
induction on the cortical processing of affective images, both with and
without the presence of a cognitive load manipulation. Half of the images
were viewed freely in the absence of a task, while the other half required
the solution of a time constrained mathematical equation superimposed
upon the image. We hypothesized that the stress group would exhibit a
strong motivated attention bias that would persist even in situations where
the affective images served as distractors in the context of completing a
competing cognitive task. The stress group performed a cold pressor hand
immersion challenge that raised both systolic and diastolic blood pressure
(ps < 0.01), while the control group immersed their hands in room temperature water. Contrary to our expectations, the findings demonstrated a
suppression of motivated attention allocation (as indexed by decreased late
positive potential [LPP] amplitudes) in the immediate aftermath of acute
stress as compared to the control condition. Moreover, the cognitive load
manipulation further diminished LPP amplitude evoked by the arousing
images to a greater extent in the stress than in the control group. These
findings suggest that the cold pressor challenge attenuates visual processing in general.

F30
NEUROPLASTICITY IN AN EXTENDED AMYGDALA NETWORK AS
THE MECHANISM UNDERLYING ATTENTION BIAS MODIFICATION
TRAINING: A VOXEL-BASED MORPHOMETRY PILOT STUDY Jacob
Aday1, Josh Carlson1; 1Northern Michigan University — Increased attentional

bias to threat has been identified as a causal mechanism in the development of anxiety. As such, attention bias modification was conceived as
a treatment option where anxiety is alleviated through a computerized
cognitive training regimen that reduces an individual’s attentional bias
to threat. After more than a decade of research on attention bias modification, there is meta-analytic support for attention bias modification in
reducing attentional bias and anxious symptoms. Although attention bias
modification appears to be a very promising treatment option for anxiety,
the mechanism of action by which attention bias modification is effective
is unknown. Existing neuroimaging evidence suggests attentional bias to
visual threat is associated with a network of brain regions including the
amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex, and visual cortex. The participants in
our study received 6 weeks of at-home attention bias modification training.
Pre-training and post-training measures of T1-wieghted structural MRI,
attentional bias (dot-probe), and trait anxiety were collected. Results from
voxel-based morphometry analyses provide initial evidence that attention
bias modification results in reduced gray matter volume in the extended
amygdala (substantia innominate/bed nucleus of the stria terminalis)
and anterior cingulate cortex at a group-level. At the individual-level, we
found that greater reductions in gray matter volume correspond to greater
reductions in attentional bias and anxiety. These results provide initial evidence that the mechanism underlying effective attention bias modification
training is a reduction of gray matter volume in an extended amygdala
network. Neuroplasticity in this network may be an important target for
anxiety treatment.

F31
MODULATION OF VISUAL SENSORY PROCESSING BY ASSOCIATED VALENCE – EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED BRAIN
POTENTIALS Annekathrin Schacht1, Annika Grass1, Anna Grimm1, Mareike
Bayer1; 1University of Goettingen — Stimuli of emotional content are prefer-

entially processed because of their high intrinsic salience for the organism.
This processing advantage has been shown already for initial stimulus
analyses at a sensory level much before conscious recognition or elaborate appraisal, as reliably indicated by modulations of event-related brain
potentials (ERPs) at short latencies. Interestingly, such early effects are not
restricted to the processing of evolutionary or socially relevant stimuli but
occur even for symbolic and arbitrary stimuli like written words of emotional content. While sometimes interpreted as an indicator of extremely
fast access to inherent meaning, recent research suggested that these effects
might instead origin from associative learning mechanisms, particularly
in the verbal domain. In three ERP studies this assumption was directly
examined by employing reinforcement-learning paradigms. These studies

230

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
provide evidence that newly acquired valence can effectively boost sensory processing of symbolic stimuli at different sub-stages, depending on
whether or not they convey inherent meaning. Importantly, these effects
do not occur under cross-modality learning conditions, indicating the
relevance of the sensory percept in the acquisition of new valence. Taken
together, these findings strongly suggest associative learning as a potential
source of early emotion effects in visual stimulus processing.

F32
READING CROWD EMOTION: THE ROLES OF HEMISPHERIC
SPECIALIZATION, TASK GOAL, ANXIETY, AND FACIAL IDENTITY

Hee Yeon Im1, Daniel Albohn2, Reginald Adams2, Kestutis Kveraga1; 1Harvard
Medical School / Massachusetts General Hospital, 2The Pennsylvania State
University — The ability to read the collective mood of a crowd of faces is

a critical social skill that guides our interactions with groups. Despite its
important implications for behavior in real life situations (e.g., deciding
whether a crowd is safe to approach or best avoided), the factors modulating crowd emotion perception remain largely unexplored. Methods: In
four studies, we examined how crowd emotion perception is influenced
by intrinsic factors (observers’ intent to approach or avoid, anxiety level)
and extrinsic factors (visual field of presentation and gender of crowds).
We simultaneously presented two crowds of faces morphed along an emotion continuum in the left and right visual fields for 1 second and asked
observers to rapidly report which crowd they would approach or avoid.
Results: While right hemisphere dominance for negative stimuli, and left
hemisphere preference for positive stimuli, have been reported, we found
that lateralization effects are actually goal-dependent: both happier crowds
and angrier crowds were perceived significantly more accurately in the
left visual field/right hemisphere when observers sought to approach
happier crowds and to avoid angrier crowds. We also found that happy
female crowds and angry male crowds were perceived significantly more
accurately, as in single face perception. Moreover, observers’ anxiety level
significantly modulated crowd emotion perception such that high-anxiety
participants were faster overall and less accurate in perceiving happier, but
not angrier, crowds. Conclusion: Perception of crowd emotion shows taskdriven dominance of the right hemisphere, and is strongly modulated by
crowd gender and observers’ anxiety level.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding
F33
AN EEG STUDY OF E-CIGARETTE RELATED ADDICTION AND
AFFECTIVE PROCESSES Aishwariya Chandrasekar1, Matthew Bachman1,
Neva Gakavian1, Anne Tootell1, Adreanna Massey1, Jessica Ellis1, Debra Bernat1,
Edward Bernat1; 1University of Maryland, College Park — While event-related

potentials (ERPs) have been studied in relation to nicotine addiction with
various delivery systems (Versace et al., 2011), research regarding nicotine
use with e-cigarettes is limited. The current study utilizes ERPs to assess
e-cigarette users’ reactivity towards e-cigarette cues, as well as differences between states of nicotine withdrawal and satiation. Seventeen daily
e-cigarette users completed an affect regulation task in which they were
instructed to either increase or decrease their reactions to picture stimuli,
or simply view them. The picture stimuli included e-cigarette, unpleasant,
pleasant, and neutral cues. The task was completed first in a state of withdrawal, and then again after vaping to satiation. ERP components were
assessed for the different picture cues, regulatory instructions, and nicotine
states. Components included earlier P2, N2, and P3 components, and the
late positive potential (LPP). An increased LPP was observed for pleasant,
unpleasant, and e-cigarette cues relative to neutral during withdrawal.
After satiation, an LPP decrease was observed to e-cigarette cues, but no
change was observed for pleasant or unpleasant. Instruction effects were
also observed in earlier P2, N2, and P3 components. Results indicate that
e-cigarette users’ responses to e-cigarette cues are similar to those evoked
by more intrinsic high arousal cues, when in withdrawal. When sated,
e-cigarette cue reactivity was significantly decreased, indicating modulation by nicotine state. These results parallel effects previously found in cigarette users, suggesting a similar addictive pattern.

2016 Annual Meeting	

OTHER
F34
CAPTURING YOUR BEST SIDE: THE INFLUENCE OF FACIAL
ATTRACTIVENESS ON POSING BIASES Victoria Harms1, Nicole Bolt1,
Lorin Elias1; 1University of Saskatchewan — When examining the posing ori-

entation in portraits, individuals tend to post with their left cheek forward.
However, individuals also show an awareness of asymmetries in facial
expressivity, showing a greater tendency to pose with the more expressive
left cheek forward in loving family portraits and the less expressive right
cheek forward when posing for stoic scientific portraits. Further research
has provided some evidence that the right side of the face is perceived as
more attractive compared to the left side. We examined posing bias in modeling headshots to assess whether this attractiveness asymmetry influences
posing direction in portraits specifically highlighting the attractiveness of
the subject. Despite an emphasis on individual attractiveness, we observed
an overall leftward posing bias for the modeling images rather than the predicted rightward bias. Consistent with the typical left-cheek bias observed
in portraiture, this observed leftward bias suggests that either the rightward bias for facial attractiveness does not influence posing behaviour,
or it is less dominant than other factors such as asymmetries in emotional
expressivity.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Self perception
F35
SELF-PERCEPTION AS ITS OWN REWARD: BRAIN BASIS OF
NARCISSISTIC SELF-VALUATION IN PERSON PERCEPTION AND
SOCIAL COGNITION Noam Zerubavel1, Kevin Ochsner; 1Columbia University,
2

Columbia University — What compelled Narcissus to fixate on his reflection
instead of others? Could the underlying neural mechanisms also explain
narcissists’ excessively self-centered cognitions? We hypothesized that narcissistic self-absorption—both in person perception and social cognition
processes—relates to disproportionate reward value elicited by focusing on
oneself relative to others. Specifically, we tested the hypothesis that individual differences in subclinical narcissism (Narcissistic Personality Inventory; NPI-16) would correlate with activity in core valuation regions—ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and ventral striatum (VS)—evoked
by images of oneself (relative to group members) and making trait judgments about oneself (relative to group members). To test this hypothesis,
we recruited groups of well-acquainted participants to complete several
tasks in the fMRI scanner: (1) viewing their own and group members’ faces
while performing a simple cover task; (2) making trait judgments about
themselves and group members; and (3) an independent functional localizer (Monetary Incentive Delay task) to identify vmPFC and VS regions of
interest (ROIs) active during anticipation and receipt of monetary rewards.
We found that individual differences in subclinical narcissism were predicted by heightened neural activation in both vmPFC and VS ROIs while
(1) viewing images of oneself (relative to group members) as well as (2)
making trait judgments about oneself (relative to group members). In addition, these neural indices of narcissistic self-perception explained more
variance in behavioral self-enhancement effects in the trait judgment task
relative to the NPI-16. More broadly, the naturalistic paradigm we advance
here can be used to investigate the neurocognitive mechanisms implicated
in various personality disorders.

F36
SEX DIFFERENCES IN CO-RUMINATION ARE RELATED TO DISTINCT PATTERNS OF MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX RESTING
STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY Gabriela Alarcon1, Bonnie J. Nagel1;
1

Oregon Health & Science University — Co-rumination, or repetitive, problem-focused talk in a dyadic relationship, has been shown to predict the
onset of depression and mediate gender differences in risk for adolescent
depression. Sex differences in co-rumination have been reported previously in healthy adolescents; however, the mechanisms supporting these
sex differences have not been determined. We examined how the interaction of co-rumination and sex relates to resting state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fcMRI) of the medial prefrontal cortex

Poster Session F
(mPFC), a node of the default mode network involved in self-reflection and
implicated in major depression. Thirty-six adolescents (15-18 years) were
included in the rs-fcMRI analysis of bilateral mPFC seed regions. Partial
correlations assessed whether the interaction of sex and co-rumination
(Co-Rumination Questionnaire) was related to bilateral mPFC rs-fcMRI.
Girls reported higher co-rumination scores than boys (t=2.92, p=.006),
which were related to stronger connectivity between left mPFC and frontal
lobe regions implicated in major depression, self-awareness, and risk aversion, as well as the supramarginal gyrus, important for empathy. In contrast, boys showed negative associations between co-rumination and rs-fcMRI of the same regions. However, higher co-rumination scores in boys
were positively related to stronger rs-fcMRI between right mPFC and right
frontopolar cortex, a region important for executive functioning, while a
negative association was present in girls. These findings may indicate that
heightened rs-fcMRI between mPFC and socio-affective and fronto-parietal
networks in girls and boys, respectively, explain sex differences in co-rumination. More research is needed to determine if these sex differences potentiate subsequent onset of major depression.

F37
IN THE FACE OF CHANGE: WHICH COPING STRATEGIES PREDICT BETTER OUTCOMES AFTER A FACE TRANSPLANT SURGERY? Marie-Christine Nizzi1, Megan Oser2,3, Jenny Zinser2; 1Harvard University, 2Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 3Harvard Medical School — Objectives:

Face transplantation is an innovative surgical procedure aiming to restore
appearance and function in patients with a history of severe facial trauma.
Since the first case in 2005, more than 20 patients have received full or partial face transplants worldwide. However, little is known about the cognitive, emotional and psychological impact of such a transformative surgery
on the patients’ sense of self. Methods: In this longitudinal study, we used
the Brief COPE (Carver, 1997) to investigate how different coping strategies prior to transplantation relate to post-transplantation outcomes such
as self-esteem (Rosenberg’s Self Esteem Scale, Rosenberg, 1965), depression
(CES-D, Lewisohn et al., 1997) and quality of life (QoL) (EQ-5D, EuroQuol
Group, 1998). We monitored 6 patients up to 48 months after their surgery.
Results: Correlations between coping patterns were higher in patients with
more negative outcomes on self-esteem, depression, and QoL compared
to patients with more positive outcomes. This may suggest that there are
several ways of being resilient but one sure way of facing change that
leads to poor outcome. Additionally, we categorized coping strategies into
active and avoidant coping (following Amoyal et al., 2011). We found that
active strategies foster better post-surgery outcomes in all three measures
and that avoidant coping foster more negative quality of life. Conclusions:
The coping profile of candidates might have predictive utility in patients’
post-surgery subjective experience. Practice implications: as pre-surgery
education programs are being developed for face transplantation candidates, training in the relevant coping strategies could be integrated to
improve post-surgery resilience.

F38
GENERAL AND SPECIFIC SELVES: DIFFERENTIAL FUNCTIONAL
BRAIN NETWORK CONNECTIVITY Rui Nouchi1, Motoaki Sugiura1,
Shinichi Mizokami2, Yuki Yamamoto1, Kelssy Hitomi dos Santos Kawata1, Kohei
Sakaki1, Joseph Hsun-Cheng Lee1, Shohei Yamazaki1, Tetsuya Kageyama1, Ryuta
Kawashima1; 1Tohoku University, 2Kyoto University — Self-concepts are com-

posed of multiple self-aspects (Marsh et al. 2006). People may have different attitudes to general and specific selves. For example, self-esteem for the
specific self (the most important aspect of the self) was higher than that for
general self (Mizokami, 2013). The purpose of this study was to investigate
the differences of neural correlates between the general and specific selves.
Before fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) scan, 25 participants
were interviewed to select the specific self, general other, and specific other.
During block-designed MRI scan, all participants rated 30 sentences which
are related to self-concepts from the positions of general self (GS), specific
self (SS), general other (GO), and specific other (SO). Additionally, participants rated number of wrong phrases in the 30 sentences as a control task
(C). A 2 (target: self, other) by 2 (aspect: general, specific) factorial design
analysis using [GS vs C], [SS vs C], [GO vs C], and [GS vs C] contrasts
was performed in Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM8). The functional
connectivity (FC) analyses using the mPFC and precuneus related to the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

231

Poster Session F	
self process as a seed were conducted by CONN tool box. Results showed
that SS had a higher FC between the mPFC as a seed and the right superior
frontal gyrus areas compared to GS. On the other hand, GS had a higher FC
between the precuneus as a seed and the bilateral vmPFC compared to SS.
These results firstly showed the neural correlate’s differences between the
general and specific selves.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Other
F39
FURTHER DATA FOR A POTENTIAL CAUSE FOR THE SIMILARITY
OF PERCEPTS ASSUMED ACROSS INDIVIDUALS Maud Haffar1,
Hugo Pantecouteau2, Sheila Bouten1, J. Bruno Debruille1; 1McGill University,
2
École Normale Supérieure de Lyon — Looking for an account of the similar-

ity of perceptions assumed across individuals, a previous study found that
the processing of a stimulus by a person has an impact on the ERPs of a
closely related person (partner). The present study was thus aimed at verifying these results and at seeing whether such an impact could be found
in strangers. We focused on the mean voltages of event-related potentials
(ERPs) in the time-window of the P600 and the N400. These ERPs were
elicited by stimuli of the internal affective picture system in 20 pairs of
closely related persons. Each member of a pair couldn’t see what his/her
partner was seeing and faced one half of the same screen. Two stimuli were
presented simultaneously, one on each half. The sameness of these stimuli
and the participants’ belief in that sameness were manipulated. We found
a significant effect of consistency (belief and reality were either consistent
vs. inconsistent) in the N400 time window and a significant consistency
x electrodes interaction at the sagittal electrode subset in the P600 time
window. The same experiment was run with 16 pairs of strangers. No such
effects were found. However, a “closeness effect” was observed, that is,
ERPs were more negative when partners were doing the task than when
strangers were doing it. The results of the previous study were therefore
replicated and were specific to closely related persons. These findings support the existence of spontaneous brain-to-brain communications.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Self perception
F40
NEUROCOGNITIVE MECHANISMS UNDERLYING HUMAN KINSHIP PREFERENCE Mareike Bacha-Trams1, Enrico Glerean1, Juha Lahnakoski2, Vappu Elisa Ryyppö1, Mikko Sams1, Iiro P Jääskeläinen1,3; 1School of
Science, Aalto University, Espoo Finland, 2Max-Planck-Institute of Psychiatry,
Munich, Germany, 3Advanced Magnetic Imaging Centre, School of Science, Aalto
University, Espoo Finland — Kinship premium effect, previously demonstrated

behaviorally, describes enhanced willingness to help kin over others. Here,
we studied the underlying neurocognitive mechanisms. During functional
magnetic resonance imaging, 30 volunteers engaged in a decision game to
either save, in different constellations, their sister, friend, vs. others, from
a crisis area. The level to which kinship premium effect was stimulated
was varied parametrically from saving sister and four others over a single
other to saving sister-only over friend and four others. Further, the subjects
viewed four times a re-edited film (“My sister’s keeper”) depicting a moral
dilemma with kinship premium question involving refusal by a healthy
sister to donate her kidney to her gravely ill sister. Subjects were asked
to adopt, in different runs, the perspective of the to-be-organ-donor vs.
recipient sister, and were on different runs given information about genetic
vs. adoptive relatedness of the sisters. Our results showed that brain areas
in prefrontal cortices, cingulate, insula, and precuneus were activated as
a function of increasing involvement of kinship premium dilemma in the
decision-making game. Further, similar sets of brain areas were observed to
exhibit increased inter-subject correlation of brain hemodynamic responses
when subjects were watching the movie and taking the perspective of the
to-be-organ-donor sister (i.e., the active agent in the kinship premium
dilemma depicted) with a priori knowledge that the sisters were genetically
related. Together, our results suggest, based on brain regions activated
across the tasks, that kinship premium effect involves moral judgment,
emotion regulation, and self-referential thinking.

232

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

F41
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SCHIZOTYPY AND THE PROPENSITY TO ACCEPT EXTRAORDINARY SOCIAL ROLES Gifty Asare1,3,

Ana L. Fernandez Cruz4, Ola Mohamed Ali, Ishan Walpolla, Julia Segal1,3,
Bruno Debruille1,2,3; 1Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal,
Qc, Canada, 2Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University,
Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Montreal,
QC, Canada, 4McGill University Integrated Program in Neuroscience, Montréal,
Canada — Background: Delusions of grandeur are frequent in schizophrenia

and psychosis. They also exist to a lesser extent in the general population.
They reveal a will to play extraordinary roles (e.g., being a prophet). Given
that cognitive and behavioral strategies associated with such a will could
conflict with those involved in playing more ordinary roles, one can ask
whether this propensity contributes to some symptoms, such as behavioral
disorganization. We thus tested if the will to play extraordinary roles in
healthy participants could predict some schizophrenia-like traits. Methods:
209 healthy volunteers between the ages of 18 and 30 were recruited to fill
out questionnaires assessing schizotypal traits, including the schizotypal
personality questionnaire (SPQ). They were then presented with hundreds
of names of social roles and asked to decide, for each role, whether or not
they would consider playing it at any moment of their lives. Results: Participants accepting a greater percentage of the extraordinary roles, regardless
of the favorability of these roles, had higher SPQ scores. This correlation (r
= .401, p = 7.17E-09) was significantly greater than the correlation between
the percentages of ordinary roles accepted and the SPQ scores (r = .145, p
= .044) (Fisher Z-transform, p = .003). Among the three factors of the SPQ,
disorganization was the one best predicted. Conclusions: The correlations
found here should prompt further studies to investigate whether the will to
play extraordinary roles could be a contributor to the symptoms accompanying psychosis and schizophrenia.

F42
ERP CORRELATES OF THE REPRESENTATIONS OF THE SELF, OF
THEIR ACTIVATION AND OF THEIR BINDING WITH THE REPRESENTATIONS OF THE STIMULUS Monique Mata3, M Whyte3,4, R Petrie3,
JB Debruille1,2,3; 1Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, Qc,
Canada, 2Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Montreal, QC,
Canada, 4School of Psychology, University of Queensland, QLD, Australia — To

study the ERP correlates of the representations of the self, namely, their
activations and their integration with the representations activated by the
stimulus, we designed a new experiment in which each trial started either
with the pronoun ‘Me’ or with the pronoun ‘Him’, which referred to an
individual who introduced himself in a twelve minute video prior to testing. The second stimulus of each trial was the name of a social role. The
task of the participant was then to decide whether or not (s)he would consider playing the role at any moment of his/her life, in the case of ‘Me’ and
whether the other person would play it, in the case of “Him”. (S)he thus
had to try to bind representation of the self to the representations of the
behaviors associated to the role. Fifty three participants were tested, we
found larger P3-600s when they had to make the decision for themselves
rather than for the other person. We discussed the functional significance
of these electrophysiological differences as indexing a greater binding that
would occur between the more complex representations of the self and the
social role compared to the binding of the social roles to the representations
of the other person. We also examined the ERP elicited by the presentation of the pronouns. P2s were larger for the pronoun ‘Him/Her’ when the
pronoun of the preceding trial was ‘Me’ as compared to the pronoun ‘Me’
when it was preceeded by ‘Him’.

2016 Annual Meeting	

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development
& aging
F43
THE INFLUENCE OF MINDSET ON MATH-RELATED POST-ERROR
ADJUSTMENTS IN ADOLESCENTS Nienke van Atteveldt1, Sandra van Aalderen-Smeets2, Lydia Krabbendam1; 1VU University Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
2
University of Twente, The Netherlands — Students’ implicit beliefs (“mind-

sets”) about the malleability of their abilities have major impact on school
motivation and performance. Students with an entity mindset believe that
their abilities are fixed and cannot be improved much by effort, those with
an incremental mindset believe that they can increase their abilities by
working harder. Mindset shapes students’ responses to setbacks; an entity
mindset often results in adopting maladaptive strategies to cope with, or
avoid, failure and negative feedback. Stimulating an incremental mindset
is therefore of great importance to improve motivation and school success.
We investigated the impact of 15-year-old students’ mindset on how they
adjust their performance after making mistakes. We assessed default mindset using a questionnaire, and manipulated mindset by presenting information about brain stability vs. plasticity (prime). Next, they performed a
set-shifting math task in which they solved equations while the mathematical rule changed occasionally. Students with an incremental mindset were
faster and more accurate on the math task. Post-error analysis indicated
that students with an entity mindset slowed down after mistakes more,
and improved less in accuracy, than those with an incremental mindset.
Priming effects were nonsignificant on any task measure. In contrast, the
brain plasticity prime produced a significantly stronger incremental self-report mindset score. These results demonstrate that mindset influences how
adolescents learn from making mistakes on a math task. The discrepancy
between the priming effects on the questionnaire vs. on task performance
indicates that knowledge about brain plasticity is not necessarily enough to
influence on-line learning behaviour.

F44
PHIBRA - AN AEROBIC EXERCISE INTERVENTION EXAMINING
DOPAMINE D2 RECEPTORS AND COGNITION IN THE AGING
BRAIN Lars Jonasson1, Katrine Riklund1, Arthur F. Kramer2, Lars Nyberg1,
Carl-Johan Boraxbekk1; 1Umeå University, Sweden, 2University of Illinois — In

the PHysical Influences on BRain in Aging (PHIBRA) study, 60 sedentary elderly individuals (64-78y) completed a randomized physical activity intervention, contrasting aerobic exercise with a stretching and toning
active control condition. For the first time on human subjects, the effects
from a physical activity intervention was related to dopamine D2 receptor availability, as measured by [11C]Raclopride. In addition, data from a
robust cognitive test battery was collected, as well as a range of magnetic
resonance imaging modalities, providing the opportunity to examine the
role of dopaminergic transmission on brain functions following physical
activity. The intervention was successful as indicated by a clear baseline
to follow-up group interaction on VO2, that reflected improved VO2 from
aerobic exercise. A group interaction favoring the aerobic exercise group
was also found for general cognitive function, indexed by a composite
including episodic memory, processing speed, updating, shifting, and
complex working-memory tasks. Ongoing analyses focus on intervention
effects on the D2 system. To conclude, our preliminary results add to a
growing literature suggesting that aerobic exercise has a broad influence on
cognitive functioning, which may aid in explaining why studies focusing
on a narrower range of functions have sometimes reported mixed results.

F46
WORKING MEMORY TRAINING INCREASES ENGAGEMENT OF
FRONTAL REGIONS IN ADOLESCENTS Gail Rosenbaum1, Morgan Botdorf1, Jamie Patrianakos1, Henry Wilmer1, Laurence Steinberg1, Jason Chein1;
Temple University — Adolescence is a period of heightened risk-taking

1

relative to adulthood or childhood, due in part to peers’ increased influence on decision-making (Gardner & Steinberg, 2005). According to the
dual-systems model of adolescent decision-making, adolescents’ increased
risk-taking is driven by heightened reactivity in a socio-emotional system,

Poster Session F
including ventral striatal and ventromedial prefrontal regions, and a
still-maturing cognitive control system, including the lateral prefrontal
cortex (lPFC; Steinberg, 2008). Because adolescents’ choices have harmful
consequences, it is important to investigate interventions that might attenuate risk-taking. Drawing on the dual-systems framework, one way to lower
adolescent risk-taking might be to increase cognitive control. Working
Memory Training (WMT) has proven effective in increasing adults’ cognitive control (Chein & Morrison, 2011), but impacts on adolescent cognitive
control have not been explored. Accordingly, we tested whether four weeks
of WMT (relative to Trivia Training, TT) would increase cognitive control,
and decrease risk-taking in adolescents. We found that adolescents receiving WMT, but not TT, increased the number of locations they could hold
in memory. Improvements did not significantly transfer to performance on
basic cognitive control measures, but across two risk-taking tasks, WMT
adolescents showed suppressed levels of risk taking when observed by an
anonymous peer audience, an effect not seen in TT. In a preliminary fMRI
study, we find enhanced lPFC activity during a cognitive control task in
WMT but not TT participants. These early results suggest that WMT may
enhance adolescents’ cognitive control and subsequently decrease risk-taking in the context of socio-emotional challenges.

F47
CONTRIBUTIONS OF AGE AND BETA-AMYLOID DEPOSITION TO
FRONTO-PARIETAL COGNITIVE CONTROL REGIONS DURING
TASK SWITCHING AMONG COGNITIVELY NORMAL ELDERLY

Hwamee Oh1, Qolamreza Razlighi1, Christian Habeck1, Yaakov Stern1; 1Taub Institute, Columbia University — Impairments in cognitive control are one of core

components of age-related cognitive decline. Cognitive aging studies have
shown age-related functional alterations in fronto-parietal cortices implicated in cognitive control. Although cognitively normal, a relatively large
proportion of older adults presents with the accumulation of beta amyloid
peptides, a pathological hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). The topography of amyloid deposition largely overlaps with fronto-parietal control
(FPC) regions, although little is known about the impact of amyloid deposition on FPC regions. The present study examined independent contributions of age and amyloid deposition to task-evoked FPC activations during
task-switching. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), 43
young and 62 cognitively normal older adults underwent an fMRI session
during an executive contextual task in which task difficulty varied: Single
(either letter case or vowel/consonant judgment task) vs. dual (switching
between letter case and vowel/consonant decisions) task. Older subjects
additionally completed 18F-Florbetaben positron emission tomography
scans to quantify brain amyloid deposition and were grouped into either
amyloid-positive or amyloid-negative. Consistent with previous reports,
age-related increases in brain activity were found in fronto-parietal control regions that were commonly identified across groups. For both task
conditions, amyloid-related increases in brain activity were found in comparison to baseline activity. For higher cognitive control load, however,
amyloid-positive elderly showed reduced task-switching activation in the
right inferior frontal cortex compared to amyloid-negative elderly. The
present results suggest that failure of modulating activations to accommodate enhanced control demand may differentiate functional alterations due
to age from AD pathology in cognitively normal elderly.

F48
THE HEALTHY AGING BRAIN’S POTENTIAL TO COMPENSATE FOR
AGE-RELATED FUNCTIONAL DECLINE - WHAT CAN WE LEARN BY
LOOKING AT THE INTRINSICALLY ACTIVE BASELINE? Angela Martina Muller1,2,3, Susan Mérillat1,2,3, Lutz Jaencke1,2,3,4; 1University Research Priority Program (URPP), Dynamic of Healthy Aging, University of Zurich, Switzerland,
2
International Normal Aging and Plasticity Imaging Center (INAPIC), University of
Zurich, Switzerland, 3Division Neuropsychology, Institute of Psychology, University of Zurich, Switzerland, 4Center for Integrative Human Physiology (ZIHP), University of Zurich, Switzerland — While differences in fMRI activation patterns

between young and old adults have been reliably observed, their meaning
is still an open question, with interpretations ranging from successful compensation mechanisms to indicators of age-related functional degradation.
As the intrinsic baseline architecture of the brain is the dominant configuration during all brain states, we speculate that the aging brain’s intrinsic

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

233

Poster Session F	
functional architecture might be also one of the limiting factors its capacity to compensate for age-related constraints. The aim of our study was to
investigate the functional baseline configuration of a large sample of older
adults (n = 186, mean age = 70.4) using graph theoretical analyses in order
to evaluate its potential to compensate for functional and structural reductions occurring with age. We found a clear anterior-posterior dichotomy,
with nodes in the posterior part of the brain showing more age-related loss
of functional flexibility than nodes in the anterior regions. Additionally, we
found an age-related hemispheric asymmetry in the frontal regions’ capacity to potentially compensate for functional degradation. Compared to the
right frontal regions, the left frontal cortex might have preserved a higher
capacity to compensate for age-related functional degradation. At least, our
findings also showed the relevance of the functional intactness of the cerebellum, the thalamus, and the caudate nucleus for preserved cognitive and
behavioral performance in age

F49
INTERLEUKIN-6 AND LONGITUDINAL PROCESSING SPEED
CHANGE IN OLDER ADULTS Rowan Saloner1, Hannah Holt1, Brianne

M Bettcher1, Shubir Dutt1, Ryan Fitch1, John M Neuhas1, Matthew Wynn1, Joel
H Kramer1; 1University of California, San Francisco — Previous studies link

systemic inflammation with worse cognition and white matter changes.
These studies have been cross-sectional, however; little is known if baseline inflammation is associated with longitudinal changes in cognition.
Our objective was to determine if baseline inflammation predicted steeper
cognitive decline longitudinally. Participants were 126 functionally intact,
community-dwelling, older adults (mean age=73.1) followed over multiple timepoints over 4-6 years. We measured baseline plasma interleukin-6
(IL-6) using the Mesoscale platform. At each time point, participants were
administered a series of computerized reaction time tasks that yielded a
single, composite processing speed score. Participants also underwent 3T
MRI scans; volumes were obtained using Freesurfer 5.1. The IL-6 values
were log transformed, and slope values of the processing speed scores were
calculated using linear mixed models. In our first linear regression analysis,
higher baseline IL-6 levels predicted greater increases in processing speed
slope after controlling for baseline processing speed (beta=.109, p<.01). Follow-up regression analyses entered vascular risk factors (body mass index;
diastolic blood pressure) and corpus callosum volumes into the model, but
the relationship between IL-6 and change in processing speed remained
significant. These findings suggest that higher levels of systemic inflammation at baseline are associated with increased rates of cognitive slowing
over time in functionally intact older adults. This associated remained significant even after controlling for baseline processing speed, vascular risk
factors, and white matter volumes. These results highlight the importance
of inflammation in cognitive aging, and further suggest that the effect of
inflammation may be independent of vascular pathways.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring &
inhibitory control
F50
ATTENTIONAL BIAS IN INDIVIDUALS WITH COMORBID CANNABIS USE DISORDERS AND TOBACCO USE Alina Shevorykin1,2, Ayman
Baig2, Daniel Robles2, Naomi Dambreville2, Lesia Ruglass2, Robert Melara2;
Pace University, 2The City College of New York, CUNY — Cannabis Use Disorder

1

(CUD) is a complex and prevalent condition affecting approximately 4.3
million people in the U.S. (National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 2012).
Long-term cannabis use is associated with cognitive impairments within
the domains of attention, concentration, inhibition, and impulsivity, among
others (Thames, Arbid & Sayegh, 2014; Crane et al., 2013). Research has
shown that up to 90% of cannabis users also smoke tobacco, and identified
both synergistic and compensatory effects of comorbid tobacco and cannabis use (Rabin & George, 2015). The current study was a preliminary data
analysis, as part of a larger study on attentional bias and cannabis cue reactivity, which aimed to examine the cognitive relationship between CUD
and tobacco use. Fifty two participants matched on age, race/ethnicity,
education level and gender were screened for eligibility, diagnosed using
the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV, and assessed using a Mod-

234

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
ified Flanker Task, which measures inhibitory control. People with CUD
and comorbid tobacco dependence were compared to people with CUD
without tobacco dependence and controls. Repeated-Measures ANOVA
revealed a significant main effect for Condition Type (p<0.01), for overall
Reaction Time and overall Accuracy variables. As expected, individuals
were more accurate and faster in the Baseline condition versus Filtering.
Interestingly, results showed a marginal interaction between Group Type
and Condition for the Reaction Time variable only. Cannabis users with
comorbid tobacco use were slower than controls, but faster than cannabis
users who don’t smoke. This suggests the possibility of a stimulant effect of
tobacco for cannabis users.

F51
MEG CORRELATES OF UNINTENTIONAL VALUE INTEGRATION OF
VISUAL FOOD CUES AND ITS DOWN-REGULATION BY HEALTHGOAL ACTIVATION Rotem Beit-Arie1, Abraham Goldstein1; 1Bar-Ilan University — Everyday marketing media bombards us with visual cues of high-en-

ergy food in situations that do not require (or do not allow for) decision
making or intentional valuation and most times under satiety conditions.
Using magnetoencephalography (MEG) we studied the automatic brain
responses to visual high-energy food cues under such conditions. Specifically, we tested whether the mechanism of value integration, involving the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), usually found in overt decision
making studies, is activated by visual food cues even without deliberate
decision-making or judgment, and whether it can be down-regulated by
inadvertently activating health goals. Twenty not-hungry lean participants (19<BMI<25) watched pictures of high-energy food, low-energy
food, neutral and pleasant images and were engaged in a food-unrelated
oddball task, in two sessions, a week apart. MEG was recorded after activating health goals by reading a text regarding the dangers of overeating
or after reading a control text on computer overuse, in a counterbalanced
order. High-energy food cues elicited greater activity than neutral pictures
with sources estimated at the vmPFC and insula (~355ms), but this effect
was reduced after health-goal activation. Health-goal activation also lead
to heightened activity at the left inferior-frontal gyrus at an earlier stage
(~100ms). Results suggest that high-energy food cues do engage vmPFC
based value-integration processes in unintentional viewing, but that their
regulation by health-goal priming involves inferior-frontal inhibitory processes and reduction of insula activity, and is different than that invoked
during voluntary self-control or deliberate attention (involving dorsolateral prefrontal areas).

F52
THE ROLE OF ALPHA OSCILLATIONS IN DISTRACTOR INHIBITION
DURING MAINTENANCE IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY. Sofia
Deleniv1, Mark Stokes1; 1University of Oxford — Oscillatory neural activity in

the alpha frequency band (8-12 Hz) has increasingly become implicated
as an inhibitor of information processing by creating a state whereby neuronal populations are less responsive to external inputs. Recent research
suggests that alpha oscillatory activity is subject to flexible top-down control in several respects. Specifically, there is evidence that anticipation of
challenging distractors is characterised by a preparatory increase in alpha
synchrony, as well as robust phase-locking of ongoing alpha rhythm to the
expected onset of distraction, such that it would coincide with the most
suppressive stage of the alpha cycle. The current experiment examined the
extent to which alpha power is under top-down strategic control, by combining EEG recordings of oscillatory brain activity with a precision visual
working memory paradigm featuring distractor interference. Critically,
symbolic cues predicted weak or strong distractors on a trial-by-trial basis.
Our results provide behavioural evidence that participants are able to use
distractor-predictive information to protect working memory from the
effects of expected distraction. Furthermore, we observe a general ramp-up
in alpha power during the period of distractor anticipation, indicating
that alpha oscillatory activity is used to prepare for distractor inhibition.
However, we did not find any evidence that the observed alpha power is
sensitive to cue-driven expectations of distractor difficulty, thereby potentially limiting the functional role of alpha oscillatory activity in top-down
attentional control.

2016 Annual Meeting	

F53
NETWORK CONTROLLABILITY AS A MEDIATING MECHANISM
FOR IMPULSIVITY John Medaglia1,2, Shi Gu2, Fabio Pasqualetti3, Caryn

Lerman2, Joseph Kable2, Danielle S Bassett2; 1Moss Rehabilitation Research
Institute, 2University of Pennsylvania, 3University of California, Riverside — Delay

discounting and stop-signal tasks are often used to examine dissociable
aspects of impulsivity that display differential patterns of medial and inferior frontal involvement. However, the distinct neurophysiological drivers underlying individual differences in task performance remain poorly
elucidated. Here, we consider task performance to be a function of the
distributed integration and segregation of cognitive processes. We study
these processes mechanistically in the mathematical framework of network
control theory, a relatively new field of engineering that offers a principled set of tools to understand the impact of a brain region’s structural
connectivity on neurophysiological dynamics. Specifically, we construct
structural brain networks from 106 healthy individuals by applying tractography to diffusion weighted imaging data to link 1015 brain regions by
white matter streamlines. For each person, we calculate boundary controllability – a measure of a brain region’s role in segregating and integrating
activity across the network – and determine its relationship to individual
differences in cognitive performance. We introduce a novel cluster-correction technique built on the notion of minimum spanning trees. We find
that individual differences in boundary controllability in the medial frontal cortices are associated with individual differences in delay discounting.
We additionally observe a double dissociation in stop signal performance:
boundary controllability variability in the right inferior frontal gyrus is
negatively associated with stop signal reaction time, whereas variability in
the left inferior frontal gyrus is positively associated with stop signal accuracy. Together, these results provide compelling evidence for dissociable
structural network mechanisms of impulsivity in the human connectome.

F54
DISENTANGLING THE RELATIVE TIMING OF RIGHT FRONTAL
SUBREGIONS IN RESPONSE INHIBITION WITH INTRACRANIAL
RECORDINGS IN HUMANS. Eleonora Bartoli1, Adam Aron2, Nitin Tandon1;
1

University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston (UTHealth), 2University of
California San Diego — Stopping a response is a core process of cognitive con-

trol. Stopping paradigms consistently show recruitment of right ventral lateral prefrontal cortex, including the right inferior frontal cortex (rIFC) and
the adjacent right anterior insula (rAI). Yet their relative functional roles
are currently debated. Functional imaging techniques lack the temporal
resolution to resolve processes occurring in rapid succession, such as stop
signal processing, braking of the response, and processing the outcome. We
used electrocorticographic recordings in 6 patients who each had coverage
of both rIFC and rAI, to study the temporal evolution of neural activity
around the stop signal reaction time (SSRT). We tested the relative timing
of rAI activation: a) Does it also occur before SSRT (like the IFG is known
to be, in which case it may also be involved in stopping), or does it occur
afterwards (in which case it is not), b) If it does occur before SSRT, what is
its timing relative to rIFC? (if earlier it may convey information to rIFC).
We analyzed gamma power (50-150 Hz) for each region in each subject. We
observed that: a) rIFG activation (stop vs. go trials) occurred before SSRT
in most subjects, and always preceded rAI activation, b) rAI activation
was more variable, but generally occurred after SSRT, therefore too late to
play a causal role in stopping. Instead its activity may relate to changes in
arousal or post-trial feedback. These preliminary results may help resolve
debates about the functional roles of prefrontal sub-regions in stopping.

F55
THE ROLE OF THE DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN
THE SUPPRESSION OF NEGATIVE AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORIES Jonathan Fawcett1, Roland Benoit2, Ana Fotachi3, Jun Kawaguchi4,
Michael Anderson1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, 2Harvard University, 3University of Westminster, 4Nagoya University — Prior work has found that

suppressing retrieval of an unwanted word or image when faced with a
suitable reminder recruits regions within the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex to down-regulate hippocampal activity, preventing retrieval of
the target and suppressing its representation. Here, we addressed for the

Poster Session F
first time whether similar neural mechanisms are invoked to suppress the
retrieval of unpleasant autobiographical memories. Thirty healthy adults
described upsetting experiences that occurred to them over the past three
years, providing a cue word for each that reminded them uniquely of the
event. While in the fMRI scanner, participants performed trials in which
they encountered a cue word from one of their events. On Think trials, they
were asked to retrieve the associated memory and, on No-Think trials, to
suppress retrieval of the associated memory. After scanning, participants
were then presented with each of the cue words one final time and were
asked to describe the associated event in detail. Our findings revealed
that suppressing retrieval of an upsetting experience involves activation
of a right-lateralized fronto-parietal network including the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, together with a bilateral de-activation of regions
implicated in autobiographical retrieval, including the hippocampus and
the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, and of the amygdala. Our findings
demonstrate that frontal control mechanisms first isolated through laboratory studies of relatively simple materials are also invoked to prevent the
retrieval of personally upsetting, person-specific memories.

F56
DELAYED AND BIASED SENSORY-PERCEPTUAL PROCESSING OF
NEGATIVE OVER POSITIVE VALENCED STIMULATIONS IN MOTHERS WITH HIGH ADVERSE CHILDHOOD EXPERIENCES Jordan
Bate1, Anne Murphy2, John Foxe2,3, Sophie Molholm2, Camila Rivera-Morales1,
Kelsey Armusewicz1, Or Dagan1, Gregory Peters2, Pierfilippo De Sanctis2; 1The
New School for Social Research, 2Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 3University
of Rochester Medical Center Rochester — A history of childhood maltreatment

and low parental protection increases individuals’ risk for future physical
and mental health problems. In fact, childhood experience of four or more
adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) is linked to impaired affective and
social functioning. Little is known about the impact of ACEs on the neural
processing of emotional information. Our goal was to investigate whether
individuals with ACEs scores ≥ 4 (n=12, mean age = 26.11 years) showed
impaired processing of emotionally valenced stimuli relative to individuals with ACEs scores < 4 (n=10, mean age = 29.44 years). Using high-density electrophysiology, the neurodynamics of processing of emotionally
valenced versus neutral images was compared between the two groups.
Participants performed a go/no-go task using the International Affective
Picture System, in which they responded quickly and accurately to every
image, while withholding responses to immediate image repetitions. In
preliminary analysis, the low ACEs-group showed affect-related modulations of visual event-related potentials (VEPs) starting at ~180ms after stimulus onset, with increased amplitude for valenced (positive or negative)
relative to neutral stimuli. This suggests early-onset enhanced processing
of biologically salient stimuli. In contrast, in the high ACEs-group affect-related modulations of the VEP only onset at ~300ms, and only for negative
stimuli. Thus there was a delay in the onset of valence-related modulation
of the VEP, and selective amplification of negative over positive valenced
inputs. These preliminary data suggest impaired processing of emotional
content, and a processing bias towards stimuli evoking emotional distress
in individuals who underwent adverse childhood experiences.

F57
MODULATION OF FEEDBACK PROCESSING IN SOCIAL ANXIETY
DISORDER UNDER OBSERVATION CONDITIONS Rolf Voegler1, Jutta

Peterburs1, Christian Bellebaum2, Thomas Straube1; 1Institute of Medical Psychology and Systems Neuroscience, University of Muenster, Germany, 2Department of Biological Psychology, Heinrich-Heine University Düsseldorf, Germany —

Monitoring of ongoing behavior is a crucial function of the human central
nervous system. Previous research suggests that electrophysiological correlates of performance monitoring such as the feedback-related negativity
(FRN) vary depending on contextual factors as well as personality traits
and anxiety level. In this study, 18 patients with social anxiety disorder
(SAD) and 20 healthy adult controls completed an adapted version of the
Frank task, a probabilistic learning task designed to discriminate between
learning from positive and negative feedback. Importantly, all participants completed the task in two distinct social conditions, an observation
condition in which social observation was operationalized by means of a
video camera, and a control condition without observation by a third party.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

235

Poster Session F	
While overall learning rates were comparable, behavioral results showed
that learning from positive and negative feedback differed significantly
between groups depending on social context. Similarly, ERP results did
not yield significant main effects for either group or condition. However,
a significant group by condition interaction indicated that FRN amplitudes
were more negative in patients in the observation condition, while this
effect was absent in controls. Also, FRN amplitudes were more negative for
positive feedback in the observation as compared to the control condition.
This effect was absent for negative feedback. Results are discussed with
regard to differences between groups in saliency processing, motivational
tendencies and risk aversion.

F58
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EMOTIONAL/INHIBITORY CONTROL AND BRAIN MORPHOLOGY IS DEPENDENT ON DIURNAL
CORTISOL SLOPE Teodora Stoica1, Melina Ramic1, Farah Naaz1, Brendan
Eliot Depue1; 1University of Louisville — Emotional and inhibitory control are

necessary self-regulatory processes to maintain stable goal driven behavior.
Our recent work, as well as others suggests that variance in the ability to
inhibit various psychological domains is related to morphological features
of the brain, including cortical thickness, surface area, volume and gyrification. Reductions in self-regulation are also associated with various mood
and anxiety disorders and more generally, negative affect. Furthermore,
individuals high in negative affect exhibit dysfunction of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the endocrine response related to
stress. This is frequently measured by the circadian cortisol rhythm, which
exhibits a high waking level with a short 30-60-minute increase, subsequently followed by reduction throughout the remainder of the day until
sleep. Individual differences in cortisol response are frequently assessed by
measuring diurnal slope. Therefore, we aimed to investigate whether the
relationship between emotional/inhibitory control and brain morphology
was related to diurnal cortisol slope. The present study obtained neuroimaging data from the National Institute of Health’s Pediatric Database
(NIHPD), funded by NICHD, NIDA, NIMH and NINDS. We analyzed
structural MRI data (N=154) with FreeSurfer to assess brain morphology
using emotional/inhibitory control questionnaires and cortisol measures
as regressors. Results indicate that individuals with more negative cortisol
slopes (larger decrease over time) exhibited a positive relationship between
increased emotional and inhibitory control and thickness/surface area in
both the left and right prefrontal cortex. These results suggest that behavioral, neural and endocrine responses are related to individual differences
in self-regulation.

F59
CONFIDENCE IN MEMORY RECALL AS STATISTICAL CONFIDENCE Paul Masset1, Adam Kepecs1; 1Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory — The

capacity to learn and recall previously encountered objects or situations
are central to adaptive behavior at timescales beyond those of sensory
systems. The ability to know when to trust recalled memories and when
to doubt them allows us to make plans about current and future actions.
Although the ability to assign appropriate level of confidence to recalled
memories confers an obvious evolutionary advantage, the accuracy of such
confidence reports has been questioned in the literature. We specifically
consider results from experiments of word recall revealing that confidence
is positively correlated with recall accuracy for correct identifications but is
negatively correlated for false identification of distractors. Here we present
a model that accounts for this paradox. We present a statistical explanation and an implementation inspired by signal detection theory and sensory psychophysics to show that the presence of negative correlations is
expected when categorizing the data according to properties only available to the experimenter. Our analysis shows that confidence reports in a
memory task have all the expected signatures of confidence based on the
statistical definition of confidence: the probability of a choice being correct
given the evidence available to the subject. The observed confidence reports
across the population suggest that individual subjects share a common discriminability measure across an abstract ensemble of stimuli that cannot
be mapped on an intuitive metric. In conclusion, our analysis shows that a
simple model inspired by perceptual psychophysics can explain confidence
reports in memory without the need of heuristics or dual process models.

236

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
F60
PRIORITY MEDIATES THE PRECISION OF MEMORY-GUIDED
ACTIONS Zuzanna Klyszejko1, Sarah Cook1, Clayton E. Curtis1,2; 1Psychology
Department, New York University, New York, NY, 2Center for Neural Science, New
York University, New York, NY — Recently, we demonstrated that the spatial

priority of items determined the precision of working memory using psychophysical discrimination (Klyszejko, Rahmati, Curtis, 2014). Here, we
attempt to generalize these findings by testing if the precision of memory-guided saccades is also determined by spatial priority. To test our hypothesis, we used endogenous cues to indicate target priorities, which were
operationalized as the probability (0%, 10%, 20%, or 60%) with which each
of four briefly presented targets will be the goal of a later memory-guided
saccade. We hypothesized that priority would linearly affect the precision
and latency of memory-guided saccades. Consistent with our hypothesis,
we found that 1) saccadic reaction times decreased with increasing priority,
and 2) the precision of memory-guided saccades increased with increasing
priority. Importantly, these data extend our previous findings and show
that priority determines the precision of memory-guided motor actions and
does not depend on the manner in which memory is tested (i.e., discrimination vs. motor estimation). Thus, priority may sculpt the distribution of
attention weights that determines the quality with which items in working
memory are encoded and/or maintained.

F61
NOREPINEPHRINE
ALPHA-2A
RECEPTOR
ACTIVATION
INCREASES FRONTO-PARIETAL FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
DURING WORKING MEMORY Andrew Breeden1, Charles Lynch1, Peter
Turkeltaub1, Chandan Vaidya1; 1Georgetown University — Working memory is

accompanied by precise interactions within a network of frontal and parietal
regions. Although norepinephrine (NE) release increases working memory
performance, it is unknown if it does so by regulating the functional connectivity of this fronto-parietal network. We hypothesized that administering a NE alpha-2a receptor agonist, guanfacine, would strengthen the fronto-parietal network during working memory. Characterizing NE’s network
impacts would inform neural models of working memory, and improve
understanding of noradrenergic medications commonly prescribed for
attentional and executive function problems. 17 healthy adults participated
in two fMRI scanning visits, once receiving guanfacine and once placebo.
The order of visits was counter-balanced and double-blind. After medication dosing, participants were scanned using fMRI during an N-Back working memory task. fMRI images were realigned, normalized, and smoothed.
To define a fronto-parietal network, functional connectivity was computed
between a left dorsolateral PFC (dlPFC) seed region and every voxel in
the brain. Motion, white matter and CSF activity, and N-Back loads were
regressed out. Fronto-parietal network maps were compared on drug vs.
placebo visits with paired t-tests. Guanfacine increased functional connectivity between the dlPFC and bilateral parietal regions, as well as the
left cerebellum (p < .005, k = 10). Furthermore, increases in dlPFC-parietal
functional connectivity were significantly correlated with improvements in
working memory accuracy (r=.59, p < .05). NE alpha-2a receptor activation
contributed to fronto-parietal network strength in a behaviorally relevant
manner. This suggests that NE may play an important role in regulating
large-scale networks in the service of working memory.

F62
RESTING-STATE SIGNATURES OF DOMAIN AND DEMAND-SPECIFIC WORKING MEMORY PERFORMANCE Jeffery Durbin1, Wessel van

Dam2, Scott Decker2, Jennifer Vendemia2, Rutvik Desai2; 1University of Kansas,
2
University of South Carolina — Working memory (WM) represents a key

component of higher-level cognition, with its multidimensional and multimodal nature illustrating the complex system of receiving, retaining, and
manipulating information across modalities. The present study examined
patterns of neural activity in the subjects’ resting state as they relate to offline measures of working and short-term memory (STM). Participants (n =

2016 Annual Meeting	
18) completed two segments: first, resting-state functional MRI data were
collected; and second, behavioral measures of verbal and visuospatial WM
and STM were collected irrespective of the scanning session. Fractional
amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations (fALFFs) were calculated from
the resting-state fMRI data and a seed-based analysis was conducted to
identify functional connectivity between frontal and parietal lobes. Correlational analyses between whole-brain fALFF values and the off-line
behavioral measures indicate that the fALFF values in the fronto-parietal
network positively correlated with a multimodal WM measure. Additionally, fALFF values within the right angular gyrus and left middle occipital
gyrus were significantly correlated with STM performance whereas fALFF
values within the right intraparietal sulcus and left dorsomedial cerebellar
cortex were significantly correlated with WM performance. Finally, modality-specific WM performance showed dissociable patterns of functional
connectivity such that verbal WM measures were correlated with the left
fronto-parietal seed connectivity (p = 0.52, p = 0.013) and visuospatial WM
measures were correlated with the right fronto-parietal seed connectivity
(p = 0.47, p = 0.024). These findings contribute to the growing literature
surrounding low-frequency fluctuations in the resting state brain and their
relationship with differences in cognitive performance.

F63
EARLY BLINDNESS IMPACTS ON THE SPATIAL ORGANIZATION
OF VERBAL WORKING MEMORY Roberto Bottini1, Stefania Mattioni1,
Olivier Collignon1; 1Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, University of Trento — Sev-

eral studies have suggested that serial order in working memory (WM) is
grounded on space. For a list of ordered items held in WM, items at the
beginning of the list are associated with the left side of space and items at
the end of the list with the right side. Is visual experience instrumental in
establishing this link between serial order in working memory and spatial
processing? We tested early blind (EB), late blind (LB) and sighted individuals in an auditory WM task. Participants had to keep in mind an ordered
sequence of 5 fruit and vegetable names while they did a classification task
involving words that were or were not in the memorized list. Replicating
previous studies, left-key responses were faster for early items in the list
whereas later items facilitated right-key responses in sighted and LB individuals. In contrast, EB did not show any association between space and
serial position. These results suggest that visual experience shapes the link
between ordered items in WM and spatial representations. We discuss the
findings in relation to previous studies investigating how visual deprivation influence the way spatial representations are used to ground non-spatial concepts such as time, order and magnitude (Bottini et al. 2015, Space
and time in sighted and blind, Cognition; Crollen et al. 2013, Embodied
numbers: Early vision drives the reference frame used for the spatial representation of numbers, Cortex; Ginsburg et al. 2014, The impact of verbal
working memory on number-space associations, JEP:LMC)

F64
LANGUAGE DEFICITS INDUCED BY TOPIRAMATE (TPM) ADMINISTRATION Christopher Barkley1, Angela Birnbaum1, Mingzhou Ding2, Serguei
Pakhomov1, Lynn Eberly1, Susan Marino1; 1University of Minnesota, 2University
of Florida — Many widely-prescribed drugs are associated with cognitive

impairments. One such drug, TPM, often causes widespread speech/
language problems. Here, we aim to characterize these deficits by testing the hypothesis that TPM selectively impairs verbal working memory.
Twenty healthy adults were included in a randomized/double-blind/
crossover study comparing the effects of TPM to placebo. One hour after
drug administration, subjects’ language abilities were assessed using a:
(1) semantic-category/phonemic fluency (COWA) task, as well as (2)
picture-description and (3) story-recall tasks. A single blood draw was
taken post-testing, enabling examination of concentration-dependent
performance effects. In nine subjects, EEG was recorded while subjects
performed a modified Sternberg task in order to assess effects of TPM on
working-memory. Results showed that after receiving TPM, participants
recalled fewer words on the MCG (p=0.02), an effect negatively correlated
with TPM-concentration levels (p=0.002). On the picture-description task,
TPM administration increased disfluencies, and was positively correlated
with concentration levels (p=0.03). The results of the COWA task showed
TPM negatively affected generative fluency, but no correlations between
performance and concentration were observed. Results from the Sternberg

Poster Session F
task showed that TPM increased RT (p = 0.003) and error rate (p = 0.037),
and at the highest memory load, amplitude reductions of the left anterior
negativity (300-800 msec. post-probe onset), a component typically associated with verbal working-memory processes. The data show that TPM
disrupts language at lexical and discourse levels, disruptions that appear
to arise from working-memory impairments. These results elucidate the
nature of TPM-induced speech/language deficits and the neurobiology of
language.

F65
THE EFFECT OF NATURAL VERSUS BUILT ENVIRONMENTS ON
CHILD REVERSE DIGIT SPAN PERFORMANCE: A SPECTRAL
ANALYSIS Salif Mahamane1, Alexis Porter1, Allison Hancock1, Justin Campbell1, Nicholas J. A. Wan1, Kerry E. Jordan1; 1Utah State University — Typically

healthy adults, and children with ADHD, show improved performance on
the reverse digit span (RDS), a demanding test of working memory, after
immersion in natural versus built environments. From an Attention Restoration Theory (ART) standpoint, these findings suggest that natural environments are cognitively restorative and improve attention and working
memory. Cognitive neuroscience methodology is used here to go beyond
these behavioral data and assess neural activity with RDS performance
during immersion in different environments that theoretically correspond
to differential degrees of attention restoration. Specifically, we hypothesized less alpha (8-12Hz) desynchrony when participants are in a natural
environment than a built environment. We collected data using mobile
electroencephalography while children (age 7 – 12 years) performed the
RDS in natural and built environments using a two-way repeated-measures ANOVA design. Participants performed the RDS shortly after arrival
at the environment (Time 1) and after an attention-to-environment immersive task (Time 2). Participants completed this procedure in both environments, counterbalanced for order. Current data show an increase in alpha
desynchrony from RDS Time 1 to Time 2 in the built environment whereas
in the natural environment, alpha desynchrony was comparatively stable
from Time 1 to Time 2. These are among the first neural data to suggest
an effect of attention restoration in natural versus built environments, and
the first behavioral data comparing performance in these environments for
typically healthy children.

F66
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF VISUOSPATIAL
WORKING MEMORY FOR SEQUENTIAL STIMULI INDEPENDENT
OF SPATIAL CUEING Peter Lynn1,2, Scott Sponheim2,1; 1University of Minnesota, 2Minneapolis VA Medical Center — To date, electrophysiological

correlates of visuospatial working memory (VWM) have been primarily investigated in spatial cueing paradigms featuring multiple stimulus
arrays. We administered a delayed-response task to healthy participants
as well as people with schizophrenia and their relatives. Two or three test
stimuli were sequentially presented in one of 16 locations, after which a
probe stimulus appeared; in half of the trials, one of these stimuli was an
irrelevant “distractor” stimulus. Participants indicated whether the probe
appeared in the location of a previous target stimulus. Using ERP analyses, we examined neural correlates of task manipulations during encoding
and retrieval, as well as their relationship to behavioral performance. ERPs
revealed encoding effects of stimulus type (e.g., relevance: target vs. distractor), order of stimulus presentation (e.g., progressive VWM load: first
vs. second vs. third), and retrieval effects of probe location as modulated by
both the stimulus type (probe at target location vs. probe at distractor location) and order of stimulus presentation (probe at first stimulus location vs.
second stimulus location vs. third stimulus location) for the encoding stimulus whose position the probe occupied; effects were observed in both early
visual components (P1 and N1) as well as later components (P3). Neural
abnormalities in people with schizophrenia and their relatives were also
observed. These results provide important insights into neural processes
underlying visuospatial processing of serially presented stimuli independent of spatial cueing, the role of irrelevant stimuli in VWM, and how these
processes differ in people with schizophrenia and their relatives.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

237

Poster Session F	

F67
DISRUPTION OF DELAY-PERIOD ACTIVITY IN HUMAN FRONTAL
EYE FIELDS CAUSES SYSTEMATIC IMPAIRMENTS IN SPATIAL
COGNITION Wayne Mackey1, Clayton Curtis1; 1New York University — Per-

sistent neural activity in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) has been implicated as
the neural mechanism by which primates maintain information in working
memory (WM) that is no longer readily observable in the environment but
necessary for a subsequent behavioral response. During human neuroimaging experiments, this persistent activity has been routinely observed in the
precentral sulcus (PCS), the putative homologue of the monkey frontal eye
fields. The PCS has also recently been shown to contain a retinotopic map
of space. Here, we combined computational neuroimaging and repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) during a classic spatial WM task
to test the assumption that this persistent neural activity observed in the
PCS is responsible for WM maintenance. First, we used population receptive field mapping to identify our stimulation site in individual subjects.
This method allows for a much more accurate localization of the retinotopic map in the PCS. We then measured subject performance on a memory-guided saccade task where a short burst of rTMS was applied during the
task delay period. During this period the location is no longer visible but
must be maintained in WM. Stimulation of the PCS caused slower response
times and an increase in error in the contralateral visual field. Moreover, we
used computational modeling to better describe the spatial distribution of
systematic error caused by the perturbation. These results provide critical
insights into the function of persistent neural activity in PFC, as well as the
underlying coordinate system that spatial locations are coded in within the
PCS.

F68
“IS TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION EVEN
DOING ANYTHING?”: EFFECTS ON WORKING MEMORY PERFORMANCE AND BRAIN ACTIVITY SIMULTANEOUSLY MEASURED
WITH OPTICAL NEUROIMAGING Nicholas Koleits1, Nathan Rose1, Ans
Vercammen1, Peter Goodin1,2, Peter Rendell1; 1Australian Catholic University,
2
Swinburne University of Technology — Transcranial direct current stimulation

(tDCS) is being increasingly used in attempts to modulate brain activity
and cognitive performance. However, the effects of tDCS on behavioural
performance are inconsistent and the extent to which it modulates neural
activity in brain areas other than motor cortex is unclear. To address this
issue, we applied tDCS to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) of
eighteen healthy, young adult participants during the performance of an
N-Back working memory task while we simultaneously recorded their brain
activity in the PFC with functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) – an
optical neuroimaging technique that is well suited for assessing the effects
of electrical stimulation. Participants performed the N-Back task with a
load of zero, one, two, or three letters during 20 minutes of active (2 mA)
and sham (0 mA) tDCS conditions (counterbalanced across participants)
with the anode and cathode electrodes positioned over the left and right
DLPFC, respectively. There was no difference in task performance between
active tDCS and sham conditions. There was a clear effect of N-Back load
on the level of oxygenated hemoglobin, with increases detected in optodes
over left and right anterior PFC in both active tDCS and sham conditions,
but there were no differences in oxygenated hemoglobin concentrations
between the active tDCS and sham stimulation conditions.

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
F69
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN COMPREHENDING UNFAMILIAR
METAPHORS Yi-Ting Tsai1, Chia-Lin Lee1; 1National Taiwan University — This

study assessed event-related potentials (ERPs) from 24 healthy older adults
while they read literal and unfamiliar metaphorical usages of sentence-final
action verbs, and judged, 800ms post verb onset, if a probe that was either
literally related or unrelated to the verb was related to the sentential message. Unlike younger adults from our previous study that showed a larger
N400 response followed by a late positive component (LPC) to unfamiliar
metaphors relative to the literal condition, older adults as a group showed a
negativity to unfamiliar metaphors only in a later and more restricted time

238

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
window (450-550ms) and no LPC effect. These age-related brain response
differences were accompanied by older adults’ lower accuracy on the
probe (literal and unfamiliar metaphor conditions: young: 86.6%, 94.6%;
old: 80.7%; 72.2%), suggesting that older adults tend to interpret unfamiliar
metaphors literally at the time when probes were presented. Despite these
differences in online measures, older adults were quite accurate (94.3%) in
a subsequent offline metaphor-paraphrasing task, suggesting that, given
time, older adults could successfully obtain the figurative readings for
unfamiliar metaphors. Further analysis showed that older adults’ individual variations in brain responses could be accounted for by their verbal
fluency scores in that older adults with higher verbal fluency elicited a sustained negativity to unfamiliar metaphors relative to the literal condition
(450-750ms) and were more accurate in probe judgment following unfamiliar metaphors (77.3%). These results suggest that high-functioning older
adults are better able to seek additional cognitive-neural resources to aid
unfamiliar meaning interpretations.

F70
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN INTEGRATIVE AND PREDICTIVE
MECHANISMS DURING LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION Ya-Yi

Wang1,2, Pei-Shan Huang1, Ovid J.-L. Tzeng2,3, Hsu-Wen Huang3; 1Academia
Sinica, Taiwan, 2Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, 3National Chiao Tung
University, Taiwan — This study aimed to investigate age-related changes in

using contexts during auditory sentence comprehension. Young and old
participants listened to sentences completed by predicted and unpredicted
(but plausible) words, and made a judgment according to the predictability of sentence-final word. Half of the sentence contexts were highly
constraint. Effects were examined by measuring ERPs responding to the
onset of ending words.Both age groups showed constraint main effect on
N1,highly constraint sentences elicited enhanced N1 than low constraint
sentences. There were no differences in the size, and timing for the two
groups. Besides, predictability effect on N400 is observed in both groupspredicted words elicited smaller N400s than unpredicted words. The N400
effects were smaller and later for older adults. Moreover, richer information eases processing of predicted words for young adults but not older
adults- predicted words embedded in highly constraint sentences elicited
smaller N400 than that embedded in low constraint sentences. Similarly,
young adults displayed a post-N400 frontal positivity for unpredicted
wordsembedded in high constraint sentences, indicating the cost of mispredicting the word.And this effect did not found for older adults (as a
group). Thus, although context provides top-down information that facilitates attention allocation, older adults seemed failed to effectively make use
of context information to guide semantic processing.

F71
CHILDREN BORN PROFOUNDLY DEAF SHOW TYPICAL HEMISPHERIC ASYMMETRIES IN CEREBRAL BLOOD FLOW DURING
LANGUAGE PRODUCTION Heather Payne1,2, Eva Gutierez-Sigut1, Bencie
Woll2, Mairead MacSweeney1,2; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, 2ESRC Deafness, Cognition & Language Research Centre,
University College London — Most adults show left lateralization for speech

production (Price, 2012). Developmental research suggests that asymmetries in early auditory areas, linked to the low-level acoustic properties of
speech, may be a precursor to left-lateralized language processes later in
development (Minagawa-Kawai et al.,2011). Children born deaf, regardless
of amplification, will inevitably experience a drastically different spoken
language input to hearing children. Assessing hemispheric dominance in
deaf children therefore allows us to test the relevance of auditory experience on language lateralization. Measuring neural activity in deaf children
has been difficult to date due to incompatibility between imaging techniques and cochlear implants. Here we use functional transcranial Doppler sonography (fTCD) which is a safe and cost-effective way of assessing
gross differences in hemispheric activity during cognitive tasks (Deppe
et al.,2004). We measured changes in cerebral blood flow velocity in the
middle cerebral arteries in 21 school-aged children (mean age 7 years 9
months) born severely or profoundly deaf (>70dB loss in better ear) whist
they described an animated story (Bishop et al., 2009). At the group level,
significant left lateralization during expressive language was observed
(mean lateralization index=2.2 , sd=3.3; t(20)=3.06, p=.006). A comparable

2016 Annual Meeting	
proportion of children were left (78%), right (16%), and low (6%) lateralized
as has been reported in studies of hearing children of a similar age (Groen
et al.,2012). We discuss the relationship between strength of lateralization
and behavioural performance. This study is a first step in attempting to
measure neurobiological processes involved in language production in this
understudied paediatric population.

F72
T-COMPLEX MEASURES IN BILINGUAL SPANISH-ENGLISH AND
TURKISH-GERMAN CHILDREN AND MONOLINGUAL PEERS Tanja

Rinker1, Valerie Shafer2, Markus Kiefer3, Nancy Vidal2, Yan H. Yu4; 1University of
Konstanz, Germany, 2The Graduate Center, City University of New York, USA, 3University of Ulm, Germany, 4St. John’s University, New York, USA — Lateral temporal

measures of the auditory evoked potential (AEP) including the T-complex
(positive Ta and negative Tb) as well as an earlier negative peak (Na) index
maturation of auditory/speech processing. They have also been shown to
be sensitive to language experience in adults. Neural responses to a vowel
sound at temporal sites in Spanish-English bilingual and English monolingual children and Turkish-German bilingual and German monolingual
children were measured. The goal was to determine whether obligatory
AEPs at temporal sites were modulated by language experience (monolingual versus bilingual) as well as the amount and quality of the language
experience. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded at left and right
temporal sites to a 250-ms vowel [ε] from 20 monolingual (American)-English and 18 Spanish-English children and from 11 Turkish-German and
13 monolingual German children. Language background information
and standardized verbal and non-verbal test scores were obtained for the
children. The results revealed differences in temporal AEPs (Na and Ta of
the T-complex) between monolingual and bilingual children. Specifically,
bilingual children showed smaller and/or later peak amplitudes than the
monolingual groups. Ta-amplitude distinguished monolingual and bilingual children best in both the German/Turkish-German and the English/
Spanish-English groups at right sites. Amount of experience and type of
experience with the target language (English and German) influenced processing. The finding of reduced amplitudes at the Ta latency for bilingual
compared to monolingual children suggests that language specific experience, and not simply maturation factors, influences development of the
neural processes underlying the Ta AEP.

F73
NEURAL FUNCTIONS MEDIATING WORD RETRIEVAL IN AGING

Ranjini Mohan1, Christine Weber1; 1Purdue University — Word retrieval difficul-

ties are one of the most frustrating of memory problems in older adults.
Poorer access to phonological representation of the target word has been
postulated as the underlying deficit, supported by findings of improvement
in word retrieval after phonological priming (Burke, MacKay, & James,
2000). The present study examines the underlying neurophysiological
mechanisms of phonological priming and word retrieval in adults across
the lifespan. Young (20-35 years), middle-aged (40-55 years) and older
(60-75 years) adults viewed pictures that were preceded by pseudo words
(prime) whose onset either matched or did not match the picture’s name.
Half of the pictures were low frequency words. Participants used a button
press to make phonological judgments about the prime and picture’s name.
Behavioral and electrophysiological correlates of phonological priming and
word retrieval were recorded. RTs of each group were shorter for phonologically primed pictures. Young adults were faster than both other groups
for retrieval of high and low frequency words. Middle-aged adults were
faster than older adults for the high, but not low, frequency words. The
effect of phonological priming on the N400 elicited by high and low frequency pictures was greater over the right hemisphere for young adults.
ERPs of the middle-aged and older adults did not display a priming effect
until after 500ms. Thus, phonological priming benefited all ages, however
priming effects were delayed in middle-aged and older adults. Poorer
access to phonological representation associated with word retrieval, especially for low frequency words, may begin as early as middle age.

Poster Session F

F74
DEVELOPMENT OF THE NEURAL ORGANIZATION UNDERLYING
NON-WORD REPETITION Carlo de los Angeles1, Zhenghan Qi1, Calvin

Goetz1, Michelle Han1, Irina Ostrovskaya1, Adrianne Harrison2, Kelly Halverson1,
Tyler K. Perrachione2, Helen Tager-Flusberg2, Kenneth Wexler1, John D. E. Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Boston University — Accurate rep-

etition of nonwords involves coordination of systems of speech perception,
speech production and phonological working memory. Nonword repetition performance correlated with children’s phonological and grammatical
development (Botting et al, 2011). In this study, we investigated the relation
between age and the ability to repeat nonwords of varying syllable lengths
(2-5 syllable) during a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scan.
The subjects were divided into three groups: younger children (n=29, 19
males, age range 5.8-9.6), older children (n=30, 14 males, age range 9.6-18)
and adults (n=23, 13 males, 18-34). The groups did not differ significantly
in gender (χ2 = 2.13, p =0.34), non-verbal IQ (F=2.07, p =0.132), or number
of motion outliers (F=1.703, p=.189). Our findings show that although
behaviorally the older children achieve the same accuracy as the adult
group, there exist neurological differences within the speech network and
the premotor cortex for the task over baseline contrast. The locations of
these changes are in the same areas that differ between the younger and
older children. The older children also had increased basal ganglia activation over the young children, with no significant homologous difference
between adults and older children. Under parametric load conditions, the
older children and the adults shared a superior temporal lobe activation
that was absent in the younger children. This data suggests further neurological development beyond achieving behavioral success exists during the
nonword repetition task.

F75
EARLY PARENTAL LANGUAGE INPUT QUALITY, BUT NOT QUANTITY, PREDICTS CORTICAL THICKNESS AT CHILD AGE 7-9 Ozlem
Ece Demir-Lira1, Meredith L. Rowe2, Susan C. Levine1, Susan Goldin-Meadow1,
Steven L. Small3; 1The University of Chicago, 2Harvard University, 3University
of California, Irvine — Early parental language input quantity and quality

strongly predict children’s later language development. Among different
measures of input quality, parents’ decontextualized utterances about
abstract topics removed from the here-and-now uniquely predict children’s
vocabulary outcomes, stronger than parental background factors and overall parental input quantity. Little is known about relations between early
parental input and the neurobiology of language. In the current longitudinal study, we assessed parental language input quantity and quality during
naturalistic parent-child interactions of 18 dyads at child age 30 months.
We acquired structural scans from children at child age 7-9 years. Using
Freesurfer, we quantified cortical thickness in 7 regions of interest that
have been shown to play a role in vocabulary processing: left inferior frontal gyrus (opercularis and triangularis), middle frontal gyrus, supramarginal gyrus, angular gyrus, superior temporal sulcus and middle temporal
gyrus. Results showed that our measure of input quality, parental decontextualized language input, but not parental socioeconomic status or overall parental input quantity, significantly predicted cortical thickness in left
inferior frontal gyrus (opercularis). These results provide the basis for our
current work examining relations of parental input quantity and quality to
white matter connectivity and developmental changes in gray matter structure and white matter connectivity. Overall, our results add to the existing
literature examining the role of experience in shaping the neurobiology of
language, and highlight the specific role of early home environment.

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
F76
THE MODULATION OF PERSONALITY ON CHINESE EMOTION
WORD PROCESSING: AN ERP STUDY Li-Chuan Ku1, Shiao-hui Chan1;
1

National Taiwan Normal University — Eysenck’s (1947) personality model
proposed that individuals of extraversion and neuroticism have different
sensibility to emotional stimuli. However, it remains unclear whether such
observations can be further influenced by lexical categories of emotion
words--a classification system widely adopted in linguistics. The present
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

239

Poster Session F	
ERP study thus examined whether personality traits, particularly extraversion and neuroticism, would affect the processing of Chinese two-word
compounds in various lexical categories under a lexical decision task. We
manipulated emotional valence (positive/neutral/negative) and lexical
category (stative verbs (e.g. ashamed)/eventive verbs (e.g. deceive)/nouns
(e.g. murderer)) of the stimuli. Thirty-five native Chinese speakers (Mean
age=26) were divided into high vs. low extraversion and neuroticism
according to their scores in the revised Eysenck personality questionnaire.
To test personality effects, we conducted separate ANOVAs on the ERP
data for subjects’ extraversion and neuroticism. Consistent with previous
literature, our results showed emotion effects in the P2, N400, and LPC
amplitudes. However, we did not find connections between extraversion
and the processing of emotional valence, as suggested in Eysenck’s personality model. We did, however, find modulations of neuroticism on the
emotion effects in N400 and LPC. Interestingly, the neuroticism modulation was also pronounced in processing stative verbs, with earlier onsets of
N400 and larger mean amplitudes of LPC, indicating neurotics’ sensitivity
to emotion words in this lexical category. Since stative verbs are semantically less complex than eventive ones, we argued that neurotics’ sensitivity
to stative verbs might be due to their easier/more direct access to the core
emotion concepts denoted by such verbs.

F77
RELATIONALITY IN LEFT ANGULAR GYRUS: EVIDENCE FROM
MEG Adina Williams1, Liina Pylkkanen1,2; 1New York University, Department of
Linguistics, 2New York University, Department of Psychology — The left inferior

parietal cortex has been implicated for broad semantic functions such as
heteromodal conceptual processing (Bonner et al., 2013), semantic integration (Lau et al., 2008) and conceptual combination (Price et al., 2015), but its
precise role in semantic cognition remains elusive. More specific hypotheses have proposed it as relevant for representing event concepts (Binder &
Desai, 2011), encoding relations (Boylan et al., 2014) and processing argument structure (Thompson et al., 2007). We pitted the integration hypothesis
against the eventivity and relationality accounts by varying target nouns’
eventivity and relationality, while presenting them in isolation and in two
combinatory contexts. High relational eventive nouns described events
with two participants (‘murder’) while low relational events had one participant (’yawn’). High relational non-events described relations between
entities (‘mother’) whereas low relational non-events were non-relational
objects (’chair’). A consonant string (e.g. ‘xhlpft’), an adjective ( ‘cute’), or a
possessor (e.g. ‘director’s’) preceded each noun. MEG source activity localized in the left inferior parietal cortex was analyzed using cluster-based
permutation tests. A 2x2x3 ANOVA showed a significant main effect of
relationality (high>low) in a spatio-temporal cluster 170-260ms after target
noun presentation. Relational nouns elicited similarly increased amplitudes
compared to non-relational nouns in isolation (murder > yawn & height >
chair) and across eventivity-type and combinatory context. No evidence
was found for a sensitivity in this region to eventivity or combinatory context. Thus, we found that the presence of potential relations encoded in a
noun’s meaning drives activity in the left inferior parietal cortex.

F78
ELABORATIVE FEEDBACK: ENGAGING THE VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND TASK-RELEVANT REGIONS PROMOTES
LEARNING IN NONWORD READING ALOUD Samantha R. Mattheiss1,
Edward J. Alexander2, William W. Graves1; 1Rutgers University - Newark, 2Tufts University — The goal of this study was to determine the neural basis by which

elaborative feedback (EF) may be more helpful than other types of feedback
in learning orthography-phonology (spelling-sound) mappings for novel
letter strings. EF (e.g. “Great, you blended po-tep.”), was compared to
Simple Feedback (SF; e.g. “Great, you got it correct.”), and to Content Feedback (CF; “It’s best to blend po-tep.”), all of which were provided on correct trials. In fMRI, EF was expected to activate neural regions implicated
in self-processing, reward, and orthography-phonology conversion. Our
predictions were mainly supported. EF compared to SF and CF resulted
in the highest accuracy; compared to CF, EF activated the ventromedial
prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), implicated in reward as well as self-referential
processing; and compared to SF, EF activated the posterior middle and
superior temporal and supramarginal gyri— regions implicated in orthography-phonology conversion and found to be underactive in individuals

240

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
with dyslexia—and the left fusiform/visual word form area—implicated
in orthographic processing. Contrary to our predictions, SF, but not EF,
activated the ventral striatum, yet resulted in the lowest accuracy. This
suggests the enhanced effectiveness of EF may be due to concurrent activation of reward-related (vmPFC) and task-relevant regions. Thus, receiving
elaborative feedback upon correctly applying a skill may not only promote
learning, but may also enhance an association between the self, reward,
and a target skill or behavior, thereby increasing application of the skill in
the future.

F79
CONTEXTUAL MODULATION OF HIPPOCAMPAL ACTIVITY
DURING PICTURE NAMING F.-Xavier Alario2,3, Anaïs Llorens1,2,3, Anne-So-

phie Dubarry1,2,3, Patrick Chauvel1,3,4, Catherine Liégeois-Chauvel1,3; 1INSERM,
UMR1106, Marseille, France, 2CNRS, UMR7290, LPC, Marseille, France,
3
Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France, 4AP-HM, Neurophysiologie Clinique,
Marseille, France — Picture naming is a standard task used to probe lan-

guage processes in healthy and impaired speakers. Picture naming recruits
a broad neural network of language related areas, among which hippocampus is typically not included. Indeed, hippocampus is not frequently associated with word production deficits, and its activation is rarely reported in
imaging data of word production. However, hippocampus can be expected
to play a role during picture naming, subtending for example implicit
learning of the links between pictured objects and their names. To test this
hypothesis, we probed hippocampal activity during plain picture naming,
without any memorization requirement; we further assessed whether this
activity was modulated by contextual factors such as repetition priming
and semantic interference. The data were recorded from intracerebral electrodes that had been directly implanted for clinical diagnosis in the hippocampi of six epileptic patients. The electrophysiological responses revealed
a specific and reliable pattern of activity that was markedly modulated by
repetition priming and semantic context. These results indicate that hippocampus is recruited during picture naming, presumably in relation to
implicit learning, with contextual factors promoting differential hippocampal processes, possibly subtended by different sub-circuitries.

F80
MIXED METAPHORS: ERP RESPONSES TO ABSTRACT AND CONCRETE PREPOSITIONAL PHRASES Emily Zane1,2, Valerie Shafer1; 1CUNY

Graduate Center, 2Emerson College — It has been postulated that concrete and

abstract senses of a preposition are interconnected, so that each preposition
has a central spatial sense, which is chained to multiple tertiary, related
senses. In this account, abstract uses of prepositions are not idiomatic, but
are instead cognitively associated with spatial concepts through metaphor (e.g., Lakoff, 1990). To compare the processing of abstract and concrete prepositional phrases, event-related potentials (ERPs) were used to
examine the processing of reference nouns in concrete and abstract phrases
headed by “in” or “on”. ERPs were recorded from 28 adult participants
using a 128-channel Geodesic net as they read prepositional phrases. In
the phrases, nouns either matched or did not match the preceding preposition (e.g., “in the bowl/plate” and “in the wrong/mend”). ERPs were
time-locked to the onset of the noun. Results indicate that while spatially
unexpected concrete nouns (e.g., “in the plate”) elicit a significant centro-parietal N400 response, unexpected abstract nouns (e.g., “in the mend”)
yield a relative, late positivity in central sites from 700ms post-noun onset
to the end of the epoch. This suggests that inappropriate concrete nouns
are semantically unexpected (leading to N400 effects), while mismatched
abstract nouns require phrase reanalysis and/or reconstruction (leading to
P600 effects). These findings cast doubt on accounts of polysemy that claim
that abstract uses of prepositions are cognitively and metaphorically linked
to a preposition’s spatial sense, and instead suggest that abstract uses of
prepositions are idiomatic and are stored in the lexicon as phrasal units.

F81
AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY OF INITIAL AMERICAN SIGN
LANGUAGE ACQUISITION IN ADULT LEARNERS Megan Mott1, Karen

Emmorey1, Gabriela Meade1,2, Sara Campbell1, Phillip J Holcomb1, Katherine J
Midgely1; 1San Diego State University, 2University of California, San Diego — Previous research on second-language learning indicates changes in event-re-

2016 Annual Meeting	
lated potentials (ERPs) to L2 words, most notably an increase in amplitude
of the N400 as learning occurs. The present study examined the earliest
stages of learning American Sign Language (ASL), a visually dynamic
language with no written form. ERPs were recorded from 32 scalp sites
in college-age English-speaking monolinguals with no prior knowledge of
ASL as they watched short individual video clips of a native signer producing 160 ASL signs. In a laboratory setting, participants then learned the
English translations of 80 of the 160 signs via a series of associative learning
protocols. Each of the learned English/ASL pairs was presented a total of
five times during the learning protocols, and participants were instructed
to avoid ASL outside of the lab in between experimental sessions. Post
learning, ERPs were recorded as participants watched all 160 ASL clips
(learned and unlearned), performing a go/no-go semantic categorization
task. Pre-learning, there were no ERP differences between the 80 signs that
were in the to-be-learned group and the 80 signs in the unlearned group.
However, post-learning there were clear ERP differences between learned
and unlearned signs, with increased negativity for the learned signs. These
effects were similar in polarity and latency to those seen in previous studies
of spoken and written language learning. Overall, these results suggest that
comparable mechanisms underlie the formation of lexico-semantic representations for signed and spoken language learning.

LANGUAGE: Other
F82
THE EFFECT OF LEARNING TO READ ON THE NEURAL SYSTEMS
FOR VISION AND LANGUAGE: A LONGITUDINAL APPROACH WITH
ILLITERATE PARTICIPANTS Falk Huettig1, Uttam Kumar2, Ramesh Mishra3,
Viveka Nand Tripathi4, Anupam Guleria2, Jay Prakash Singh4, Frank Eisner5; 1Max
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics Nijmegen, 2Centre of Biomedical Research
Lucknow, 3University of Hyderabad, 4University of Allahabad, 5Radboud University
Nijmegen — How do human cultural inventions such as reading result in

neural re-organization? In this first longitudinal study with young completely illiterate adult participants, we measured brain responses to speech,
text, and other categories of visual stimuli with fMRI before and after a
group of illiterate participants in India completed a literacy training program in which they learned to read and write Devanagari script. A literate
and an illiterate no-training control group were matched to the training
group in terms of socioeconomic background and were recruited from the
same societal community in two villages near Lucknow, India. This design
permitted investigating effects of literacy cross-sectionally across groups
before training (N=86) as well as longitudinally (training group N=25). The
two analysis approaches yielded converging results: Literacy was associated with enhanced left-lateralized responses to written text along the ventral stream, dorsal stream, (pre-) motor systems and thalamus. These effects
corroborate and extend previous findings from cross-sectional studies.
However, effects of literacy were specific to written text and to false fonts.
Contrary to previous research, we found no direct evidence of literacy
affecting the processing of other types of visual stimuli such as faces, tools,
houses, and checkerboards (cf. Dehaene et al., 2010, Science). Furthermore,
we did not find any evidence for effects of literacy on responses in the auditory cortex in our Hindi-speaking participants. The latter result in particular raises questions about the extent to which phonological representations
in the auditory cortex are altered by literacy acquisition or recruited online
during reading.

F83
HIPPOCAMPAL DECLARATIVE MEMORY SUPPORTS LANGUAGE
AND GESTURE PRODUCTION Caitlin Hilliard1, Susan Wagner Cook1,

Melissa Duff1; 1University of Iowa — The spontaneous hand gestures that

accompany spoken language affect communication, learning, and memory.
Despite substantial behavioral evidence demonstrating this, the cognitive
and neural mechanisms underlying gesture production remain unknown.
Because the forms of gestures reflect the concept or idea being communicated, we hypothesized that gesture may directly reflect activation of information in memory, particularly hippocampally-supported memory. We
examined the speech and gesture of patients with hippocampal amnesia
and healthy comparison participants. Patients with bilateral hippocampal
damage and severe declarative memory impairment provide a rare oppor-

Poster Session F
tunity to examine whether degraded memory representations influence
online gesture and speech production. We calculated the gesture rate (gestures/word) for speech and gesture produced during four discourse tasks
in which patients talked about past personal (e.g., frightening experience)
and habitual events (e.g., sandwich making). We coded spoken words for
standard measures including frequency, familiarity, imageability, and
length. We analyzed data using mixed effects models with a fixed effect of
patient status and random intercepts for task and participant. Patients with
hippocampal amnesia gestured at a lower rate than healthy comparisons
(β=0.56,t=2.41,p=.03). Additionally, patients produced words that were
more frequent (β=-0.13,t=-1.82,p=.08), more familiar (β=0.004,t=2.05,p=.05),
and shorter in letters (β=0.05,t=2.85,p=.01) than those of comparisons.
Although amnesic patients produced as much speech as comparison participants, the richness of their communication was impoverished; they produced fewer gestures and used more frequent and familiar words when
communicating events from their memory. This suggests that activation
of rich mental representations via the hippocampus is one mechanism of
gesture production.

F84
THE IMPACT OF EURHYTHMIC STRUCTURES ON SPEECH PROCESSING: ERPS ATTEST TO EFFECTS ON SENSORY MEMORY
Victor J. Boucher1, Annie C. Gilbert2, Boutheina Jemel1; 1Université de Montréal,
2
McGill University — Our work on speech segmentation has shown that lis-

teners attend to marks of temporal groups in meaningful utterances or
nonsense syllables (Gilbert et al, 2014, 2015). These marks are the same as
those of chunking patterns that arise spontaneously in list recall, which
suggest a link with processes of short-term memory. It has also been
reported that speakers tend to produce eurhythmic temporal chunks in
utterances (Martin 1987). One wonders if these patterns are idiosyncratic
or if they reflect a general “perceptual chunking” associated with immediate memory. In exploring the latter possibility, we hypothesized that
heard regular (eurythmic) groups in sequences of syllables would benefit
a sensory memory of sounds as opposed series with irregular groups or
no groups. EEG responses of 18 participants were monitored while they
listened to series of 12 non-sense syllables containing regular 3-syllable
groups, irregular 2- to 4-syllable groups, and no groups. Each sequence was
followed by a target syllable which participants had to identify as present
or absent in the sequence. The ERPs to target syllables showed effects of
groups on the amplitude of the P300, a component that indexes the load on
sensory memory (with rising amplitudes reflecting increase load). Targets
presented in groupless stimuli show the largest P300 amplitudes, whereas
targets presented in eurhythmic conditions show the smallest P300 amplitudes. The results demonstrate that perception of temporal groups links to
sensory memory, and the fact that regular groups ease memory load may
explain the tendency of eurythmic patterns in speech.

F85
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF TEXT COMPREHENSION PROCESSES FOR BILINGUALS: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS
(ERPS) INVESTIGATION. Chin Lung Yang1, Charles A. Perfetti2, Jiang Ying3;
1

Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2Learning, Research and Development Center,
University of Pittsburgh, 3City University of Hong Kong — We conducted a EPRs

study to examine the proficiency effect on the bilingual processing of text
comprehension. Four-eight English as the second language learners (L2/
ESL: high vs. low proficiency, 24 each), read two-sentences passages in
English where the “referent-matching” relation of the target word (“The
explosion..”), to the text matches with the three levels of text representation[1]: A surface-level match as in “…exploded... The explosion…”; a textbase match as in “…blew up... The explosion…”; and a situation-model
match as in “…bomb…dropped. The explosion…”. Additionally, a non-sensible baseline “…bomb was stored safely… The explosion…” was used to
compare the ease of integration processing among conditions. We analyzed
the N400 (250-500ms post-target onset) and late positivity component
(LPC, 500-700ms) to assess the proficiency effect on the semantic integration [2] and the mental-model construction processes [3,4] respectively. The
results indicate robust proficiency effect when processing textbase match:
the amplitude of both N400 and LPC was reduced for high-proficient L2/
ESL while enhanced for low-proficient L2/ESL. No reliable proficiency
effect was observed when integrating the target word with the text relied

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

241

Poster Session F	
on a surface-match and a demanding conceptual processing (i.e., inference-drawing when processing the situation match): both groups showed
reduced N400 while enhanced LPC effect. The results, overall, underline
the importance of the L2 semantic/conceptual processing in modulating
the ease of both meaning integration and mental-model construction processes during L2 text comprehension; and also suggest the high resource
constraints in bilinguals’ mental-model construction processes due to their
non-native lexico-semantic processing (as compared to monolinguals [3,5]).

F86
THE ROLE OF LANGUAGE PRODUCTION DURING PREDICTION IN
LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION Cristina Baus1, Anne-Sophie Dubarry1,2,
F-Xavier Alario1; 1Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, (France), 2INSERM (France)
— This work investigated how language production modulates predic-

tion of upcoming utterances in language comprehension. Specifically, we
asked whether involving language production in a task alters the neural
correlates associated to prediction in language comprehension. To do so,
listeners were tested in two blocks, one involving uniquely listening trials
and the other involving both speaking and listening trials. We compared
the electroencephalographic (EEG) activity elicited by those listening trials
in the two blocks. As an index of word predictability, we manipulated color
knowledge, thus having words with highly associated colors (lemon) and
words with less associated colors (umbrella). Participants were presented
with a visual prime word (lemon) followed by the auditory presentation
of a target color-name that was either congruent (yellow) or incongruent
(blue) with the word’s associated color. Activity time-locked to the target
revealed the classical N400, with larger negativities for incongruent color-names than for congruent color-names. In contrast, no difference was
observed between the listening trials in the two blocks. Interestingly, activities time-locked to the prime (visual word) revealed a clear effect of block:
starting at 300 ms, listening trials in the listening block elicited a larger negativity than in the listening/speaking block. More importantly, differences
between more predictive (lemon) and less predictive words (umbrella) in
terms of their color arose in the same time-window but only in the speaking/listening block. Altogether, these results suggest that language production modulates prediction of upcoming events but not their integration
during comprehension.

F87
ALEXIA WITH AGRAPHIA OF KANJI WITH PRESERVED JUKUJI-KUN
READING IN A PATIENT WITH SUBCORTICAL HEMORRHAGE IN
THE LEFT POSTERIOR MIDDLE TEMPORAL AND ANGULAR GYRI
Mizuho Yoshida1, Toshihiro Hayashi1, Shoji Tsuji1, Yasuhisa Sakurai2; 1The University of Tokyo, 2Mitsui Memorial Hospital — Non-aphasic alexia with agraphia

for kanji (Japanese morphogram) are attributed to the left posterior inferior
temporal area or angular gyrus. As for reading of kanji, patients are predominantly impaired in on-reading, which conveys phonetic value, rather
than kun-reading, which conveys semantic value. Jukuji-kun-reading of
kanji words, whose reading is highly irregular and their meaning could
not derive from each kanji character, is severely impaired in most patients.
A 66 year-old patient with subcortical hemorrhage in the left posterior
middle temporal and angular gyri presented with mild anomia and alexia
with agraphia. Her general intelligence was preserved (WAIS-III TIQ 102).
Evaluation of aphasia showed mild anomia, mild impairment of repetition,
and alexia with agraphia for kanji. Reading of kana (Japanese syllabogram),
tested with three-character words and non-words, was preserved. In contrast, reading of kanji, tested with two-character kanji words (three moras),
was impaired (78 %). Writing of single-character kanji was impaired (29%),
whereas writing of the kana transcription of the kanji characters was preserved (100%). Further evaluation of two-character kanji words reading
revealed that on-reading was impaired (58%), whereas kun-reading was
relatively preserved (85%). Notably, jukuji-kun-reading was also preserved
(82%). These results suggest that representation of visual forms of kanji
words per se and its association with semantic values were preserved,
whereas association of visual forms of kanji with their phonetic values was
disconnected. Furthermore, correct reading of jukuji-kun-reading could be
routed via semantic representation.

242

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

F88
LONGITUDINAL RESTING STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
PATTERNS IN THE EARLY PHASE OF RECOVERY FROM APHASIA
IN TEMPOROPARIETAL STROKE Julian Klingbeil1, Anika Stockert1, Max
Wawrzyniak1, Katrin Wrede1, Dorothee Saur1; 1University of Leipzig — Substan-

tial language improvements can be observed within the first days after
stroke. However, underlying changes in the functional status of the language network during the acute phase remain to be demonstrated. In a resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) fMRI study we assessed changes
in functional connectivity repeatedly (acute(t1)=2±1, subacute(t2)=10±2
days post-onset) in aphasic patients (N=12, 62±14 years, 10 male) with left
temporoparietal stroke. Language comprehension and production scores
were calculated based on the Aachener Aphasie-Test. For RSFC analysis
9mm spherical ROIs reflecting core language regions in the left anterior
inferior frontal (aIFG: x=-54 y=32 z=1, MNI-space), posterior middle temporal gyrus (pMTG: x=-54 y=-43 z=4) and their right hemisphere homologous were selected. Seed-to-whole-brain analysis from left aIFG or pMTG
revealed RSFC to right hemisphere homologous frontal or temporal areas
at t1 and t2 (p>.05, FWE corrected). Longitudinally, RSFC from left pMTG
to left aIFG as well as RSFC from left aIFG to left frontal (operculum, insula,
premotor cortex) and to right frontal (IFG, premotor cortex) areas increased
significantly from t1 to t2 (p>.001, uncorrected). Subsequent ROI-to-ROI
analysis revealed increased RSFC between left aIFG and pMTG from t1 to
t2 associated with improved language production (r=.579, p=.049). During
the acute phase (t1) better scores for language comprehension and production were predicted by higher RSFC between left aIFG and right aIFG
(r=.736 p=.006). To conclude, we observed early ipsi- and contralesional
changes in the language network’s functional connectivity and associated
language improvements indicative of acute diaschisis and subsequent reorganization within the distributed language network.

F89
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY NETWORKS FOR WORD PROCESSING IN EARLY ENGLISH-SPANISH BILINGUALS Edith Brignoni-Perez1,
Nasheed I. Jamal1, Guinevere F. Eden1; 1Georgetown University — Single-word

reading relies on a left-lateralized network including occipito-temporal
(OTC), temporo-parietal, and inferior frontal (IFG) cortices. The use of
these regions is modulated based on the age of the reader (Martin et al.,
2014), the nature of the writing system (Bolger et al., 2005), and the depth of
the orthography (OD) (Paulesu et al., 2000). Specifically, languages that are
shallow (i.e., letter-to-sound mapping is consistent, as in Italian, German,
and Spanish) tend to rely more on the left posterior portion of the superior
temporal gyrus (pSTG) (for grapheme-to-phoneme mapping), while languages with a deep orthography (e.g., French and English) rely relatively
more on the OTC. Here we examined the functional connectivity (FC) of
fMRI data among these brain regions in early English-Spanish bilingual
adults during the processing of English and Spanish words. We wanted to
test whether FC maps reflect the differences in OD for the languages with
which they have a lifelong experience. We performed a left-hemisphere
region of interest (ROI)-to-ROI analysis by connections intensity using
CONN toolbox. We found FC between pSTG and IFG during Spanish, but
not English, word processing (p < 0.05 FDR seed-level corrected). We did
not find FC between the OTC (including the visual word form area, VWFA)
and any other ROI while processing words in either English or Spanish.
Our finding of FC between pSTG and IFG during Spanish word processing
supports the idea that languages with a shallow orthography utilize the
dorsal pathway for grapheme-to-phoneme mapping.

F90
ERP CORRELATES OF WHOLE-LANGUAGE AND ITEM-LEVEL
COMPETITION IN BILINGUAL LANGUAGE PRODUCTION Zofia
Wodniecka1,2, Jakub Szewczyk1, Paweł Mandera1,3, Patrycja Kałamała1, Joanna
Durlik1; 1Jagiellonian University, 2Penn State University, 3Ghent University — The

goal of the study was to explore global (whole-language) and local (item-related) sources of language competition in bilingual production. 71 native
speakers of Polish (L1) who were learners of English (L2), first named a
set of pictures in L1, then named a different set of pictures in L2, and in
a third block, named pictures in L1. In the third block, half of the items
were repeated from the L2 block and half were completely new. The par-

2016 Annual Meeting	
adigm allowed calculation of two indices: 1) item-related competition: a
comparison between L1 naming of the item which was previously named
in L2 vs. L1 naming of a new item; and 2) whole-language competition: a
comparison between L1 naming of new items before vs. after a block of L2
naming. We observed costs related to both global and local types of competition: picture naming latencies were slower both after naming a block of
unrelated items in L2 and after naming the same item in L2. However, both
measures yielded different neural correlates. The global costs were accompanied by centrally distributed negativity in the 200-500ms time-window
for L1 trials named after a block of L2 naming (relative to L1 trials named
before the block of L2 naming). The item-related costs were associated with
a more pronounced P300 effect, starting at 200, and lasting to the end of
the recorded epoch. The results indicate that different neural mechanisms
underlie resolution of global and local language competition.

F91
THE EFFECT OF SENTENCE COMPLEXITY ON THE RESOLUTION
OF AMBIGUOUS PRONOUNS Hossein Karimi1, Tamara Swaab1, Fernanda
Ferreira1; 1University of California at Davis — Discourse processing requires

accessing information from preceding sentences and relating it to incoming
information. One such process involves establishing pronominal reference.
Previous research has demonstrated that pronominal ambiguity incurs a
processing cost that is reflected as a sustained negative shift (Nref; e.g.,
van Berkum, Brown, & Hagoort, 1999; van Berkum, Brown, Hagoort, &
Zwitserlood, 2003). In the present study, we examined whether and how
complexity of the preceding sentence affects the resolution of ambiguous
pronouns. Two competing hypotheses make differential predictions in
this regard: On the one hand, complexity might make it harder to establish
reference because the representations of the referents might be more difficult to retrieve from memory, producing a greater Nref magnitude. On the
other hand, complexity might cause the comprehension system to adopt
a “good‐enough” processing strategy (Ferreira, Ferraro, & Bailey, 2002),
where reference is not fully established, resulting in smaller Nref magnitude (under‐specification). We manipulated complexity by adding a relative clause to each of the two potential referents in the complex condition
(e.g., “The actor who was visibly upset walked away from the cameraman
who was critical of the show”) and adding no extra information to the
potential referents in the non‐complex condition (e.g., “The actor walked
away from the cameraman”). Our results revealed that the Nref magnitude
on the frontal electrodes was reliably greater in the non‐complex condition
compared with the complex condition, suggesting that a complex preceding sentence results in under‐specification of the reference establishment,
consistent with Good Enough language processing.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
F92
PREDICTING NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF CONCEPT MEANINGS IN CONTEXT Jing Wang1, Vladimir Cherkassky1, Marcel Just1; 1Carne-

gie Mellon University — Although individual concepts are the fundamental

elements of thought, the complexity and generativity of human thoughts
stems from the ability to combine simple concepts into propositions. We
have developed a predictive theory that can characterize the neural representation of a large corpus of sentences, with sufficient accuracy to decode
the content of a sentence that is entirely new to the model. Seven participants read 240 sentences, containing 242 content words, varying in topic,
length and structure (“The old man threw the stone into the lake.”) during
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scans. The semantic properties of each word concept can be mapped to its neural representation as
it occurs in various sentence contexts. The semantic properties are 43 neurally plausible features that characterize many familiar concepts in various
domains (e.g. shelter, social actions). The neural representation of a word is
estimated by the percent signal change in a selected group of voxels, averaged over the images of all the sentences that contain the word. The learned
mapping allows the prediction of the neural signature of any new word
given its semantic features. The second level of the model combines the predicted neural representations of individual words to generate the predicted
neural representation of a sentence containing the words. The model can
generate predicted activation patterns for each of the 240 sentences while

Poster Session F
leaving out the fMRI data from that sentence from the model’s training set,
resulting in a mean prediction rank accuracy of 0.81 among the 240 alternatives across participants.

F93
A BRAIN NETWORK FOR NUMERICAL PROCESSING Amy L. Daitch1,
Josef Parvizi1; 1Stanford University, Department of Neurology — In every culture,

arbitrary symbols are assigned specific meanings; for example numerals
are associated with numerical quantities. We have recently identified a neuronal population within the human ventral temporal cortex (VTC) selective
for visual numerals, compared to other morphologically similar stimuli
(‘Visual number area’, or ‘VNA’). In line with neuroimaging and primate
electrophysiology work, we have also reported the involvement of human
intraparietal sulcus (IPS) in more abstract numerical representations. In this
study, we took advantage of the high temporal resolution of electrocorticography (ECoG) in human subjects to track the fast temporal dynamics
within and between VTC and IPS, as subjects read and manipulated visual
numerals across several tasks, ranging from simple recognition to more
complicated arithmetic computations. We found that during active computations, VNA became engaged later than more posterior VTC regions that
were responsive to, but less selective for, numerical stimuli. VNA, but not
posterior VTC, was also selective for words with numerical content relative
to phonologically similar words (e.g. ‘seven’ versus ‘heaven’). Lastly, we
found selective and unidirectional coupling from IPS to VNA, relative to
other VTC regions, with the low frequency phase at IPS modulating high
frequency activity at VNA. These results strongly suggest a recurrent mode
of communication between the VNA and IPS during numerical processing.

F94
LANGUAGE, EVENTS, AND THE HIPPOCAMPUS: TYPES, TOKENS,
AND TOKEN-STATES Zachary Ekves1, Pedro Paz-Alonso2, Gerry Altmann1;

1

University of Connecticut, 2Basque Center on Cognition, Brain, and Language
— Language comprehension often refers to an object undergoing a change

in state, which creates ambiguity when we refer back to this object, as the
referent could be the object before or after the change (“the man chopped
an onion. The onion…”). Previous studies have implicated the left posterior vetrolateral prefrontal cortex (pVLPFC) in selecting between possible
object states for reference. We examined functional connectivity during
sentence comprehension to investigate the neural correlates underlying the
resolution of state ambiguity and the consequences of state change for the
subsequent representation of new objects. The sentences in this experiment
described substantial or minimal object change (“chop/weigh”), and then
subsequently referred back to that changed object (“…the onion…”) or to
another instance of that object type (“…another onion…”). Data revealed
greater connectivity between left pVLPFC and hippocampus when referring to new instances of substantially changed objects compared to the
same substantially changed object. Additionally we observed increased
connectivity between the hippocampus and angular gyrus when referring
to new instances of an object, compared to referring to the same object,
regardless of the amount of change. We suggest that this connectivity
indicates suppression by the pVLPFC of previous, salient features during
the instantiation of new objects in the hippocampus. Overall, the present
results highlight the importance of the hippocampus in language processing and provide early indications of regions involved in the instantiation
of object-state representations during processing, which we suggest act as
representational primitives of events more generally.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other
F95
EMBODYING EMOTION IN NARRATIVE DISCOURSE: A FACIAL
EMG STUDY ON SIMULATION VS. MORAL EVALUATION IN AFFECTIVE LANGUAGE PROCESSING Bjorn ‘t Hart1, Marijn Struiksma1, Anton van
Boxtel2, Jos van Berkum1; 1Utrecht University, 2Tilburg University — Facial electro-

myography (fEMG) research has shown that activation and deactivation
of the corrugator supercilii (‘frowning muscle’) reliably indexes negative
and positive affect respectively. Furthermore, work on embodiment in language processing suggests such muscle activity is involved in conceptual
simulation during language comprehension. This work has focused mainly

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

243

Poster Session F	
on simple words and sentences (‘happy’, ‘John was happy’), which provide
affectively valenced lexical concepts and situation models to be simulated,
but not much else. In natural language use, however, people usually also
affectively evaluate things. Importantly, corrugator activity involved in
evaluation might be at odds with corrugator activity implicated in simulating the described concepts or events, e.g. when an immoral character enjoys
something positive. To investigate the extent to which, in more complex
situations, corrugator activity reflects simulation (lexical/situation model
valence) and/or moral evaluation (reader appraisal), we asked participants
to read 64 narratives that orthogonally manipulated valence at both levels.
Reading about characters behaving in a morally laudable or objectionable
fashion in the first half of the narrative immediately led to decreased or
increased corrugator activity respectively. Critically, corrugator activity at
subsequent events happening to these characters primarily patterned with
moral desirability or ‘justice’ of the event (people frowned most when bad
things happened to good people and when good things happened to bad
people), while simultaneously showing a small effect of lexical/situation
model valence. This suggests that neither language-driven simulation nor
moral evaluation alone determines embodied fEMG activity, highlighting
the importance of considering evaluative stance in research on embodied
language processing.

F96
LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION DOES NOT REQUIRE PERCEPTUAL SIMULATIONS Markus Ostarek1,2, Adil Ishag3, Falk Huettig1,4; 1Max
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2International
Max Planck Research School for Language Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3University of Leipzig, Germany, 4Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, &
Behavior, Nijmegen, The Netherlands — Zwaan and Yaxley (2002) found that

participants activated information about the shapes of objects implied in
sentences; they responded faster to pictures of objects matching rather than
mismatching the implied shapes in a picture-sentence verification task.
This has been widely interpreted as evidence for perceptual simulation.
The present study was based on the following rationale: If visual simulations underlie the facilitation effect, interfering with visual processing
should considerably reduce the effect. We used dynamic Mondrian-type
masks that interfere strongly with basic visual processing (especially in V1,
V2, V3; Yuval-Greenberg & Heeger, 2013) as visual noise to impair any lowlevel visual simulations. In a within-subjects design, 112 participants listened to 80 sentences while looking at visual noise or at a blank screen and
their reaction times to subsequently appearing matching vs. mismatching
target pictures were measured. Linear mixed-effects modelling revealed a
robust match effect (t=4.22, p<.001), which, crucially, was not affected by
visual noise (t<1, p>0.4 for the interaction). These results suggest that, in
contrast to the received view, perceptual simulation is not responsible for
the shape priming in the current paradigm. More generally, the findings
speak against the idea that language comprehension involves the automatic
activation of modality-specific representations.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
F97
MALE FASHIONISTAS AND FEMALE FOOTBALL FANS: HOW
GENDER STEREOTYPES AFFECT NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF SPEECH COMPREHENSION Angela Grant1, Sarah E. Grey1,
Janet G. van Hell1; 1The Pennsylvania State University — Recent studies have

found that pre-existing contextual information, such as gender stereotypes,
is incorporated online during comprehension (Van Berkum, van den Brink,
Tesink, Kos & Hagoort, 2008). Fewer studies, however, have measured how
we create new contexts when we are not given explicit instructions (Regel,
Coulson & Gunter, 2010). We studied the effects of exposure to stereotypically congruent and incongruent patterns of speech on the processing of
semantic incongruities. Participants listened to 240 critical sentences, consisting of a female speaker and a male speaker reading sentences about
stereotypically feminine (fashion) and stereotypically masculine (sports)
topics. Half of the participants heard a stereotype congruent pattern of sentences (e.g. for the female speaker, no errors about fashion but errors on
sports sentences) and the other half heard a stereotype incongruent pattern.
Aside from the pattern of errors, no explicit information was given regard-

244

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
ing the speakers. We assessed the influence of correctness and stereotype
congruence during the first and second halves of the experiment. We found
that gender-incongruent incorrect sentences elicit larger N400s than gender-congruent incorrect sentences, but only in the first half of the experiment. These results suggest that a) stereotype congruence affects listener’s
reaction to gender-based semantic incongruities, and b) that participants
are able to create new, speaker-specific contexts online in order to adjust
their expectations and responses.

F98
CROSS-LANGUAGE FMRI DECODING OF SENTENCES IN THREE
LANGUAGES: PORTUGUESE, ENGLISH AND MANDARIN Ying
Yang1, Cyntia Bailer2, Vladimir Cherkassky1, Jing Wang1, Marcel Just1; 1Carnegie Mellon University, 2Federal University of Santa Catarina, Brazil — This study

investigated the universality of concept representations in the human brain
across languages and across people. We tested whether neural concept representations are sufficiently common to allow a predictive model trained
on the mapping between concepts and fMRI patterns of one person reading
in one language, to recognize those concepts in another person reading in
another language. The stimuli were 3 sets of 60 translation equivalent sentences in either English, Portuguese or Mandarin, read by 9-12 young adult
native speakers of these languages while fMRI images were acquired. A
regression model mapped between the semantic properties of each content
word (characterized by a set of 42 semantic (e.g. social interaction, physical
action, person) and 6 case role features (e.g. subject, main verb)) and the
corresponding brain activity pattern. The model, iteratively trained on 59
of the sentences in one language, can predict the translation equivalent of
the left-out sentence in the other languages with a mean rank accuracy of
.70 (where chance level is .5). To further enhance the model’s prediction,
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) was used to project the mapping of
the activation patterns of a pair of languages into a latent space to maximize
the pattern commonalities. For the pairwise cross-language sentence predictions obtained from CCA, rank accuracies range from .71 (Portuguese
to English) to .79 (Portuguese to Mandarin) (critical value at p = .01 was
.56). These findings provide the first evidence for a meta-language neural
universality of concept representation at the sentence level.

F99
MAPPING NOVEL WORD FORMS TO MEANING IN BEGINNING
CHILD AND ADULT SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNERS: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL AND BEHAVIORAL EVIDENCE Katharine Donnelly
Adams1, Fatemeh Abdollahi1, Kathleen Ammerman1, Ping Li1, Janet Van Hell1;
1
The Pennsylvania State University — In ERP and behavioral studies, we exam-

ined the development of lexical knowledge in beginning classroom second
language (L2) learners at two ages, Kindergarten and young adulthood,
both tested at around 20-25 hours of L2 instruction. Leading theoretical
models (e.g., Revised Hierarchical Model), developed to describe L2 learning in adults, assume that beginning L2 learners connect L2 word forms to
native-language (L1) word forms, and access the meaning of an L2 word via
the L1 translation. As L2 learners become more proficient, L2 word formto-meaning-mapping is strengthened and L2 meaning is accessed directly
without first translating to L1. However, because adults are integrating
novel L2 words into an entrenched L1 lexicon (likely to be less permeable to
new L2 words), this learning pattern may not hold true for children. In fact,
because children are still building L1 lexical codes as part of their ongoing
L1 literacy development, child L2 learners may be more likely to map novel
L2 words to meaning rather than to L1 lexical forms. In a translation recognition task, learners were presented with correct (e.g., burro–donkey),
semantically-related incorrect (burro–spider), or semantically-unrelated
incorrect (burro–rainbow) translations. Both child and adult L2 learners
showed increased negativity (N400) to semantically-related relative to
unrelated incorrect translations. Behaviorally, however, performance was
at chance. These findings indicate that both child and adult L2 learners,
after only 20-25 hours of instruction, have established L2 word-to-concept
mappings, and exploit conceptual information during L2 processing as
reflected in ERPs, but not (yet) in behavioral accuracy.

2016 Annual Meeting	

F100
DECOMPOSING FMRI SENTENCES INTO WORDS, THEN WORDS
INTO EMBODIED NEURAL FEATURES, THEN REASSEMBLING
THE PIECES TO PREDICT NEW WORDS WITHIN SENTENCES

Andrew Anderson1, Jeffrey Binder2, Leonardo Fernandino2, Colin Humphries2,
Lisa Conant2, Mario Aguilar3, Xixi Wang1, Donias Doko1, Rajeev Raizada1; 1Brain
and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, NY 14627, 2Medical College of
Wisconsin, Department of Neurology, Milwaukee, WI 53226, 3Teledyne Scientific
Company, Durham, NC 27703 — We introduce new methods that enable mod-

el-based predictions of word and feature-level semantic content of embodied neural activity automatically induced in sentence-comprehension. How
meaning is coded in the brain is a major question, and important recent
advances have used semantic-models to predict neuro-semantic representations and break down elements of the brain’s code by linking model-features to neural activity components. To date analyses have largely focused
on brain patterns associated with isolated nouns. However it is more natural for words to appear in sentences, when not only are there multiple
words, but combinatorial meanings induced by word order and semantic
enrichment arising from inferences. Nevertheless behavioral tests predict
that there will be some degree of context-invariant activity associated with
individual words even when they are presented in sentences. It is unknown
what forms the semantic content of context-invariant word representations
and how they are distributed throughout the brain. As an early step toward
understanding sentence-level neural activity we target these questions by
recording fMRI for 240 sentences describing everyday situations using
242 nouns, verbs and adjectives (distributed across sentences). We apply
a recently developed semantic model that uses naive human ratings to
estimate the strength of association between individual word-labels and
different elements of neural activity in sensory, motor, social, emotional
and cognitive networks. In a series of tests we show: where in the brain
context-invariant word activity can be detected, where multiple words
accumulate, and how different embodied-model components contribute to
explaining neural activity patterns across the brain.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
F101
EVENT-RELATED FMRI STUDIES OF FALSE MEMORY: AN ACTIVATION LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION META-ANALYSIS Kyle A Kurkela1,
Nancy A Dennis2; 1Penn State University, 2Penn State University — A wealth of

research in the domain of episodic memory has focused on understanding the neural correlates mediating false memories, or memories for events
that never happened. While several qualitative reviews have attempted to
synthesize this literature, methodological differences amongst empirical
studies have limited broader conclusions regarding the neural mechanisms
underlying false memories. The current study performed a voxel-wise
quantitative meta-analysis to investigate commonalities within the false
memory functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) literature. The
results were broken down by memory phase (Encoding/Retrieval) and
within retrieval by contrast baseline (Hit/CR) and stimulus type (Verbal/
Pictorial). The general retrieval analysis identified loci of consistency in the
left inferior parietal lobe and bilateral prefrontal cortex (PFC). Additionally,
studies utilizing a Hit baseline showed consistent activity in late occipital
cortices, whereas studies utilizing a CR baseline showed consistent activity in right parietal cortex and left caudate. Breaking down the studies by
stimulus type, consistent loci of activity were found in several left prefrontal regions for verbal tasks whereas pictorial stimuli activated right inferior PFC as well as occipital cortex when pictorial lures were perceptually
related to targets. Encoding studies were associated with common activity
in the left middle temporal gyrus. Additionally, while all analyses identified the medial PFC as a consistent loci of activation, none found common
activation in the medial temporal lobe. Together, results provide quantitative evidence for the critical role of medial PFC in mediating false memories
as well as regions associated with specific experimental designs.

Poster Session F

F102
EFFECTS OF RETRIEVAL PRACTICE ON THE MODIFICATION OF
LONG-TERM MEMORIES Rosalie Samide1, Hongmi Lee2, Franziska Richter3, Brice Kuhl1; 1University of Oregon, 2New York University, 3University of Cambridge — Studies on the consequence of retrieval practice have traditionally

focused on the strengthening that reactivated memories experience (‘testing
effect’). However, theories of consolidation suggest that reactivation can
also modify memories, and may shift memories toward more semantic representations. In order to test whether retrieval changes the nature of mnemonic representations, we conducted a three-phase behavioral experiment.
In the initial study phase, subjects learned to associate words with pictures
of a face, scene, or object. During the following retrieval phase, half of the
previously learned words were presented alone. Subjects retrieved the pictures associated with the words and rated the vividness of the memory.
In the final memory test phase, subjects were tested on their recognition
memory for the pictures. There were three types of test pictures: novel,
studied, and critical ‘lure’ pictures perceptually and semantically similar
to the studied pictures. Subjects indicated whether the test pictures were
exactly the same as the studied ones or not, and how confident they were in
their judgments. We found that vivid retrieval increased overall recognition
accuracy for the pictures, consistent with previous studies. However, this
memory advantage was driven by an increased hit rate, and not by reduced
false alarm to the lures. In fact, vivid retrieval increased high-confidence
false alarm rates, suggesting that retrieval modifies memories to be less
perceptually precise and more semantic or gist-based. In a separate fMRI
study we related distributed, pattern-based evidence of neural reactivation
to behavioral measures of retrieval-based modification and strengthening.

F103
IMPROVED PRECISION OF SUCCESSFUL RECOLLECTION 24
HOURS AFTER TARGETED STIMULATION OF POSTERIOR HIPPOCAMPAL-CORTICAL NETWORKS Aneesha Nilakantan1, Donna Bridge1,

Elise Gagnon1, Jane Wang1, Sungshin Kim1, Joel Voss1; 1Northwestern University
— The posterior hippocampal-cortical network, specifically the hippocam-

pus, posterior cingulate, and lateral parietal cortex, is thought to support
spatial and episodic memory. We have previously shown that multiple-day
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) increases functional
connectivity among these network regions and improves associative
memory. Here, we aimed to extend these findings by examining neural
correlates of associative spatial recall following stimulation. Targeted hippocampal-cortical network rTMS used subject-specific stimulation targets
in the parietal cortex based on intrinsic resting-state functional-connectivity
MRI with the hippocampus. Twelve participants completed five consecutive days of targeted hippocampal-cortical network stimulation and five
consecutive days of vertex (sham) stimulation over two separate weeks in
counter-balanced order. The spatial task involved recall of 96 object-locations, and was administered with a unique set of stimuli 24 hours before
and 24 hours after each week of stimulation. Successfully recollected object
locations were more precisely recalled (i.e., placed closer to the studied
location) following five days of network-targeted stimulation, relative to
sham. Event related potential (ERP) correlates of the recollection precision
improvement included reduced late-positive potentials at parietal electrode locations, relative to pre-stimulation. Targeting the posterior hippocampal-cortical network with multiple-day rTMS therefore improves
recollection precision and modulates neural correlates of recollection for
at least 24 hours after stimulation. These findings support the causal role
of posterior hippocampal-cortical networks in precision tuning of episodic
memory. Analyses of task-related and resting-state frequency-domain EEG
changes due to stimulation will also be discussed.

F104
THE DEVIL IN THE DETAIL: EXPOSURE DURATION DURING
ENCODING AFFECTS RETRIEVAL-RELATED BRAIN ACTIVITY Flavia

Schechtman Belham1, Stephanie Hatzifilalithis1, Leun J. Otten1; 1Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London (UCL), UK — Longer stimu-

lus durations generally lead to better memory. It is unknown, however,
whether this is because of quantitative or qualitative changes in processing.
Here, we investigated how exposure duration of emotional images during
encoding influences encoding-related and retrieval-related brain activity.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

245

Poster Session F	
Healthy adults made indoor/outdoor judgments on negative and neutral images preceded by cues that indicated the emotional valence of the
upcoming item. In separate blocks, images were presented for either a short
(1 s) or longer (2 s) period of time. Memory for the images was probed with
a remember/know recognition test in which exposure duration was held
constant. Brain activity was measured via scalp-recorded EEG. Memory
performance was better following longer exposures regardless of valence.
With respect to brain activity, all images elicited the anteriorly-distributed
ERP subsequent memory effect usually attributed to semantic processing.
However, these effects differed quantitatively, being larger in the short
duration condition, and for negative images. In contrast, qualitative differences as a function of exposure duration were seen for retrieval-related
activity. The left-parietal old/new effect associated with recollection was
elicited by all images except negatives ones that were studied longer. These
images instead elicited the frontal post-retrieval monitoring effect, which
was also observed for neutral images presented briefly. These findings
suggest that different exposure durations during encoding lead to memory
traces that are retrieved in qualitatively different ways. This, in turn, indicates that small differences in experimental design can have big impacts on
brain activity.

F105
TRACKING COLLECTIVE SCHEMAS IN INDIVIDUAL MEMORIES Pierre Gagnepain1,2,3,4, Thomas Vallée1,2,3,4, Fausto Viader1,2,3,4, Denis

Peschanski5,6, Francis Eustache1,2,3,4; 1U1077, INSERM, Caen, France., 2UMRS1077, Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, Caen, France., 3UMR-S1077,
Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Caen, France., 4U1077, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Caen, France., 5CNRS, Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne, 6CHS 20e siècle,
équipex Matrice — Schemas describe mental structures storing recurrent

and organized patterns of information (van Kesteren et al., 2012). Previous
brain imaging studies have exclusively considered schemas isolated from
their collective contexts. Social-cultural frameworks stored in collective
memory, however, might also shape the construction and organization of
individual memories. We recorded brain activity using fMRI in a group of
24 young adults while there were remembering pictures from a tour at the
WWII Memorial (Normandy). An image arrangement task (Kriegeskorte &
Mur, 2012) was used to capture the structure of participants’ semantic space
(individual schema). The organization of collective memory was measured
at two different levels using: 1) topic modelling analysis (Steyvers & Griffiths 2007) of a corpus (http://www.matricememory.fr/) composed of
more than 20000 French television and radio News about WWII (sociocultural schema), and 2) an internet-based image arrangement task measuring common representations across control individuals (shared schema).
These schemas were then compared to the neural organization of individual memories using Representational Similarity Analysis (Nili et al., 2014).
Semantic distances between images based on visual categories irrespective
of historical content served as baseline. Analyses focused on the anterior
temporal cortex (ATC) and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) given their
their core role in mediating social knowledge (Olson et al., 2013). Analyses
revealed that individual, shared and sociocultural schemas explained activity patterns in the ATC better than baseline. The ventral portion of mPFC
was specifically sensitive to shared schemas. These finding demonstrate
that human memory encapsulates the collective structure of knowledge
transcending individuals’ own representations.

F106
STRESS ENHANCES MNEMONIC DISCRIMINATION OF NEGATIVE
OBJECTS Stephanie L. Leal1,2, Tony J. Cunningham3, Michael A. Yassa2, Jessica
D. Payne3; 1Johns Hopkins University, 2University of California, Irvine, 3University of Notre Dame — Emotional modulation of memory influences how we

remember significant events and how these events shape future behavior.
Recently, we showed that emotion modulates the ability to discriminate
highly similar information, where emotional detail memory (mnemonic
discrimination) is impaired and emotional gist memory (target recognition) is preserved compared to neutral memory. The current study sought
to examine the effects of stress on mnemonic discrimination of negative and
neutral information. Participants encoded scenes composed of negative or
neutral objects placed on neutral backgrounds and then underwent a psychosocial stressor or matched control task. During testing, objects and back-

246

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
grounds were presented separately, with some identical old objects (targets), some new objects (foils), and some similar but not identical objects
(lures). We measured target recognition (d’) and lure discrimination index
(LDI) and found enhanced discrimination for negative objects in the stress
group compared to controls [F(1,48)=5.0, p=0.03]. We also found a general
emotional modulation effect for d’ [F(1,48)=17.6, p<.001], suggesting mnemonic discrimination is sensitive to stress-related enhancements in detail
memory. Finally, we found a quadratic inverted-U relationship between
negative LDI and maximum cortisol increase [F(2,47)=3.7, p=0.03], where
cortisol release benefited negative discrimination to a point, but excessive
concentrations hindered performance. This suggests that stress may lead
to better memory for negative detail information. Further, this relationship
may be mediated by cortisol, suggesting excessively low or high levels
impair memory, while mid-levels of cortisol enhance memory for negative
detail information.

F107
SUPERIOR EPISODIC, BUT NOT WORKING, MEMORY PERFORMANCE IN INCONSISTENT- RELATIVE TO CONSISTENT RIGHTHANDERS Neil Patel1, Ruth E. Propper1, Stephen D. Christman2; 1Montclair

State University, 2University of Toledo — Superior episodic memory in incon-

sistent- relative to consistent-right-handers (ICH vs CRH), has been found
across a wide variety of stimuli types. Christman and Propper and colleagues theorize ICH have an advantage during episodic retrieval because
ICH have greater access to the right hemisphere, and greater interhemispheric communication. Neurological findings offer support: The hemispheric encoding/retrieval activation model proposes involvement of
left prefrontal areas during encoding, and right prefrontal areas during
retrieval, of episodic verbal information, and studies indicate significantly
larger callosal volumes with increasing inconsistent-handedness. Memory
performance not requiring right hemisphere access or interhemispheric
interaction may be equivalent between handedness groups. Phonological
aspects of working memory involve primarily left hemisphere processes;
thus, episodic, but not working memory, may be superior in ICH. Methods: 62 female undergraduates (36 CRH, 26 ICH) were visually presented
36 list words, at a rate of 5 seconds each. Following a 2-3 minute distractor
task, participants had 3 minutes to verbally recall as many words as possible. Results: Episodic memory: number of words recalled from the first
5 words presented (Primacy Words). Working memory: number of words
recalled from the last 5 words presented (Recency Words). Unpaired t-tests
revealed significantly (t(60)=2.04, p<.05) greater Primacy Words recalled
by ICH (x=2.42, sd=1.37) than by CRH (x=1.78, sd=1.61), but no between
group differences in Recency Word recall (p>.8). Conclusions: Memory
tasks presumed to require greater right hemisphere access, or corpus callosum-mediated interhemispheric interaction, are performed better by ICH;
left hemisphere mediated, working memory performance does not differ
between groups.

F108
THE TWO PROCESSES UNDERLYING THE TEST EFFECT ---EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS (ERPS) Xiaonan Liu1,2,
Deborah Tan2, Ya Zhang3, Lynne Reder2; 1Xiamen University, 2Carnegie Mellon
University, 3University of Pittsburgh — Theoretical explanations of the testing

effect have focused on either a retrieval process or a re-encoding process
after retrieval. Based on prior neuroimaging evidence, we propose that
both processes contribute to the benefits of testing. To test this account, we
recorded ERPs while subjects studied, re-studied or took cued-recall tests
of word pairs. ERPs were analyzed based on current and subsequent test
accuracy, yielding three conditions: both tests correct, both in correct and
correct followed by incorrect. The mean amplitudes of waveforms between
400-700 ms during the first test were highest when both tests were correct
and lowest when both were incorrect while the mean amplitudes between
700-1000 ms only differed as a function of subsequent memory, higher
when the later test was correct. We interpreted the earlier time window as
a component reflecting a retrieval process and the later time window as a
component reflecting a re-encoding process.

2016 Annual Meeting	

F109
EPISODIC SIMULATION AND PROSOCIALITY IN YOUNGER AND
OLDER ADULTS Caspian Sawczak1,2,3, Mary Pat McAndrews1,2, Morris Moscovitch1,3; 1University of Toronto, 2Toronto Western Research Institute, University
Health Network, 3Rotman Research Institute — Recent work has shown that

vividly imagining oneself helping people in situations of need increases
one’s self-reported willingness to help those individuals (Gaesser &
Schacter, 2014). The underlying mechanism, however, has yet to be elucidated. It is widely accepted that the hippocampus, in addition to supporting episodic memory, is critical for the vividness of episodic simulation
(imagination). We have previously shown that older adults, like patients
with medial temporal lobe lesions, have impaired episodic simulation
which contributes to deficiencies in open-ended problem solving (Sheldon,
McAndrews, & Moscovitch, 2011). Here, we hypothesized a similar aging
effect on the link between imagination and prosocial intent. We recruited
older adults (M age = 71.5, SD = 4.72) and younger adults (M age = 18.1, SD
= 0.33) and had them vividly imagine helping people in situations of need.
Participants then verbally described what they had imagined. We found
that vividly imagining oneself helping people, compared to a baseline
task involving verbal fluency, significantly increased willingness to help
in younger adults but not in older adults. Further, self-reported willingness to help was significantly correlated with the level of perceptual detail
in descriptions of imagined events for younger adults, but not for older
adults, and the latter group produced significantly fewer perceptual details
compared to younger adults. We interpret these results as preliminary evidence that the effect of imagination on willingness to help relies on intact
hippocampal functioning.

F110
DIFFERENCES IN TEMPORAL MEMORY PRECISION IN THE ANTERIOR AND POSTERIOR MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBES Maria E. Montchal1, Michael A. Yassa1; 1UC Irvine — Recent studies suggest that anterior

and posterior regions of the hippocampus support memory for space at
different levels of precision (Nadel et al., 2013). Anterior and posterior hippocampus have differential cortical connectivity, and differences in precision may reflect unique contributions of anterior and posterior medial temporal lobe (MTL) networks. The anterior hippocampus is more connected
with anterior MTL regions (perirhinal cortex [PRC] and prefrontal cortex
[PFC]), and the posterior hippocampus is more connected with posterior
MTL regions (parahippocampal cortex [PHC] and retrosplenial cortex
[RSC]) (Duan et al., 2015). PRC activity has been correlated with familiarity
(a feeling of “knowing” without contextual details), whereas PHC and RSC
are more engaged when participants successfully recall contextual details
(Ranganath & Ritchey, 2012). This is consistent with posterior MTL networks supporting memory for precise details and anterior MTL networks
supporting memory for more general information. This study targeted
anterior/posterior MTL differences in the precision of temporal memories.
During MRI scanning, participants watched an episode of a sitcom. At test,
participants were presented with still frames from the episode and asked
to place each on a timeline, one at a time. Based on their error (the temporal distance between when the still frame occurred and their response), we
classified trials as “precise” or “general.” We find greater engagement of
anterior MTL regions for “general” trials and greater engagement of posterior MTL regions for “precise” trials. These findings suggest that there
may be representations at different time scales in the anterior and posterior
MTL.

F111
REACTIVATION-EXTINCTION OF PAVLOVIAN CATEGORY THREAT
MEMORY RESULTS IN RETURN OF THREAT RESPONSES AND A
SELECTIVE PROACTIVE AND RETROACTIVE EPISODIC MEMORY
ENHANCEMENT Marijn Kroes1, Joseph Dunsmoor1, Qi Lin1, Elizabeth
Phelps1,2; 1New York University, 2Nathan Kline Institute — Reactivating a previously acquired threat memory prior to extinction can prevent the return of
threat responses. This reactivation-extinction procedure raises hope to permanently modify specific memories during reconsolidation that contribute
to psychiatric disorders using a straightforward behavioral intervention.
An important caveat to existing studies investigating the reactivation-ex-

Poster Session F
tinction procedure is the use of simple associative threat learning tasks (e.g.,
a tone or a picture predicts shock administration). The applicability of this
work to memories that can consist of associations between multiple related
cues and aversive outcomes, such as those implicated in trauma, may be
limited. We tested if reactivating a category threat memory prior to extinction would affect the return of physiological threat responses and subsequent episodic memory for a variety of stimuli associated with the aversive
learning experience. In contrast to research on simply associative threat
memories, we found across two experiments in humans (N=37 and N=38)
that reactivating an aversive category threat memory prior to extinction
did not prevent the return of threat-related skin conductance responses. A
test of episodic memory for category exemplars revealed a retroactive and
proactive enhancement of episodic memory selective to items related to the
reinforced category. Our results indicate a potential boundary condition for
the reactivation-extinction effect, specifically that the procedure does not
prevent the return threat responses to stimuli related to those encountered
during threat learning. Moreover, our findings indicate that reactivating a
category threat memory can result in selective strengthening of relevant
episodic memories.

F112
PHASE SYNCHRONIZATION IN THE HUMAN MEDIAL TEMPORAL
LOBE PREDICTS THE PRECISION OF SPATIAL MEMORY ENCODING: EVIDENCE FROM INTRACRANIAL RECORDINGS Andrew

Watrous1, Brad Lega2, Michael Sperling3, Ashwini Sharan3, Gregory Worrell4, Barbara Jobst5, Robert Gross6, Joel Stein7, Sandhitsu Das7, Daniel Rizzuto7, Michael
Kahana7, Joshua Jacobs1; 1Columbia University, 2University of Texas-Southwestern, 3Thomas Jefferson University, 4Mayo Clinic, 5Dartmouth University, 6Emory
University, 7University of Pennsylvania — Patient lesion and fMRI studies have

identified the hippocampus and adjacent cortical areas in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) as critical areas for spatial memory encoding, although the
electrophysiological basis for spatial encoding is less clear. Prior invasive
MTL studies have implicated oscillatory phase as a possible mechanism for
coordinating activity within and between different MTL structures during
episodic encoding. Here, we asked whether similar phase based mechanisms support spatial encoding by testing patients with pharmaco-resistant epilepsy on a virtual Morris water maze task. Patients were able to
successfully encode an object location in the environment and return to this
location during a retrieval test. Assessing phase synchronization between
all MTL electrodes in each of 43 patients in the low and high theta bands,
we found that particular phase relations between MTL subregions was
related to the precision of spatial encoding. These observations 1) were statistically robust both on individual electrode pairs and in the majority (27)
of patients, 2) were strongest in the slow theta/delta band, and 3) showed
subregionally specific effects in right MTL regions, particularly CA1, with
28% of electrode pairs showing significant effects. These findings further
implicate slow theta phase as a mechanism of information representation
and transmission in the human MTL.

F113
STABILITY AND CONSISTENCY OF NARRATIVE PRODUCTION
ACROSS TIME IN HIPPOCAMPAL AMNESIA Jake Kurczek1, Melissa
Duff2; 1Haverford College, 2University of Iowa — There has been increased inter-

est in the relationship between memory and narrative (Gaesser et al., 2011;
Race et al., 2013; Zeman et al., 2013). Examination of narrative in patients
with hippocampal amnesia has shown that these patients produce narratives composed of significantly fewer episodic details (Kurczek et al., 2015;
Race et al., 2013) and that are less coherent (Kurczek & Duff, 2011) than
healthy adults. An open question is what happens to these narratives when
told repeatedly across time. For example, in healthy participants, narratives can change in length and in the accuracy or consistency of details with
repetition (Bartlett, 1932; Nadal et al., 2007; Neisser, 1981). We asked six
individuals with bilateral hippocampal damage and amnesia and 12 demographically matched healthy comparison participants to tell and retell six
personal stories four times over the course of a month. Consistent with previous work, we found that the individuals with amnesia produced significantly fewer episodic details in their tellings (mean = 0.60, SD = 0.04) than
comparison participants (0.76, SD= 0.04; F(1, 11) = 8.34, p = 0.015). Looking
at narrative production across time, the retellings of healthy comparison

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

247

Poster Session F	
participant narratives were quite consistent across retellings, with a high
proportion of repeated details. Narratives from amnesia participants, in
contrast, were inconsistent with a high proportion of new or added details
across each retelling. This difference was significantly different (F(1, 11) =
57.78, p < 0.001). These findings suggest a role for the hippocampus in the
stability of narrative production across time.

F114
MENTAL TRAVELS IN TIME AND IN SPACE: PARIETAL OVERLAP
IN DISSOCIATED NETWORKS Baptiste Gauthier1, Benoît Martin1, Karin

Pestke1, Virginie van Wassenhove1; 1Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, CEA DSV/
I2BM, INSERM, Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, NeuroSpin center,
91191 Gif/Yvette, France — Does Mental Time Travel (MTT) involve building

an internal map of time (Arzy et al, 2009)? Neurocognitive models for mapping spatial memories have been elaborated (Burgess, 2001) but it is not
known whether MTT relies on similar principles. After having learned a
set of events, participants performed temporal or spatial judgments (TJ and
SJ) while being recorded with M/EEG and with fMRI. They were asked to
tell whether events (e.g. “Katrina Hurricane”) occurred “before/after” (TJ)
or “east/west” (SJ) of their imagined self- location in time and space (e.g.
Paris in nine years). Possible self-locations were egocentric (Paris, now) or
not (Cayenne or Dubaï, nine years before or after). If TJ and SJ did not differ
regarding reaction times (RT) or error rates (ER), fMRI and M/EEG contrasts revealed that TJ recruits posterior part of the brain while TJ activate
more frontal regions. Moreover, judging from non-egocentric locations led
to higher RT and ER than from egocentric ones. These self-location changes
in time and space elicited overlapped fMRI activations in right angular
gyrus, precuneus and superior frontal gyrus along with posterior/frontal space/time dissociation. Larger temporal or spatial distances between
imagined self-location and events produced faster and more accurate
responses (Gauthier & van Wassenhove, 2014). These parametric effects of
distance on brain activity were found in both posterior and frontal topographies in M/EEG and located in right angular gyrus and right anterior
insula in fMRI. Together, despite global dissociations, behavior and right
parietal overlaps suggest similar egocentric mapping of time and space.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Other
F115
DYNAMIC NEURAL CORRELATES OF OVERT AND COVERT AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL USING HIGH-RESOLUTION
FMRI Charles Ferris1, Cory Inman1, G. Andrew James2, Stephan Hamann1;
1

Emory University, 2University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences — Retrieval of
autobiographical memories (AM) is a complex process that recruits dynamically changing networks of brain regions as processing shifts between
memory search, access, and content elaboration. In prior fMRI work we
have used graph analyses to characterize whole-brain changes in dynamic
connectivity during AM retrieval, highlighting time-varying engagement
of the hippocampus, PFC, and other regions. Here we extended these investigations, using high temporal (1 second TR) and spatial (2 mm isotropic)
resolution fMRI, an optimized experimental design, and both covert and
overt (spoken) retrieval to test theoretical accounts of AM retrieval. Motion
minimization and post-processing ICA was used to minimize speech artifact effects. During scanning, healthy adults retrieved unrehearsed AMs
to cue words across a long retrieval period, followed by ratings of vividness and emotion, with overt (spoken) retrieval during half of the runs. We
identified regions active during different retrieval periods and used graph
theory analyses to examine dynamic changes in network connectivity. A
broadly similar core AM retrieval network was identified for covert and
overt AM retrieval, with relatively greater hippocampal activation during
memory access. Network connectivity changed substantially across AM
retrieval, particularly for hippocampal-neocortical interactions. These findings provide evidence that accessing and reconstructing autobiographical
memories involves the large-scale reorganization of memory networks that
reflect changing retrieval processes both during covert and overt retrieval.

248

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

F116
VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL DAMAGE REDUCES MIND-WANDERING Elisa Ciaramelli1, Elena Bertossi1; 1Department of Psychology, University of Bologna — Mind-wandering is the tendency to engage in spontaneous

thought unrelated to the current task. Previous work shows that the Default
Mode Network (DMN) is activated during mind-wandering (e.g., Christoff
et al., 2009). Little is understood, however, about the causal contribution
of individual DMN nodes to mind-wandering. Here, we focus on the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC). Patients with lesions to the vmPFC
(vmPFC patients), control patients with lesions not involving vmPFC, and
healthy individuals performed three tasks requiring increasing amount of
cognitive resources (Smallwood et al., 2009). In each task, thought probes
were periodically presented, and participants reported the degree to which
their attention was off-task (mind-wandering), and classified the temporal
direction of thoughts occurring during mind-wandering. Across groups,
mind-wandering was less frequent during relatively difficult vs. easy tasks.
Across conditions, vmPFC patients engaged in mind-wandering less frequently and intensely than healthy and brain-damaged controls, whereas
no significant difference was found between the control groups. Importantly, vmPFC damage also altered the content of mind-wandering, which
tended to focus on the present, rather than the future. These findings indicate that vmPFC plays a critical role in mind-wandering, possibly by mediating shifts of attention towards internal information, or the construction of
future experiences which typically populate spontaneous thoughts.

F117
NEURAL EFFECTS OF PLAUSIBILITY DURING EPISODIC AND
SEMANTIC COUNTERFACTUAL THINKING Natasha Parikh1, Luka

Ruzic1, Gregory W. Stewart1, R. Nathan Spreng2, Felipe De Brigard1; 1Duke University, 2Cornell University — Previous research has shown that episodic coun-

terfactual thoughts (eCFT)—mental simulations of alternative ways past
personal events could have occurred—engage the default network (DN).
Such engagement is modulated by the perceived plausibility of eCFT,
with greater engagement of DN areas for imagined alternatives perceived
as plausible relative to implausible. A parallel line of research has shown
that self-oriented eCFT activates the DN to a greater extent than other-oriented counterfactual simulations involving more semantic information.
It remains unclear whether the level of DN activity during counterfactual simulation depends mainly on perceived plausibility or involvement
of episodic as opposed to semantic information. The current fMRI study
aims to clarify this issue by comparing brain activity during plausible and
implausible episodic and semantic (sCFT) counterfactual thoughts. Participants recalled specific autobiographical events and, in the scanner a week
later, created plausible and implausible counterfactual simulations to these
and factual statements. Consistent with previous results, we found greater
engagement of DN areas—including cingulate gyrus, medial prefrontal,
and parietal cortices—for eCFT > sCFT. Conversely, sCFT > eCFT recruited
regions involved in semantic processing, such as the lateral temporal cortex.
Greater hippocampal activity was found for implausible relative to plausible eCFT, suggesting an increased constructive role of the hippocampus
during implausible simulations. In contrast, the parahippocampal gyrus
was preferentially recruited during plausible versus implausible sCFT,
suggesting greater contextual coherence during the former. These results
illuminate differences in the neural mechanisms involved during plausible
and implausible counterfactual simulation and their relation to the DN.

F118
WHITE MATTER PREDICTORS OF PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT
FOLLOWING MEMORY TREATMENT IN TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY

Kathy S. Chiou1, Joshua Sandry1,2, Mark D. Zuppichini2, Nancy D. Chiaravalloti1;
1
Kessler Foundation, 2Montclair State University — Memory impairment is a

common and significant concomitant symptom of traumatic brain injury
(TBI). Problematically, efforts to develop treatments to improve memory
have been met with mixed results. Thus, there has been increased interest
in determining factors that can be used to predict success of treatment. This
pilot study utilizes diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to investigate whether
white matter integrity at baseline could be used to predict changes in performance associated with use of a memory intervention by adults with TBI.
Adult participants with moderate to severe TBI and documented memory

2016 Annual Meeting	
impairment on neuropsychological testing were recruited to participate in
a larger study involving a 5 week randomized clinical trial of a memory
retraining intervention. Prior to starting the intervention, participants
received a DTI scan and completed the Memory Assessment Scales Prose
Memory Test (PMT). The PMT was completed again upon completion of
the intervention. A change score between performance on the PMT at baseline and follow-up was calculated. For participants in the treatment group,
correlation analyses were conducted between white matter fractional
anisotropy (FA) at baseline and PMRT change scores. Results showed positive correlations between PMRT change scores and white matter integrity
in the left inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus, uncinate fasciculus, left superior longitudinal fasciculus, and left anterior thalamic radiation assessed at
baseline. These findings support the potential use of white matter metrics
to predict the efficacy of a memory retraining intervention after TBI.

F119
NOT ALL SPACING IS CREATED EQUAL: EYETRACKING AND PERFORMANCE Patti Simone1, Matthew Bell1; 1Santa Clara University — Spacing

enhances memory, although exactly why that happens is not well understood. We replicated Kornell et al. (2010) paired associates task presenting artists and paintings. Subjects saw 12 artists and 24 paintings (2 per
artist). Each artist-painting pairing was presented 6 times. For half of the
artists, paintings were presented in a massed fashion for the first half of
the session and a spaced fashion for the second half of the session. For the
remaining artists paintings were presented in a spaced fashion for the first
half of the session and a massed fashion for the second half of the session.
Subjects were randomly assigned to either speak the name of the artists
aloud or read them silently. Eye tracking data were collected during this
learning phase. Following a brief distractor task, the subject’s memory
for the paintings and induction for a new painting by the same artist was
tested. We hypothesized that (1) speaking the artist’s name aloud would
increase memorability, (2) that in spaced conditions, more time would be
spent looking at the artist’s name, and (3) that any spacing effects would be
equal regardless of when the spaced trials occurred. We found a main effect
of spacing (M = 81% for spacing vs. 66% for massing), that saying the name
aloud (M = 60%) lead to lower performance than reading quietly (M = 88%)
and an interaction between spacing and time of presentation. Preliminary
analysis of cognitive load collected using eyetracking equipment shows no
difference between groups.

F120
SLEEP FACILITATES RULE LEARNING THROUGH ‘TEMPORAL
SCAFFOLDING’ Shira Lupkin1, Itamar Lerner1, Alan Tsai1, Mark Gluck1;
1

Rutgers University — Human studies investigating the effects of sleep on
memory consolidation suggest that sleep both strengthens newly acquired
memories and facilitates the discovery of hidden regularities embedded
within these memories. The strongest evidence for a facilitatory effect of
sleep on such ‘hidden-rule’ learning can be seen using tasks that involve
regularities embedded within a temporal structure (i.e., those that include
associations between temporally disparate events). However, it remains
unclear to what extent sleep aids in the extraction of hidden non-temporal
regularities. To investigate this, we employed four novel tasks: two with
hidden temporal structures and two with non-temporal hidden structure.
In each experiment, participants completed the task twice, separated by a
12-hour interval, which either did or did not include sleep. For the temporal
tasks, the sleep group performed better on measures of rule learning than
the wake group, suggesting superior extraction of the hidden temporal
structure. In contrast, for the non-temporal tasks, there was no difference
in performance between the two groups. These findings, as well as those
from previous studies, can be understood in light of our recently developed computational model that argues that the time-compressed memory
replay in the hippocampus during slow-wave-sleep allows the alignment
and association of temporally disparate events through Hebbian learning,
leading to the discovery of temporal regularities that may, because of their
temporal separation, go undetected during wake.

Poster Session F

F121
DOPAMINE INDEPENDENT PREFERENTIAL MEMORY CONSOLIDATION FOR NEGATIVELY REINFORCED STIMULI Elizabeth
Coulthard1, John Grogan1, Demitra Tsivos1, Alan Whone1, Rafal Bogacz2; 1University of Bristol, 2University of Oxford — When learning, dopamine enhances pos-

itively reinforced information whereas Parkinson’s disease (PD; depleted
dopamine) favours negatively reinforced information. However the role
of dopamine after learning, during consolidation of memory, is more controversial. Here we investigate whether dopamine during consolidation
enhances retention of positively or negatively reinforced information over a
24 hour period in people with PD. We tested 18 PD patients and 18 healthy
age-matched controls on a reinforcement learning task. 2 pairs of symbols
were presented (A/B and C/D) with feedback that A and C were correct
80 and 65% and B and D correct 20 and 35% of the time, respectively. After
24 hours participants then viewed novel pairs (A/C, A/D, B/C and B/D)
and we measured propensity to Choose A or Avoid B. PD participants performed learning and novel pairs in four medication conditions day1/day2:
ON/ON; ON/OFF; OFF/OFF and; OFF/ON (order counterbalanced). 14
PD patients also did the task ON and OFF medication without the 24 hour
delay. There were no consistent effects of PD or dopamine on Choose A or
Avoid B even without the 24 hour delay. Interestingly, however, after 24
hours, all participants preferentially avoided A rather than chose B. In contrast, no such bias for negatively reinforced information was found without
the 24 hour delay. Thus, we have demonstrated selective retention of negatively reinforced information over 24 hours in those with PD and perhaps
healthy participants. We have not replicated previous findings that dopamine and PD enhance learning from positive and negative reinforcement,
respectively.

F122
A BRAIN SYSTEM FOR MENTAL ORIENTATION IN SPACE, TIME,
AND PERSON Michael Peer1, Roy Salomon2, Ilan Goldberg1,3, Olaf Blanke2,

Shahar Arzy1; 1Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel, 2École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Geneva, Switzerland, 3McGill University, Montreal,
Canada — Orientation is a fundamental mental function that processes the

relations between the behaving self to space (places), time (events), and
person (people). Behavioral and neuroimaging studies have hinted at interrelations between processing of these three domains. To unravel the neurocognitive basis of orientation, we used high resolution 7T functional MRI as
16 subjects compared their subjective distance to different places, events, or
people. Analysis at the individual-subject level revealed cortical activation
related to orientation in space, time, and person in a precisely localized set
of structures in the precuneus, inferior parietal, and medial frontal cortex.
Comparison of orientation domains revealed a consistent order of cortical
activity inside the precuneus and inferior parietal lobes, with space orientation activating posterior regions, followed anteriorly by person and then
time. Core regions at the precuneus and inferior parietal lobe were activated for multiple orientation domains, suggesting also common processing for orientation across domains. The medial prefrontal cortex showed a
posterior activation for time and anterior for person. Finally, the defaultmode network, identified in a separate resting-state scan, was active for
all orientation domains and overlapped mostly with person-orientation
regions. These findings suggest that mental orientation in space, time, and
person is managed by a specific brain system with a highly ordered internal
organization, closely related to the default-mode network.

F123
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR LEARNING DIFFERENCES IN TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Lauryn Zipse1, Yael Arbel1; 1MGH
Institute of Health Professions — People who have experienced a traumatic

brain injury (TBI) often exhibit impaired self-monitoring of their performance and behavior, which may negatively impact treatment effectiveness
and generalization. Concerns about treatment effects have prompted an
interest in learning in TBI, and there is some evidence that errorless learning, in which a person is prevented from making errors during the learning
process, may result in better outcomes than more traditional error-based
learning in this population. In this study, we examine two electrophysiological markers of error and feedback processing, the error-related negativity (ERN) and the feedback-related negativity (FRN), during a controlled

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

249

Poster Session F	

2016 Annual Meeting

nonword learning task. We compare these markers across errorless and
errorful learning conditions in people with TBI and in healthy controls. Our
preliminary sample includes people with TBI who report persistent cognitive deficits, yet mostly score within normal limits on clinical measures
of cognitive functions. Among these individuals, however, differences in
electrophysiological markers of processes critical to learning are observed.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Priming

F124
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SEMANTIC CONGRUENCY AND MULTIPLE REPETITIONS IN RECOGNITION MEMORY Azlina Amir Kassim1,

Tobin1, Layla Rao1, Tala Brewster1, Elizabeth Race1; 1Tufts University — Accu-

Jess Price2; 1HELP University, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2University of Nottingham
Malaysia Campus, Semenyih, Malaysia — Past research has shown that stimuli

presented in more than one modality (multi-modal) facilitate recognition
memory compared to stimuli presented in a single modality. Furthermore,
the semantic congruency of the multi-modal stimuli plays a crucial role in
facilitating recognition memory. However, whether this effect is observed
after multiple repetitions is still unclear, as are the underlying neural processes related to this. Event related potentials (ERPs) were recorded while
participants made old/new discriminations in a continuous recognition
test where visual and auditory stimuli were either semantically congruent
(e.g. picture of a dog presented with a spoken word “bark”), or semantically
incongruent (e.g. picture of a ball presented with a spoken word “cup”).
Stimuli were presented once, repeated after a short delay (first repetition)
and repeated again after a long delay (second repetition). Behavioral results
showed that participants made fewer errors when multi-modal stimuli
were congruent compared to when they were not congruent. However,
this was only observed for the first repetition. Semantic congruency had
no significant effect in performance at the second repetition. ERP results
showed an early frontal old/new effect, thought to index familiarity for the
first repetition in both conditions, but this effect was significantly diminished for the second repetition. In contrast, the parietal old/new effect was
observed for both repetitions in both conditions. The findings of this study
suggest that semantic congruency only has an effect for the first repetition,
which relies on familiarity in recognition performance, but has no effect in
subsequent repetitions, which rely on recollection.

F125
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY OF VIOLENT SEXUAL-AFFECTIVE
RELATIONSHIPS: EXPLORING ITS EMOTIONAL RECONSTRUCTION THROUGH THE EXPERIENCE OF SCIENTIFIC READING
ON LOVE Sandra Racionero-Plaza1, Lídia Puigvert2, Leire Ugalde3, Carmen
Martín-Gómez1; 1Loyola University Andalusia, 2University of Cambridge, 3Universidad del País Vasco — Research has shown some female adolescents’

attraction toward violent masculinities. Once violent sexual-affective relationships have been experienced, memories of those become the ground
for perceiving and processing next intimate experiences. However, little
has been inquired about which type of experiences and language uses may
induce recall of those autobiographical episodes to generate their emotional reconstruction. Starting from the malleability of autobiographical
memory, and the relevance of language in memory processes, we examined in a sample of female adolescents (N = 10, age range 17-20) whether
reading a scientific text on love, written using ‘language of desire’, modified in any ways the autobiographical memories of violent sexual-affective
relationships, particularly their associated emotions. This was compared
with a control group (N =10, age range 17-20). Memory reports were collected before and after the reading and coded to quantify the amount of
episodic details in each (Levine et al., 2002) and to qualify their emotional
content. Memory quality was assessed with memory quality questionnaires
(Alea & Bluck, 2007). Compared to controls, the experimental group had a
higher ratio of negative emotional content in the second round of memory
reports and showed greater consciousness about how the relationship actually was. Also, experimental participants showed changes in the emotional
quality of those memories after the intervention, with average decrease in
positive emotions and average increase in negative emotions. This did not
occur in the controls. The results deepen into the role of language and reasoning in autobiographical memory retrieval and reconstruction of violent
sexual-affective relationships.

250

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

F126
ASSOCIATIVE LEARNING SIMILARLY CONTRIBUTES TO REPETITION PRIMING ACROSS DISTINCT STIMULUS FORMATS Hope
mulating evidence suggests that learned associations between stimuli and
responses (S-R bindings) as well as stimuli and decisions (S-D bindings)
make significant contributions to the behavioral and neural facilitation
observed in repetition priming paradigms (Henson et al., 2014). An important outstanding question is how factors such as stimulus format influence
the magnitude of these associative learning contributions to priming. While
prior evidence suggests that associative learning impacts priming for both
stimuli presented as pictures and stimuli presented as words (Horner and
Henson, 2011), the magnitude of neural facilitation in left inferior frontal
regions during priming is reduced for pictures compared to words, potentially reflecting differential analysis of semantic information across stimulus formats and a greater contribution of facilitated perceptual processes
for pictures (Wager et al., 1997). If this is the case, it follows that the magnitude of associative learning contributions to priming may be reduced for
stimuli presented as pictures compared to stimuli presented as words. The
current study investigated this possibility by having participants perform
a semantic classification priming task in which critical stimuli were presented as either pictures or words. A robust associative learning effect was
observed for stimuli presented as pictures as well as stimuli presented as
words. Importantly, the magnitude of this associative learning effect was
not reduced for pictures compared to words. These results reveal that associative learning makes similar contributions to repetition priming across
distinct stimulus formats and emphasize the broader impact of learned
associations on behavior.

F127
SYMBOLIC NUMBER RECOGNITION ACROSS TASKS: AN
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY OF THE EFFECT OF INCIDENTAL REPETITION Danielle Dickson1, Kara D. Federmeier1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Do symbolic numbers contact their semantics

(information associated with them in long-term memory) using mechanisms similar to those for semantic access of words? We assessed the effect
of incidental, delayed repetition on the ERP response to numbers across
tasks that vary in levels and types of encoding processes. Of particular
interest is whether the effect of symbolic number repetition resembles the
N400 facilitation seen for other potentially meaningful visual elements
(e.g., letter strings) in similar paradigms, or whether numbers elicit an
effect that differs in distribution or emerges on a different (earlier/later)
component entirely. Task demands influence repetition effects in the language domain, and we suspected that the same should be true of symbolic
digits. We presented the critical items (double-digit numbers) in three task
contexts, with the critical number always followed by a task-specific probe
that required a response. The probes require attention to have been paid to
different properties of the critical numbers (physical characteristics, semantic value, or arithmetic knowledge). We find that symbolic numbers elicit
repetition effects that are both sensitive to task demands and different from
those observed to words. Thus, there are important differences in how symbolic numbers and other potentially meaningful stimuli make contact with
long-term memory, as well as differences in how numbers are processed as
a function of the particular demands of a task.

F128
EFFECTS OF EMOTIONAL VALENCE ON REPETITION SUPPRESSION DURING A RECOGNITION MEMORY TASK Sarah Kark1, Scott

Slotnick1, Elizabeth Kensinger1; 1Boston College — Repetition suppression (RS)

effects are reflected by reduced activation upon repeated presentation of
a stimulus. While earlier studies have shown greater RS of the amygdala,
prefrontal cortex, and visual processing regions for emotional items compared to neutral items, others have reported no emotional modulation of
amygdala RS effects. We investigated the effect of valence on repetition
effects during a recognition memory task. While undergoing fMRI, twenty-four participants studied negative, positive, or neutral images (i.e., they
viewed each line-drawing outline immediately followed by the complete

2016 Annual Meeting	
photo) and then performed a recognition memory test in which they distinguished studied from nonstudied line-drawings. For each line-drawing,
participants made an old-new recognition judgment and followed by a
sure-unsure confidence rating. RS effects were identified using a parametric approach to identify regions that showed a reduction in activity from
high-confidence (HC) CRs, to low-confidence (LC) CRs, to LC Misses, to
HC Misses. Consistent with prior research, RS effects were revealed in the
PFC, visual processing regions, and the amygdala, and follow-up analyses showed no emotional modulation of RS effects in the majority of these
regions. When analyses queried for valence-specific RS effects, the orbital
frontal cortex showed greater RS effects for negative items compared to
neutral items. No RS effects were specific to positive valence. The present
study confirms the utility of using recognition memory paradigms to examine unconscious influences within emotional memory and offers novel evidence for a nonconscious memory signature in the OFC for negative visual
stimuli.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition
F129
NEURAL ENTRAINMENT TO THE BEAT: THE “MISSING PULSE”
PHENOMENON Idan Tal1, Eshed Rabinovitz1, Charles Schroeder2,3, David

Poeppel4, Edward Large5, Elana Zion Golumbic1; 1Bar Ilan University, Israel,
2
Nathan Kline Psychiatric Institute, USA, 3Columbia University Medical Center,
USA, 4New York University, USA, 5University of Connecticut, USA — Humans per-

ceive music as having a regular pulse marking equally spaced time-points
within which the musical notes are organized. Moreover, an automatic and
unique human response when listening to music is to move to the beat.
The Neural Resonance Theory (NRT; Large 2008) proposes a computational
model for how a periodic representation of a pulse may be induced from
non-periodic stimuli through non-linear coupling between two oscillating
systems. The goal of this study was to determine whether there is evidence
for pure neural entrainment to the pulse, beyond the frequencies present
in the stimuli themselves. Using MEG, we recorded neural activity from
human participants listening to syncopated rhythms engineered such that
a perception of a pulse emerges yet does not exist in the acoustics’ spectrum. We found that in addition to mirroring the spectrum of the acoustics, the neural response showed clear peaks at the pulse frequency, even
though the stimuli did not contain energy at this frequency. Moreover, the
power of the pulse frequency peaks correlated with the subject’s ability to
tap to the pulse, linking this response directly to pulse perception rather
than stimulus properties. Source localization revealed clear peaks at the
pulse frequency in primary auditory regions bilaterally. These results support the NRT model and provide evidence for neural entrainment to the
pulse, beyond the sensory representation of the stimulus, which may arise
through coupled auditory oscillators resonating at the pulse frequency.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Priming
F130
BRAIN MECHANISMS OF WORD-SPECIFIC REPETITION EFFECTS
ON EARLY STAGES OF VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION Chun-Hsien
Hsu1, Chia-Ying Lee1; 1Academia Sinica — Previous ERP/MEG studies have

demonstrated the enhancement of the P2 activity for repetition of words,
but not to pseudowords. The word-specific repetition effect on P2 suggests
that P2 reflects early access to long-term memory representations of words
during visual word recognition. This study aims to further examine how
orthographic neighborhood size modulates the word repetition effect on
P2 and to elucidate brain mechanisms underlying early lexical processing. ERPs were recorded from 27 participants while performing a go-nogo
semantic judgment task. The no-go trials consisted of sixty real characters,
which were divided into subsets with large and small phonetic combinability (the number of characters sharing the same phonetic radical), and sixty
pseudocharacters. The means of the number of strokes and radical combinability were matched between real characters and pseudocharacters. The
results replicated the typical repetition effect on P2 for real characters, but
not for pseudocharacters. Furthermore, characters with large combinability
yielded bilateral P2 repetition effect, while characters with small combin-

Poster Session F
ability yielded left lateralized P2 repetition effect. By applying the exact
low-resolution brain electromagnetic tomography method, the repetition
enhancement effects were localized on the left middle frontal gyrus, the left
precentral gyrus, and the right inferior temporal gyrus for high combinability character. For small combinability characters, the repetition enhancement effects were found on the left inferior parietal gyrus, the left inferior
temporal gyrus, and the left precuneus. These findings suggest a trade-off
between processing efforts and orthographic neighborhood size in word
repetition.

F131
SEQUENTIAL PRIMING INFLUENCES MNEMONIC DISCRIMINATION OF SIMILAR OBJECTS IN A DIRECTIONALLY DEPENDENT
MANNER Jared Roberts1, Krista Kernodle1,2, Jessica Noche1, Elizabeth Murray1,
Michael Yassa1; 1University of California, Irvine, 2University of Michigan — Com-

putational models describing sequence memory such as the temporal context model and others predict that activation of a memory also activates
temporally proximate memories. Prior work by our lab has been guided
by a model of the hippocampal DG/CA3 network as supporting multi-domain pattern separation/completion. We applied this model to an investigation of the temporal aspects of memory encoding and retrieval using a
variation of a well-established mnemonic discrimination task. During the
basic task, participants undergo an incidental encoding phase in which
they are shown everyday objects and are asked to make a category judgment. Following encoding, they undergo a recognition memory test, where
they are shown repetitions (targets), novel foils, and similar lures (to tax
pattern separation). To test the effect of sequential priming, we examined
discrimination performance during test on similar lures that were presented following three different types of target cues. The first was the same
target that immediately preceded the similar object seen during encoding
(FORWARD). The second was the target that immediately followed the
similar object seen during encoding (REVERSE). The third was an out of
sequence target (RANDOM). We predicted that sequential priming would
activate the similar object’s neural representation thus increasing interference and biasing the network towards pattern completion. Accordingly,
we found reduced lure discrimination in the FORWARD condition. However, we found that REVERSE priming facilitated lure discrimination. We
discuss these results in the context of sequence memory, neural prediction,
and models of the DG/CA3 network as a multi-domain pattern separation/completion network.

METHODS: Electrophysiology
F132
LOCALIZING THE NEURAL SIGNATURES OF TARGET DETECTION:
AN ELECTROCORTICOGRAPHY STUDY Julia W. Y. Kam1, Sara M. Szc-

zepanski1, Ryan T. Canolty2, Adeen Flinker3, Kurtis I. Auguste4,5, Nathan Crone6,
Heidi Kirsch5, Rachel A. Kuperman4, Josef Parvizi7, Robert T. Knight1; 1University
of California, Berkeley, 2University of Houston, 3New York University, 4Children’s
Hospital and Research Center, 5University of California, San Francisco, 6Johns
Hopkins University, 7Stanford University — Although the temporal dynamics

and spatial distribution of the scalp EEG response to goal-relevant events
are well established, the electrophysiology and neuroimaging literature
provide conflicting evidence for the specific neural contributions to this
target detection process. Specifically, scalp EEG studies center the origin
of the P3b ERP component in temporal-parietal cortex, whereas numerous fMRI studies reported increased activation in both frontal and parietal cortices. Our study aims to account for this discrepancy by examining
the sources that give rise to the target detection process using electrocorticography (ECoG). To address this question, we recorded ECoG activity
directly from the surface of the human cortex in 13 patients undergoing
pre-surgical monitoring for intractable epilepsy, as they performed a target
detection task in either the auditory or visual modality. We examined the
target-related response in two domains: high gamma (HG; 70-150Hz) and
the P3b. Across tasks, while a robust increase in HG power to targets relative to non-targets was observed in numerous electrodes over frontal and
parietal cortices, fewer electrodes showed larger P3b amplitude to targets
than non-targets. Notably, there was minimal overlap in the electrodes that

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

251

Poster Session F	
showed HG and P3b. These results revealed that the target detection process can be characterized by at least two neural markers (i.e., HG & P3b)
occurring across numerous distinct locations on the cortex. Our findings
suggest that separate neural mechanisms are driving the differential patterns of activity observed in fMRI and scalp EEG studies, highlighting the
notion that target detection is not a unitary phenomenon.

F133
SUBSEGREGATION WITHIN THE AUDITORY ‘WHAT’ STREAM Chrysa

Retsa1, Pawel J. Matusz1,2, Jan Schnupp1,3, Micah Murray1,4,5,6; 1The Laboratory for
Investigative Neurophysiology (The LINE), Neuropsychology & Neurorehabilitation
Service , University Hospital Center and University of Lausanne, 2Attention, Brain,
and Cognitive Development Group, University of Oxford, 3Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford,, 4EEG Brain Mapping Core,
Center for Biomedical Imaging (CIBM) of Lausanne and Geneva, 5Department
of Hearing and Speech Sciences, Vanderbilt University, 6Department of Ophthalmology, University of Lausanne, Jules-Gonin Eye Hospital — Distinct anatomical

and functional pathways are postulated for analysing a sound’s object-related and space-related information (i.e. and antero-ventral pathway for
‘what’ and postero-dorsal pathway for ‘where’). Most studies have focused
on this ‘what’ vs. ‘where’ distinction. It remains unresolved to what extent
there are dedicated brain resources for the processing of specific object-related dimensions. To address this topic, we recorded high-density auditory
evoked potentials (AEPs) while participants discriminated sounds according to their pitch, speaker identity, uttered syllable or their location (i.e. 3
‘what’ conditions, 1 ‘where’ condition). The to-be-discriminated dimension
was varied across blocks; sound acoustics were held constant. AEPs were
analysed within an electrical neuroimaging framework to differentiate
modulations in response strength from modulations in response topography; the latter of which forcibly follow from changes in the configuration
of underlying sources. In this way, we investigated how selective attention modulates brain responses both between ‘what’ and ‘where’ feature
dimensions and also across specific ‘what’ feature dimensions. There were
no differences in performance across feature dimensions. As early as 80ms
post-stimulus onset, the AEP topography significantly differed between
‘what’ and ‘where’ conditions, replicating prior works. Critically and for
the first time, we show that AEP topographies also differed across ‘what’
conditions, supporting there being functional subsegregation within the
auditory ‘what’ pathway. These differences may constitute the neural substrates by which we are able to attend to and extract specific information in
complex auditory scenes, such as when listening out for someone talking
about you at a conference.

F134
EARLY AUDITORY BRAINSTEM RESPONSES TO SPEECH
SOUNDS IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Fatemeh Mollaei1,2, Douglas M.

Shiller1,3, Shari R. Baum1,2, Vincent L. Gracco1,2,4; 1Centre for Research on Brain,
Language and Music, 2School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, McGill
University, 3School of Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology, Université
de Montréal, 4Haskins Laboratories — Parkinson’s disease (PD), as a mani-

festation of basal ganglia (BG) dysfunction, is associated with a number
of speech deficits, including reduced voice modulation and vocal output.
Interestingly, previous work has shown that the compensatory response
to altered auditory-feedback of vocal pitch (fundamental frequency) in PD
participants is associated with an enhanced response relative to control
participants. Moreover, the detection of pitch differences is enhanced in PD
when participants are monitoring their own speech output. The origin of
this enhanced perceptual and motor response to pitch alterations remains
unclear. Previous studies of auditory evoked cortical responses in PD have
provided mixed results. Here we asked whether individuals with PD show
an enhanced response at the level of the auditory brainstem during speech
processing. We recorded the auditory brainstem response (ABR) to the
speech syllable [da] in individuals with PD and age- and gender-matched
control participants. Using scalp-recorded ABR, we observed the degree
of neural synchrony to the repeated syllable. PD participants displayed a
larger auditory brainstem response and an enhancement in the frequency
following response related to the fundamental frequency relative to the
control group. The current results suggest a BG contribution to early stages

252

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
of auditory processing in the brainstem and may reflect one component
of a sensorimotor processing impairment in PD linked to their enhanced
motor and sensory responses to auditory feedback alterations observed in
prior studies.

F135
INDEPENDENT CONTRIBUTIONS OF THETA AND DELTA TIME-FREQUENCY ACTIVITY TO THE VISUAL ODDBALL P300 Matthew D. Bachman1, Edward M. Bernat1; 1University of Maryland, College Park — A growing

body of work has begun to demonstrate that the P300 (P3) event-related
potential (ERP) component is better understood as a mixture of task-relevant processes (Polich, 2007). This activity is mainly described as two
theoretical subcomponents, composed of an early frontocentral salience
response, and later centroparietal stimulus evaluation. The P3 subtypes
(P3a/P3b) are caused by differing contributions of these subcomponents
due to stimulus context. These theoretical subcomponents parallel recent
work based on time-frequency (TF) methodology, which finds that the P3
from gambling (Bernat et al., 2015) and go-nogo tasks (Harper et al., 2014)
are composed primarily of centroparietal delta (0-3 Hz) activity related
to complex stimulus processing and frontocentral theta (3-7 Hz) activity
related to salience processing. This study (N = 238) aimed to determine the
contributions of these time-frequency components to the visual oddball P3.
Delta and theta TF regions of interests were extracted to assess their contributions to the time-domain target and non-target P3, as well as differences
between targets and non-targets, target-to-target interval (TTI), and target
habituation. Results replicate and extend earlier work indicating that delta
and theta account for a majority of variance in both the target and non-target P3, and newly indicates that theta and delta activity can have unique
contributions to target – non-target differences, target TTI, and target habituation effects. Findings suggest that both delta and theta are critical components of the P3 whose selective changes can relate to amplitude differences, and could serve as reasonable representations of these theoretical P3
subcomponents.

F136
DECREASED SALIENCE AND CONTROL ACTIVITY DURING INHIBITORY PROCESSING IN COCAINE USERS INDEXED USING EEG
TIME-FREQUENCY MEASURES Anne Tootell1, Vaughn Steele2, Selin Avi-

yente3, Vince Calhoun4, Ed Bernat1; 1University of Maryland College Park, Department of Psychology, 2Intramural Research Program, Neuroimaging Research
Branch, National Institute of Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore,
MD, 3Michigan State University, Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, 4The Mind Research Network, New Mexico — There is growing evidence

supporting a neurobehavioral dual-process model consisting of salience
and control systems. The salience system is involved in automatic processing that evaluates the motivational significance of stimuli, while the
control system integrates slower, reflective processes with salience input
to manage behavior, often recruiting dorsolateral prefrontal regions. Substance use disorders have been hypothesized to result from a decrease in
salience system activity toward substance irrelevant stimuli combined with
a decrease in control/regulatory systems. Previous work in our group has
utilized time-frequency (TF) analyses to demonstrate that theta (3-7 Hz)
energy can index salience system activity, medial-lateral TF interchannel
phase-synchrony (ICPS) can index control networks, and delta (0-3 Hz)
activity is relevant to more complex evaluative processing. The current
study investigated theta and delta TF amplitude and theta-band ICPS
between medial and lateral prefrontal regions, in subjects with cocaine-use
(N=47, M age=41.2, 63% male) and non-using controls (N=90, M age=32.0,
43% male) during a go/no-go task. Consistent with previous go/no-go
studies, processes associated with response inhibition were engaged
during no-go trials as indexed by increased theta and delta activity and
medial-lateral prefrontal functional connectivity, regardless of substance
use. Importantly, cocaine users had reduced go/no-go amplitude differences compared to controls in theta and delta activity (t=6.216, t=5.912,
respectively, ps < .001), as well as reduced medial-lateral ICPS (t=2.135,
p=.038). These findings suggest that cocaine users remain engaged in the
response inhibition task, but have decreased engagement of salience and
control systems on no-go trials compared to controls.

2016 Annual Meeting	

F137
REWARD POSITIVITY: EFFECTS OF GAIN, EVEN, AND LOSS CONTEXTS ON EEG TIME-FREQUENCY DELTA Adreanna Massey1, Mary Fernandes1, Edward Bernat1; 1University of Maryland — The role of experimental

context has been investigated as an important factor in feedback processing. Previous work has demonstrated that the amplitude of the feedback
negativity (FN) depends on the value of the outcome relative to the range
of possible outcomes in a given context, not the objective value of the outcome (Holroyd et al., 2004). Time-frequency decomposition techniques
have shown that time-domain ERPs are better understood as separable
processes in delta (0-3 Hz) and theta (3-7 Hz) (Bernat et al., 2015). Furthermore, recent work has suggested that differences in FN amplitude are due
in part to the superposition of a reward positivity (RP) component primarily composed of delta activity (Bernat et al., 2008; Holroyd et al., 2008). The
current study assessed whether the role of context in feedback processing is
better elucidated using time-frequency analysis. Participants (N=132) completed a modified gambling task, which comprised three contexts (gain,
even, and loss) with a best and worst outcome in each context. Time-frequency analysis revealed an interaction between context and outcome in
delta (F(2,130)=44, p<.001), where delta RP amplitude to best outcomes
scaled positively with reward value (gain > even > loss). When considered
with the worst outcomes (i.e., delta best-worst differences), effects were
positively associated with the valence of the context, where the gain context
produced the largest difference and the loss context showed no difference.
Results suggest that delta scales positively with the objective value of a
reward (best outcomes); however, context is influential when considered
with the worst outcomes.

F138
P300 AMPLITUDE REDUCTION ACROSS EXTERNALIZING AND
INTERNALIZING AS AN INDICATOR OF A GENERAL FACTOR OF
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY (P): A PRELIMINARY FINDING Jessica S. Ellis1,
Matthew D. Bachman1, Edward M. Bernat1; 1University of Maryland College Park,
Department of Psychology, Clinical and Cognitive Neuroscience Lab — A widely

accepted representation of psychopathology is a two-dimensional model
including externalizing (aggression, substance use, and impulsivity) and
internalizing (anxiety and depression) problems. These two dimensions are
moderately correlated, and their shared variance has been modeled using
a general p factor of psychopathology (Caspi et al., 2013), suggesting p
may reflect shared neurobiological markers. Both internalizing and externalizing problems have been associated with P300 amplitude reductions
(P3AR) in target and novel stimuli using common oddball tasks, indicating
P3AR may index variance associated with p. The current study assessed
shared variance between externalizing and internalizing P3AR in the novel
condition of a visual oddball task (target effects are the same, but trendlevel), and computed a single factor of psychopathology across indicators
of externalizing, depression, and anxiety. Subjects (N = 126) completed a
three-stimulus visual oddball task, with IAPS pictures serving as novel
stimuli. Results replicated significant parietal P3AR relative to novel stimuli
in externalizing (r= -.22, p=.013), depression (r= -.25, p=.005), and anxiety
(r= -.18, p=.040). All three lose significance when predicting P3 amplitude
together in a regression model, reflecting the shared underlying variance
in predicting P3. A computed shared-variance p factor, explaining 69.6%
of the questionnaire variance, significantly predicted novelty P3 amplitude
(r= -.26, t= -2.98, p=.004), mediating the relationship of each constituent
questionnaire. The results indicate that P3AR is accounted for by the shared
variance within externalizing, depression, and anxiety. This suggests that
P3AR may represent a neurobiological indicator of the general p factor of
psychopathology.

F139
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN HEART RATE VARIABILITY AND
TIME-FREQUENCY THETA AND DELTA MEASURES DURING AN
INHIBITION TASK Lucy Wang1, Anne Tootell1, Ellie Stern1, Edward Bernat1;
1

University of Maryland, College Park — The emerging neurovisceral integration model posits that heart rate variability (HRV) is a peripheral index of
neural processes, including executive functioning, attention, and emotion
regulation (Thayer, 2000). Past literature has found that decreased HRV
during a task compared to baseline HRV (at rest) is associated with anx-

Poster Session F
iety and depression, suggesting lower autonomic reactivity to stress is an
important marker of psychopathology. The current study aims to assess the
relationship between task HRV and neural correlates. Participants’ (N=113)
HRV and ERP data were collected during the performance of a response
inhibition go/no-go task. ERP data were analyzed using Time-Frequency
(TF) approaches to extract theta (3-7 Hz) and delta components (0-3 Hz)
from the time-domain ERP. High Frequency (HF) HRV was extracted from
EKG data and was indexed using frequency-domain measures (AR and
Welch Power). HF-HRV at rest and HF-HRV collected while participants
completed the go/no-go task were significantly correlated (r=.782, p=.000),
suggesting that these measures index similar neural processes, yet indicate
substantial unique variance. TF-ERP analyses revealed that higher task
HF-HRV was correlated with enhanced delta activity on go and no-go trials
(r=.25, p=.006), while HF-HRV was selectively correlated with increased
theta activity on no-go inhibition trials (r=.20, p=.035). Individuals with
higher HF-HRV had higher activity in inhibitory processing, suggesting
greater engagement in the go/no-go task.

F140
RESTING EEG DYNAMICS: AMPLITUDE AND FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY CHANGES OVER TIME Mary A. Fernandes1, Jessica S. Ellis1,

Selin Aviyente2, Vince D. Calhoun3, Edward M. Bernat1; 1University of Maryland,
College Park, 2Michigan State University, 3The Mind Research Network — Recent

work has begun to investigate dynamic functional connectivity based
on fMRI measures indexing change over time during the resting-state
and during tasks. There is a current interest in additional investigation
of these dynamics using EEG measures, which could provide valuable
insight beyond what has been found with fMRI. The present study assesses
dynamic changes in resting state amplitude and connectivity across time in
delta (0-3 Hz), theta (3-7 Hz), and alpha (8-15 Hz) frequency bands using
time-frequency amplitude (activity) and interchannel phase synchrony
(ICPS; functional connectivity) approaches. Participants (N=147) completed
a resting-state task which included two two-minute periods, eyes-open and
eyes-closed. During the eyes open period, subjects were instructed to focus
their gaze on a fixation cross in the middle of a black screen. Results indicate significant modulation of delta, theta, and alpha amplitudes in both
conditions over time, specifically showing decreased amplitude over time
in theta and alpha frequency bands across frontal and central brain regions
during both eyes open and eyes closed (p<.01). Analyses of spatiotemporal
ICPS activity also highlights dynamic changes in functional connectivity
across time in multiple frequency bands for eyes open and eyes closed conditions, including dynamic connectivity between occipital and prefrontal
(medial and lateral) regions (p<.01). The present findings provide evidence
that EEG measures can index functional dynamics of brain systems over
time during the resting state, offering new information and motivating the
integration of EEG and fMRI measures.

F141
ERP MEASURES OF ACTIVITY AND FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
INDEX PERFORMANCE ON A GO/NO-GO TASK Andrew Gradone1,

Anne Tootell1, Matthew Bachman1, Selin Aviyente2, Edward Bernat1; 1University
of Maryland, College Park, 2Michigan State University — The current study

sought to assess the role of neurophysiological inhibitory processing in performance (reaction time, RT; accuracy, ACC) on a go/no-go task (N=138).
Inhibition is particularly relevant to performance in this task because it
represents both the implementation of inhibitory processing during no-go
trials, and the shift from response execution to inhibition. Recent work from
our group has utilized time-frequency (TF) approaches to suggest common
go/no-go ERP components are accounted for by unique contributions of
activity in the delta (0-3 Hz) and theta (3-7 Hz) ranges. Using TF analysis,
we extracted delta and theta amplitude, and theta functional connectivity
(based on TF interchannel phase-synchrony; ICPS). Results showed that
longer RT was associated with greater theta energy (r = .43, p < .001), delta
energy (r = .34, p < .001) and ICPS between medial and lateral prefrontal
cortical regions (r = .39, p < .001) on no-go trials. Although this effect was
also observed on go trials, these correlations were accounted for by activity
on no-go trials using regression analyses, suggesting the effect lies mainly
within the processes involved in the no-go trials. Increased medial-lateral
frontal functional connectivity during inhibitory no-go processing is also
consistent with an increase in executive control during the switch to inhibi-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

253

Poster Session F	
tion from execution. Broadly, greater no-go inhibitory activity (amplitude
and ICPS) was associated with lower performance (longer RT and lower
ACC), suggesting the multiple processes indexed during inhibitory processing are important for understanding behavioral task performance.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory
F142
BEYOND MODALITIES: INTEGRATING MULTISENSORY INFORMATION ACROSS DIFFERENT REFERENCE FRAMES Yuqi Liu1, Jared
Medina1; 1University of Delaware — When integrating inputs from multiple

modalities to form a single percept, information is weighted based on the
precision of each input. Are multisensory representations within different
reference frames also weighted based on the strength of each representation? To address this question, we placed participants’ hands in a mirror
box with the hidden hand 6” from the mirror, and the viewed hand next
to the mirror. The two hands were in opposite postures (palm up, palm
down), and we asked participants to move their fingers in a spatially congruent (e.g. simultaneous upward/downward movement) or motorically
congruent (e.g. simultaneous flexion/extension) manner for 60 seconds. To
assess multisensory integration, we measured the sense of ownership and
perceived limb position of the hand behind the mirror. In Experiment 1,
we examined multisensory integration during one- and four-finger movements. We found significantly more multisensory integration for externally congruent versus motorically congruent one-finger movements, with
no difference for four-finger movements. In Experiment 2, we increased
the amount of motor outflow by having participants fully flex/extend all
of their finger joints. Interestingly, ownership ratings were significantly
higher for motorically versus spatially congruent movements. These findings suggest that in multisensory integration, multisensory representations in different reference frames are dynamically weighted based on the
strength of information from each reference frame.

F143
THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF HAND GESTURE COMPREHENSION: EVIDENCE FROM A QUANTITATIVE META-ANALYSIS STUDY

Jie Yang1, Michael Andric2, Mili Mathew3; 1ARC Center of Excellence in Cognition
and its Disorders, Department of Cognitive Science, Macquarie University, Australia, 2Center for Mind/Brain Sciences (CIMeC), University of Trento, Italy, 3ARC
Center of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, Department of Linguistics,
Macquarie University, Australia — Hand gestures along with speech convey

meaning during face-to-face communication. Although previous research
has pinpointed the neural substrates for gesture comprehension, these
findings are inconsistent due to different types of gestures (e.g., iconic
gestures, metaphoric gestures, and beats) and various task demands (e.g.,
passive viewing, semantic judgment, and memory tasks). The current activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis investigated the brain networks
underpinning gesture comprehension while considering the impact of gesture type (co-speech gestures vs. speech-independent gestures) and task
demand (implicit processing vs. explicit processing). The meta-analyses of
31 fMRI studies showed that comprehending gestures involved three networks: a perceptual-motor network responsible for action understanding
and consisted of premotor-parietal areas (bilateral dorsal and ventral premotor cortices and bilateral inferior parietal lobule) and superior temporal
sulcus; a semantic network involved in the conceptual processing of gestures and consisted of posterior middle temporal gyrus and inferior frontal
gyrus (BA 45); and a social cognitive network involved in the processing
of emotive information of gestures and consisted of inferior frontal gyrus
(BA 47), insula and putamen. These findings highlight the complexity of
the neural substrates for gesture comprehension, and suggest that future
research is necessary in order to clarify the dynamic interactions among
these networks.

F144
ERP SEARCH FOR A CAUSE OF THE SIMILARITY OF QUALIA
ASSUMED ACROSS INDIVIDUALS Bruno Debruille1,3,4, Sheila Bouten1,

Hugo Pantecouteau2; 1Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Montreal, QC,
Canada, 2École Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon, 69007, France, 3Department

254

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, Qc, Canada, 4Department of Neurology
and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada — We function as if

we were perceiving the world as it really is. We believe we capture colors,
sounds and smells that exist in our environment. This belief persists despite
the failure to find corresponding qualities in the outside world, where just
lengths of electromagnetic and air pressure waves can be measured and
molecules identified. We keep our belief even knowing that electromagnetic, acoustic and chemical signals are all transformed into something
completely different, namely, into nerve impulses that are processed by
the brain. Seeing our perceptual world as an original creation emerging
from this processing continues to be difficult even though we know, from
our dreams, that brains can make up scenes. This difficulty could be due
to one of the consequences of this creation idea: the immense difference
that could then exist between perceptual worlds across individuals; a consequence that appears instantly wrong since we successfully interact with
others assuming that they are in a world similar to ours. But then, how
could that similarity exist when perceptual worlds are created by different
brains, which, when processing stimuli, do not influence each other? To
check such an absence of influence, we recorded the event-related brain
potential (ERPs) elicited by IAPS stimuli in 16 pairs of closely related persons (32 partners) who were side by side and processed separately stimuli that occurred simultaneously. We found that the activity of the brain
triggered by stimuli had a statistically significant impact on the N400- and
P600-ERP of the partner.

F145
CHANGES IN CORTICAL FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY FOR
AUDIOVISUAL SPEECH PERCEPTION ASSOCIATED WITH HEARING AID USE WITH OR WITHOUT AUDITORY TRAINING Luodi Yu1,
Aparna Rao2, Yang Zhang1, Phillip C. Burton3, Dania Rishiq4, Harvey Abrams5;
1
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, 2Department of speech and
hearing sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, 85287-0102, 3Office of
the CLA Associate Dean for Research, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
55455, 4Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Mayo Clinic, FL, 5Starkey Hearing
Technologies, Eden Prairie, MN 55344 — This event-related fMRI study inves-

tigated changes in cortical functional connectivity in hearing aid users. Our
experimental protocol relied on the well-known McGurk effect of hearing /
da/ from visual articulation of /ga/ dubbed with the /ba/ sound. Previous
research has shown stronger connectivity between areas for multimodal
integration (i.e., superior temporal sulcus, STS) and unimodal regions (Nath
et al., 2012) in McGurk perceivers than non-perceivers. Participants in our
preliminary study were two adults with moderate hearing loss who were
first-time hearing aid users. A structured auditory training program, ReadMyQuips™ (RMQ), was applied, targeting audiovisual speech perception.
After 4 weeks of hearing aid use, the experimental participant received
RMQ training for 4 weeks. The control participant used hearing aids for
8 weeks and did not receive the training. Identical fMRI tests were administered at pre-fitting and post-training to assess effects related to hearing
aid use with or without RMQ training. An independent functional localizer
was used to identify unimodal regions of interest (ROIs) including voxels
within auditory and visual cortex, and a multimodal ROI within posterior
STS. Enhanced connectivity between unimodal ROIs and the multimodal
ROI was observed at posttest compared to pretest in both participants, with
greater magnitude of change observed in the trained experimental participant. The results show initial evidence of facilitation for audiovisual speech
perception from hearing aid use with additional benefit from the RMQ
training program.

F146
MULTISENSORY SPEECH PERCEPTION IN NOISE: A SEX-LINKED
AUTISM SPECTRUM ENDOPHENOTYPE Victor A. Del Bene1, Lars A.
Ross1, Sophie Molholm1, John J. Foxe2; 1Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
2
University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry — Children with an

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) are significantly impaired in their ability
to integrate multiple sensory inputs, and this is particularly pronounced for
audiovisual speech. The clear relevance of audiovisual language abilities
for social communication and the magnitude and the early emergence of
this impairment in ASD, raises questions about its role in the disease process and whether it might represent a behavioral endophenotype of genetic

2016 Annual Meeting	
liability. Here we investigated whether unaffected siblings of children diagnosed with ASD showed a deficit in the ability to benefit from visual speech
signals during speech perception in noise. We hypothesized that if this
represents a behavioral endophenotype, unaffected first degree relatives
should show performance deficits relative to healthy controls, due to inherited genetic liability, but not as severe as ASD children. Based on our recent
finding of a sexual dimorphism on this task, we also explored the specificity
of this behavioral endophenotype to (male) sex. To test our hypotheses we
compared audiovisual speech perception of 26 unaffected siblings, 63 children with ASD, and 121 typically developing children between the ages of
5 and 15 years. In line with our prediction, male siblings showed impaired
audiovisual speech perception. This level of impairment was intermediary
between males with an ASD and neurotypical controls. In contrast, female
siblings’ performance was not distinguishable from female controls. These
findings suggest that audiovisual speech perception is affected by genetic
liability to develop ASD. This effect is pronounced in male siblings and
may therefore represent a sex-linked behavioral endophenotype.

F147
INFERIOR FRONTAL OSCILLATIONS REVEAL VISUO-MOTOR
MATCHING FOR ACTIONS AND SPEECH: EVIDENCE FROM
HUMAN INTRACRANIAL RECORDINGS Pär Halje1,2, Margitta Seeck3,

Olaf Blanke1,3, Silvio Ionta1,4; 1Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland., 2Integrative Neurophysiology and Neurotechnology, Department of Experimental Medical Sciences,
Lund University, Sweden., 3Presurgical Epilepsy Evaluation Unit, Department of
Neurology, Geneva University Hospital (HUG), Switzerland., 4The Laboratory for
Investigative Neurophysiology (The LINE), Department of Radiology and Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University Hospital Center and University of Lausanne, Switzerland. — Exploiting electrocorticography recording in awake

humans, this article focuses the multimodal representation of actions. The
direct, even though partial, correspondence between the neural systems
responsible for the observation and execution of actions has been reported
in non-human primates since the original description of so-called “mirror
neurons” in the ventral premotor cortex of the macaque brain (area F5).
Based on intracranial electrophysiology and surface electroencephalography, similar visuo-motor matching systems have been hypothesized in
humans. Given the homology between the monkey area F5 and Broca’s
area (inferior frontal gyrus, IFG) in the human brain, IFG is the best candidate for grounding this action visuo-motor matching system in humans,
further extending to language. Yet, the direct comparison between visual,
motor, and linguistic representations of actions was still missing. Here we
provide for the first time evidence for comparable mu-rhythm suppression in IFG during observation, execution, and verbal description of the
same action. We recorded intracranial local field potentials with implanted
subdural electrode grids covering frontal, parietal, and temporal regions.
During the data recording participants observed an experimenter performing an action (visual condition), performed the same action themselves
(motor condition), and verbally described the action (language condition).
Results showed that IFG activation was present for all the conditions, no
matter the modality (observation, execution, language), and independent
of oro-facial movements. By showing visuo-motor-language matching systems for action representation, the IFG exhibit the typical pattern of mirror
activity. These data support the notion of a multimodal representation of
actions further extending to language processes.

F148
CAN’T FIGHT THIS FEELING: ACCESS TO SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE OF GRASPABLE OBJECTS IS INFLUENCED BY SOMATOSENSORY PRIMING Chelsea Ekstrand1, Eric Lorentz1, Layla Gould1, Marla
Mickleborough1, Ron Borowsky1; 1University of Saskatchewan — Embodied cog-

nition theories assert that the sensorimotor system plays a functional role
in the semantic processing of graspable objects. Previous research has indicated that motor tasks have the ability to interfere with object processing
and that motor information contributes to semantic processing depending
on specific learning experience. While this research suggests that the motor
system is involved in object processing, involvement of the somatosensory system has remained relatively unexplored. Therefore, we developed
a novel somatosensory priming paradigm. In Experiment 1, participants

Poster Session F
received a vibratory hand prime (on half the trials) prior to viewing a picture of either a graspable (e.g., a razor) or non-graspable (e.g., an elephant)
object and reported how they would interact with it. In Experiment 2,
non-graspable objects were replaced with ‘foot’ objects (objects with easily
identifiable foot related affordances; e.g., a soccer ball). In both experiments, somatosensory priming effects on reaction time arose for the graspable objects, while the non-graspable and foot objects showed no priming
benefits. These results suggest that semantic knowledge of objects includes
contributions from the somatosensory system. As well, we provide clear
evidence that pure somatosensory contributions can aid object processing
even in the absence of motor execution.

F149
THE BINDING PROBLEM 2.0: MULTISENSORY INTERACTIONS
REVEAL MECHANISMS OF CATEGORY-SPECIFIC OBJECT PROCESSING Pawel J. Matusz1,2, Antonia Thelen1,3, Joseph Nour1, Jean-Francois
Knebel1,4, Celine Cappe1,5, Micah Murray1,3,4,6; 1The Laboratory for Investigative
Neurophysiology (The LINE), University Hospital Centre and University of Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Attention, Brain, and Cognitive Development Group, University of Oxford, UK, 3Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA, 4EEG Brain Mapping
Core, Center for Biomedical Imaging (CIBM), Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Centre de
Recherche Cerveau & Cognition - UMR5549, Toulouse, France, 6Jules-Gonin Eye
Hospital, University of Lausanne, Switzerland — Object recognition is a staple

of goal-directed behaviour in real-world environments, but its mechanisms
remain unclear. Traditional, unisensory studies revealed that categorical
boundaries are an organising principle of how the brain represents objects,
but the dynamics whereby these representations are discriminated seem
surprisingly slow (~150ms post-stimulus). Real-world environments are
multisensory in nature, and the facilitatory influence of multisensory integration on stimulus processing is well-established. We assessed whether
multisensory processes and their neural mechanisms (160-channel EEG)
vary across object categories. Participants categorised sounds, drawings
or auditory-visual pairs of environmental objects in a living/man-made
go-nogo task. Behavioural analyses revealed no multisensory benefits,
besides overall performance benefits for living objects. Multisensory benefits
were, however, observed, when analyses were performed at a subordinate
level within the living-object category (conspecifics, mammals, birds). Only
perception of conspecifics showed multisensory facilitation. At the brain
level, multisensory interactions differed across both the ordinate as well
as subordinate object categories. Interactions in ERP topography occurred
early (<100ms post-stimulus) for living but not for man-made multisensory
objects. At the same early latency, interactions in ERP strength differed in
polarity between conspecifics and non-human mammals; i.e., sub-additive
for conspecifics and super-additive for other living objects. First, our results
provide empirical evidence that in multisensory environments the identification of conspecifics is more efficient. More generally, we provide the first
evidence that object categorization is accomplished faster in multisensory
environments. This opens the possibility that in real-world environments
object recognition occurs via the fusion of semi-extracted object attributes
from each of the senses.

F150
THE INTERACTING RHYTHMS BETWEEN PERCEIVED AND PRODUCED SPEECH M Florencia Assaneo1, David Poeppel1,2; 1Department of
Psychology, New York University, 2Max-Planck-Institute, Frankfurt — The classi-

cal approach to study the sensorimotor integration of speech is through
exploring the inhibitory/excitatory effect that motor and auditory cortices
exert on each another. Here we propose a shift in this paradigm: we aim to
characterize the interaction of those brain regions by examining the relationship between the rhythms of perceived and produced speech. More
specifically, we developed a psychophysical and an MEG protocol to investigate the coupling between the phases of the slow oscillations in motor and
auditory cortices. In a psychophysical experiment, subjects are instructed
to continually repeat a set of three syllables, while their auditory feedback
is blocked and replaced with a manipulated, ‘alien’ voice pronouncing a
different set of syllables at a fixed rate. We observe that synchronization
between heard and produced speech occurs only when the externally
imposed syllable rate is close to participant’s own rate. We designed an
MEG protocol to identify the neural substrates of the synchronization. First,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

255

Poster Session F	
a source localization protocol was employed to localize each subject’s motor
and auditory cortical regions. Second, the MEG signals originating in those
areas - while hearing syllables at different rates - are extracted and evaluated for synchronization. We found that synchronization occurs for just a
narrow range of rates, as in the psychophysical experiment. The specific
features of the coupling between the produced and perceived speech invite
the hypothesis that the motor and auditory cortices behave as two weakly
coupled phase oscillators. This coupling could be crucial at the early stages
of speech development.

F151
DECODING GRAPHEME-COLOR SYNESTHESIA USING MULTIVARIATE PATTERN ANALYSIS Radhika Gosavi1, Emma Meyering1, Nathan
Rose1, Bradley Postle1, Edward Hubbard1; 1University of Wisconsin- Madison —

Synesthesia is a condition in which the stimulation of one sensory modality
evokes experiences in a second, unstimulated modality (for a review, see
Simner & Hubbard, 2013). In the “grapheme-color” variant, synesthetes
reliably, automatically experience a specific color when viewing black-andwhite graphemes. Previous neuroimaging studies using univariate analyses
have shown that synesthesia is associated with activity in color areas (for
reviews, see Hubbard, 2013; Rouw et al., 2011). However, these approaches
are inherently unable to address a question of fundamental theoretical
interest: Is the subjective experience of synesthetic color generated by the
same, or different, neural processes from those that support the perception
of veridical color? We have addressed this question using multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) by first training a classifier to discriminate neural
patterns evoked by the visual perception of four different color patches,
then decoding activity from separate scanning blocks during which six
synesthetes and six nonsynesthetes viewed the four letters associated with
each of the four colors. We included voxels within V1-V4 in the posteromedial ROI and within downstream extrastriate areas in the anterolateral
ROI. Our classifier was able to classify color significantly above chance in
both ROIs for synesthetes and nonsynesthetes, but decoding generalized
to letters significantly above chance only for synesthetes, and only in the
anterolateral ROI. These findings suggest that the synesthetic experience
of color may be generated by the same mechanisms that support the visual
perception of color. We are currently extending these results using representational similarity analysis (RSA) and searchlight procedures.

F152
DRAWING MUSIC: AN ANALYSIS OF VISUAL REPRESENTATION
OF MUSICAL SOUNDS Natalie Callahan1, Zoe Bertz, Ferrinne Spector;
1

Edgewood College — In the realm of audio-visual integration, we have
moved beyond the question of whether auditory and visual stimuli are consistently associated and into exploration of how information is represented
across domains. The purpose of this study is to further explore how the
elements of an auditory stimulus reliably relate to visual elements across
individuals. To this end, we recruited non-synesthetic adults (N = 40) and
audio-visual synesthetic adults (N = 20) (who actually have visual experiences in response to music). All participants responded to musical sounds
by drawing their associations or experiences using a box of 120 crayons and
plain poster board. Participants listened to five 10-second clips of recorded
instrumental music and drew what they best associated with each music
clip. Drawings were analyzed for abstract and non-abstract form constants
(Kluver, 1929), shape, and color relating to pitch and rhythm. In all participants, we found form constants present in across visualizations. However,
we found other shapes not categorized as form constants - providing evidence of the need to expand our vocabulary of form constants. We also
found similarities in shapes and colors in response to pitch and rhythm.
These results give credence to the hypothesis that sensory information can
be reliably translated across domains. Taken together, these results add to
the evidence that multisensory mapping is the norm and conscious awareness of it is experienced on a spectrum with everyone potentially capable of
providing a window into the neural architecture underlying multisensory
integration.

2016 Annual Meeting

F153
ALPHA BAND ACTIVITY AS A MEASURE FOR ASSESSING THE
IMPACT OF LIP-READING ON THE PERCEPTION OF ACOUSTICALLY DEGRADED SPEECH Stanley Shen1, Jess Kerlin1, Antoine Shahin1;
1

University of California, Davis — Natural speech is more difficult to process
in adverse listening situations; however, listening effort decreases when
the listener has access to visual information via lip-reading. As alpha band
(8-14 Hz) suppression in electroencephalography (EEG) is associated with
neural engagement in perceptual and cognitive tasks, we sought its use as
an indicator of listening effort during audiovisual speech perception. We
hypothesized that acoustic degradation leads to greater listening effort, as
reflected in greater alpha band suppression; meanwhile, clear video of lip
movement, which provides linguistic context to functionally restrict auditory processing, reduces listening effort and thus alpha band suppression.
In this study we presented normal hearing subjects with video clips of a
male speaker uttering common monosyllabic English words that refer to
either an animate or inanimate object. In each video clip, clear or 24-channel
vocoded speech sound was paired with clear or blurred lip movement, producing four different audiovisual conditions. EEG was acquired during an
auditory oddball lexical-semantic task, in which the participants responded
to the animate/inanimate oddball word while listening and fixating on the
mouth area. Data were aligned to the acoustic onset of each word. Event-related time-frequency analysis using wavelet transform shows greater
post-stimulus alpha suppression in vocoded versus clear audio conditions
in posterior channels, suggesting increased auditory involvement when
acoustic information is degraded. However, clear versus blurred visual
information did not consistently reduce alpha suppression in response to
vocoded speech, perhaps reflecting individual differences in the stage at
which visual information impacts auditory speech restoration.

F154
HAZARD RATE MODULATES REACTION TIME TO AUDITORY AND
VISUAL STIMULI IN A PROBABILITY LEARNING TASK Matthias

Grabenhorst1, Cornelius Abel1, Wolff Schlotz1, Vera Dehmelt1, David Poeppel1,2;
1
Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, Frankfurt, Germany, 2New York
University, New York, NY, USA — Anticipating the timing of salient events is

crucial for successful interaction with the environment. Recent quantitative
research demonstrates that the analysis of temporal cues embedded in sensory information is based on representing elapsed time and on calculating
the probability of an event (formalized by the hazard rate, HR) (Janssen and
Shadlen, 2005). It is unclear whether sensory input modality affects these
computations. In a series of psychophysical experiments, participants’ reaction times (RTs) to auditory and visual stimuli were recorded. The temporal
trial structure was the same in auditory and visual blocks and consisted of
‘ready’, ‘set’ and ‘go’ cues. The waiting time between ‘set’ and ‘go’ cues was
drawn randomly from a fixed probability distribution. Participants were
asked to react as fast as possible to the ‘go’ cue. To analyse the relationship between RTs and HR of the presented distribution within and across
modalities, we fitted a mixed-effects multi-level regression model. The HR
was robustly predictive of the RTs. The model identified a significant mean
difference of RT modulation between visual and auditory modalities: the
average response to visual stimuli was slower compared to auditory stimuli. Importantly, HR modulated RT, indicating that participants learned the
probability distribution encoded in the trial structure. Although the effect
was more pronounced in the auditory modality, our data suggest that calculating hazard rate may be one basic computation in probability learning
in both sensory modalities.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
F155
CORTICAL SPECIALIZATION FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF INFORMATION ABOUT LETTERS CAN BE REVEALED BY MULTIVARIATE,
BUT NOT UNIVARIATE, ANALYSIS OF FUNCTIONAL MRI DATA
Mitchell Valdes Sosa1, Jorge Iglesias1, Marlis Ontiveiro1, Agustin Lage1, Gong
Jinnan2, Dezhong Yao2; 1Cuban Neuroscience Center, Cuba, 2University of Electronic Science and Technology of China — Cortical specialization for object rec-

256

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting	
ognition has been established by pitting different categories against each
other in fMRI activation studies. Here we show that multivariate pattern
analysis (MVPA) can reveal specialization for different types of abstract
information derived from the same set of visual objects (in this case letters). Letter identity recognition depends on neural coding which discard
variations in physical layout (such as position and size) that nevertheless
are used by attention and when assembling higher-order reading units. We
used MVPA of responses to compound figures that allowed dissociation of
letter identity and format (i.e. hierarchical level) to examine which cortical
areas carry each type of information. Although many areas carried both,
abstract-letter identity dominated in the lateral posterior fusiform and inferior occipital gyri, whereas abstract-level information dominated areas in
more medial ventral temporal cortex. Unexpectedly, abstract letter identity
was found in the foveal representation of V1, which is inconsistent with
conceiving the role of this area as only dedicated to simple visual feature
detection. The interaction of these two sub-systems could be important in
guiding the process of reading. More generally, these studies show how
MVPA plays a complementary role to traditional activation studies in
revealing cortical specialization for different types of abstract information.

F156
AN ERP INVESTIGATION INTO ATTENTION RESTORATION THEORY

Alexis Porter1, Salif Mahamane2, Allison Hancock3, Nicholas John Alexander
Wan4, Kerry Jordan5; 1Utah State University — Attention Restoration Theory

(ART) suggests certain features within different environment types (natural or built) can best help restore attention (Kaplan & Kaplan, 1989). In
several different cognitive studies, natural environments have specifically
been found to possess greater restorative features than built environments
(Akbar, 2011; Berman et al, 2008; Kaplan, 1995), but very few studies have
investigated ART from a neural perspective (Aspinall et al, 2013). We
investigate ART through event-related potentials, specifically predicting a
lesser positive P300 potential and also lesser late positive potential (LPP)
for oddball stimuli presented within nature-immersed stimulus streams vs
built-immersed stimulus streams. Lesser positive potential for either P300
or LPP would contribute to a faster return to baseline, suggesting faster
attention restoration for immersion in natural environments than built
environments. Sixty adult participants passively viewed a set of images.
One block contained 80 nature images with 20 built images; the other
block contained 80 built images with 20 nature images. Blocks were counterbalanced across participants. Participants viewing oddball stimuli in
nature-immersed image streams showed a lesser LPP than when viewing
oddball stimuli in a built-immersed image stream. This is some of the first
neural evidence for ART, in which attention may be more quickly restored
when immersed in natural environments as opposed to built environments.

F157
INTERDEPENDENT MECHANISMS FOR PROCESSING THE
GENDER AND EMOTION OF A FACE? THE SPECIAL STATUS OF
ANGRY MALE FACES Daniel Harris1, Vivian M. Ciaramitaro1; 1Developmen-

tal Brain Sciences, University of Massachusetts Boston — Previous models

suggest face features (e.g., gender, ethnicity, emotion) may be processed
independently of each other (Bruce & Young, 1986); while other evidence
suggests interdependent processing (Haxby, Hoffman, Gobbini, 2000;
Ng, Ciaramitaro, Anstis, Boynton, Fine, 2006). We used contingent adaptation to investigate if mechanisms for processing gender and emotion
were interdependent. Participants (64; 18females/condition) were either
adapted to happy male and angry female faces (Experiment1) or to angry
male and happy female faces (Experiment2). For adaptation, we used 15
unique female and 15 unique male faces, happy or angry. For test, we used
4 unique male and 4 unique females faces, morphed along an emotional
continuum (80% happy to 80% angry). Participants rated morphed faces
as angry or happy in a two-alternative-forced-choice design. To quantify
adaptation effects, data were fit with a cumulative normal to determine the
point of subjective equality (PSE), the morph supporting 50% performance
for each participant pre- and post-adaptation. In Experiment1 we found
significant contingent adaptation effects, with male images biased towards
angry and female images towards happy (p <.001). Interestingly, in the
complementary Experiment2 we found no significant contingent adaptation effects, with both male and female images biased towards angry.
Our results highlight how interdependent tuning mechanisms may only

Poster Session F
emerge for certain feature combinations, especially for emotional information, given how maladaptive it is to stop responding to threatening information, with male angry faces being the most threatening. The role societal
norms and early exposure have in creating such biases remain important
avenues for future work.

F158
LOCATION PRIMING USING FLASH-LAG ILLUSION DEPENDS ON
THE PERCEPT, NOT PHYSICAL STIMULUS Dinara Guliyeva1, Marjan

Persuh1; 1Borough of Manhattan Community College, City University of New York
— An influential proposal suggests that response priming is independent

of awareness, depends on rapid feedforward sweep of visual information
processing and depends on physical characteristics of the stimulus. We
tested this hypothesis using a well-characterized flash-lag illusion: when
a static stimulus is briefly presented in alignment with a moving stimulus,
it is perceived as lagging behind it. This illusion is especially well suited
for testing the priming hypothesis for the following reasons: (1) it is very
robust, (2) a large body of literature suggests that it is a high-level cognitive
illusion and (3) it shows a strong dissociation between physical and perceived location. To prime for location, two horizontal bars, moving downwards or upwards were presented at the center of the display. A dot was
then flashed between the bars. When bars were moving downwards, dot
position was perceived above the bar and vice versa. Participants made
speeded responses to targets, which followed primes and consisted of two
static horizontal bars with dot positioned above or below them. If response
priming is based on physical characteristics of the stimulus no priming would be expected because dot was spatially aligned with the bars.
Our data revealed strong priming, demonstrating that response priming
depends on the percept and not the physical characteristics of the stimulus.
There was no priming for moving bars alone. Because flash-lag illusion is
considered high-level cognitive phenomenon, our data further suggest that
visual system rapidly computes perceptual quality of the stimulus, which
can affect even fast motor responses.

F159
DOES AVERSIVE CONDITIONING RETUNE HUMAN VISUAL
CORTEX? L. Jack Rhodes1, Aholibama Ruiz1, Matt Rìos1, Thomas Nguyen1,
Brandon Gibb1, Vladimir Miskovic1; 1SUNY Binghamton — Recordings of sin-

gle-unit spiking indicate that aversive and appetitive conditioning induce
rapid and profound remodeling of sensory receptive fields in many mammalian species. Surprisingly little is known about whether aversive learning
can produce similar changes at the population level in human cortex. Here,
we sought to address this question by assaying learning-dependent shifts
in orientation tuning bandwidths (half-width half-heights [(θ1/2)]) using a
combination of visual psychophysics and high-density steady state visual
evoked potentials (SSVEPs). Behavioral measures of tuning consisted of
just noticeable difference thresholds and error rates from a two-sine wave
method while en masse orientation tuning of visual cortex was measured
using non-linear SSVEP intermodulation products selective for orientation
of counterphase modulated sine wave gratings. Bandwidth narrowing following threat (CS+) relative to safety (CS-) conditioning would constitute
evidence for sensory sharpening while broadening would argue in favor
of enhanced generalization. The behavioral and SSVEP tuning curves were
compared across a sweep of orientation offsets. All subjects had peak electrophysiological and behavioral error response rates between -2 and +2
degrees offset from the target orientation. Our results provide evidence of
θ1/2 broadening following aversive learning, consistent with fear generalization (data collection remains ongoing). In some instances, behavioral
error tuning curves post-CS+ were nearly flattened with effects extending
beyond ±10 degree offsets. These findings provide preliminary evidence
in support of orientation re-tuning driven by acquired affective salience.

F160
DECODING THE SELECTIVE AND DYNAMIC MAINTENANCE OF
UNSEEN SENSORY FEATURES IN THE HUMAN BRAIN Jean-Remi
King1, Niccolo Pescetelli2, Stanislas Dehaene3; 1New York University, 2Oxford,
3
College de France, Paris — Recent working memory studies have challenged
the classic association between the visibility of a stimulus and the maintenance of its corresponding neural representation. In the present study,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

257

Poster Session F	
we investigated the neural architecture underlying sub- and supraliminal
maintenance using novel multivariate pattern analyses of magnetoencephalography recordings (MEG). Subjects were presented with a masked
target Gabor patch, whose angle had to be compared to that of a subsequent memory probe. Our results first revealed that many sensory features
(presence, spatial frequency, phase, contrast, angle) could be decoded from
subjects’ early brain responses. Second, only the sensory features relevant
to the task appeared to be selectively maintained during the brief retention
period. Third, these selected codes were exclusively modulated by visibility, but, critically, were sustained in the unseen condition. Temporal generalization analyses showed that the maintenance of seen and unseen targets
was performed by a long hierarchical network. Together, these results challenge current neural and computational models of visual awareness and
suggest that visual perception relies on a long hierarchical network that i)
simultaneously and unconsciously encodes multiple sensory features, ii)
selectively recodes those relevant to the task in multiple brain regions and
iii) generate visibility inference from these spatially and temporally distributed representations.

F161
CONTRIBUTION OF FAR FIELD EFFECTS OF CORTICAL TDCS
IN THE CEREBELLUM TO LEARNING IN AN OBJECT DETECTION
PARADIGM Aaron P. Jones1, Michael C. Trumbo1, Brian A. Coffman2, Michael
A. Hunter1, Charles S. Robinson1, Angela Combs1, Kinsey Steuterman1, Vickey
Massey1, Mohamed Aboseria3, Alexander David3, Marom Bikson3, Vincent P.
Clark1; 1The University of New Mexico, 2University of Pittsburgh, 3The City College
of New York — Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) has been shown

to alter cognitive function in many domains. Our lab has demonstrated that
using either F10 anode/left arm cathode or T5 cathode/left arm anode
montages increased the ability to detect hidden objects in a complex visual
environment, with Cohen’s ds of 1.83 and 1.28, respectively (Coffman et al.,
2012; Clark, Coffman, Trumbo, & Wegele, 2014). However, an F10 anode/
T5 cathode montage produced a much smaller effect (Cohen’s d = 0.21,
unpublished). Finite element modeling (FEM) indicated that the F10/arm
and T5/arm montages produce far-field effects in the cerebellum, among
other regions, whereas the F10/T5 montage produced no cerebellar effects.
The present study was performed to see if cerebellar tDCS produced a similar effect size as our prior F10 or T5 vs. contralateral arm studies. Thirty-six
participants received anodal, cathodal, or sham stimulation over medial
posterior cerebellum vs. left arm during training in an object detection task.
Learning was calculated as the difference in performance accuracy between
post-training and pre-training tests. Neither anodal nor cathodal cerebellar tDCS led to significant increases in learning compared to sham (Anode
Cohen’s d = 0.21, Cathode = 0.25). The lack of effects of cerebellar tDCS on
learning suggest that far-field effects in the cerebellum do not play a critical
role in our prior studies, and also that the cerebellum is not significantly
involved in this task, which is consistent with our prior fMRI studies (Clark
et al. 2012). The small F10/T5 effects remain perplexing.

F162
TOWARDS A RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTING MODELS OF ILLUSORY CONTOUR PROCESSING IN HUMANS 2.0: LINES, ORIENTATION, AND LATERALITY Jacques Anken1,2, Jean-François Knebel1,2, Micah

M. Murray1,2,3,4; 1University Hospital Center, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Ophthalmology, Jules-Gonin
Eye Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
— Illusory contours (ICs) refer to the perception of borders in the absence

of contrast gradients. Despite decades of research on the psychophysics
and neurobiological mechanisms of IC processes across a multitude of
species and using a range of brain imaging/mapping techniques, debate
continues as to whether or not ICs are the result of a low-level (presumably
feedforward) process or instead occur first in higher-order brain regions.
Studies supporting a low-level mechanism have most often involved stimuli inducing IC lines rather than IC forms/shapes. By contrast, studies in
humans have most often involved IC forms/shapes and identified a visual
evoked potential (VEP) correlate of IC sensitivity, the “IC effect” that onsets
at ~90ms and is localized to bilateral lateral occipital cortices (LOC). This
IC effect is observed across a wide range of stimulus parameters, though
always involving object forms. The IC effect is moreover delayed in time

258

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
(i.e. ~200ms onset) and has a lateralized topography/localization when the
stimuli are presented to one or the other visual hemifield. The present VEP
study addressed this knowledge gap by presenting IC stimuli that induce
perceptions of lines that were oriented horizontally or vertically and were
also presented centrally or laterally (left/right) within the parafovea (i.e.
5°). IC sensitivity to induced lines modulated the VEP topography at ~250300ms and seems reflect retinotopic visual field representations. These
results are consistent with effects originating within low-level visual cortices, albeit at relatively late stimulus processing stages. We conclude by
situating these results within existing modelling of IC processing.

F163
OBJECT SELECTIVITY OR MOTIVATIONAL RELEVANCE: FUSIFORM ACTIVATION TO FACES AND FOOD Kayleigh Adamson1, Carly
Hyde1,2, Vanessa Troiani1; 1Geisinger Autism and Developmental Medicine Institute, 2Bucknell University — While activation of the fusiform gyrus (FG) is

most commonly linked to face processing, the FG is also activated by food
images. Because objects must compete for our visual attention, an intriguing hypothesis is one in which parts of the ventral visual stream respond to
salient objects, determined by individual preferences or item value. Here,
we examine whether altered motivation in one domain (food) will have
an impact on another domain (faces). We characterized category-selectivity
and brain-behavioral correlates in the FG in response to various categories
of objects in a cohort of 48 healthy adults (24 female; mean age=22.33) using
an fMRI block design with 4 object categories (faces, food, scenes, clocks).
Body mass index (BMI) was used as a measure of food motivation. We calculated face-selectivity in bilateral FG by contrasting face and food blocks
and correlated this with BMI. We find that males show a significant impact
of food motivation on face-selectivity in the right FG (r=-0.550; p=0.003).
That is, with increasing BMI, the right FG shows a diminished differential
response to faces relative to food. This suggests that the FG may not be specific to perceptual aspects of face processing, but may also respond to other
items of motivational relevance. One possibility is that the FG typically
serves face processing, but can be hijacked in cases of chronically altered
motivation. Further research exploring individual differences in motivational relevance is warranted and will impact the fields of obesity, autism,
neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric illness.

F164
THE SYNESTHETE’S A: OFTEN RED, ALWAYS SPECIAL Nicho-

las Root1, Vilayanur Ramachandran1; 1University of California, San Diego
— Although color-grapheme associations in synesthesia are often idio-

syncratic, some consistent findings have been reported. For example, the
letter “A” is red for about 40% of synesthetes (Simner et al, 2005). Here
we describe an additional, second-order property of synesthetes’ “A”: the
color that a synesthete experiences for the letter “A” is very distant from the
color experienced for all other letters. We constructed a distance matrix of
pairwise color distance between letters (in CIELuv space), and found that
the average distance of the “A” column was significantly larger than any
other column. In our sample, for ~65% of synesthetes “A” was the most
distant letter; for ~85% of synesthetes, “A” was one of the five most distant
letters. Importantly, our effect cannot be explained by the “A is often red”
effect, but the reverse is true: at maximum chroma, red is perceived as more
saturated than other colors (cf., the furthest point from white on the both
the CIELuv chromaticity plane and the Munsell color system), so mapping
“A” to red would allow for the maximum possible average distance in color
space from every other point. The dramatic effect size also suggests that
second-order effects reported in synesthesia (e.g., that letter ordinality and
hue distance are correlated) might need to be re-analyzed to account for the
uniqueness of the letter “A”.

THINKING: Decision making
F165
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN DOPAMINERGIC MIDBRAIN AND STRIATUM CHANGES OVER PROBABILISTIC LEARNING William Lloyd1, Tiffany Bell1, Anastasia Christakou1; 1University of Reading,
UK — Striatal activity is associated with reward-based decision making. This
association is thought to be driven by the prediction error-coding dopa-

2016 Annual Meeting	
minergic influence from the midbrain. If midbrain structures are driving
striatal activation during learning, we may expect changes in the relationship between activation in the midbrain and the striatum over a learning
episode. Using probabilistic learning, we tested whether midbrain-striatal
connectivity during feedback changes once criterion is reached. 17 participants chose between four card decks with different winning probabilities
during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Learning criterion was set as the repeated selection of either of the two highest decks
for at least eighteen out of twenty consecutive trials. We concentrated on
activation during feedback presentation. fMRI activity timecourses were
extracted for the feedback epoch from the following midbrain and striatal regions of interest: substantia nigra (SN), ventral tegmental area (VTA),
caudate, putamen, and ventral striatum. The correlation coefficient was
calculated between each midbrain and each striatal region before and after
criterion for each subject. Group data was tested for a significant (p<0.05)
change in correlation post-criterion. An increase in correlation was found
between SN and ventral striatum (left, p=0.024) and VTA and ventral striatum (left, p=0.011). No significant change in correlations were found in
any other midbrain-striatal ROI combinations, or in the right hemisphere.
Results show increased correlation between midbrain and striatum when a
task has been learnt compared to when a task is being learned. This demonstrates an adaptive aspect of the midbrain-striatal pathways utilised in
reward-based learning.

F166
LEARNING IN UNCERTAIN ENVIRONMENTS IS MODULATED BY
REINFORCEMENT TYPES AND INTOLERANCE OF UNCERTAINTY
IN SUBCLINICAL OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE CHECKERS Camila G.
Victorino1, Annette Sterr1,2, Ellen Seiss1,3; 1University of Surrey, 2Department of
Neurology, University of São Paulo, 3Bournemouth University — Decision making

(DM) and learning deficits are found in Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
(OCD) in uncertain environments and when previous reinforcer information is important to succeed (Starcke et al., 2009). Some authors have argued
that the DM deficit in OCD could be related to altered perception of reinforcers (Cavedini et al., 2006) while others state this might be related to
the uncertainty in the task per se (Kaczkurkin, 2013). Here, we examine
DM deficits in OCD related to specific changes in monetary and emotional
reinforcement (including OCD-related stimuli) in a probabilistic learning
task. Three emotional DM experiments were employed with a total of 36
subclinical checkers and 36 controls. In all experiments, participants had to
repeatedly choose between 2 cards learning how to improve their decisions
based on: previous monetary gain and a positive emotional picture (positive experiment), monetary loss and a negative picture (negative experiment) or monetary loss and a checker symptom-related picture (symptom-related experiment). A learning curve analysis revealed that checkers
learned faster in the positive condition presenting a higher accuracy at the
beginning of the block (p=0.03). Also, checkers had a decreased probability
to shift options after losing (lose-shift) in the previous trial for the negative
(p=0.01) and positive (p=0.003) but not for the symptom-related experiment (p=0.95). Finally, we found a significant correlation between scores
in the intolerance of uncertainty questionnaire (IU) and lose-shift values
(r=-0.239). It is possible the intolerance of uncertainty is partly responsible
for the lose-shift strategy change in checkers in specific emotional environments.

F167
LOSS AVERSION PREDICTS RELIANCE ON GOAL-DIRECTED
CONTROL Alec Solway1, Terry Lohrenz1, P. Read Montague1,2; 1Virginia Tech

Carilion Research Institute, 2. Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, University College London — Research on reward-based decision making has drawn

a distinction between two different types of controllers: one that is slow
to adapt, but cheap to use, identified with the common sense notion of
“habit”, and another that is flexible and goal-directed, but computationally
expensive by comparison. These systems have been identified with model-free and model-based reinforcement learning, respectively, opening the
door for generating precise quantitatively driven hypotheses. An active
area of research aims to determine the factors that drive the degree to which
individuals rely on each system. While some work suggests that the brain
uses a sophisticated meta-controller, other studies are consistent with the
idea that simple heuristics are also involved. Here we show that reliance

Poster Session F
on model-based control is related to loss aversion, a measure of how much
losses are weighed relative to gains. Individuals that are particularly sensitive to losses are happy to pay the cost of using the model-based controller
in order to better avoid them. A related quantity, risk aversion, is unrelated
to model-based control. Neither quantity is related to model-free control.

F168
DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN TEMPORAL DISCOUNTING IN
ADOLESCENTS: A LONGITUDINAL FMRI STUDY Erik de Water1, P.

Cedric M.P. Koolschijn2, Gabry W. Mies1, Bernd Figner1, Yuliya Yoncheva3, Wouter
van den Bos4, F. Xavier Castellanos3, Antonius H.N. Cillessen1, Anouk Scheres1;
1
Radboud University, 2University of Amsterdam, 3New York University, 4Max
Planck Institute — Adolescents frequently engage in impulsive behaviors,

such as substance use. Temporal discounting (TD) tasks have been widely
used to study one important aspect of impulsivity: the preference for immediate rewards. TD tasks involve choices between small rewards that are
immediately available, and larger rewards that are available after a delay.
Adolescents show a decline in their preference for immediate rewards with
increasing age, driven by decreased activation of the ventral striatum (VS)
and increased activation of frontoparietal brain areas. However, to date,
no longitudinal fMRI studies on TD have been conducted. The goal of the
present study was to examine the neural mechanisms of developmental
changes in TD in adolescence. Forty-two adolescents aged 12-17 years were
scanned with fMRI twice, approximately one year apart, while they completed a TD task with money and candy rewards. We used a mixed-effects
model approach to decompose participants’ TD choices into three components: 1) general immediate reward preference; 2) immediate reward sensitivity; 3) delay aversion. Adolescents who showed a stronger longitudinal
increase in VS activity during immediate reward choices, showed greater
decreases in their general immediate reward preference and delay aversion over time. Adolescents who showed a stronger longitudinal increase
in activation of the precuneus and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex during
delayed reward choices, showed greater decreases in their general immediate reward preference and delay aversion over time. These findings indiciate that the development of reward valuation and cognitive control networks contributes to decreased impulsivity in adolescence.

F169
NEURAL SIGNATURES OF EXPERIENCE-BASED IMPROVEMENTS
IN DECISION-MAKING Joshua Tremel1, Mark Wheeler2, Patryk Laurent3,

David Wolk4, Julie Fiez1; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2Georgia Institute of Technology, 3Johns Hopkins University, 4University of Pennsylvania — Feedback about

our choices is crucial to how we gather information and learn from our
environment. It provides key information about decision experiences that
can ultimately be used to optimize future choices. However, our understanding of the processes through which feedback translates into improved
decision-making is lacking. Using fMRI and cognitive models of decision-making and learning, we examined the influence of feedback on multiple aspects of decision processes across learning. Subjects learned correct
choices to 50 word pairs across eight repetitions of a concurrent discrimination task. Predictions derived from drift-diffusion and reinforcement learning models were then used as fMRI regressors to identify regions whose
activity modulated with specific cognitive processes described by the
models. The patterns of intersection of these neural effects support three
main inferences about feedback’s influence on decision-making. First, frontoparietal, cerebellar, and caudate nucleus regions behave like performance
monitors, reflecting errors in performance predictions that signal the need
for changes to control over decision-making. Second, posterior cingulate
and precuneus regions behave like confidence monitors, reflecting differences in the quality of learned information available to guide a decision.
Last, medial temporal lobe and putamen regions behave like memory storage sites, reflecting differences in learned item values that inform optimal
decision choices. As information about optimal choices is accrued, these
neural systems dynamically adjust, shifting the processing from controlled
performance monitoring to bottom-up, stimulus-driven choice selection.
Collectively, the results provide a detailed perspective on the fundamental
ability to use past experiences to improve future decisions.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

259

Poster Session F	

F170
DECONSTRUCTING WIN-STAY LOSE-SWITCH: AN FMRI DISCORDANT TWIN PAIR ANALYSIS Rashina D. Seabury1, Deanna M. Barch1,

Pamela A. F. Madden1, Andrew C. Heath1, Bradley L. Schlaggar1, Christina N.
Lessov-Schlaggar1; 1Washington University in Saint Louis School of Medicine
— Reward-based decision-making involves a conjunction of multiple cog-

nitive processes in order to complete a task with an uncertain outcome.
The present study sought to examine the relationship between reward
processing and decision-making in female monozygotic twin pairs who
are discordant for heuristic response strategies during an event-related
two-button choice monetary reward guessing task using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Based on button press responses following each of three task conditions including monetary win, monetary loss,
or neutral feedback, subjects were categorized to stay or switch strategy
categories. Using repeated measures ANOVAs, we compared activation
between strategy groups for each task condition. Win-stay subjects showed
increased activation in areas with high functional connectivity to the cerebellum and the cingulo-opercular, dorsal attention, and visual systems
compared to their win-switch co-twins. Lose-switch subjects, compared to
their lose-stay co-twins, showed increased activation in areas associated
with the default-mode, dorsal attention, somatomotor, and visual systems.
Neutral-stay subjects, compared to their neutral-switch co-twins, showed
increased activation in left putamen only. Using a study design where
groups are matched on genetic and many familial background factors, our
findings indicate that subjects who employ strategies that ostensibly minimize monetary loss (win-stay, lose-switch, and neutral-stay) utilize systems that coordinate top-down task control, motor coordination, and visual
processing to a greater extent than subjects who employ a more uncertain
response strategy (win-switch and lose-stay).

F171
USING A NEW VISUAL CATEGORY LEARNING PARADIGM TO
ELICIT IMPLICIT LEARNING Catherine Ives-Louter1, Ben Reuveni1, Paul J.
Reber1; 1Northwestern University — Research suggests that both explicit and

implicit memory are implicated in visual category learning, which offers
a unique opportunity to study the mechanisms and interactions of these
memory systems. However, the study of implicit visual category learning
is often challenged by the ability of healthy individuals to explicitly remember study stimuli used and consciously extract rules. Here we introduce a
new visual category learning paradigm that uses movement and time pressure to reduce the tendency of healthy participants to identify the category
structure explicitly. The visual categories to be learned are based on sine
wave gratings that vary on two continuous dimensions, orientation and
spatial frequency, that are commonly used in studies of rule-based (RB) and
information-integration (II) category learning. Participants were shown
falling sine wave gratings (velocity of 14.5cm/s, giving 1.6s to respond and
total presentation time of 1.9s, similar to traditional static presentation) and
were instructed to categorize each stimulus into one of two categories. Participants learned the underlying category structure by trial-and-error with
feedback provided after each response, gradually improving performance
over 1000 trials and performing reliably above chance. Post-learning interviews indicated low rates of conscious knowledge of the underlying category structure when presented with a traditional II paradigm. In contrast,
participants shown stimuli categorized by an RB rule exhibited an early,
step-like jump in performance characteristic of explicit learning. By using
movement to create a sense of time pressure, we were successfully able to
elicit implicit, II category learning with little contamination from explicit
rule discovery.

F172
NEURAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN
PROBABILISTIC REINFORCEMENT LEARNING Tiffany Bell1, Michael
Lindner1, Angela Langdon2, Ying Zheng1, Anastasia Christakou1; 1University of
Reading, UK, 2Princeton University, USA — Performance in decision-making

tasks varies between people in a way that indicates decision-making is
guided by more than just choice feedback. In this study, we used a multi-alternative probabilistic learning task during high resolution, multiband
fMRI, to examine neural and psychological differences between people
who learn the task (i.e. reach a pre-determined performance criterion) and

260

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting
people who do not (approximately one third of participants are typically
unable to learn to criterion). Behavioural data was modelled using a temporal difference reinforcement-learning algorithm. The model captured the
impact of participants’ subjective choice value on future behaviour (value
parameter) and learning rates based on positive and negative prediction
errors. Learners had significantly higher value parameter estimates than
non-learners. Across the whole sample, higher value parameter estimates
were associated with increased activation in the striatum during feedback,
whereas low value parameter estimates were associated with increased
activation in the thalamus. After accounting for learning rate, non-learners
showed increased activation in the hippocampus during presentation of
their total cumulative score at the end of each trial. These results suggest
that differences between learners and non-learners in the task may not be
restricted to the degree of neural activation, but may be driven by qualitative differences in thinking style, memory processing, or strategy.

F173
CULTURAL INFLUENCES ON NEURAL PROCESSING OF CONTEXTUAL SCENES Chih-Mao Huang1, Pei-Shan Ho1, Yi-Chen Lee2, Ho-Ling Liu3,
Robert Doole1, Chien-Te Wu2, Hsu-Wen Huang1; 1National Chiao-Tung University,
2
National Taiwan University, 3University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center —

Converging behavioral evidence indicates that East Asian and Western
individuals have different biases for processing information that may stem
from contrasting cultural values. East Asians appear to be more sensitive to
contextual information shaped by the collectivistic/interdependent culture.
In contrasts, Westerners have a tendency to process focal and salient objects
of the environment due to their individualistic/independent representation. In this cross-cultural study, we employed event-related functional
MRI to examine how collectivistic and individualistic biases of East Asian
and Western cultures affect the neural function associated with the contextual processing of visual scenes by manipulating the congruence of the pictures presented. Both Taiwanese and Western participants were instructed
to perform visual categorization task (i.e., animacy judgment) for the visual
scenes in which the salient object was either congruent or incongruent with
the background. Each participant’s degree of endorsement of individualistic and collectivistic values was assessed by their self-report on the Singelis
Self-construal Scale (SCS). Taiwanese rated higher SCS scores than Westerners in collectivistic value and Westerners rated higher SCS scores than
Taiwanese in individualistic value. A whole-brain contrast when processing incongruent pairs between two cultural groups showed that Taiwanese
elicited greater activity in cortical regions that correspond to attentional
and inhibitory controls, including dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex. These results are consistent with the collectivistic-individualistic dichotomy, and suggest that East Asians devoted more neurocognitive resources to a holistic information-processing bias in which object
and contextual information are jointly encoded and in which relational
information is prioritized over categorical information.

F174
THE ROLE OF THE VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN
CATEGORY LEARNING: DECISION EVIDENCE OR EXPECTED
REWARD? Kimberly Morris1, Darrell Worthy2, Kaileigh Byrne2, Bailey
Brashears1,3, Tyler Davis1; 1Texas Tech University, 2Texas A&M, 3Rice University
— Ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC), has been found to track sub-

jective value estimates in a number of behavioral economic and reward
learning tasks. However, VMPFC also tends to track cognitive processes
not clearly identified with expected value such as episodic memory formation, metamemory judgments, and measures of decision evidence in basic
decision making tasks. Together, these results suggest that the VMPFC
may have a more general role in cognition such as signalling confidence
rather than computing subjective value per se. To test this hypothesis, we
conducted an fMRI study in which expected value of responses was anticorrelated with the decision evidence associated with making a choice. Subjects learned to categorize perceptual stimuli that differed along two perceptual dimensions using trial and error. In this task, items located closer
to the boundary, separating the categories, tend to be the hardest to classify
and items far from the boundary the easiest. To pit expected value against
decision evidence, we thus rewarded items more the closer they were to
the boundary. Subject specific predictions for expected value, probability
correct, and prediction error were estimated from behavior using rein-

2016 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session F

forcement learning models and were used to interrogate the fMRI data. We
found that VMPFC only tracked probability correct, our measure of decision evidence. No voxels in VMPFC were correlated with expected value
at even liberal thresholds. These results suggest that in category learning,
VMPFC may not code subjective value per se, but a more general function
related to decision evidence.

F175
ECONOMIC GAMES WITH HUMANS AND SOCIAL ROBOTS Stephanie Tulk1, Eva Wiese1; 1George Mason University — More work is needed in the

domain of Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) to see what qualities of social
robots and virtual agents are necessary for team building, trust and social
connection. Such information is necessary to appropriately design agents
that can be used as teachers, collaborators and care takers. The social treatment of a non-human agent involve some degree of anthropomorphism
(Epeley, Waitz & Cacioppo, 2007), which modulates social attention, as can
be observed through reaction times (Wiese, Wykowska, Zwickel & Müller,
2012). Trust can be examined through the use of Economic Games (EGs),
where an individual’s rejection of an unfair offer results in activation of
bilateral anterior insula (a region often associated with anger and disgust)
(Sanfey et al., 2003). This study explores the relationship between agent
type (morphed images, some percent human and robot) and monetary
offers in EGs. Using a 2-way repeated measures ANOVA, preliminary data
shows differences across agent type in percentage of offers accepted and
mean reaction times, especially in the 80/20 split (i.e., mostly unfair) condition, which may suggest uncertainty of punishment towards non-human
agents.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

261

Poster Topic Index
ATTENTION: Auditory

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Self perception

A1 – A8, A10 - A11, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
C1 – C2, C5 - C8, C10, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

F35 - F38, F40 - F42, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

ATTENTION: Development & aging

B45 – B51, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
D42 – D48, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am
F43 – F49, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

C12 – C19, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

ATTENTION: Multisensory
B1 – B2, B5 - B10, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am

ATTENTION: Nonspatial
A12 – A17, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

ATTENTION: Other
B11 – B19, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
F1 – F5, F7 - F9, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

ATTENTION: Spatial
D1 – D15, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E1 – E14, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F10 – F17, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Development & aging
B20 – B33, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
F18 – F21, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition interactions
A18 - A28, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
B34 – B44, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C20 – C31, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
D16 – D27, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E15 – E25, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F22 - F32, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional responding
A29 – A36, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
C32 – C39, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
E26 – E32, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F33, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Other
C40 – C45, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
D28 – D36, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am
F39, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
A37 – A43, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
D37 – D41, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E33 – E37, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F6, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

262

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development & aging

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Goal maintenance &
switching
B52 – B59, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
D49 – D55, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring & inhibitory
control
A44 – A51, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
C46 – C55, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
E38 – E47, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F50 – F59, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Other
A52 – A59, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
C56, C58 – C62, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
E48 – E54, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working memory
A60 – A67, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
B60 – B68, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C3, C63 - C70, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
D56 – D64, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E55 – E62, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F60 – F68, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
A68 – A83, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
C9, C71 - C78, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
D65 – D72, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am
F69 – F75, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
B69 – B76, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
D73 – D78, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am
F76 – F81, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

LANGUAGE: Other
A84 – A93, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
B3, B77 - B86, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C79 – C84, C86 - C88, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
D79 – D88, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E63 – E71, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F82 – F91, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

2016 Annual Meeting	

Poster Topic Index

LANGUAGE: Semantic

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition

B87 – B95, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C89 - C90, C92 – C97, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
E72 – E77, E79 - E80, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F92 – F94, F97 - F100, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

A134 – A144, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
C4, C138 - C147, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
F129, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

LANGUAGE: Syntax

C165 – C167, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

E81 – E89, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Development & aging

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Development & aging
PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control

C98 - C109, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
E90 – E99, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm

A9, A154, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
B139 – B150, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
D136 – D148, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory

A94 – A112, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
B96 – B112, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C110 – C128, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
D89 – D108, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E100 – E117, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F101 – F114, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

A145 – A153, A155 - A157 Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
E78, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F142 - F154, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Other
A113 – A123, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
F115 – F125, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Priming
F126 – F128, F130 - F131, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Semantic
B113 – B119, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
D109 – D117, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Skill learning
B120 – B128, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
D118 – D123, D125 - D127, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am

METHODS: Electrophysiology
E118 – E121, E123 - E127, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F132 – F141, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

METHODS: Neuroimaging

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other
B151 – B157, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C91, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
E128 – E137, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F95 - F96, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
C148 – C157, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
D149 – D156, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E138 – E148, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F155 - F164, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

THINKING: Decision making
A158 – A167, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
B4, B158 - B167, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C158 – C164, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
D158 – D166, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E149 – E154, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F165 - F175, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

THINKING: Development & aging
C168 - C173, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

A124 – A125, A127 - A133, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
B129 – B136, B138, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C129 – C137, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

THINKING: Other

METHODS: Other

THINKING: Problem solving

D128 - D135, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am

A126, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
E156 – E161, E163, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm

NEUROANATOMY

A168 – A172, Saturday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
D167 – D171, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am

E164 – E171, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm

THINKING: Reasoning

OTHER
B137, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C57, C85, Sunday, April 3, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
D124, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E122, E155, E162, Monday, April 4, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F34, Tuesday, April 5, 8:00 - 10:00 am

B168 – B172, Sunday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am
D172 – D176, Monday, April 4, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

263

Author Index
A
Abad-Hernando, S 70
Abdi, H 140, 171
Abdollahi, F 55, 244
Abdollahi, R 179
Abdus-Sabur, F 192
Abel, C 256
Abosch, A 212
Aboseria, M 258
Aboud, K 79
Abouzari, M 115
Abrahams, BS 57
Abrahamse, E 48
Abram, M 64
Abram, S 145
Abrams, H 254
Abubshait, A 155
Abugel, J 192
Achal, S 115
Acke, F 92
Acosta, MT 51
Adair, D 177, 180
Adamson, K 223, 258
Adams, R 230
Adams, S 112
Aday, J 230
Adcock, RA 59, 211
Addis, DR 58, 136
Adebiyi, O 177
Adeyemo, B 197
Adkins, M 194
Adleman, N 85
Agjayan, S 136
Agnew, Z 80
Aguilar, M 245
Ahmed, R 62
Ahn, J 109
Ahrens, L 116
Ahuja, N 152
Aichele, S 48
Aimola Davies, AM 98
Aisenberg, E 58
Aizenstein, H 84
Akwuole, I 146
Akyürek, E 199
Alain, C 166
Alamia, A 178, 215
Alam, ZM 150
Alarcon, G 231
Alario, F-X 240, 242
Alatorre Cruz, GC 163, 175
Albert, M 132
Albert, N 101
Albohn, D 230
Albonico, A 143
Alday, PM 213
Alexander, EJ 240
Alexander, H 44
Alexander, L 184
Alexander, LM 115, 155
Alexander, W 29
Alfred, K 185
Alhazmi, F 140
Alho, J 166, 202
Allaham, M 156
Al-Loos, R 147

264

Almeida, J 172
Alm, KH 136
Aloysi, AS 139
Alperin, B 51, 82
Alsemari, A 173
Altmann, G 243
Amir Kassim, A 250
Ammerman, K 244
Amoruso, L 12, 214
Amso, D 189
Anaki, D 184
Ancelle, J 128
Andersen, SK 123
Anderson, A 72, 184, 245
Anderson, AK 171, 192
Anderson, D 73
Anderson, K 150
Anderson, L 80
Anderson, M 235
Anderson, MT 227
Andersson, A 94
Andrade, G 57
Andreatta, M 62, 117, 193
Andric, M 254
Andrzejewski, JA 45
Angell, W 207
Anken, J 258
Ankrett, S 224
Anne-Marie, S 152
Anthonipillai, N 197
Anticevic, A 24
Antoine, S 199
Appelbaum, G 219, 221
Apšvalka, D 106
Arbel, Y 160, 249
Archila, P 92
Archilla-Suerte, P 160
Arciniega, H 125
Arduino, L 143, 151
Arkin, C 205
Armenta, M 118
Armstrong, A 205
Armusewicz, K 235
Arnaez-Telleria, J 208
Arndt, J 172
Aron, A 235
Arrington, C 86
Aruguete, J 156
Arvaneh, M 108, 158
Arzy, S 249
Asan, E 117
Asare, G 232
Asaridou, SS 53
Asarnow, R 103
Ashby, FG 123, 124, 145,
162, 175
Aslin, R 103
Asp, EW 49
Assaneo, MF 255
Assudani Patel, S 211
Astle, D 33, 34, 226
Astur, DR 220
Astur, R 211
Athauda, D 106
Audrain, S 173
Auguste, KI 251
Au, J 34

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Auksztulewicz, R 69
Avery, T 55, 121
Aviyente, S 252, 253

B
Babbit, C 103
Babb, J 164
Babikian, T 103
Bacha-Trams, M 166, 232
Bachman, M 213, 214, 230,
253
Bachman, MD 252, 253
Bacigalupo, F 43
Bacopulos, A 171
Badde, S 69
Bader, R 96
Badre, D 51
Baek, Y 63
Baeuchl, C 62
Bagattini, C 143, 216
Bagic, A 66
Baig, A 234
Bailer, C 244
Bailey, S 66
Baker, C 175, 216
Baker, CI 156
Baker, S 170
Baker, SL 12, 158
Baldwin, CL 77
Balhorn, A 68
Banerjee, D 71
Barak, O 22
Barascud, N 113
Barbaro, L 224
Barbaroux, M 202
Barbera, D 153
Barch, DM 260
Bardi, L 151
Barense, M 11, 63, 99, 134,
174, 209, 215
Barker, J 167
Barkley, C 237
Bar, M 202
Baron-Cohen, S 105, 157,
171
Baron, E 202
Barragan, D 77
Barredo, J 227
Barrett, AM 149, 164
Bartel, T 157
Bartoli, E 235
Basak, C 176
Basil, R 157
Bass, DI 60
Bassett, D 101
Bassett, DS 235
Bastin, C 98, 207
Bate, J 235
Batterink, L 59
Bauer, AJ 131
Bauer, A-KR 112, 141
Bauer, P 133
Bauer, Y 12, 189
Baumann, A 113
Baum, SR 252
Baunez, C 229

Baus, C 242
Bayer, M 35, 154, 230
Bays, PM 209
Beach, S 11, 54, 128
Bearden, CE 102
Beaton, D 140, 171
Beaton, EA 112
Beatty, PJ 155, 195
Beauchamp, MS 32
Beaudoin, C 41
Becerra, J 212
Beck, DM 181
Becke, A 197
Becker, B 54, 129, 163, 164
Beck, J 219
Bedny, M 129
Beeman, M 185
Beesley, T 178
Begani, N 197
Behmer Jr., LP 104
Bein, O 137, 210
Beit-Arie, R 234
Bejjani, C 117
Bellebaum, C 235
Belleville, S 38
Bell, M 206, 249
Bell, T 75, 258, 260
Benasich, AA 127
Benavides-Varela, S 188
Bender, HA 139
Bengson, J 77
Bennett, K 228
Bennion, K 168
Benoit, J 42
Benoit, R 235
Bentley, V 102
Benzekri, A 192
Benzell, JA 227
Bercovitz, K 206
Bergstedt, D 102
Bergstrom, Z 172
Berken, JA 53
Bernat, D 230
Bernat, E 190, 214, 230,
252, 253
Bernat, EM 213, 252, 253
Bernstein, M 207
Berntsen, D 97
Berron, D 197
Berry, A 139
Berry, AS 12, 158
Berryhill, M 50, 52, 125
Bertoldo, A 86
Bertossi, E 248
Bertz, Z 256
Besson, M 202
Bestmann, S 214
Bettcher, BM 234
Beversdorf, D 74, 126
Beyer, F 193
Bezdek, M 44, 111
Bezdek, MA 219
Bezgin, G 209
Bhandari, A 51
Bhangal, S 125
Bielecki, M 162
Bielser, M-L 107

Bier, J-C 199
Bijanki, KR 60
Bikson, M 177, 258
Bild-Enkin, H 63
Binder, J 245
Binns, M 85
Binsted, G 175
Biondo, F 160
Birnbaum, A 237
Bisiacchi, P 213
Biswal, B 23
Biswal, S 11, 101
Bjernestedt, A 173
Björnsdotter, M 226
Black, S 141
Black, SE 170
Blais, C 46, 171
Blakely, RD 139
Blanco-Elorrieta, E 203
Blanco, N 219
Blankenburg, F 12, 162, 203
Blanke, O 249, 255
Bleichner, MG 141
Blevins, G 221
Blini, E 188
Bloomquist, T 58
Blumberg, EJ 121
Blum, R 193
Blundon, EG 142
Bobes Leon, MA 194
Boccagno, C 193
Bock, A 132
Boebinger, D 129
Boeke, EA 193
Bogacz, R 109, 249
Boggio, Ps 45
Bo, J 114
Bokeria, L 218
Boldt, A 109
Bolt, N 231
Bolt, T 71
Bonaiuto, J 214
Bonato, M 188, 199
Boncompte, G 187
Bond Chapman, S 198
Bonnefond, M 25
Bontrager, M 94
Boon, P 196
Boran, L 158, 197
Boraxbekk, C-J 161, 233
Borders, J 160
Borg, J 210
Bornkessel-Schlesewsky,
I 213
Borowsky, R 130, 255
Borst, G 150
Bortfeld, H 163
Bosnyak, D 40
Botdorf, M 233
Botero, N 181
Bottacin, E 161
Bottini, R 237
Boucher, VJ 241
Boudes, E 115
Boukezzi, S 229
Boukrina, O 164
Boulenger, V 55

2016 Annual Meeting	
Bouten, S 232, 254
Bouvy, C 107
Bowen, H 96
Bowman, C 211
Braem, S 44, 48
Bramão, I  169
Brande-Eilat, N 149
Brang, D 11, 75, 135
Branzi, FM 90
Brashears, B 260
Brashier, NM 99
Brass, M 44, 48
Braun, D 86
Bray, S 115
Breakspear, M 17
Breeden, A 236
Breslin, B.A., C 70
Brewer, G 171
Brewer, GA 46
Brewster, T 250
Brice, H 168
Bricolo, E 143
Bridge, D 30, 31, 171, 245
Bridges, D 47
Brielmann, AA 190
Bright, P 169
Brignoni-Perez, E 242
Brinkmann, L 118
Brinton, R 207
Brito, N 201
Brito, NH 103
Brodar, K 97
Brodbeck, C 203
Brod, G 206
Brooks, H 222
Brooks, S 70
Brosnan, M 115
Brothers, T 53, 164, 165
Brouwer, H 212
Brown, J 29, 218
Bruchmann, M 119
Bruckner, R 183
Brudner, EG 152
Bruening, J 159
Bruett, H 137
Brunec, I 134, 209
Bruss, J 120
Brysbaert, M 92
Brzezicka, A 162
Buades-Rotger, M 193
Buc Calderon, C 73
Buck, C 200
Buckholtz, J 184
Buis, B 90
Bulkes, NZ 94, 205
Bulsing, P 214
Bundt, C 48
Bunge, SA 219
Burak, K 197
Burgio, F 188
Burton, P 226
Burton, PC 254
Buschkuehl, M 34
Busch, NA 217
Butler, EE 105
Butler, J 159
Butler, JS 104
Butterworth, B 188
Buxbaum, LJ 107, 215
Buysse, D 84
Buzsáki, G 33
Buzzell, GA 155, 195

Author Index
Byrne, K 218, 260
Byrne, KA 148

C
Caballero, MI 212
Cabeza, R 11, 61, 95, 99,
134, 137, 172
Caffarra, S 91
Cai, Q 92
Cairney, S 59
Calcagno, V 210
Calder, A 157
Caldera, C 79
Calhoun, EM 156
Calhoun, V 252
Calhoun, VD 253
Callahan, N 256
Calma, NE 204
Calvo-Merino, B 44, 47, 70,
125, 229
Cam-CAN, 85
Cameron, DJ 68
Campbell, J 237
Campbell, JM 108
Campbell, K 210
Campbell, KL 85
Campbell, RJ 114
Campbell, S 240
Campoverde, G 204
Cannon, TD 210
Canolty, RT 251
Cantlon, J 185
Capanzana, J 191
Caparis, GA 58
Caplan, JB 58, 61
Caple, A 139
Caplovitz, G 144
Cappe, C 255
Cappon, D 213
Caracciolo, C 229
Carbajal Valenzuela, CC 81
Cardenas Sanchez, SY 163
Cárdenas Sánchez, SY 175
Cardullo, S 111
Carlier, MEM 162
Carlson, J 42, 230
Carnevale, F 22
Carota, F 11, 165
Carreiras, M 54, 56, 90,
94, 208
Carter, C 152
Case, F 72
Casey, B 79
Cash, SS 11, 101
Cason, S 178
Castellanos, FX 51, 259
Castro Chavira, SA 163
Cate, A 218
Caulfield, MD  225
Cavanagh, JF 86, 228
Ceballos, N 78, 224, 225
Cercignani, M 102
Cerreta, A 50
Cetron, J 186
Chaire, A 197
Chait, M 113
Chai, X 53
Cha, J 87
Chanales, AJH 211
Chandrasekar, A 230
Chandrasekaran, B 68

Chang, A 40, 137
Chang, E 83, 165
Chang, K-e 92
Chang, M 164
Chan, S-h 202, 239
Chan, VTM 166
Chapman, S 103
Charney, D 113
Chatterjee, A 131, 132
Chaudhury, S 193
Chaumon, M 217
Chauvel, P 240
Chee, M 168
Chein, J 233
Chelazzi, L 36
Chenail, S 122
Chen, C 225
Chen, CP 65
Chen, E 53
Chen, G 85
Cheng, L 61
Cheng, T 50
Chen, H-Y 165
Chen, J 141, 150
Chen, J-K 53
Chen, M-H 205
Chen, P 225
Chen, P-H 122, 205
Chen, Q 145, 172, 217
Chen, R 24, 139
Chen, RH 159
Chen, SHY 79
Chen, X 141
Chen, Y 49, 178
Chen, Y-C 203
Chen, Y-P 159
Chen, YY 61
Cherkassky, V 243, 244
Cherubini, P 111
Cheyne, D 147
Cheyne, DO 196
Cheyne, JA 196
Chiang, H-S 100, 124
Chiang, M-C 100
Chiang, T 68
Chiaravalloti, N 40, 139
Chiaravalloti, ND 248
Chiarello, C 64
Chiew, KS 59
Ching, CRK 102
Chinn, L 39
Chiou, K 139
Chiou, KS 248
Chiu, Y-C 87, 97
Choe, J 102
Cho, I 115
Choi, H 71
Choi, J 100, 173
Chong, SD 77
Chong, TT-J 64, 98
Chou, T-L 205
Chow, C-C 180
Chow, HM 75
Chrastil, E 137
Christakou, A 258, 260
Christensen, JF 47, 229
Christine, S 152
Christman, SD 246
Chrysikou, EG 73, 172, 191
Chua, E 62
Chua, EF 135
Chun, A 169

Church, JA 87, 103, 201
Ciaramelli, E 42, 135, 248
Ciaramitaro, V 75
Ciaramitaro, VM 154, 257
Ciardullo, J 139
Cichinelli, R 11, 95
Cillessen, AHN 259
Cimino, CR 198
Claassen, D 47
Claassen, DO 49
Clancy, K 190
Clark, M 88
Clark, V 111, 118
Clark, VP 201, 219, 258
Cleeremans, A 73, 183
Clement, NJ 59
Clewett, D 116
Cobzas, D 221
Coch, D 93
Coderre, S 197
Coelho, C 128, 130
Coffman, BA 102, 201, 258
Cogliati-Dezza, I 73
Cohen, AB 46
Cohen, JD 45, 222
Cohen, MS 61
Cohen, N 97, 133, 176
Cohen, NJ 169
Cohen, S 76, 77, 140
Cohn, N 144, 204
Cole, M 23, 24, 50, 139
Cole, MW 66, 159
Colflesh, G  88
Colino, F 175
Collignon, O 237
Collins, A 17, 29, 45
Collins, J 222
Combs, A 118, 201, 258
Conant, L 245
Conklin, QC 63
Connelly, JJ 228
Connolly, A 186
Connolly, AC 185
Conte, MM 39
Conway, CM 49
Cook, S 46, 236
Cookson, S 88
Cools, R 43
Cooper, J 148, 191
Cooper, JA 146
Cooper, R 171
Cooper, RA 209
Coppola, M 128
Corbett, B 153
Corona, C 89
Corsi, N 106, 179
Coslett, M.D., HB 70
Cosmelli, D 187
Costa, AS 50
Costa-Faidella, J 67
Coulthard, E 161, 206, 224,
249
Couth, S 69
Cowan, E 138
Cox, C 65
Craddock, C 140, 184
Craddock, M 69
Craighead, B 76
Crain, M 192
Craver, CF 135
Creery, J 11, 59, 135
Cristofori, I 185

Crivelli-Decker, J 170
Crocker, L 83
Crocker, M 212
Croft, K 46
Crone, N 12, 227, 251
Cross, ES 99, 106
Crowther, A 192
Crump, MJC 104
Cunningham, T 96
Cunningham, TJ 49, 246
Cunningham, W 72
Cunningham, WA 86
Curley, WH 39
Curran, T 45, 62, 138
Curtis, C 12, 180, 238
Curtis, CE 217, 236
Cusack, R 215
Cushing, D 215
Cutting, L 66, 79
Czisch, M 190

D
Daffner, K 51
Dagan, O 235
Dagenbach, D 71
Daini, R 143, 151
Daitch, A 71
Daitch, AL 243
Dambreville, N 234
D'Angelo, M 63
D'Angelo, MC 134
da Ponte Martins Calado,
S 177
Darcey, VL 108
D'Argenio, G 157
Darling, WG 228
Das, S 247
Datta, H 142
Daun-Gruhn, S 179
Davachi, L 18, 19, 60, 98,
126, 138, 169, 210
Dave, S 53
David, A 258
Davidesco, I 12, 79
Davidow, J 101
Davidson, P 210
Davidson, PSR 41, 198, 207
Davidson, R 119
Davila, MI 72
Davis, S 11, 95, 134, 172
Davis, T 65, 148, 181, 195,
224, 260
Davranche, K 123
Dawes, H 83
DeAngelis, G 31
De Araújo Andreoli, M 45
Debener, S 112, 141
De Brigard, F 248
de Brito, S 82
Debruille, B 232, 254
Debruille, J 232
Debruille, JB 232
Decety, J 12, 153
de Chastelaine, M 132, 135
Decker, JH 109
Decker, S 236
Deckert, J 193
de Dios, C 149
DeFord, NE 206
DeFreese, JD 88
Dehaene, S 11, 181, 257

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

265

Author Index	
Dehmelt, V 148, 256
De Houwer, J 44
Dehzangi, O 131
Deitrick, S 223
DeJesus, SY 206
DeJoseph, M 121
de Lafuente, V 22
DeLaRosa, B 100
DeLaRosa, BL 173
Del Bene, VA 57, 254
De Leenheer, E 92
Deleniv, S 234
Delgado, E 160
Delhaye, E 207
Della Libera, C 36
de los Angeles, C 239
Del Prato, P 203
Del Tufo, S 56, 130
DeLuca, J 40
De Luca, M 151
Demanet, J 44
Demaria, G 115
DeMaster, DM 201
Demeter, E 38
Demir-Lira, ÖE 53, 239
Demos, AP 141
Denburg, N 227
Dennis, EL 103
Dennis, N 137, 138, 211
Dennis, NA 97, 245
Denny, BT 44
DePalma, F 78, 224
DePasque, S 117, 227
Depue, BE 81, 236
Derisso, M 125
De Saedeleer, L 191
Desai, R 236
De Sanctis, P 104, 235
De Santi, S 164
Deschner, L 87, 201
Desender, K 109
D’Esposito, M 24, 41, 181
De Taeye, L 196
Deutsch, MB 139
Devinsky, O 138, 169
Devitt, AL 58
Dewar, C 118
de Water, E 259
Dewey, D 115
de Wit, DH 220
de Wit, MM 107
Dewulf, M 73
Dhooge, I 92
Diamond, N 209
Diamond, S 186
Diana, RA 89
Diaz, M 130
Dichter, G 192
Dickerson, B 222
Dickey, MW 177
Dickson, D 250
DiCostanzo, J 180
DiFrancesco, M 200
Dikker, S 12, 79
Dillon, S 206
Di Luca, S 57
DiMenichi, B 117
Dimond, D 115
D'Imperio, M 202
Di Muro, F 42
Ding, M 12, 79, 149, 190,
237

266

2016 Annual Meeting
Di Rosa, E 111, 151
Dittinger, E 202
Di, X 23
D'Mello, AM 104
Dobbins, IG 87
Dobel, C 148, 194
Dobrowolski, P 162
Dobryakova, E 40
Dockree, P 108, 115
Dockree, PM 158
Doelling, K 66
Dogan, I 50
Do, J-r 209, 210
Doko, D 245
Dolcos, F 42, 82
Dollfus, S 150
Donaldson, D 95
Donchin, E 212
Donnelly Adams, K 244
Doole, R 260
Doré, B  43, 193
Dorjee, D 157
Dorman, S 149
Dosamantes, N 84
Doss, M 60
Douglas, D 11, 99, 174
Dowd, EW 88
Dowell, N 102
Downing, PE 157
Downs, E 125
Doyle, C 197
Doyle, OM 87
Doyle, PJ 177
Dratch, L 101
Drew, AR 77
Drury, J 200
Drury, JE 204
Duarte, A 153, 170, 172,
199
Dubarry, A-S 240, 242
Dube, C 212
Dubé, C  186
Dubois, B 64
DuBrow, S 126
Dudley, T 225
Duerksen, K 180
Duff, M 11, 46, 241, 247
Duff, MC 99
Dufford, A 49
Du, J 188
Dulas, M 97, 176
Dunabeitia, JA 56
Dunbar, R 46
Duncan, J 160, 226
Duncan, K 138, 169, 174
Dunsmoor, J 60, 247
DuPre, E 148
Duraiswami, DJ 213
Durbin, J 236
Durisko, C 167, 177
Durlik, J 242
Dussault, O 38
Dutt, S 234
Düzel, E 197
Dwivedi, V 93
Dylan, B 228

E
Ealey, A 79
Earle, FS 130
Easton, J 225

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Eaton, B 165
Eberly, L 237
Ebner, NC 79
Eckstein, MK 219
Eddy, M 91
Eddy, MD 56
Edel, M-A 121
Edelmann, A 219, 221
Eden, GF 242
Egan, L 49
Egger, J 174
Eggleston, S 113
Egner, T 87, 88, 145, 211,
219
Ehlers, M 118
Ehritt, A 211
Eichenlaub, J-B 11, 101
Eidelman-Rothman, M 12,
153
Einhorn, P 192
Eisner, F 241
Ekstrand, C 130, 255
Ekves, Z 243
El-Deredy, W 69, 151, 183
Elias, L 180, 231
Eling, P 174
Elke, S 114
Elkin-Frankston, S 111
Ellemberg, D 177
Elliott, B 171
Ellis, DM 46
Ellis, J 230
Ellis, JS 213, 253
Ellis, MU 103
Elmer, S 202
El Qirinawi, I 82, 191
El Sheikh, J 138
Elvio, B 152
Emadi Andani, M 106
Emadi-Andani, M 179
Emberson, L 103
Emerson, R 11, 127
Emmorey, K 89, 166, 240
Engel, AK 198
Engelhardt, LE 103
Engelke, C 193
Engelmann, J 189
Enticott, P 179
Enticott, PG 179
Erez, J 215
Erickson, B 74
Eriksson, E 63
Erlikhman, G 144
Ernst, B 72
Eroh, J 100, 124, 131
Errante, E 211
Escalera, J 140
Escera, C 67
Eskes, G 147
Essoe, JK-Y 63, 107
Euler, F 154, 191
Eustache, F 246
Evans, CL 78
Evans, S 11, 79, 80, 129, 141
Eveland, E 125
Ewbank, M 157
Ewerdwalbesloh, JA 161
Exton, EL 204

F
Fabiani, M 133

Facque, V 64
Failes, EJ 176
Fairchild, G 82
Falk, D 228
Fallon, N 46
Fang, S-Y 200
Fang, Y-W 159
Fan, J 44, 49, 188
Farah, MJ 19, 20
Farah, N 114
Fareri, D 79
Farnè, A 189
Farr, K 85
Fausett, JS 64
Faust, M 184
Favila, SE 135
Fawcett, J 235
Fearon, P 180
Federmeier, K 131
Federmeier, KD 96, 132,
202, 204, 250
Feffer, K 149
Fehlbaum, LV 82, 154, 191
Fei-Fei, L 181
Feigenson, L 129
Feldker, K 193
Feldman, R 12, 153
Fellows, L 146
Fellrath, J 151, 188
Fels, S 44
Felton, A 64
Feng, P-K 182
Fennell, A 156
Ferguson, A 78
Ferguson, B 74
Fernandes, M 253
Fernandes, MA 253
Fernandez, A 168
Fernandez, C 129
Fernandez Cruz, AL 232
Fernandez, E 204
Fernandez Harmony, T
163
Fernández Harmony, T
175
Fernandez, K 183
Fernandez, T 212
Fernandino, L 245
Ferrante, O 36
Ferrari, S 219
Ferreira, F 243
Ferris, C 248
Fiati, M 169
Fidalgo, C 134
Fiedler, L 39, 114
Field, M 46
Fiez, J 167, 220, 259
Fiez, JA 177
Figner, B 259
Figuccio, M 163
Finisguerra, A 12, 214
Fink, G 179
Finn, B 117
Fiorio, M 106, 179
Fischer, H 79
Fischer, M 125
Fishbein, DH 108
Fisher, AV 114
Fitch, R 234
Fitzgerald, L 108
Fleming, S 27
Flinker, A 142, 251

Flohr, EL 153
Flohrschutz, A 73
Flor, H 62
Foerde, K 101, 174
Foggo, M 194
Foltynie, T 106, 109
Fonagy, P 180
Ford, J 133
Forgacs, PB 39
Forgione, M 151
Forster, B 44, 70, 125
Fortgang, R 210
Foster, C 133
Fotachi, A 235
Fowler, AE 191
Foxe, J 159, 235
Foxe, JJ 12, 32, 57, 104, 187,
215, 254
Frackman, A 85
Franklin, N 145
Frank, M 17, 145
Frank, MJ 183
Fratantoni, J 100
Freedberg, M 105
Freigang, C 141
Freitag, C 82
Frenzel, S 213
Friederici, AD 12, 81
Friedland, S 211
Friedman, D 225
Frijters, J 90
Friston, K 69, 113
Frobose, MI 43
Frömer, R 175
Frostig, D 63
Frost, R 168
Frost, S 52, 90, 94
Froud, K 55, 91, 113, 121,
127, 128
Fuelscher, I 179
Fuentemilla, L 19
Fu, F-R 100
Fu, G 225
Fujioka, T 67, 141, 205
Fujiwara, E 221
Fuller, J 180
Funahashi, S 199
Fu, S 149
Fuster, D 193

G
Gaab, N 11, 54, 128, 129,
163, 164
Gaal, ZA 40
Gabard-Durnam, L 79
Gable, P 116
Gabrieli, J 53, 54
Gabrieli, JDE 11, 128, 239
Gagnepain, P 246
Gagnon, E 245
Gagnon, SA 96
Gaigg, SB 47, 229
Gakavian, N 230
Gal, C 113
Galfano, G 168
Galitzer, H 44
Gallagher, N 110
Gallo, D 60
Galvan, A 101, 196, 227
Galvez-Pol, A 125
Galvis, J 49

2016 Annual Meeting	
Gamble, ML 38
Gandy, S 139
Ganis, G 47
Gans, LK 59
Gan, T 155
Gantman, AP 43
Gao, F 170
Gao, W 11, 127
Garagnani, M 126
Garcea, F 145, 172
Garcia, AC 125
Garcia, F 92, 212
Garel, K 53
Garrison, S 133
Garza, G 118
Garzon, L 97
Gaskell, G 59
Gates, K 88
Gathercole, S 34, 161
Gauthier, B 248
Gaynor, AM 135
Gazzaley, A 35
Gee, D 79
Gehring, WJ 66
Geib, B 11, 61, 75, 95, 134
Geib, BR 99, 137
Geiser, E 67
Geisler, MW 125
Gelbard, H 149
Genheimer, H 117
Genova, H 40, 139
Genty, N 207
Georgiev, D 106, 109
Gerger, G 119
Gerraty, R 101
Gerstenecker, A 157
Gess, JL 64
Gevers, W 73, 199
Geweke, F 38
Ghane, M 65
Ghosh, S 140
Ghuman, A 213
Giangrande, E 110
Giannelli, F 91
Giattino, CM 150
Gibb, B 257
Gierstorfer, S 195
Giesbrecht, T 46, 214
Gilbert, AC 56, 241
Gilbert, J 147
Gilbert, PE 206
Gilboa, A 168, 170
Gillam, RB 200
Gillaspy, K 55
Gillon-Dowens, M 56
Giordano, IA 50
Giovanello, K 88, 133
Girard, S 167
Giuseppe, V 152
Giza, CC 103
Glassberg, B 38
Glauser, T 131
Glerean, E 232
Glotzbach-Schoon, E 62
Gluck, M 249
Gluck, MA 147
Glymour, C 140
Glymour, M 140
Gobbini, MI 194
Godfrey, S 194
Godwin, CA 122, 219
Goerger, C 90

Author Index
Goetz, C 239
Goff, B 79
Goldberg, I 249
Goldenberg, D 196
Goldfarb, EV 43
Goldin-Meadow, S 53, 239
Goldstein, A 12, 153, 234
Golisch, A 124
Goljahani, A 213
Gollwitzer, P 42
Golob, E 39, 113
Golob, EJ 227
Gomes, A 79
Gomes, H 147
Gomila, A 229
Gonçalves Donate, AP 45
Gonzalez-Lima, F 219
Gonzalez Lopez, M 163
Gonzalez, R 97
Goodin, P 238
Goodman, M 44
Goodwin, L 113
Gordon, B 143
Gorina-Careta, N 67
Gorlick, M 191
Gosavi, R 11, 256
Gosseries, O 51
Gottfried, J 116
Gould, L 130, 255
Goupil, L 28
Gowen, E 69
Gowland, PA 98
Gozenman, F 52
Grabenhorst, M 256
Grabowecky, M 75
Gracco, VL 53, 252
Gradone, A 253
Grady, C 229
Grafman, J 130, 185
Graham, R 78, 224, 225
Grahn, JA 68
Grainger, J 165
Granjon, L 40
Grant, A 244
Grant-Villegas, N 140
Grass, A 154, 230
Graß, A 35
Gratton, C 197
Gratton, G 133
Graves, LV 206
Graves, WW 164, 240
Green, A 110
Green, AE 99
Greenberg, T 42
Greene, D 104
Greene, MR 64, 122, 160,
181
Green, H 113
Green, R 113
Green, S 184
Greenshaw, A 42
Greenwood, P 114
Grefkes, C 179
Gregory, M 181
Grey, S 57
Grey, SE 204, 244
Grieco, JA 78
Griffiths, E  137
Grimm, A 230
Griogorenko, E 52
Groessl, EJ 77
Grogan, J 161, 249

Gronau, N 207
Grooms, JK 122
Grosse Wiesmann, C 12, 81
Grossi, G 89
Gross, J 128
Grossmann, T 80
Grossman, T 228
Gross, R 247
Gross, RE 60
Grot, S 89
Gruber, M 172
Grulke, Z 81
Grzenda, M 216
Guarino, S 111
Gudi-Mindermann, H 198
Guedj, E 229
Guerra, P 194
Guggisberg, AG 188
Guigelaar, E 200
Guignebert, A 64
Guillaume, A 180
Guillory, S 75
Guiraud, H 55
Guldner, S 79
Guleria, A 241
Guliyeva, D 257
Gullberg, M 94
Guntinas-Lichius, O 194
Guo, T 221
Gupta, RS 96
Gurariy, G 144
Gu, S 235
Guskiewicz, K 88
Gutchess, AH 134
Gutierez-Sigut, E 238
Gutierrez, A 185
Gutiérrez, CC  112
Gutierrez-Sigut, E 91
Gutman, BA 102
Gutwin, C 180
Guyon, V 229
Gvirts, H 149
Gwilliams, L 143, 203

H
Habeck, C 233
Habekost, T 78
Haberman, A 150
Haffar, M 232
Haffey, S 70
Haggerty, TK 198
Hagoort, P 208
Hakun, J 126
Halchenko, YO 99
Halderman, L 117
Halfmann, K 227
Halgren, E 11, 101
Halje, P 255
Hall, S 97
Halt, A 74
Halverson, K 239
Hämäläinen, JA 127
Hamann, S 60, 248
Hambrook, D 38
Hamilton, N 155
Hamm, AO 82
Hammerschmidt, W 154,
190
Hampshire, A 226
Hampton, W 81
Hampton Wray, A 75, 127

Hancock, A 108, 237, 257
Hancock, AS 200
Handy, TC 36
Hanelli, A 121
Hanke, M 67
Han, M 53, 239
Hanna-Pladdy, B 70, 71
Han, S 87, 109, 117, 139,
171, 220
Hansen, M 185
Hansen, N 229
Hansen, S 93
Han, S-M 149
Han, YC 68
Harbaugh, W 120
Harden, KP 103
Hardy, KK 51
Harmony Baillet, T 81
Harmony, T 112, 162, 212
Harms, V 231
Harnad, S 181
Harrell, D 105
Harris, D 257
Harris, DA 154
Harrison, A 239
Harrison, N 102
Hart, J 100
Hart Jr., J 100, 124, 131, 173
Hartley, CA 109, 193
Hartley, CN 206
Hartmann, L 187
Harwood, A 114
Hasbroucq, T 123
Hashemi, J 59
Hasher, L 85
Hassall, C 147
Hassevoort, KM 169
Hasson, U 166
Hatzifilalithis, S  245
Haufler, AJ  72
Haustein, M 227
Hawkes, T 125
Haxby, JV 99
Haxhar, E 68
Hayashi, T 242
Hayden, B 28
Hayes, SM 60
Hazeltine, DB 192
Hazeltine, E 105, 126
Heath, AC 260
Heatherton, T 122
He, B 27
Hebscher, M 168
Hedges, J 226
Hegarty II, J 126
Heideman, SG 187
Heim, S 50
Heitmann, C 193
Hejazi, Z 68
Heller, NE 59
Heller, W 83
Henin, S 76, 77
Henry, B 101
Henson, R 134, 217
Herbert, C 120
Herbst, S 114
Herde, L 182
Herlitz, A 133
Herman, A 105
Herman, B 70
Hernandez, A 92

Hernandez, AE 64, 122,
160
Her, O-S 203
Herpertz-Dahlmann, B 82
Herrera-Díaz, A 212
Herriott, B 74
Herrmann, C 216
Herrmann, CS 142, 177
Herrmann, M 118
Herzmann, G 45, 194
Hestvik, A 142
Heusser, A 66
Heverly-Fitt, S 146
He, W 147
He, Y 40
Hibar, DP 123
Hickey, C 224
Higby, E 204
Hilgetag, CC 226
Hilliard, C 11, 241
Hillman, CH 169
Hill, PF 89
Hillyard, SA 150
Himes, L 140
Hincapié, A-S  55
Hird, E 183
Hiroya, S 129
Hirst, EM 54
Hoagey, D 221
Hoagey, DA 157
Ho, E 184
Hoegler, K 149
Ho, EJ 115, 155
Hogan, TP 54
Ho, H 169
Holcomb, P 51, 89, 165, 166
Holcomb, PJ 56, 91, 205,
240
Holden, HM 206
Holling, H 148
Holmes, J 113, 161
Holt, H 234
Hong, T 225
Honjo, K 141
Hopf, J-M 151
Hoppstädter, M 62
Ho, P-S 260
Horecka, K 176
Horne, E 135
Horowitz-Kraus, T 200
Horvath, J 40
Hot, P 207
Ho, T-Y 124
Houde, J 105
Houde, JF 90
Houdé, O  150
Hoversten, LJ 165
Howard, DV 191
Howard Jr., JH 191
Howard, M 120, 136
Howse, A 49
Hreha, K 225
Hsieh, L-T 170
Hsieh, S-K 205
Hsieh, Y-T 124
Hsu, C-H 128, 251
Hsu, C-W 47
Hsu, KC-H 92
Hsu, W 166
Hsu, W-C 54
Hsu, Y-F 40
Huang, A 198

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

267

Author Index	
Huang, C-M 159, 260
Huang, C-Y 124
Huang, H-W 159, 238, 260
Huang, P-S 238
Huang, R 116
Huang, S-T 83
Huang, S-TT 82
Huang, X 141
Huang, Y-T 106
Hubbard, E 11, 81, 256
Hubbard, EM 185
Hubbard, J 120, 218
Hubbard, N 140
Hubbard, RJ 96, 132
Huberth, M 67
Hudd, E 220
Huettel, S 87, 219, 221
Huettig, F 241, 244
Hughes, AJ 176
Hughes, GM 63
Hughes, L 195
Hultman, CM 210
Humphries, C 180, 245
Hung, Y-H 90, 202
Hunter, LE 109
Hunter, M 111, 118
Hunter, MA 201, 219, 258
Hunter, RG 154
Huo, Y 79
Hupbach, A 30, 31
Huppert, T 167
Huppert, TJ 114
Hu, S 47
Husain, M 64, 98
Huskey, R 72, 76
Hussain, S 105
Hwang, K 41
Hwang, W-h 124
Hyde, C 179, 223, 258
Hyun, J 164

I
Iacoboni, M 198
Iannotta, JA 147
Iglesias, J 256
Iiro, J 202
Illecki, K 156
Im, HY 230
Infantolino, Z 83
Inman, C 60, 248
Inyang, C 147
Ionta, S 255
Iordan, MC 181
Irani, SR 98
Irving, K 158
Isabella, S 196
Ishag, A 244
Ito, T 24, 139, 159
Itzhak, I 56
Ives-Louter, C 260
Iyer, J 67

J
Jääskeläinen, I 166
Jääskeläinen, IP 232
Jack, C 207
Jackson-Maldonado, D 162
Jacobsen, T 78
Jacobs, J 247
Jacobs, S 215

268

2016 Annual Meeting
Jacobs, TL 63
Jaeger, M 112
Jaeggi, S 34
Jaencke, L 233
Jafari, R 131
Jagadeesh, A 41
Jagger, A 124
Jagust, WJ 12, 158
Jahanshad, N 123, 207
Jahanshahi, M 106, 109
Jahn, A 94
Jamal, NI 242
James, GA 64, 248
James, N 156
James, T 172
Jamrozik, A 132
Janacsek, K 100, 101
Jäncke, L 202
Janney, E 179
Janowich, J 86
Janssens, C 196
Jaramillo, J 217
Jasinska, K 52, 163, 202
Jasmin, K 105, 129
Javitt, D 180
Jawdat, M 108
Jemel, B 241
Jenkins, T 128
Jensen, O 25
Jeon, M 209, 210
Jerbi, K 55
Jerde, T 226
Jessen, S 80
Jevtic, I 107
Jeyakumar, N 209
Jeye, B 97
Jeye, BM 168
Jha, AP 152
Jiang, J 145
Jiang, T 40
Jin, J 116
Jinnan, G 256
Jobst, B 247
Jobst, C 147
Jochim, J 199
Joergensen, G 229
Johansson, M 169, 173
Johansson, R 173
Johndro, HA 134
Johns, AR 200
Johns, C 94
Johnson, B 147
Johnson, D 101
Johnson, E 125
Johnson, EL 51
Johnson, J 103, 137
Johnson, JD 98
Johnson, JS 125
Johnson, MR 98
Johnson, PL 198
Joly-Mascheroni, RM 70
Jonas, RK 102
Jonasson, L 233
Jonas, V 136
Jones, A 40, 118
Jones, AP 201, 258
Jones, H 94
Jonides, J 34
Jordan, K 108, 257
Jordan, KE 155, 237
Josef, A 222
Jost, K 78, 182

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Jovanovic, T 79
Juhász, D 101
Jung, H 205
Jung, SH 88
Jun, S 220
Juranek, JJ 201
Juravle, G 42
Just, M 243, 244
Just, MA 131

K
Kable, J 235
Kable, JW 192, 221
Kacollja, A 63
Kageyama, T 231
Kaggen, L 12, 79
Kahana, M 117, 247
Kahane, R 174
Kałamała, P  242
Kalisch, R 44
Kam, JWY 251
Kamowski-Shakibai, M 38
Kanai, R 182
Kanayet, FJ 107
Kang, C 221
Kang, H 79
Kanjlia, S 129
Kanoff, KE 49
Karalunas, S 82
Karanian, J 97
Karanian, JM 168
Karim, H 84
Karimi, H 243
Kark, S 250
Karlsson, A 169
Karrer, T 222
Kastner, AK 153
Kastner, S 12, 22, 33, 227
Katz, B 34
Kaufer, D 133
Kauppila, M 202
Kauppinen, R 206
Kawaguchi, J 235
Kawasaki, M 74
Kawashima, R 231
Kawata, KHdS 231
Kay, D 84
Kayser, C 128
Keane, MM 60
Kearney-Ramos, TE 64
Kehagia, AA 87
Keil, A 35
Keilholz, S 44
Keilholz, SD 122
Keller, A 76
Kelley, T 195
Kelley, W 122
Kelly, S 184
Kelly, SP 155
Kenett, Y 184
Kennard, C 98
Kennedy, K 221
Kennedy, KM 157
Kensinger, E 65, 96, 133,
250
Kepecs, A 236
Kerlin, J 256
Kernan, C 103
Kernodle, K 251
Kerr, D 157
Kersey, A 185

Kersten, L 191
Keshabyan, A 63
Kessels, R 174
Ketz, N 62
Khader, P 182
Khader, PH 161
Khalfa, S 229
Khamis-Dakwar, R 55
Khamosia, N 79
Khodayari, N 77
Kidron, R 144
Kiefer, M 239
Kikumoto, A 73, 89, 218
Kilts, CD 64
Kim, H 146
Kim, J 114
Kim, K 210
Kim, S 245
Kim, TH 49
Kimura, Y 224
King, B 47, 48
King, BG 63
King, D 132, 135
King, J-R 11, 181, 257
King, M 70
Kiran, S 57
Kirby, Z 41
Kirkham, T 214
Kirsch, H 251
Kishida, KT 65
Kiyonaga, A 87
Klasen, M 83
Klein, D 53
Kleinschmidt, A 24
Klepousniotou, E 69
Klingbeil, J 93, 242
Klockgether, T 50
Klooster, NB 99
Klöpfer, E 50
Klyszejko, Z 236
Kmech, J 221
Kmiecik, MJ 110
Knaus, TA 45, 222
Knebel, J-F 107, 255, 258
Knight, LK 81
Knight, M 206
Knight, R 12, 21, 227
Knight, RT 51, 118, 251
Knoblich, G 106
Knowlton, B 100
Knowlton, BJ 62, 101
Knutson, B 12, 146
Kóbor, A  100
Koenigsberg, HW 44
Koen, J 64
Kohler, PJ 107
Kohler, S 158
Koleits, N 238
Komes, J 194
Komogortsev, O 225
Kong, S 139
Koolschijn, PCMP 259
Kornilov, S 52
Koslov, S 68, 191
Kossut, M 162
Kostakoglu, L 139
Kotecha, R 193
Kothare, S 138
Kotz, S 11, 113
Kouider, S 28
Koun, E 189
Kounios, J 74

Kourtis, D 106
Kovacs, M 140
Kowalczyk, N 162
Koyama, MS 115, 155
Krabbendam, L 233
Kraemer, D 186
Kraemer, DJM 99, 185
Kramer, AF 233
Kramer, JH 234
Krämer, UM 106, 193
Kranjec, A 201
Krause, K 156
Kraut, M 100
Kraut, MA 124, 131
Krawczyk, D 103
Krawczyk, DC 110
Krebs, C 205
Kreysa, H 194
Kriegeskorte, N 11, 165
Krigolson, O 49, 147, 175,
197
Krishan, S 11, 141
Krishnan, S 79, 129
Krizan, J 137
Kroes, M 247
Kroll, JF 94
Krueger, F 130
Ksander, JC 134
Kuerbis, A 42
Kuhl, B 245
Kuhl, BA 135, 211
Kuhnen, C 183
Kuhney, F 211
Kuhn, J-T 148
Kühn, S 66
Ku, L-C 239
Kulkarni, K 24, 139
Kumar, U 241
Kuo, W-J 121
Kuperman, RA 251
Kurczek, J 247
Kurian, A 197
Kurkela, KA 245
Kürten, J 118
Kurylo, D 144
Kushan, L 102
Kush, D 94
Kutas, M 144
Kveraga, K 230
Kwan, D 135

L
L'Abbate, F 168
Lacey, EA 158
lackey, J 137
La Corte, V 64
Lage, A 194, 256
Lahnakoski, J 166, 232
Lai, P 52
Lake, J 83
Lambert, K 178
Lambon Ralph, M 65
Lametti, D 214
Lamm, C 112
Lamphere, M 118
Landi, N 52, 163, 202
Landman, B 79
Lane, A 89
Lane, C 129
Lane, S 88
Langdon, A 260

2016 Annual Meeting	
Langer, N 155, 184
Lapate, R 119
LaPoint, M 136
Lapp, HE 154
Large, E 251
LaRocque, J 51
LaRocque, KF 65
Larson, C 228
Larsson, E-M 133
Laszlo, S 52, 54, 177
Latimer, WW 195
Latzke, CP 69
Lau, A 163
Laube, I 189
Lau, H 27
Laumann, T 197
Laurent, P 259
Laurienti, P 71
Lavan, N 80
Lawrence, A 206
Layher, E 59, 110
Leach, L 85
Leal, S 169
Leal, SL 246
Leckey, M 204
Leder, H 119
LeDoux, JE 193
Lee, A 134
Lee, ACH 150
Lee, C-L 205, 238
Lee, C-Y 128, 251
Lee, H 210, 245
Lee, H-J 121
Lee, JH-C 231
Lee, M 52, 83
Lee, M-C 82, 83
Lee, RR-W 92
Lee, S-C 109
Lee, S-K 117, 171, 220
Lee, T 100
Lee, T-H 116
Lee, WH 88
Lee, Y 209
Lee, Y-C 260
Lee, YS 99
Lega, B 247
Legault, J 200
Leibenluft, E 85
Leiker, EK 98
Leimbach, F 109
Lempert, KM 192
Leong, J 12, 146
Lerebours, L 59, 211
Lerman, C 235
Lerma-Usabiaga, G 54, 208
Lerner, I 249
Lessov-Schlaggar, CN 260
Leung, H-C 198
Levenson, RW 118
Leventon, J 133
Levine, B 85, 168, 171, 209,
210
Levine, SC 239
Levinson, L 91
Levy, B 156
Levy, D 207
Lewis, G 66
Lewis, GF 72
Lewis-Peacock, JA 58
Leynes, PA 137
Ley, P 69
Liang, J 215

Author Index
Libertus, M 220
Li, C 139
Li, C-s 47
Liddane, R 207
Lieberman, G 111, 219
Liebrand, M 106
Liégeois-Chauvel, C  240
Lighthall, N 183
Lima, C 11, 79, 80, 105,
129, 141
Limousin, P 106, 109
Lim, S-J 38, 39
Lin, C-H 100
Lin, C-P 159
Lindner, M 260
Lindsey, A 130
Lindsey, H 112
Lin, JJ 51
Lin, K-Y 202
Lin, L 199
Lin, Q 247
Lin, S-K 92
Lin, T 79
Lin, W 11, 127
Lin, WM 67
Lin, Z 66, 139
Linzen, T 143
Li, P 200, 244
Lipp, O 89
Lisi, M 188
Lissek, S 124
Li, T 204
Litcofsky, KA 200
Litvak, V 109
Liu, A 138, 220
Liu, C 155
Liu, H 141
Liu, H-L 260
Liu, H-M 54, 166
Liu, J 126
Liu, L 179
Liu, R 220
Liu, X 246
Liu, Y 254
Li, W 120, 180, 190
LI, Y 161
Llorens, A 240
Lloyd, D 69
Lloyd, W 258
Lockrow, AW 148, 192
Lockwood, JR 117
Loebach, J 68
Loew, A 78
Lohnas, L 169
Lohrenz, T 259
Lohse, K 116
Lo, J 168
Long, N 117
Looi, A 153
Lopas, R 78, 224
Lopez, FV 206
López, V  76
Lorentz, E 130, 255
Loui, P 67, 68, 205
Love, T 205
Löw, A 82
Lowe, MR 70
Low, K 133
Lu, C 205
Lucas, HD 96
Luck, D 89, 218
Luck, S 43

Luck, SJ 150
Ludwig, VU 159
Luh, W-M 148, 192
Luisa, G 152
Lum, J 179
Luna-Rodriguez, A 78
Luo, Y-j 155
Lupkin, S 249
Lurie, DJ 51
Lustig, C 139
Lutz, K 70
Lu, X 155
Lu, Y-T 124
Lwi, SJ 118
Lyday, R 71
Lynch, C 236
Lynn, P 237

M
Macarini Gonçalves Vieira,
S 45
MacDonald III, A 145
Machac, J 139
MacKay, A 70
Mackey, AP 20
Mackey, W 12, 238
Mackie, M-A 49, 188
MacLean, K 48
MacSweeney, M 91, 238
Madan, C 65, 178
Madan, CR 58
Madden, PAF 260
Madden, S 192
Maddox, T 191, 219
Maddox, WT 68, 146, 148
Madore, KP 136
Maes, R 174
Magnotta, VA 228
Magnuson, J 90
Magreehan, D 195
Maguire, MJ 124
Mahamane, S 237, 257
Mahon, B 92, 145
Mahon, BZ 172, 217
Maier, ME 123
Maki, K 114
Makin, A 214
Makris, S 12, 214
Malaspina, M 143
Malcolm, BR 104
Malekian, S 84
Malins, J 90
Malmberg Gavelin, H 161
Maloney, T 131
Ma, M 93
Mandera, P 242
Manfredi, M 45
Manganotti, P 143
Mangun, G 77
Mangun, GR 150
Mangus, JM 72
Man, L 11, 99, 174
Manly, T 11, 141, 226
Mann, J 193
Manns, JR 60
Mannstadt, S 191
Man, V 86
Mapelli, D 111, 151
Marantz, A 143
Marcelle, E 184
Marchewka, A 162

Marcinkowski, N 121
Maril, A 137, 210
Marin, B-M 171
Marin-Garcia, E 130
Marino, S 237
Marinsek, N 110
Marion, SD 103
Markant, J 189
Markello, R 192
Markovic, D 33
Marroquin, JL 162
Marshall, PJ 76, 77
Marsh, EJ 99
Marson, DC 157
Martelli, M 143, 151
Martignetti, C 101
Martin, A 12, 213, 227
Martín-Arévalo, E  189
Martin, B 248
Martin, BA 147
Martin Braunstein, L 42
Martin, C 90, 91, 99, 136
Martínez Briones, B 175
Martinez, D 103, 110
Martinez, JE 87, 201
Martín-Gómez, C  250
Martin, J 139
Martin, L 167
Martin, N 111
Martin, R 116
Martsberger, C 132
Masayda, L 211
Masina, F 111, 151
Masset, P 236
Massey, A 230, 253
Massey, V 201, 258
Mastrorilli, E 86
Mata, M 232
Mata, R 222
Mather, M 116
Matheson, H 99
Mathew, M 254
Mathewson, KE 43
Mathiak, K 83
Mathias, B 66, 141
Matias, B 217
Matijevic, S 221
Mattarella-Micke, A 74,
107
Mattheiss, SR 240
Mattioni, S 237
Matusz, PJ 252, 255
Mauer, M 11, 54, 128, 129,
164
Mauro, P 152
Mauro, PM 195
Maves, K 67
Mayr, U 73, 89, 120, 218
May, V 186
Mazaheri, A 25, 26
Mazzi, C 143, 216
McAndrews, MP 173, 208,
247
McBride, J 87
McCandliss, B 74
McCandliss, BD 107
McCarthy, G 144
McClelland, J 93
McClelland, JL 107
McClintock, J 12, 79
McCue, M 177
McCullough, A 170

McCullough, AM 61
McDonald, CG 195
McEwen, BS 20
McFarland, B 194
McGarrigle, L 158
McGhee, AK 98
McGuire, JT 192
McGuirk, W 73
McIntosh, AR 209
McLaren, D 136
McLaughlin, JL 167
McMaster, A 44
McQuade, C 220
McQueen, JM 57
McQuiggan, D 63
McTeague, LM 213
Meade, G 93, 181, 240
Meadows, C 116
Mecklinger, A 96, 211
Medaglia, J 235
Medina, J 178, 216, 254
Medrano, P 138
Meekings, S 105
Mega, LF 73
Mehndiratta, A 211
Mehta, E 80
Mehta, N 152
Mehta, PS 63
Melara, R 161, 234
Mele, S 143
Mellem, M 213
Mellinger, TJ 12, 158
Melloni, L 69
Melo, H 72
Meltzoff, AN 77
Melvin, S 158
Melvin, SA 55
Melzer, N 118
Mencl, E 52, 202
Mencl, WE 90
Mendelsohn, A 46
Mende-Siedlecki, P 43
Mendoza-Montoya, O 162
Mendrek, A 122
Meneghello, F 188
Menks, WM 82, 154, 191
Mercuri, G 112
Mérillat, S  233
Merkel, C 151
Merz, E 158
Merzenich, M 83, 154
Merz, M 183
Metcalfe, J 225
Meurs, A 196
Mevel, K 150
Meyering, E 11, 256
Meyer, J 158
Meyer, P 62
M. Frick, K 211
Mian, F 138
Michon, A 64
Mickleborough, M 130, 255
Middlebrooks, P 71
Middleton, E 90
Midgely, KJ 240
Midgley, K 89, 165, 166
Midgley, KJ 91, 205
Mies, GW 259
Mifsud, N 178
Milham, M 140, 184
Milham, MP 51, 115, 155
Miller, G 83

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

269

Author Index	
Miller, M 59, 76, 116
Miller, MB 110
Miller, NM 203
Miller, TD 98
Mill, RD 66, 159
Miltner, W 118, 119
Miltner, WHR 118
Mingino, F 68
Mink, R 103
Minor, G 194
Mirrione, MM 223
Mirzabekov, J 83
Mirzazade, S 50
Mishra, R 241
Miskovich, T 228
Miskovic, V 229, 257
Mitchell, DJ 160
Mitis, E 139
Mitra, P 56
Mittone, D 53
Miyauchi, E 74
Mizokami, S 231
Mock, J 113
Moens, V 183
Mohamed Ali, O 232
Mohammed, A 51
Mohan, R 239
Mohanty, A 84, 116
Mok, B 137
Molfese, P 52, 90
Molholm, S 12, 32, 57, 104,
187, 215, 235, 254
Molinaro, N 91
Mollaei, F 252
Momen, A 156
Monge, Z 172
Montague, PR 259
Montague, R 17
Montal, V 222
Montchal, ME 247
Monti, M 79
Moody, J 219, 221
Mooneyham, B 40
Moore, M 167
Moore, RD 177
Moraczewski, D 80
Morales, A 77
Morales, M 201
Morales, P 218
Morand, A 207
Moran, R 18, 147
Morgan, A 71
Morgan, J 219
Morgan, JH 221
Morgan, L 199
Morgan, O 166
Morgan, R 181
Morgenstern, J 42
Morita, D 131
Morris, E 222
Morris, JP 228
Morris, K 260
Morris, L 102
Morrison, R 84
Morrison, RG 132
Morris, R 90
Morrow, HM 73, 172
Morsella, E 125, 215
Morton, NW 173
Moscarello, JM 193
Moscovitch, M 97, 208, 209,
210, 247

270

2016 Annual Meeting
Moses, TEH 195
Motes, M 100
Motes, MA 173
Mothes-Lasch, M 119
Mottarella, M 113
Mottaz, A 188
Mott, M 240
Moya Sepulveda, D 128
Mrazek, A 40
Mrazek, K 40
Mrazek, M 40
Mruczek, R 144
Mucci, MA 223
Mudar, RA 124
Muehlberger, A 62
Mueller, AA 228
Mujica-Parodi, L 42
Mulckhuyse, M 189
Muller, AM 233
Müller-Bardorff, M 119
Müller, DJ 171
Müller, R-A 65
Mumford, JA 65, 201
Muñoz, M 163
Munro, C 136
Munson, B 64, 122, 160
Murphy, A 235
Murphy, K 85
Murray, E 169, 251
Murray, J 24, 95
Murray, M 252, 255
Murray, MM 67, 107, 258
Murty, V 60
Mutai, S 146
Muyingo, L 41
Myers, E 56
Myers, EB 130, 200
Myers, N 41, 87
Myuz, H 122

N
Naaz, F 81, 236
Nagarajan, S 105
Nagarajan, SS 90
Nagel, BJ 231
Nahum, M 83, 154
Nah, Y 87, 109, 139, 171
Naish, KR 178
Nandur, V 186
Napan, J 150
Narayan, D 145
Nashiro, K 176
Nassar, M 183
Nastase, SA 99
Nauer, R 137
Nauvel, TN 39
Nayak, S 53
Nazarian, B 229
Neary, J 118
Neill, J 151
Neimat, J 47
Neimat, JS 49
Nemeth, D 100, 101
Neophytou, K 143
Neueder, D 62, 193
Neuhas, JM 234
Neuling, T 142
Neumeister, P 193
Neville, H 75, 127
New, AS 44
Newhouse, P 211

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Newman, S 184
Newman, SD 185
Newsome, R 11, 99, 174
Newson, A 59
Newson, M 206
Ng, TWC 98
Nguyen, LT 124
Nguyen, T 257
Nicolas, F 229
Nielsen, A 104
Niemeier, M 150
Niezrecki, R 211
Niklaus, M 41
Nilakantan, A 245
Nili, H 11, 165
Nir, T 207
Nishimura, R 224
Nizzi, M-C 231
Noble, K 158, 201
Noble, KG 20, 55, 103
Nobre, AC 41, 69, 87, 187,
189, 226
Noche, J 169, 251
Noh, S 146
Nolte, G 198
Noonan, MP 12, 189
Noppeney, U 31, 32
Norcia, AM 107
Nordin, K 95, 133
Norman, KA 65
Norton, E 54
Norton, ES 11, 128
Notbohm, A 216
Notebaert, W 48
Notter, MP 67
Nouchi, R 231
Nour, J 255
Novak, L 120, 180
Nowak, R 65
Nugiel, T 136
Nussenbaum, K 189
Nyberg, L 233
Nyhus, E 138

O
Oakes, TR 119, 222
Oberg, S 115
Obhi, SS 178
Obler, L 164
Obler, LK 204
Obleser, J 38, 39, 114
O'Brien, C 68
O'Bryan, S 195
Ochsner, K 42, 43, 116,
193, 231
O'Connell, M 176
O'Connor, D 115, 140
Oettingen, G 42
Ofen, N 207
O'Hagan, M 229
O'Hare, AJ 153
O'Hearn, K 80
Oh, H 219, 233
Ohno, AA 63
Oliva, A 136
Oliver, M 94
Olivier, E 107, 178, 215
Olsen, R 63
Olson, I 81
Olson, IR 136
Olthof, M 38

O’Neil, EB 150
O'Neil, JT 60
Ontiveiro, M 194, 256
Oostrik, M 12, 79
Oostwoud Wijdenes, L 214
Orban, L 210
Orederu, T 46
O'Reilly, R 62
Orliac, F 150
Ortiz-Mantilla, S 127
Orvis, P 229
Oser, M 231
Osman, A 152
Osman, Y 140
Ostarek, M 129, 244
Osterhout, L 167
Ostrovskaya, I 239
Oswal, U 65
Otero, G 212
Otten, LJ 245
Owen, LLW 176
Ozernov-Palchik, O 11,
54, 128
Ozubko, J 209

P
Paap, K 122
Pacheco, J 119
Pachur, T 182
Packer, RJ 51
Paczynski, M 120, 144, 152
Padmala, S 154
Paget, M 197
Paige, LE 134
Pajkossy, P 160
Pakhomov, S 237
Pakulak, E 75, 127
Palacios-García, I 76
Paller, K 11, 19, 59, 61, 135
Paller, KA 61
Palmer, C 66, 141
Palmisano, A 220
Palombo, D 60
Palombo, DJ 171
Palva, S 161
Paneto, A 184
Pang, B 148, 218
Paniukov, D 181
Pantecouteau, H 232, 254
Papp, K 136
Parasuraman, R 120, 121
Pardilla-Delgado, E 49
Parga, N 22
Parikh, N 248
Park, H 128
Park, J 171
Park, S 209, 210
Park, SY 117
Pärnamets, P 173
Parra, L 76, 77, 140
Parsons, K 115
Parsons, O 105
Parthasarathi, T 221
Parvisi, J 12, 227
Parvizi, J 33, 71, 243, 251
Paschke, LM 159
Pascual-Leone, A 136
Pasqualetti, F 235
Passarini, L 188
Patai, EZ 189, 226
Patel, N 246

Pater, J 163
Patil, A 60, 138
Patrianakos, J 233
Patricia, B 208
Patrick, CJ 218
Patterson, TK 62
Patti, M 223
Pauker, C 39
Paul, H 229
Pauli, P 62, 116, 117, 153,
193
Payne, B 131
Payne, H 91, 238
Payne, JD 49, 96, 246
Payne, L 76
Paz-Alonso, P 90, 94, 243
Paz-Alonso, PM 54, 130,
208
Pearce, A 85
Pearson, JM 88
Pedrazzini, E 151
Pedro, C 58
Peelen, M 224
Peer, M 249
Peers, P 226
Pein, I 106
Pelli, DG 119, 190
Pell, P 157
Peng, C 80
Penolazzi, B 168
Peperkamp, S 92
Peretz, I 38
Pérez, A  56
Perez Gay Juarez, F 181
Perez-Rodriguez, M 44
Perez, S 204
Perfetti, CA 241
Perrachione, TK 239
Perry, A 118
Persson, J 63, 95
Persson, N 79
Persuh, M 160, 161, 217,
257
Pesaran, B 66
Pescetelli, N 11, 257
Peschanski, D 246
Pessoa, L 154
Pestke, K 248
Peterburs, J 235
Petersen, A 78, 115
Petersen, S 104, 197
Peterse, Y 190
Peters, G 215, 235
Peterson, D 125
Peterson, E 26
Peterson, KM 60
Petrican, R 229
Petrie, R 232
Peyrin, C 150
Peysakhovich, B 129
Pezanko, LR 153
Phan, A 154
Phelps, E 60, 247
Phelps, EA 43, 192, 193
Phillips, D 40
Phillips, H 195
Phillips, ME 102
Phillips, R 152
Picart, J 60
Piccolo, LR 103
Pierce, GL 228
Pilcher, W 92

2016 Annual Meeting	
Pineau, A 150
Pine, D 85
Piolino, P 64
Pisella, L 189
Pishdadian, S 97
Pitteri, M 188
Placek, K 58
Plaisted-Grant, K 171
Poeppel, D 12, 66, 79, 93,
142, 143, 251, 255, 256
Poikonen, H 70
Poirel, N 150
Poissant, H 122
Poldrack, RA 65
Poliakoff, E 69, 151
Polidura, C 197
Poline, J-B 24
Poller, H 118
Polnaszek, K 84
Poncin, A 167
Popovych, S 179
Poppenk, J 30, 31
Porges, S 72
Porter, A 108, 237, 257
Postle, B 11, 26, 51, 256
Potts, G 149, 186
Potts, GF 198
Pourtois, G 35, 182, 191,
196
Powell, T 157
Powers, C 47, 77
Powers, J 87
Pradat-Diehl, P 226
Prather, R 146
Prätzlich, M 191
Prentiss, E 217
Preston, AR 173
Price, GR 220
Price, J 250
Price, M 137
Prickett, C 78
Prieto Corona, B 175
Priftis, K 188
Primativo, S 151
Propper, RE 246
Przysinda, E 68
Ptak, R 151, 188
Pugh, K 52, 90, 163
Pu, H 91
Puigvert, L 250
Pulsifer, MB 78
Pulvermüller, F 11, 126,
165, 203
Purcell, JB 70
Pylkkanen, L 240
Pylkkänen, L 95, 203

Q
Qi, Z 53, 239
Quandt, L 132
Quinn, A 226
Quin, S 176
Quirarte, GL 81

R
Rabinovich, EL 191
Rabinovitz, E 251
Rabipour, S 198
Rabovsky, M 93
Race, E 250

Author Index
Racionero-Plaza, S 250
Racki, A 211
Racsmány, M 160
Raddatz, J 148
Raedt, R 196
Rahman, M 197
Rahmati, M 217
Rahnev, D 181
Raizada, R 103, 245
Rajagovindan, R 149
Rajaram, S 84
Rajendran, S 127
Ramachandran, V 258
Ramdani, C 123
Ramdeen, K 41
Ramdeen, KT 207
Ramey, CH 156
Ramic, M 236
Ramirez, W 204
Ramos Nunez, AI 64
Ramos-Nuñez, AI 122, 160
Ramsey, JD 140
Ramsey, R 105, 106
Randazzo, M 127
Raney, T 129, 163
Ranganath, C 61, 170, 172
Ranzini, M 199
Rao, A 254
Rao, L 250
Rao, V 83
Rapin, L 122
Raschle, N 164
Raschle, NM 82, 154, 191
Rashid, F 103
Raskin, S 58
Rasmussen, EC 191
Rastelli, F 226
Rauch, L 70
Rau, MS 125
Rauss, K 182
Ravizza, S 126
Ray, N 176
Razdan, V 85
Razlighi, Q 233
Reagh, Z 169
Realpe-Bonilla, T 127
Reber, J 46
Reber, P 108
Reber, PJ 61, 174, 260
Redcay, E 12, 80, 156
Reder, L 246
Redick, T 34
Reetz, K 50
Reggente, N 63, 107
Reggev, N 137, 210
Reicherts, P 42
Reidy, GR 119
Reier, CC 58
Reif, A 116
Reilly, J 52
Reilly, KT 189
Reiman, K 86
Reina, A 73
Reininger, BP 58
Rendell, P 238
Renoult, L 210
Retsa, C 252
Reuveni, B 108, 260
Reverberi, C 111
Reyes, A 205
Reynolds, R 85
Rhodes, LJ 257

Ribary, U 54
Ricardo-Garcell, J 162
Rice, J 167
Rice, K 12, 80, 156
Richey, JA 65
Richter, F 245
Richter, FR 209
Ricther, FR 211
Ridderinkhof, KR 183
Riedel, B 207
Riedy, G 222
Riggall, A 51
Rigon, A 46
Riklund, K 233
Rimeikyte, V 184
Rimmele, J 198
Rinker, DA 123
Rinker, T 239
Rìos, M 257
Rishiq, D 254
Rissman, J 63, 107
Ritchey, M 61
Rivas, D 181
Rivera-Morales, C 235
Rivilis, N 11, 101
Rizio, A 130
Rizzuto, D 247
Robbins, TW 87
Roberts, DM 77, 195
Roberts, J 251
Robertson, I 115
Robertson, IH 158
Robin, J 97
Robinson, B 108, 155
Robinson, C 118
Robinson, CS 201, 258
Robles, D 77, 234
Roca Stappung, AM 175
Röder, B 69, 198
Rodrigue, K 221
Rodríguez, E 76
Rodriguez, MdC 212
Rodriguez, N 225
Rodriguez, V 212
Roeder, J 145
Roelofs, K 189
Roe, MA 201
Roeske, T 179
Rogers, T 65
Rohe, T 32
Rohr, C 115
Rohrig, S 180
Rojas Méndez, M  175
Rolma, G 188
Roman, I 205
Romanzetti, S 50
Romeo, Z 188
Romero, K 209
Romero, V 111
Rommers, J 132
Romo, R 22
Root, N 258
Roque, J 212
Rosburg, T 211
Rose, EJ 108
Rose, G 124
Rose, JJ 195
Rose, N 11, 51, 238, 256
Rosenbaum, G 233
Rosenbaum, RS 134, 135,
170
Rosen, DS 196

Rosenthal, CR 64, 98
Rosjat, N 179
Ross, B 141
Rossi, V 35, 182
Ross, J 183
Ross, LA 32, 57, 254
Ross, R 138
Rothwell, J 214
Roüast, NM 189
Rousseau, P-F 229
Rowe, G 85
Rowe, J 195
Rowe, JB 87
Rowe, ML 239
Rowland, B 71
Rowland, J 12, 79
Royston, A 150
Rubin, D 97
Rueckl, J 90
Rugg, M 59, 64, 132, 135
Ruglass, L 234
Ruiz, A 257
Ruiz-Blondet, M 177
Rumak, SP 142
Rutherford, BJ 176
Ruzic, L 248
Ryals, AJ 60
Ryan, E 51
Ryan, J 63, 229
Ryan, JD 134, 209
Ryan, L 206
Ryherd, K 202
Rypma, B 24, 140
Ryyppö, VE 232

S
Saalasti, S 166, 202
Saalmann, Y 12, 227
Sabatino DiCriscio, A 188
Saber, G 217
Sabri, H 181
Saby, JN 76
Sacchi, E 54
Sack, A 25
Sadaghiani, S 24
Sadikova, E 12, 156
Saemann, P 190
Sagui, E 123
Sahadevan, SS 61
Sakaki, K 231
Sakraney, N 219
Sakraney, NJ 221
Sakurai, Y 242
Salem, H 53
Sallard, E 187
Salomon, R 249
Saloner, R 234
Salvi, C 185
Samaha, J 25, 26
Samanez-Larkin, G 12,
146, 222
Samejima, T 73, 89
Samide, R 135, 245
Samra, JK 101
Sams, M 166, 202, 232
Samson, R 78, 224, 225
Samu, D 85
Samuel, DL 152
Sanchez-Adam, A 194
Sanchez Lopez, J 143
Sanchez Moguel, SM 163

Sanchez-Romero, R 140
Sandberg, C 56
Sanders, LD 163
Sandry, J 139, 248
San Martin, R 75
Sano, M 139
Santander, T 228
Santandrea, E 36
Santhanam, P 119, 222
Santiago Rodríguez, E 81
Santillan, J 75
Sapiro, G 59
Sapuram, V 191
Saron, C 47, 48, 77
Saron, CD 63
Sarraf, S 229
Sarter, M 139
Saur, D 93, 242
Savazzi, S 143, 216
Sawczak, C 247
Sawi, O 122
Sazma, M 170
Scanlon, G 197
Schacht, A 35, 154, 190, 230
Schacter, DL 58, 136
Schäfer, TAS 73
Schall, J 71
Schauer, GF 110
Schechtman Belham, F 245
Schelenz, P 83
Scheres, A 259
Scheuerman, J 227
Schiff, ND 39
Schiller, D 46
Schiltz, C 57, 167
Schlaggar, B 104
Schlaggar, BL 260
Schlesewsky, M 213
Schlotz, W 256
Schmalzl, L 77
Schmidt, B 213
Schmidt, M 144
Schmidt, NB 190
Schmidt, TT 12, 162, 203
Schneiderman, I 12, 153
Schneider, W 66
Schnupp, J 252
Schoenfeld, MA 151
Schomers, MR 126
Schooler, J 40
Schoomer, E 70
Schreiber, J 12, 81
Schröder, O 118
Schroeder, C 251
Schroeder, CE 69
Schröger, E 11, 113
Schubel, LC 57
Schuchard, J 90
Schuller, A-M 57
Schultz, D 24, 50
Schultz, DH 159
Schulz, JB 50
Schumacher, E 44, 88, 111
Schumacher, EH 122, 219
Schunn, C 220
Schuster, K 184
Schutter, D 189
Schwartz, MF 90
Schweinberger, S 194
Schwenk, C 148
Scott, S 11, 79, 80, 105, 141
Scott, SK 129

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

271

Author Index	
Scroggins, K 206
Seabury, RD 260
Seaman, K 12, 146
Sebanz, N 106
Sebrechts, M 156
Sebti, M 107
Seeck, M 255
Sefranek, M 146
Segal, J 232
Segev, A 149
Sehatpour, P 180
Seiss, E 259
Sekuler, R 76
Sel, A 44
Selarka, D 85
Selvam, R 209
Semenza, C 188
Semick, S 214
Seng, K 229
Serra, M 195
Serra, MJ 195
Seth, A 182
Sevcikova Sehyr, Z 89, 166
Sevcik, R 90
Sevinc, G 83
Sewell, M 139
S. Ferreira, V 203
Shafer, A 207
Shafer, AT 42
Shafer, V 38, 127, 142, 239,
240
Shafer, VL 68, 147, 204
Shafto, MA 85
Shahin, A 256
Shah, N 131
Shah, VD 12, 158
Shakal, S 173
Shallice, T 188
Shams, T 115
Shantz, K 205
Shapiro, LP 205
Sharan, A 247
Shari, B 56
Sharma, K 224
Sharma, R 152
Sharp, M 174
Sharp, ME 176
Shattuck, KF 218
Shaver, PR 63
Shaw, A 147
Shaw, T 114
Shears , C 155
Sheffield, J  180
Shehzad, Z 144
Sheldon, S 208
Shen, G 76
Shen, GM 55
Shen, K 209
Shen, S 256
Sheppard, S 205
Sheridan, M 84
Sherman, B 126
Sherman, M 182
Shestyuk, A 12, 227
Shevorykin, A 234
Shiller, DM 252
Shimin, F 41
Shimizu, RE 101
Shing, YL 206
Shin, N-Y 117, 171, 220
Shi, TC 109

272

2016 Annual Meeting
Shohamy, D 18, 101, 174,
176
Shuai, L 163
Sicard, V 177
Sideridis, G 11, 128
Siegel, J 135
Siegel, LS 54
Siever, LJ 44
Sievers, C 210
Sigurjonsson, J 197
Silson, E 175, 216
Silva Pereyra, J 175
Silva-Pereyra, J 163
Silverstein, SM 144
Simionsmeier, V 200
Simone, P 206, 249
Simon, G 150
Simons, J 134, 171, 172
Simons, JS 209
Sine, S 211
Singer, T 12, 81
Singer, W 69
Singhal, A 42, 178
Singh, I 136
Singh, JP 241
Singh, T 193
Sirbu, M 154
Skoe, E 56
Skorko, M 162
Slama, H 199
Sliva, D 129
Slotnick, S 97, 250
Slotnick, SD 168
Slunga Järvholm, L 161
Small, SL 53, 239
Smayda, K 148
Smeaton, A 197
Smith, A 180
Smith, C 82, 202
Smith, DJ 210
Smith, DM 122
Smith, E 176
Smith, GNL 49
Smith, J 112
Smith, LL 215
Smith, S 92
Smith, T 45
Smolen, A 138
Smoski, M 192
Snyder, J 84
Soder, HE 198
Söderlund, H 63, 95, 133
Soehnchen, B 153
Sohal, V 83
Sojitra, RB 147
Solinger, LA 135
Solis-Vivanco, R 25
Solomyak, LI 159
Solopchuk, O 107, 178
Solway, A 259
Somandepalli, K 51
Sommer, M 219
Sommer, W 175
Song, X 63
Soni, S 39
Son, L 28
Sonnenburg, S 121
Soria Bauser, D 107
Sosson, C 57
Soulières, I 89, 218
Southwell, R 113
Spaak, E 199

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Spagna, A 188
Spaniol, J 42
Spector, F 69, 173, 256
Speed, M 56, 130
Speekenbrink, M 106
Spence, J 100, 198
Sperling, M 247
Sperling, R 136
Spiegel, K 110
Spielberg, J 83
Spierer, L 187
Spironelli, C 188
Sponheim, S 237
Spoormaker, V 190
Spreng, N 83
Spreng, RN 148, 192, 248
Stabile, M 90
Stadler, C 82, 154, 191
Stagg, C 175
Stahl, J 44
Stancak, A 46, 214
Stanek, J 211
Stanley, B 193
Stanley, M 134, 172
Stanley, ML 99, 137
Stark-Inbar, A 83, 154
Starrett, M 51
Starr, G 44
Steel, A 175, 216
Steele, B 43
Steele, K 159
Steele, V 252
Stein, B 71
Steinbeis, N 12, 81
Steinberg, L 233
Stein, D 70
Steinhauser, M 72, 123
Stein, J 247
Stelzel, C 159
Stening, E 63, 95
Stenlund, T 161
Stenson, A 133
Stephens, J 50
Stepien, D 137
Stern, C 137
Stern, E 253
Stern, Y 43, 233
Sterr, A 259
Steueterman, K 201
Steuterman, K 258
Stevens, C 113
Stevenson, J 194
Stewart, GW 248
Stigsdotter Neely, A 161
Stillman, CM 191
Stites, MC 52
Stockert, A 93, 242
Stodola, D 119
Stoica, T 236
Stokes, M 21, 199, 234
Stokes, MG 87
Stokes, MS 12, 189
Stoodley, CJ 104
Stout, D 228
Stramaccia, DF 168
Strang, A 125
Straube, T 118, 119, 193,
235
Struiksma, M 243
Strunk, J 170, 172, 199
Stürmer, B 175
Suchan, B 107, 121

Sugiura, M 231
Su, LI-w 205
Summerfield, C  12, 145,
189
Sun, D 102
Sung, K 143
Sung, Y-T 92
Sun, H 197, 221
Sun, Y 92
Sussman, T 84
Sutterer, M 120
Suvisaari, J 210
Suzuki, S 75
Swaab, T 53, 243
Swaab, TY 164, 165
Swinnerton, KN 12, 158
Sword, K 221
Szczepanski, SM 251
Szekely, A 84
Szewczyk, J 242
Szőllősi, Á  160
Szpunar, KK 136

T
Tager-Flusberg, H 45, 222,
239
Tagliabue, CF 216
Takács, Á  100
Takashima, A 208
Tal, I 251
Talloni, M 89
Talmi, D 183
Tamez, ER 196
Tan, D 246
Tandon, N 235
Tang, H 147, 155
Tang, L 207
Tang, R 48
Tanguay, A 41
Tang, Y-Y 48
Tanigawa, N 90
Tanner, D 94, 204, 205
Tao, J 11, 75, 135
Tark, K 209, 210
Tarullo, A 53
Tata, M 38, 115
Tata, MS 39
Tavakoli, P 210
Tavano, A 11, 113
Tavares, R 46
Taylar, G 153
Tegenthoff, M 124
Teghipco, A 92
Teng, X 93
Tenney, J 131
ten Oever, S 25
Tervaniemi, M 70
Teslovich, T 119, 222
Thakral, P 59
't Hart, B 243
Thelen, A 255
Therien, VD 218
Therman, S 210
Thesen, T 169
Thiessen, E 167
Thiessen, ED 114
Thoma, P 121
Thomas, A 46, 214
Thompson, J 41, 46, 157,
212
Thompson, K 45

Thompson, KR 174
Thompson, M 105
Thompson, P 207
Thompson, PM 102, 103,
123
Thompson-Schill, SL 99,
196
Thompson, T 53
Thorne, JD 112
Thut, G 128
Tian, X 93
Tian, Y 188
Tibon, R 207, 217
Timman-Braun, D 50
Tinazzi, M 106, 179
Tippett, LJ 58
Tivarus, M 92
Toba, MN 226
Tobin, H 250
Tobyne, S 137
Todd, R 35, 50, 118
Todd, RM 36, 171
Toepel, U 107
Toiviainen, P 70
Tomer, R 149
Tompary, A 98, 210
Toneatto, C 151
Toomarian, EY 185
Tootell, A 230, 252, 253
Torrence, RD 45
Tottenham, N 79
Tountas, AM 112
Tousch, A 199
Towle, V 11, 135
Towle, VL 75
Tozzi, L 119
Traffalls, J 225
Trainor, LJ 40
Tranel, D 120
Traxler, M 53
Traxler, MJ 164, 165
Treffalls, J 78, 225
Trelle, A 134
Tremel, J 259
Tricomi, E 117
Trinh, S 131
Tripathi, VN 241
Troiani, V 188, 223, 258
Troup, LJ 45
Troyer, A 85
Truelove-Hill, M 74
Trumbo, M 118
Trumbo, MC 201, 258
Truong, D 177
Truong, G 35, 36
Tsai, A 249
Tsai, M-H 166
Tsai, Y-T 238
Tsakiris, M 44
Tsao, F-M 54, 166
Tsivos, D 206, 249
Tsuji, S 242
Tucker-Drob, EM 103
Tulk, S 261
Tune, S 53
Turkeltaub, P 110, 236
Turkeltaub, PE 104
Turner, B 59
Turner, BO 110
Turner, M 140
Turney, I 138
Tusch, E 51

2016 Annual Meeting	
Tychinsky, R 173
Tyler, LK 85
Tyshynsky, R 68
Tzeng, OJ-L 92, 159, 238
Tzeng, Y-L 128
Tzvi, E 106

U
Ugalde, L 250
Ugolini, M 163
Umiltà, C 188
Umiltà, CA 151
Unger, A 81, 136
Unger, K 48, 227
Urbain, C 196
Urgesi, C 12, 157, 214
Ursache, A 158
Usrey, WM 150

V
Vaidya, A 146
Vaidya, C 85, 236
Valdes Sosa, M 256
Valdes-Sosa, M 194
Valdez, GE 49
Vale, L 119
Valentin, V 175
Valentin, VV 124, 162
Valero, A 212
Valero-Cabre, A 226
Vallée, T  246
Vallesi, A 86
Vallila-Rohter, S 57, 160
van Aalderen-Smeets, S
233
van Atteveldt, N 233
Van Bavel, J 12, 79
Van Bavel, JJ 43
van Berkum, J 243
van Boxtel, A 243
van Boxtel, M 158
van Dam, W 236
van den Berg, B 75
van den Bos, W 259
Vandenbroucke, A 181
van den Wildenberg, W 47
Van der Haegen, L 92
Vanderwal, T 140
van Dijck, J-P 199
Van Dyke, J 94
van Ede, F 41
Van Gerven, PWM 115
van Hell, J 204
Van Hell, J 244
van Hell, JG 55, 57, 94,
129, 244
van Lamsweerde, AE 125
Vanlangendonck, F 208
Vanlessen, N 35
VanMeter, JW 108, 218
Vannest, J 131, 200
Vannini, P 136
Van-Opstal, F 73
Van Rinsveld, A 167
Van Roost, D 196
Van Vleet, T 83, 154
van Wassenhove, V 248
van Wouwe, N 47
van Wouwe, NC 49
Varangis, E 88

Author Index
Varela, E 204
Vargas, I 61, 204
Vargas, Jr., R 145
Varvaris, M 119, 222
Vasquez, A 224
Vasquez, D 92
Vassena, E 28, 29, 196
Vaughan, JW 71
Vaughn, KA 64, 122, 160
Vazquez, D 64
Vega Potler, N 140
Velasco, R 116
Velasquez, AG 125
Velenosi, LA 12, 162
Veloso, A 137
Venable, KB 227
Vendemia, J 236
Venhuizen, N 212
Ventura-Bort, C 82
Venza, E 198
Verbos, J 201
Vercammen, A 238
Verfaellie, M 60
Verguts, T 73, 86, 196
Verhaeghen, P 88
Verhey, F 158
Verstaen, A 118
Vessel, E 44
Viader, F 246
Victorino, CG 259
Vidal, F 123
Vidal, J 150
Vidal, N 239
Viehman, RW 210
Vieweg, P 170
Vila, J 194
Villena-González, M 76,
187
Vincent, A 98
Vinette, S 115
Vingerhoets, G 92
Visconti di Oleggio Castello, M 194
Visscher, K 157
Vissers, C 174
Viswanathan, S 179
Voegler, R 235
Voelbel, G 112
Vogel, JW 12, 158
Vogelsang, DA 172
Vohra, S 42
Volk, F 194
Volosin, M 40
Volz, KG 73
von dem Hagen, E 157
Von Der Heide, R 81
Von Lautz, AH 12, 189
von Leupoldt, A 42
von Meer, SS 124
Voon, V 102
Voss, J 31, 171, 245
Voss, JL 60
Vosskuhl, J 177
Voss, M 120
Voss, MW 228
Voytek, B 26
Vucovich, LE 123, 162
Vu, M-A 211
Vu, M-AT 59

W
Wagner, AD 65, 96
Wagner Cook, S 11, 241
Wagner, D 122
Wagner, M 38, 68, 127
Wahlund, L-O 63
Wakeman, D 217
Walden, E 195
Walker, J 133
Wallace, D 83
Wallace, G 80
Wallace, M 32
Wallace, S 201
Walpolla, I 232
Walsh, E 192
Walter, H 159
Walzak, A 49
Wanetick, R 154
Wang, B 179
Wang, C 149
Wang, E 141
Wang, H 149
Wang, J 243, 244, 245
Wang, J-T 124
Wang, K 188
Wang, L 12, 227, 253
Wang, T 59
Wang, TH 58
Wang, W-C 99
Wang, X 245
Wang, X-J 33
Wang, Y 129, 163, 164
Wang, Y-W 175
Wang, Y-Y 238
Wan, L 12, 79
Wan, NJ 155
Wan, NJA 108, 200, 237,
257
Ward, L 50
Ward, LM 142
Warner, KA 49
Warnke, L 143
Waskom, ML 96
Waszak, F 40
Watanabe, K 199
Watkins, K 226
Watrous, A 247
Watson, CE 215
Watson, P 97
Waugh, R 48, 227
Wawrzyniak, M 93, 242
Waxman, R 144
Wayne, R 91
Weaver, LK 119, 222
Weaver, S 40, 86
Webb, CE 97
Weber, C 127, 239
Weber, D 126
Weber, J 43, 116, 193
Weber, L 182
Weber, R 72, 76, 83
Weigl, M 211
Weinberger, A 110
Weinberg, L 153
Weiner, M 207
Weisberg, S 131
Weisman, O 12, 153
Weis, P 120
Weissman, D 85
Welles, R 229

Welsh-Bohmer, K 133
Wendt, J 82
Wendt, M 78
Wenger, E 66
Weng, H 119
Weng, TB 228
Wenzel, M 55
Werner, CJ 50
Westerberg, CE 58
Westerberg, J 68, 71
Westover, B 11, 101
Westwater, M 157
Westwater-Wozniak, M 41
Wexler, K 239
Weymar, M 82
Wheeler, K 194
Wheeler, M 259
Whitaker, G 151
White, M.S., NC 70
Whitford, T 178
Whitman, J 50
Whone, A 249
Whyte, M 232
Widdowson, C 176
Wiebe, SA 61, 114
Wiegand, I 78, 115
Wiener, M 157
Wiese, E 121, 155, 261
Wiese, H 194
Wieser, M 116
Wieser, MJ 42, 153
Wiggins, E 113
Wiggin, T 194
Wilckens, K 84
Wilhelm, C 193
Wilkey, E 220
Wilkinson, L 100
Willems, R 208
Willems, S 98
Williams, A 240
Williams, C 197
Williams, J 223
Willie, JT 60
Wills, K 126
Wilman, A 221
Wilmer, H 233
Wilsch, A 142
Wilson, T 12, 187
Wilton, M 214
Wineberg, K 47
Wing, E 61
Wingert, KM 46
Winsler, K 165
Winter, M 212
Winter, S 70
Wirth, MM 96
Witkiewitz, K 111, 118, 219
Wodniecka, Z 242
Wohltjen, S 213
Wokke, ME 183
Wolbers, T 170, 197
Woldorff, M 11, 75, 95, 137
Woldorff, MG 38, 150
Wolf, D 83
Wolfe, J 118
Wolfe, S 113
Wolff, M 199
Wolf, M 11, 128
Wolk, D 259
Woll, B 238
Wood, B 206
Woodruff, C 156

Woodruff, CC 153, 228
Wood, S 40
Woolrich, M 226
Woo, YJ 57
Worden, M 48, 227
Worrell, G 247
Worthy, D 146, 181, 260
Worthy, DA 148, 218
Wöstmann, M 38, 39
Wrede, K 93, 242
Wright, B 49, 197
Wright, E 137
Wu, A 100
Wu, AD 101, 198
Wu, C 12, 146
Wu, C-T 260
Wu, D 165
Wu, DH 92, 168, 203
Wunderlich, K 219
Wurm, F 72
Wu, S 11, 75, 135
Wu, S-W 109, 110, 182
Wu, T 49
Wylie, G 40, 86
Wylie, S 47
Wylie, SA 49
Wynn, M 234

X
Xavier, Z 229
Xia, W 41
Xu, A 208
Xu, J 225
Xu, X 221

Y
Yacoby, A 210
Yamada, Y 127
Yamamoto, Y 231
Yamazaki, S 231
Yanar, J 132
Yang, CL 241
Yang, G 24
Yang, H-C 100
Yang, J 166, 254
Yang, R 41
Yang, X 71
Yang, Y 244
Yang, Y-Y 110
Yan, N 141
Yao, B 40
Yao, D 256
Yassa, M 169, 251
Yassa, MA 246, 247
Yee, C 83
Yee, E 229
Yeff, H 11, 141
Yeh, C-I 124
Yeh, P-H 222
Yeldesbay, A 179
Yendiki, A 53
Yen, N-S 203
Ye, R 87
Yetz, N 77
Yeung, L-k 134
Yeung, L-K 63
Yeung, N 109
Yi, D-J 209, 210
Ying, J 241
Yock, TI 78

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

273

Author Index	
Yoncheva, Y 51, 259
Yonelinas, A 170
Yonelinas, AP 61
Yoshida, M 242
Yoshizaki, K 224
You, Y 120, 180
Yox, R 163
Yu, A 168
Yue, G 40
Yuen, K 44
Yu, L 254
Yun, S 117
Yu, Q 207
Yu Villa, J 63
Yu, X 163, 212
Yu, Y 38, 127
Yu, YH 239

Z
Zabel, C 34
Zagoory-Sharon, O 12, 153
Zamm, A 141
Zane, E 240
Zanesco, A 47, 48, 77
Zanesco, AP 63
Zarate, D 197
Zarnowiec, K 67
Zavaglia, M 226
Zavaliangos-Petropulu, A
102, 207
Zborowski, A 78, 224, 225
Zeithamova, D 30, 31
Zeitlin, M 167
Zelano, C 116
Zendel, BR 38
Zénon, A  107, 178, 183, 215
Zepf, F 83
Zerubavel, N 231
Zetterberg, H 63
Zevin, JD 90
Zhang, F 215
Zhang, H 223
Zhang, HR 136
Zhang, J 195
Zhang, L 95
Zhang, S 47
Zhang, Y 246, 254
Zheng, A 87
Zheng, Y 260
Zheutlin, A 210
Zhu, D 126
Zinser, J 231
Zinszer, B 103
Zion Golumbic, E 251
Zippi, EL 173
Zipse, L 160, 249
Zirnstein, M 94
Zola, SE 169
Zorzi, M 188
Zozulinsky, P 149
Zuk, J 54, 164
Zuppichini, M 139
Zuppichini, MD 248
Zvyagintsev, M 83
Zwart, F 174
Zweig, LJ 75

274

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2016 Annual Meeting

Discover top
journals and books in
cognitive neuroscience
JOURNALS

Brain and Cognition

Cortex

Brain and
Language

Current Opinion in
Behavioral Sciences

Brain
Research

Developmental
and Cognitive
Neuroscience

Biological
Psychology

Neurobiology of
Sleep and Circadian
Rhythms

Cognition

Neurobiology of
Stress

Neuropsychologia

BOOKS

Cognition, Brain, and
Consciousness 2e

Cognitive
Enhancement

Exercise-Cognition
Interaction

Fundamentals of
Cognitive Neuroscience

The Neurology of
Consciousness

Find out more: www.elsevier.com/neuroscience

The MIT Press

THE HUMAN ADVANTAGE
A New Understanding of How
Our Brain Became Remarkable

THE HANDBOOK OF ATTENTION
edited by Jonathan M. Fawcett,
Evan F. Risko, and Alan Kingstone

CREATING LANGUAGE
Integrating Evolution, Acquisition,
and Processing

ANCIENT ORIGINS OF
CONSCIOUSNESS
How the Brain Created Experience

Suzana Herculano-Houzel

An authoritative overview of current research on human attention, emphasizing
the relation between cognitive phenomena observed in the laboratory and in the
real world.

Morten H. Christiansen
and Nick Chater
foreword by Peter W. Culicover

Todd E. Feinberg and Jon M. Mallatt

Why our human brains are awesome, and
how we left our cousins, the great apes,
behind: a tale of neurons and calories, and
cooking.
Hardcover | $29.95 | £19.95

Hardcover | $65 | £44.95

PRODUCTIVITY AND REUSE
IN LANGUAGE
A Theory of Linguistic Computation
and Storage
Timothy J. O’Donnell

BECOMING FLUENT
How Cognitive Science Can Help
Adults Learn a Foreign Language
Richard Roberts and Roger Kreuz

A proposal for a formal model, Fragment
Grammars, that treats productivity and
reuse as the target of inference in a probabilistic framework.

How adult learners can draw upon skills
and knowledge honed over a lifetime
to master a foreign language.
Hardcover | $24.95 | £17.95

Hardcover | $45 | £31.95

COGNITIVE UNCONSCIOUS AND
HUMAN RATIONALITY

MEMORY AND MOVIES
What Films Can Teach Us
about Memory
John Seamon

edited by Laura Macchi, Maria Bagassi,
and Riccardo Viale
foreword by Keith Frankish

How popular films from Memento to
Slumdog Millionaire can help us understand how memory works.
Hardcover | $29.95 | £20.95

Examining the role of implicit, unconscious thinking on reasoning, decision
making, problem solving, creativity, and
its neurocognitive basis, for a genuinely
psychological conception of rationality.
Hardcover | $54 | £37.95

A work that reveals the profound links
between the evolution, acquisition, and
processing of language, and proposes
a new integrative framework for the
language sciences.
Hardcover | $40 | £27.95

THE CONCEPTUAL MIND
New Directions in the Study
of Concepts
edited by Eric Margolis and
Stephen Laurence
New essays by leading philosophers
and cognitive scientists that
present recent findings
and theoretical
developments
in the study of
concepts.

Visit the

Hardcover
$58 | £39.95

How consciousness appeared much
earlier in evolutionary history than is commonly assumed, and why all vertebrates
and perhaps even some invertebrates are
conscious.
Hardcover | $35 | £24.95

DREAMING
A Conceptual Framework
for Philosophy of Mind and
Empirical Research
Jennifer M. Windt
A comprehensive proposal for a conceptual framework for describing conscious
experience in dreams, integrating
philosophy of mind, sleep and dream
research, and interdisciplinary consciousness studies.
Hardcover | $65 | £44.95

MIT PRESS

BOOTH

for a 30%

DISCOUNT
mitpress.mit.edu

Neuroscience

from the Royal Society
The Royal Society journal portfolio offers a
range of publishing options within neuroscience
Reasons to choose the Royal Society for your work:
•	 Articles handled by active, expert neuroscientists
•	 Efficient and rapid processing
•	 Rigorous, constructive peer review
•	 Open access options
•	 Theme issue opportunities
To read articles and to submit your
research or theme issue proposal visit
royalsociety.org/journals

Image: A baboon gets lost in his thoughts,
by Davide Giglio. Royal Society Publishing
photography competition 2015,
special commendation.

New York Hilton Midtown Hotel Floor plan
Function Space

Concourse Level: Student Trainee Panel Session 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Second Floor: Conference Rooms   
 
 
 
 
 
 

Third Floor: CNS Registration Desk and Conference

Exhibit Hall - Americas Hall I

Fourth Floor: Exhibit Hall – Americas Hall II

