Cognitive Neuroscience Society
Annual Meeting Program 2009
A supplement of the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience

ISSN 1096-8857
© CNS
Cognitive Neuroscience Society
c/o Center for Mind and Brain
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
www.cogneurosociety.org

Cognitive Neuroscience Society 2009 Committees
Governing Board

Founding Committee (1994)

Carol Colby, Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh
Marta Kutas, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego
Helen Neville, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Michael I. Posner, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D., University of California,
Santa Barbara (ex officio)
George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California, Davis
(ex officio)
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan (ex officio)

Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D., University of California,
Santa Barbara
George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California, Davis
Steve Pinker, Ph.D., MIT
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Art Shimamura, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley

Program Committee
Chair: Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Randy L. Buckner, Ph.D., Harvard University
Peter Hagoort, Ph.D., University of Nijmegen
Liz Phelps, Ph.D., New York University
Lorraine K. Tyler, Ph.D., University of Cambridge
Anthony Wagner, Ph.D., Stanford University

Poster Committee
Chair: Reiko Graham, Ph.D., Texas State University
Nadine Gaab, Ph.D., Harvard Medical School
Fumiko Hoeft, Ph.D., Standford University
Irene Kan, Ph.D., Vullanova
Jonathan Fugelsang, Ph.D., University of Waterloo
Chris Westbury, Ph.D., University of Alberta
Stephanie Ortigue, Ph.D., University of California Santa Barbara
Jelena Ristic, Ph.D., University of California Santa Barbara
Florin Dolcos, Ph.D., University of Alberta
Xu Ciu, Ph.D., Stanford University

Slide Session Committee
Roberto Cabeza, Ph.D., Duke University
Silvia Bunge, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley
BJ Casey, Ph.D, Cornell University
Kevin Oschner, Ph.D., Columbia University
Tamara Swaab, Ph.D., University of California, Davis
Kevin Wilson, Ph.D., Gettysburg College
Kalina Christoff, Ph.D., University of British Columbia

Young Investigator Awards Committee
Marlene Behrmann, Ph.D., Carnegie Mellon
Silvia Bunge, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley
Roberto Cabeza, Ph.D., Duke University
Karl Friston, Ph.D.,University College London
Steve Petersen, Ph.D., Washington University
Charan Ranganath, Ph.D., University of California, Davis

CNS Staff
Cathy Harding, Executive Director
Sangay Wangmo, Administrative Assistant

TM Events, Inc. Meeting Staff
Tara Miller, Event Director
Renee Smith, Registration Manager
Brenna Miller, Volunteer & Monitoring Manager
Linda Hacker, Onsite Manager
Shauney Wilson, Submissions Manager
Joan Carole, Exhibits Manager
Jeff Wilson, Website & Meeting Program

Cover Photo
© Phillip Wilkerson. Image from BigStockPhoto.com

Table of Contents
Schedule of Events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Exhibitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Young Investigator Award in Cognitive Neuroscience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
CNSSA Social Night . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Graduate Students Present . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Symposia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Slide Sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Poster Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Poster Session A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Poster Session B. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Poster Session C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Poster Session D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
Poster Session E. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
Poster Session F . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Poster Session G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180
Poster Session H . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 203
Poster Session I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 248

Mark your calendars now...
the 17th Annual
Cognitive Neuroscience Society Meeting
will be held at the Hilton Bonaventure Hotel
in Montreal, Canada
April 17 - 20, 2010

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

1

Schedule of Events
Saturday, March 21
9:00 am - 5:00 pm

Satellites

12:00 - 5:00 pm

Exhibitor Check-In, Pacific Concourse

2:30 - 7:30 pm

Onsite & Pre-Registration Check In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

3:00 - 5:00 pm

Slide sessions 1 and 2, Grand Ballrooms A & B

5:00 - 6:00 pm

Reception, Grand Ballroom Foyer

5:00 - 7:30 pm

Exhibits on Display, Pacific Concourse

5:30 - 7:30 pm

Poster Session A, Pacific Concourse

Sunday, March 22
7:30 am - 7:00 pm

Onsite & Pre-Registration Check In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

8:00 am

Coffee Service, Pacific Concourse

8:00 - 10:00 am

Poster Session B, Pacific Concourse

8:00 am - 7:00 pm

Exhibits on Display, Pacific Concourse

10:00 am - 12:00 pm

Symposium Session 1, Grand Ballroom A
Slide Session 3, Grand Ballroom B

12:00 - 1:00 pm

Lunch Break

1:00 - 3:00 pm

Poster Session C, Pacific Concourse

2:30 pm

Coffee Service, Pacific Concourse

3:00 - 4:00 pm

Announcement of the Young Investigator Awards,
Grand Ballroom
15th Annual George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience,
Grand Ballroom

4:00 - 5:00 pm

GAM Reception, Grand Ballroom Foyer

5:00 - 7:00 pm

Poster Session D, Pacific Concourse

Monday, March 23
8:00 am - 7:00 pm

Onsite & Pre-Registration Check In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

8:00 am

Coffee Service, Pacific Concourse

8:00 - 10:00 am

Poster Session E, Pacific Concourse

8:00 am - 7:00 pm

Exhibits on Display, Pacific Concourse

9:00 - 9:40 am

YIA Special Lecture 1, Grand Ballroom A

10:00 am - 12:00 pm

Symposium Session 2, Grand Ballroom A
Slide Session 4, Grand Ballroom B

2

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Schedule of Events

12:00 - 1:00 pm

Lunch Break

1:00 - 3:00 pm

Poster Session F, Pacific Concourse

2:30 pm

Coffee Service, Pacific Concourse

3:00 - 5:00 pm

Symposium Session 3, Grand Ballroom A
Slide Session 5, Grand Ballroom B

5:00 - 7:00 pm

Poster Session G, Pacific Concourse

Tuesday, March 24
8:00 am - 5:00 pm

Onsite & Pre-Registration Check In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

8:00 am

Coffee Service, Pacific Concourse

8:00 - 10:00 am

Poster Session H, Pacific Concourse

8:00 am - 7:00 pm

Exhibits on Display, Pacific Concourse

9:00 - 9.40 am

YIA Special Lecture 2, Grand Ballroom A

10:00 am - 12:00 pm

Symposium Session 4, Grand Ballroom A
Slide Session 6, Grand Ballroom B

12:00 - 1:00 pm

Lunch Break

1:00 - 3:00 pm

Symposium Session 5, Grand Ballroom A
Slide Session 7, Grand Ballroom B

2:30 pm

Coffee Service, Pacific Concourse

3:00 - 5:00 pm

Poster Session I, Pacific Concourse

Visit the CNS 2009 Exhibitors in the Pacific Concourse
ADInstruments

Elsevier

Oxford University Press

American Psychological Association

Hitachi Medical Corporation

Psychology Press

Integragen

Psychology Software Tools, Inc.

Measurand Inc

Rogue Research, Inc.

Millisecond Software

SensoMotoric Instruments

NeuroFocus, Inc

Sinauer Associates, Inc.
The MIT Press

Cortech Solutions, Inc.

NITRC: Neuroimaging Informatics Tools and Resources
Clearinghouse

Electrical Geodesics, Inc.

Noldus Information Technology

Electrode Arrays

Northern Digital Inc.

BIOPAC Systems, Inc.
Cambridge Electronic Design,
Ltd.
Cedrus Corporation
Compumedics USA Ltd.

W. W. Norton & Company
Wiley-Blackwell

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

3

15th Annual George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience

15th Annual George A. Miller Prize
in Cognitive Neuroscience
Sunday, March 22, 2009, 3:00 - 4:00 pm, Grand Ballroom
Reception to follow, 4:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom Foyer
The Cognitive Neuroscience Society is pleased to announce the recipient of the 2009 George A. Miller
Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience:

Marcus Raichle, Ph.D., Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis
The George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience was established in 1995 by the Cognitive Neuroscience Society and the James S. McDonnell Foundation to honor the career contributions of George A.
Miller to cognitive neuroscience. The first 10 years of the prize were funded by generous support from
the James S. McDonnell Foundation.
The prize is awarded to the nominee whose career is characterized by distinguished and sustained
scholarship and research at the cutting-edge of cognitive neuroscience. Extraordinary innovation and
high impact on international scientific thinking should be a hallmark of the recipient's work.
Each year a call for nominations for the George A. Miller Prize is made to the membership of the society.
The recipient is selected by a committee with the approval of the society. The prize winner attends the
annual meeting of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society and delivers the George A. Miller Lecture.

Young Investigator Award
in Cognitive Neuroscience
Sunday, March 22, 2009, 3:00 - 4:00 pm, Grand Ballroom
(Immediately prior to the George A. Miller Award in Cognitive Neuroscience Lecture)
The Cognitive Neuroscience Society is pleased to announce the recipients of the 2009 Young Investigator
Awards:

Lila Davachi, Ph.D., New York University
Clayton Curtis, Ph.D., New York University
The Young Investigator Awards in Cognitive Neuroscience recognizes outstanding contributions by scientists early in their careers. Two awardees are named each year by the Award Committee, and are honored at the Annual meeting of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society. Each award includes $500 to be used
by the awardees toward travel costs to the meeting, or for any other purpose.
In addition to the ceremony, this year, the recipients will be giving a 30 minute talk at the CNS meeting.

4

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Young Investigator Award in Cognitive Neuroscience

YIA Special Lecture 1 – Dr. Lila Davachi
Monday, March 23, 2009, 9:00 - 9:40 am, Grand Ballroom A
FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE OF THE HUMAN MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE MEMORY
SYSTEM
How are memories formed? Approaches to this question have been based on distinctions between kinds
of conscious experience or on psychological processes. While each of these approaches has its merits, it
is also important to consider the anatomical inputs to and connectivity within the medial temporal lobe
(MTL). Animal studies suggest that distinct regions of MTL cortex receive differential input from neocortical input structures that are associated with divergent roles in object and spatial cognition. This suggests a different viewpoint on the functional organization of the MTL such that distinct MTL cortical
regions may participate in the encoding of domain-specific information while the hippocampus proper,
which receives convergent input from these MTL cortical structures, contributes to the mnemonic binding of this input. In this talk, I will describe a series of studies that integrates anatomical and psychological theories to support a hybrid model of MTL function.

YIA Special Lecture 2 – Dr. Clayton Curtis
Tuesday, March 24, 2009, 9:00 - 9:40 am, Grand Ballroom A
A SINGLE CLASSIFIER PREDICTS THE DIRECTION OF SPATIAL ATTENTION, WORKING
MEMORY, AND MOTOR INTENTIONS
We recently demonstrated that neural activity in the same frontal and parietal cortical areas persists
when humans 1) maintain a location in working memory, 2) covertly maintain attention peripherally,
and 3) maintain a spatially directed motor intention. We concluded that spatial working memory, attention, and intentions share a common neural mechanism that is implemented in these areas. To further
test these conclusions, here, we use multivoxel pattern classification of fMRI data to test two hypotheses.
First, we can predict the location of a working memory representation, the direction of covert attention,
and the target of a motor intention based on the multivariate pattern of delay period activity. Indeed, we
find that frontal and parietal cortex activity can correctly classify whether subjects are remembering,
attending, and planning a movement to the right or left hemifields. Second, we show that the classifiers
generalize across tasks. We trained classifiers on one task (e.g., working memory) and tested its predictive validity on the other tasks (e.g., spatial attention and motor intention). Remarkably, despite that
subjects were performing a different task, we observe robust cross-task classification. A classifier trained
to discriminate the position of a working memory representation can predict the direction of one's attention and the goal of one's motor intentions. These results suggest that the information contained within
these areas during delay periods is not dependent on working memory, attention, or intentions. Instead,
it argues that these areas implement a common mechanism that supports a variety of spatial cognitions.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

5

CNSSA Social Night
Come and meet other students from the Cognitive Neuroscience Society and let's explore the city!
All students of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society are welcome to join us at the Hyatt Hotel Bar - The
Eclipse Lounge at 7:30 p.m. on Saturday March 21st (after the poster session). Please wear your nametags so other students can easily identify you. We will introduce everyone to each other and get
acquainted, and around 8:30 p.m. we will head out to two local bar/restaurants:
Gordon Biersch
2 Harrison Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
Phone: (415) 243-8246
www.gordonbiersch.com
Palomino
345 Spear Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
Phone:(415) 512-7400
www.palomino.com
Both bars are walking distance from the hotel and from each other.
Please note that this is not a funded event and although there is no entrance fee for any of the places we
are going to, you will have to pay for your own drinks and/or dinner.
Looking forward to you meeting you in San Francisco!
CNSSA Executives

6

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Graduate Students Present
Eight to ten abstracts are chosen each year for CNS's Graduate Students Present (GSP) Award. The
recipients are awarded a $500 travel award and present their 15 minute discussion on their research
findings during the Cognitive Neuroscience Society Annual Meeting.
The GSP sessions will be scheduled and presented with the topically organized slide session that corresponds to the topic of their abstract. Presenters/Attendees are to check the Slide Presentation Schedule
for complete presentation.
The Cognitive Neuroscience Society is pleased to announce the 2009 GSP Award Recipients:

Simon van Gaal, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Jaap Munneke, VU University, Amsterdam
Andrew Butler, Indiana University
Gerrit Hirschfeld, University of Muenster
Dominique Vuvan, University of Toronto, Canada
Antonio Lara, University of California, Berkeley
Bradford Mahon, Harvard University
Amitai Shenhav, Harvard University
Julie L. Hall, University of Michigan

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

7

CNS Symposia

S ym p os i a
S e ss i on 1

Vertically Integrating Molecular-genetics, Cognitive
Neuroscience, and Psychology
Sunday, March 22, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A
Chair: Adam Green
Speakers: John A. Fossella, Andreas Papassotiropoulos, Joseph H. Callicott, Colin G.
DeYoung
Summary: Using cognitive neuroscience techniques to investigate neural expression of genetic variants is
not only relevant for disease, it also has the potential to inform models of healthy cognitive function. The
goal of this "cognitive neurogenetic" research is to integrate genes and their protein products with brainbased intermediate phenotypes and behavioral phenotypes. While the promise is considerable, so are the
theoretical, statistical, and interpretive hazards. Psychological theory will be an indispensable pillar for
building an understanding of gene-brain-behavior relationships, including rigorous development and
validation of behavioral tasks. Another pillar will be the use of a systems approach that engages the
complexity and non-specificity of gene effects as well as the interactions between and among genetic
polymorphisms and brain systems. A third pillar is detailed molecular-genetic characterization of the
effects of polymorphisms on gene expression. Fitting gene-(intermediate) phenotype associations to
constraints established by molecular genetic data can help weed out spurious associations and provide the
link to molecular-biological mechanisms that build and guide neural systems. This symposium will review
vertically integrative approaches that help delineate the causal chain from gene to protein to brain to
behavior, as well as statistical and methodological measures that help ensure meaningfully interpretable
data.

A B S T R A C T S
RECONCILING THE DEVELOPMENT OF EXECUTIVE CONTROL WITH MOLECULAR CHANGE John
A.
Fossella, Mount Sinai School of Medicine — It is well-known that children show gradual and protracted
improvement in an array of behaviors involved in the conscious control of thoughtand emotion. Non-invasive neuroimaging in developing populations shows that activity in the developing cingulate cortex and
fronto-striatal circuits are correlated with dissociable aspects of executive control. These brain regions,
themselves, undergo protracted cellular, synaptic and molecular change in the first two decades of human
development and, as such, have been implicated in mechanisms that link the development of brain and
behavior. One approach to better understanding age-dependent changes in cognition is to consider the role
of molecular genetic change. When developmental changes in gene expression are known, it is reasonable
to begin to ask whether such changes contribute to observable correlates in brain structure, activity and
behavior. A so-called imaging-genetic approach has been validated and replicated in paradigms that measure aspects of executive control in adults and is now well poised for studies on the development of executive control in children. We present a research strategy, based on a child-friendly version of the attention
network task (ANT) that exploits evidence converging on the development of the anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) at the psychological, anatomical and molecular levels. The approach supports ongoing imaginggenetic experiments that are driven by explicit hypotheses.
GENETICS OF HUMAN MEMORY: UNDERSTANDING COMPLEXITY Andreas Papassotiropoulos, Division of
Molecular Psychology, University of Basel, Switzerland — Experimental work in animals has shown that memory formation depends on a cascade of molecular events. In humans, heritability estimates of ~50% suggest
that genetic factors have an important impact on this fundamental brain function. Therefore, our research
aims at identifying memory-related genes and gene-clusters in humans and at translating the findings to
memory-related disorders. Gene identification is done by combining unbiased genome-wide association
studies, candidate gene approaches and gene clustering, and functional MRI (fMRI) in populations which
are carefully tested for memory performance and for the presence or absence of diseases related to

8

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

CNS Symposia

Monday, March 23, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A

impaired memory function. We show that variability of human memory performance is related to variability in genes encoding proteins of a core molecular signaling cascade. Functional magnetic resonance imaging reveals that this genetic profile correlates with activations in memory-related brain regions. The
genome-wide association studies reveal the existence of novel genes significantly related to human memory performance, brain activation and to the risk for developing diseases related to memory impairment.
The search for genes related to human memory processes provides new insights into the genetic basis of
this cognitive ability and will ultimately promote the targeted treatment of memory disorders by identifying relevant genetic pathways in humans.
THE GENETIC UNDERPINNINGS OF PREFRONTAL NEURONAL INFORMATION PROCESSING:
MECHANISTIC PROMISES AND METHODOLOGICAL PITFALLS Joseph H. Callicott, National Institute of
Mental Health — Imaging genetics evolved from candidate gene studies demonstrating in-vivo effects of
allelic variation tied to increased risk for complex heritable illnesses like schizophrenia. Following findings
linking alterations in prefrontal cortex (PFC) information processing efficiency during working memory to
allelic variations in healthy individuals, we pursued two questions related to future investigations,
namely: 1) Do findings relating genes like COMT to PFC function generalize to all PFC-linked cognitive
tasks or do task characteristics (e.g., cognitive demand, task complexity, or network relationships) influence these relationships? and 2) Are analyses that ignore multiple, related genetic variants (i.e., pathways)
sufficient? Using fMRI data collected during two PFC tasks (Nback and DSST) in healthy subjects, we contrasted the information processing efficiency effects of a gene dependent on cognitive load (COMT) and
one with general effects (the potassium channel gene KCNH2). We also contrasted gene interactions
emerging in a predicted fashion from risk conferred by both genes (COMT x KCNH2) as opposed to those
only evident when conditioned on risk in an interacting partner (RGS4 x COMT, GAD1 x COMT). Analyses incorporating metabolic pathway interactions and measured at differing cognitive loads should foster
adaption from candidate gene to GWAS and beyond.
EXTERNALIZING BEHAVIOR AND COGNITION: DOPAMINE GENES AND COMPLEX ASSOCIATIONS
Colin G. DeYoung, University of Minnesota — Externalizing behavior (encompassing aggression, antisocial
behavior, impulsivity, and drug abuse) has been shown through studies of heritability to have a strong
genetic basis. Molecular genetics and neuroimaging are crucial to understanding how genetic factors, interacting with environmental influences, shape the brain in ways that lead to the expression of externalizing
behavior. A panel of genes related to the dopaminergic system has been associated with externalizing
behavior and cognitive function. Here, we focus on the dopamine D4 receptor gene (DRD4) and the catechol-O-methyltransferase gene (COMT). The products of these two genes have strong influences on
dopaminergic function in the prefrontal cortex, a key brain region for higher cognition and cognitive control. The research presented highlights the complexity of molecular genetic effects. For example, three
studies show that variation in DRD4 moderates the typically negative association of externalizing behavior
with IQ. Cognitive ability is strongly associated with working memory, and the neural circuits underlying
working memory are influenced by variation in DRD4 and COMT. A large fMRI study (N =100) shows that
genetic variation influences brain activity related to working memory and cognitive control and explores
the relation of these effects to individual differences in externalizing behavior.

S ym p os i a
S e ss i on 2

Neurobiology of human language and its evolution: Primate
perspectives
Monday, March 23, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A
Chair: William D. Marslen-Wilson
Speakers: James K. Rilling, Angela D. Friederici, Asif A. Ghazanfar, William D. MarslenWilson
Summary: The last decade has seen dramatic developments in our understanding of the neural and
functional architecture of non-human primate systems that support the processing of complex auditory
objects in general, and of conspecific vocal calls in particular. These developments are having an increasing
influence on research into human language, making it possible to situate this work in a genuinely neurobiological and evolutionary context. This symposium explores these exciting developments in four
presentations. Two speakers come from the non-human primate research community. The first speaker
will discuss evolutionary changes in the neural pathways connecting frontal and temporal cortices in the
macaque, chimpanzee and human brain, in areas critical for key human linguistic capacities. The second

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

9

Monday, March 23, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A

CNS Symposia

speaker will focus on the multi-modal functional architecture underlying vocal communication in the
macaque, and the implications of this for models of language evolution and function. Two further speakers
come from human research exploring the cognitive neuroscience of language. The first focuses on lefthemisphere pathways supporting syntax, a faculty specific to humans, and combines research with adults
and with children learning language. The second will focus on bi-hemispheric substrates for human
language functions, placed in a broader primate perspective.

A B S T R A C T S
THE ARCUATE FASCICULUS IN HUMANS, CHIMPANZEES AND MACAQUES: IMPLICATIONS FOR THE
EVOLUTION OF HUMAN LANGUAGE James K. Rilling, Emory University, Anthropology — The cognitive
attribute that most obviously distinguishes humans from other primates is our capacity for language.
Human language is supported by typically left hemisphere regions of temporal and frontal cortex that are
connected by a white matter fiber tract known as the arcuate fasciculus. The objective of our research was
to identify possible language-related specializations of the human brain by comparing human, chimpanzee
and rhesus macaque brains in the region of the arcuate fasciculus with diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).
Post-mortem and in vivo DTI scans were acquired from human, chimpanzee, and macaque subjects. Probabilistic tractography software (FSL) was used to reconstruct the arcuate pathway or its homologue in all
three species. Tractography results suggest that connections linking the posterior superior temporal gyrus
(Wernicke's region) and left inferior frontal cortex (Broca's region) exist in all three species. However, connections linking semantic processing areas of the middle temporal gyrus (BA 21, 37, 39) with Broca's area
are only present in humans and chimpanzees, and are much more extensive in humans. These differences
in the arcuate fasciculus language pathway between humans and chimpanzees may be relevant to the evolution of the neural substrates supporting human language.
NEURAL PATHWAYS RELEVANT FOR SYNTAX Angela D. Friederici, Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences — Language has evolved from non-human to human primates and it develops
in the child under external input in a predetermined manner. Both phylogenetic and ontogenetic findings
indicate a strong biological foundation of language. Language functions are known to be based on the gray
matter in circumscribed brain regions in the frontal and the temporal cortex. Recent findings, moreover,
suggest that the white matter fibre tracts connecting these regions are of major importance for language. A
number of different connections between the frontal and temporal have been identified, one of which
appears to be particularly weak in non-human primates when compared to human adults. Here we show
that this pathway, which connects the frontal and temporal cortex dorsally, is functionally relevant for the
processing of syntactically complex sentences in the adult and that it develops only late during ontogeny.
Moreover, the data indicate that children's comprehension, behaviorally not adult-like until the age of 7
years, relies on an alternative pathway. The dorsal pathway thus appears to be crucial for the adult human
ability to comprehend syntactically complex sentences.
THE EMBODIED NATURE OF PRIMATE VOCAL COMMUNICATION Asif A. Ghazanfar, Neuroscience
Institute & Department of Psychology — We are studying the neurobiology and vocal behavior of monkey
agents as way of understanding the evolution and neurobiology of human communication. There are three
principles that we use to guide our investigations. The first principle is that a primate's experience is profoundly multimodal and that multiple over-lapping and time-locked sensory systems enable it to learn,
perceive and act in the vocal domain. Second, these communication-related sensory systems develop incrementally and their initial prematurity, and the particular trajectory they take during development, are critical to their final structure. The third principle is that sensory and motor systems will be coupled; that is,
stable features of the brain, body and/or environment will be exploited to simplify vocal communication.
Using these principles, our data suggest that vocal communication arises through the coupling of multiple
oscillations that operate on different timescales. The facial dynamics and vocal acoustics of the signaler are
linked and take the form of a coupled slow oscillation. These signals, in turn, couple with on-going oscillations in the receiver's auditory cortex. These auditory cortical oscillations then modulate faster oscillations,
which in turn couple to parallel oscillations in other brain regions (including the frontal cortex and the
superior temporal sulcus). We hypothesize that the oscillatory structure present in the facial dynamics and
vocal acoustics exploit the structure of neural oscillations and that vocal communication emerges from
these multiple oscillatory couplings. As each locus of coupling is a putative substrate for the evolution of
language in humans, it is unlikely that language evolved solely through changes in key brain structures or
the development of new ones.

10

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

CNS Symposia

Monday, March 23, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A

BI-HEMISPHERIC FOUNDATIONS FOR HUMAN SPEECH AND LANGUAGE William D. Marslen-Wilson,
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit — Current research into the biological foundations for human language emphasises the evolutionary development of specialised left hemisphere (LH) perisylvian networks,
that seem to be unique to humans. This has led to undue neglect of the role of more general purpose bihemispheric processing capacities in supporting human spoken communication, even in the absence of
syntax. In fact, functional neuro-imaging studies generally report significant RH as well as LH activity in
spoken communication. Behavioral and neuro-imaging research on patients with major damage to LH
perisylvian cortex reveals surprisingly effective RH capacities for lexical access from speech and for semantic-pragmatic interpretation. Recent neuro-imaging research in healthy populations, targeted at non-linguistic sources of processing complexity in lexical access shows parallel RH and LH fronto-temporal
activity in response to increased perceptual complexity (for example, under conditions of increased wordinternal competition between cohort competitors). These co-occur with strongly left-lateralised patterns of
activation elicited by specifically linguistic sources of processing complexity (such as the presence of inflectional morphemes). These bi-hemispheric capacities for supporting vocal communication are likely to be
closely related to cognate capacities that have evolved in non-human primates.

S ym p os i a
S e ss i on 3

The key to prevent the return of fear memories - extinction
versus reconsolidation
Monday, March 23, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A
Chairs: Daniela Schiller and Karim Nader
Speakers: Mohammed R. Milad, Karim Nader, Marie-H. Monfils, Daniela Schiller
Summary: The ability to modulate, suppress, or erase, fear memories is crucial for adaptive function in
everyday life. Without such mechanisms, fear memories could abnormally persist and gain control over
behavior. To date, two seemingly opposing mechanisms are suggested to block the return of old fear
memories: 1) Extinction, where fear is suppressed by safe exposure to the fear-eliciting stimuli in the
absence of the harmful outcome; 2) Reconsolidation, a phase where fear memories are labile upon retrieval,
presumably in order to be strengthen or updated, but their re-storage can be dampened by
pharmacological manipulations. Although both mechanisms are based on triggering the fear memory,
extinction leads to new safety learning, leaving the fear memory intact, while reconsolidation results in
modification of the original trace. In this symposium we will cover seminal research investigating the
neural mechanisms and theoretical conceptualizations of these phenomena. The speakers will cover a wide
range of topics on the neuroscience of extinction and reconsolidation from rats, to humans, to
psychopathology. We will discuss recent evidence for a potentially groundbreaking technique to erase
emotional memories, by combining extinction and reconsolidation. Discovering the brain mechanisms for
these phenomena is enhancing our understanding of emotion systems in the brain, and has important
clinical implications.

A B S T R A C T S
TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH IN THE NEUROSCIENCE OF EXTINCTION: FROM RATS TO HEALTHY
HUMANS TO PSYCHOPATHOLOGY Mohammed R. Milad, Harvard Medical School — Some people adapt
well in the aftermath of traumatic events and are quickly able to inhibit their fear responses to trauma-associated stimuli. Fear responses, however, persist for longer periods of time for others to the point where
they reach a pathological state. Why are some people more resilient to trauma while others are not? What
are the neural substrates that underlie fear inhibition and extinction? Are these circuits deficient in patients
with anxiety disorders? In my talk, I will focus on presenting translational data from the rat and human
brain with the objective of trying to provide some preliminary answers to the above stated questions. Specifically, I will review human studies indicating that prefrontal areas homologous to those critical for
extinction in rats. Furthermore, I will present some data to show that those brain regions in the rat brain
appear to be structurally and functionally homologous to specific brain regions in the human brain. I will
also show some data suggesting that these brain regions, the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and
the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), appear to be deficient in patients with posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD). I will present some structural and functional neuroimaging and psychophysiological
studies done in our lab that focused on the neural mechanisms of fear extinction, particularly extinction
recall and the contextual modulation of extinction recall. These recent studies suggest that: 1) human

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

11

Monday, March 23, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A

CNS Symposia

vmPFC is involved in the recall of extinction memory; 2) the size of the vmPFC might explain individual
differences in the ability to modulate fear among humans; 3) hippocampal activation is observed during
the recall of extinction memory in a context where extinction training took place but not in the initial conditioning context; 4) and the dACC may be involved in the expression of fear responses. I will also present
recent neuroimaging and psychophysiological data from PTSD patients suggesting that 1) the retention of
extinction memory is impaired in PTSD, and 2) the function of the vmPFC and dACC (measured by fMRI)
appears to be impaired in PTSD in the context of fear extinction. Implications of these findings to the
pathophysiology of anxiety disorders such as PTSD and current extinction-based behavioral therapies for
anxiety disorders will be discussed.
CONSOLIDATION AND RECONSOLIDATION OF EMOTIONAL MEMORIES Karim
Nader,
McGill
University — For over a hundred years memories were thought to be stored in our brain as a one time process called consolidation. They are thought to be stored as changes in the strength of connections between
neurons. The molecular machinery required for memory consolidation have been relatively well described.
Recently, we rediscovered that when you remember a memory that is already stored in your brain, it can
become un-stored and has to be re-consolidated. If you block the memory from being restored it seems to
be lost. This means that, in theory, we could manipulate the strength of memories therapeutically. I will
talk about the brain mechanisms thought to be involved in memory consolidation and reconsolidation, and
discuss some of the first clinical trials attempting to manipulate our memories therapeutically in patients
with chronic post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
RECONSOLIDATION-EXTINCTION BOUNDARIES MAY HOLD THE KEY TO PREVENT THE RETURN OF
FEAR Marie-H Monfils, University of Texas at Austin — In the process of reconsolidation, a retrieved memory transiently returns to a structurally-labile state, during which time it is open to enhancement or disruption. This period of instability, termed the reconsolidation window, is known to persist for several hours
following retrieval. Its adaptive purpose might be to enable the integration of new information present at
the time of retrieval into an updated memory representation, and numerous studies have demonstrated
that the blockade of this updating process, usually via pharmacological intervention within the lability
window, prevents memory re-storage and produces amnesia (loss of the specific memory that was reactivated in the presence of the drug). Thus, blocking reconsolidation weakens the emotional impact of a stimulus by altering the molecular composition of the memory itself. The clinical efficacy of reconsolidation
blockade is limited, since it typically requires toxic drugs. My talk will focus on a paradigm we have
recently devised, in rats, that capitalizes on the mechanistic differences between reconsolidation and
extinction, and provides an effective, drug-free alternative to permanently target and reduce learned fear.
We show that destabilizing a memory by presenting an isolated retrieval trial prior to an extinction session
leads to de-phosphorylation of GluR1, facilitates a re-interpretation of the conditioned stimulus as safe,
and prevents the return of fear memories. Our results suggest that subtle modifications to a common treatment (exposure therapy) could improve clinical outcome.
PREVENTING THE RETURN OF FEAR MEMORIES IN HUMANS - INVASIVE AND NON-INVASIVE
TECHNIQUE Daniela Schiller, New York University — Nearly all forms of behavioral therapy rely, at least
partially, on extinction learning through exposure to fear arousing stimuli in a safe context. Although
extinction provides a relief from fear, this relief is temporary, as extinguished fear responses often
reemerge with the passage of time or following re-exposure to the original context or the original stress, or
even an irrelevant stress. The fact that extinguished fear can be recovered has been taken to mean that the
fear memory is not erased but rather suppressed by extinction. In recent years, research in non-human animals has attempted to erase old memories by targeting a particular phase, called reconsolidation, in which
memories are rendered labile by being retrieved. Pharmacological manipulations at this stage result in an
inability to retrieve the memories at later times, suggest that they are either erased or persistently inhibited.
While this has important implications for the treatment of traumatic memory in humans there has yet to be
convincing evidence that reconsolidation can be impaired in humans. This is in part due to obvious limitations in the use of invasive manipulations, such as drugs, and the risk of side effects. Thus, there is a critical
need to develop drug-free behavioral manipulations to achieve blockade of fear recovery. In the talk, I will
describe current research on human reconsolidation of emotional memories. In particular, I will describe a
series of experiments on reconsolidation of fear using pharmacological and behavioral manipulations, and
the initial attempts to translate animal findings to humans.

12

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

CNS Symposia

S ym p oi s a
S e ss i on 4

Tuesday, March 24, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A

The fluidity of preferences: effects of choice and context
Tuesday, March 24, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A
Chair: Ray Dolan
Speakers: Laurie Santos, Tali Sharot, Antonio Rangel, Paul Glimcher
Summary: Modern society presents individuals with more choices than ever before. We can select from a
near-infinite number of possibilities where to live, who to marry, what to eat, and how to spend our leisure
time. Traditional decision making theories assume that these choices are based on relatively stable
preferences. In this symposium we argue that preferences are in fact highly unstable and susceptible to the
context in which alternatives are presented. The focus of the symposium is on findings that begin to
describe the cognitive and neural mechanisms mediating preference generation and their modulation by
context. Santos and Sharot demonstrate how the mere act of choosing modifies our preferences; describing
both the origins of this intriguing phenomenon in children and monkeys (Santos) and the underlying
neural mechanisms in human adults (Sharot). Rangel will discuss how marketing strategies affect neural
representations of experienced pleasure. Finally, Glimcher will present data from single LIP neurons that
help explain how, and why, preferences are altered by changing choice sets. This diverse data all converge
to one underlying theme: context-dependent preference volatility is a robust effect reflected in brain
regions tracking subjective value (including striatum and OFC), and appears to be conserved across
primate evolution.

A B S T R A C T S
HOW UNKNOWN DECISIONS AFFECT PREFERENCES: EVIDENCE FROM HUMAN CHILDREN AND
CAPUCHIN MONKEYS Laurie Santos, Yale University — Common wisdom suggests that we make decisions based on our preferences. In contrast, a growing body of behavioral evidence suggests that our decisions can sometimes affect our preferences. In three studies, we explore the origin of this phenomenon in
children and monkeys (Cebus apella). We first demonstrate that, like adults, children and monkeys change
their preferences based on their decisions. We then explore whether decisions can affect preferences even
when participants are unaware of their own choices. Children and monkeys made choices between similar
alternatives while ignorant of the identities of these alternatives. Both groups then subsequently chose
between the rejected alternative and a third similar alternative. Both populations preferred the third alternative to the blindly rejected alternative, indicating that they devalued the unchosen alternative even
though they were unaware of its identity. These results demonstrate that choices can affect preferences
even when the stimulus attributes of particular choices are unknown. In this way, our results provide the
first evidence that choice-based preference changes are independent of stimulus factors. Our discovery of
choice-based preference changes in these populations also provides further evidence that these preference
changes may operate even in the absence of high-level cognitive processes.
CHOICE REVEALS AND SHAPES EXPECTED HEDONIC OUTCOME Tali
Sharot,
University
College
London — Humans tend to modify their attitudes to align with past action. For example, after choosing
between similarly valued alternatives, people rate the selected option as better than they originally did,
and the rejected option as worse. However, it is unknown whether these modifications in evaluation reflect
an underlying change in the physiological representation of a stimulus' hedonic value and our emotional
response to it. In two studies we addressed this question by combining participants' estimations of the
pleasure (Experiment I) and pain (Experiment II) they will derive from future events, with brain imaging
data recorded while they imagined those events, both before, and after, choosing between them. Participants rated the selected alternatives as better after the decision stage relative to before, while discarded
alternatives were valued less. Our fMRI findings reveal that post-choice changes in preference are tracked
in caudate nucleus activity. Specifically, the difference in BOLD signal associated with the selected and
rejected stimuli was enhanced after a decision was taken, reflecting the choice that had just been made.
This finding suggests that the physiological representation of a stimulus' hedonic value is altered by a commitment to it. Furthermore, prior to any revaluation induced by the decision process, our data show that
BOLD signal in the striatum reflects the choices we are likely to make at a later time, even when an explicit
valuation of the options does not.
BIASES IN THE NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF EXPERIENCED UTILITY Antonio Rangel, California Institute
of Technology — Experienced utility signals provide a measure of the quality of the outcomes generated by
our choices, thus providing the necessary feedback to improve future decision-making. Although multiple

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

13

Tuesday, March 24, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A

CNS Symposia

human neuroimaging studies have shown that activity in the medial orbitofrontal cortex (mOFC) is correlated with reports of subjective pleasantness, little is known about which variables affect this signal. Here
we report on the results of two studies investigating this question. In the first study we explored the extent
to which changes in prior expectations about the quality of an experience, such as changes in the price of a
product, can affect neural representations of experienced pleasantness. We tested this hypothesis by scanning human subjects using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while they tasted wines which,
contrary to reality, they believed to be different and sold at different prices. Our results show that increasing the price of a wine increases subjective reports of flavor pleasantness as well as BOLD activity in
medial orbitofrontal cortex (mOFC). In a second study we showed that random events unrelated to the
experience of tasting a wine, such as the payoff of a random lottery, also affect subjective reports of taste
pleasantness and activity in the mOFC. Together, these results suggest that the putative experienced utility
signal encoded in the mOFC is contaminated by variables that are unrelated to the objective quality of the
experience being measured. These "experiential biases" might contribute to the some of the "choice biases"
that have been identified by behavioral economists, as well as to the efficacy of some marketing practices.
CHOICE SET EFFECTS: RELATIVE REWARD REPRESENTATION IN PARIETAL CORTEX Paul Glimcher, New
York University — One of the hallmarks of rational choice theory is the desirability of choice options - the
more alternatives a decision-maker can choose from, the better off he will be. However, a growing literature suggests that when choice set size grows too large, decisions become difficult and people fare significantly worse. We hypothesize that such choice effects arise from how the values of alternative actions
are represented in neural decision-making circuits. In the lateral intraparietal area (LIP), visuomotor neurons are strongly modulated by reward variables such as expected gain, prior probability, and reward
income, suggesting that individual LIP neurons represent the subjective value of specific saccades. We
recorded monkey LIP neurons during a multiple option choice task and show that the value of an action is
represented in a relative form, normalized by the total value of all available alternatives. These results are
well-characterized by the divisive normalization model previously proposed to explain responses in early
sensory cortices, suggesting that divisive normalization may represent a canonical mechanism of cortical
operation. Furthermore, such a relative value representation can be shown to modify preferences in the
face of increasing numbers of alternatives, and may explain how actual choice behavior responds to multiple options and changing choice sets.

S ym p os i a
S e ss i on 5

Representational similarity analysis - characterizing visual
population codes for shapes, objects, and faces
Tuesday, March 24, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A
Chair: Nikolaus Kriegeskorte and Geoffrey K. Aguirre
Speakers: James V. Haxby, Hans Op de Beeck, Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Geoffrey K.
Aguirre
Summary: The characterization of neuronal codes in terms of their representational content constitutes a
challenge fundamental to cognitive neuroscience. One promising approach that has recently gained
momentum is to characterize a neuronal population code by means of a representational dissimilarity
matrix. For each pair of experimental conditions (e.g. each pair of stimuli), the representational
dissimilarity matrix contains an entry reflecting the dissimilarity of the activity patterns associated with the
two conditions. Intuitively, the representational dissimilarity matrix encapsulates the information carried
by a given representation in a brain region or computational model. Representational similarity analysis
(RSA) provides data-driven characterizations of representational content and allows us to quantitatively
relate the three major branches of cognitive neuroscience - behavioral experimentation, brain-activity
experimentation, and computational modeling - by comparing representational dissimilarity matrices. This
symposium presents a series of novel findings on high-level visual representations at the interface between
perception and cognition that have been obtained by means of RSA. These studies demonstrate the power
of RSA to bridge fundamental divides of our science so as to relate human to monkey representations, cellrecordings to fMRI, and brain-activity data to behavioral measures and computational theory in an
information-rich, quantitative framework that is well-motivated by cognitive theory.

14

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

CNS Symposia

Tuesday, March 24, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A

A B S T R A C T S
CHARACTERIZING LOCAL NEURAL REPRESENTATION AS A MULTIDIMENSIONAL SIMILARITY SPACE
James V. Haxby, Dartmouth College, Psychological & Brain Sciences — Whereas conventional univariate analysis of functional brain imaging data characterized the function of a region in terms of the conditions that
activate that region, multivariate pattern (MVP) analysis characterizes local function in terms of the conditions that evoke distinct patterns of activity. Moreover, the dissimilarities of the patterns of activity for different conditions can be quantified. Thus, local neural representation can be analyzed in terms of a highdimensional similarity structure rather than as a (short) list of functions. Functional differences among
brain regions can similarly by analyzed as differences in the neural representational space rather than as
different functional labels. For example, different categories of visual stimuli - faces and objects - activate
and evoke distinct patterns of activity in medial occipital, inferior lateral occipital (LO), and ventral temporal (VT) cortex, including when analysis is restricted to subregions that respond maximally to faces (FFA)
and places (PPA). The similarity structure of the responses to categories, however, differs significantly
among these brain regions. Whereas LO demonstrates larger distinctions than does VT within animate
(faces of different species) and inanimate domains (houses, chairs, and shoes), VT demonstrates larger distinctions between the animate and inanimate domains. Medial occipital cortex, on the other hand, demonstrates a similarity structure that is not dominated by the animate-inanimate distinction at all. MVP
analysis, therefore, reveals how local neural representation projects information into different subspaces
that emphasize different distinctions among conditions. These methods provide a powerful tool for investigating how information is processed and re-represented in hierarchical and distributed neural systems.
THE ROLE OF OBJECT FEATURES, CATEGORIES, AND LEARNING FOR THE REPRESENTATION OF OBJECT
SIMILARITY IN THE HUMAN BRAIN Hans Op de Beeck, Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, University of
Leuven — Multiple studies using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) have suggested the existence of category-selective regions in the human and monkey occipitotemporal cortex that represent
between-category and within-category object similarity. We aim to understand where these category-based
representations come from. First, they might reflect the existence of large-scale maps for object features that
are correlated with category membership. Using multivariate fMRI analyses we have indeed shown that
perceived shape is an organizational principle for object-selective regions in the human brain. These findings suggest that category selectivity might be decomposable into selectivity for simpler object features.
Second, strong category selectivity might be induced by visual experience. We have found indeed that the
neural representation of between- and within-category differences is altered by various forms of object
learning. Thus, the strong category selectivity in the human brain might be related to a combined and
dynamically updated coding of multiple object features.
THE EMERGENCE OF CATEGORICALITY ALONG HUMAN VENTRAL-STREAM STAGES OF VISUAL OBJECT
PROCESSING Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, National Institute of Mental Health —
The human ventral stream is known to host high-level representations of visual objects, from which category information can be read out with linear decoders. We have previously shown that single-object-image
response patterns in human inferior temporal (hIT) cortex, when grouped by similarity, reflect conventional object categories and that the categorical structure as well as the within-category similarity structure
matches between human and monkey IT. Here we start at early visual cortex and follow the ventral stream
through key functional regions in order to understand how categoricality emerges across stages of processing. Early visual cortex exhibits a representational similarity reflecting visual shape (predicted, for example, by the dissimilarities of the silhouette images capturing the outer boundary of the objects); its response
patterns did not allow readout of category information with a linear decoder. Categoricality (in the sense of
categorical clustering of fMRI response patterns) appears to suddenly emerge at the level of the lateral
occipital region (LO). The major categorical division is between animate and inanimate objects; the animate
cluster is further subdivided into a face and a body cluster. We relate the representation at each stage to a
range of computational models and to explicit object similarity judgments from human subjects. Within
category clusters, hIT represents object exemplars in a continuous object space, which may reflect a form of
visual similarity. However, the hIT representation is not well accounted for by a range of low- and intermediate-complexity computational models of visual features: these representations lack the strong categorical
component found in hIT. This suggests the presence of visual features explicitly optimized for distinguishing natural categories as one possible explanation. The human similarity judgments better resemble the hIT
representational similarities, but are even more strongly dominated by categoricality.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

15

Tuesday, March 24, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A

CNS Symposia

THE GEOMETRY OF NEURAL SIMILARITY SPACES Geoffrey K. Aguirre, Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania — What is the relationship between the perceptual similarity of sensory experiences and the
similarity of the neural responses that encode them? In a series of experiments we have studied the neural
representation of objects and shapes in human visual cortex using this question as a guiding principle.
With continuous carry-over, functional MRI (Aguirre, Neuroimage, 2007), we can measure the similarity of
evoked neural responses to objects on either a focal (within voxel adaptation) or distributed (across voxel
pattern) spatial scale. For simple two-dimension shapes and for faces we have found that perceptual similarity predicts neural response similarity, but that the visual information represented at focal and distributed scales differ, both within and across visual areas. Specifically, the dorsolateral potion of the "object
responsive" visual area LOC represents a subset of object features with a spatially coarse code, while ventral LOC contains focal populations of neurons that represent the entire object appearance. These studies
show that neural population coding of object appearance within ventral LOC reflects perceptual similarity.
The precise metric properties of perceptual similarity may further predict the stimulus axes along which
these representations are organized. We hypothesize that integral perceptual axes (perceived as a composite with a Euclidean distance metric) are represented by populations of neurons that are conjointly tuned to
the axes, while separable axes (defined by a rectilinear metric) are represented by independently tuned
neural populations. Using fMRI we may measure the geometric properties of neural adaptation to distinguish between conjoint or independent tuning for a population of neurons. For both two-dimensional
shapes and for faces we find that neural tuning within ventral visual areas reflects the metric properties of
perception. For shapes, curvature and thickness are independently represented while two arbitrary dimensions of shape variation have conjoint representation. For faces, left ventral areas are tuned to represent
face features, while right ventral cortex modulates tuning between face features and wholes depending
upon stimulus context and reflecting behavioral measures.

16

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Slide Sessions
S l i d e S e s s i on 1

Language
Saturday, March 21, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A
Chair: Tamara Swaab
Speakers: Mirjana Bozic, Keith J. Duncan, Corianne Rogalsky, Peter Gordon, Gerrit
Hirschfeld (GSP Winner), Marina Bedny, Christopher Kurby, Danielle van den Brink
A B S T R A C T S
NEURO-COGNITIVE COMPLEXITY OF DERIVATIONALLY COMPLEX WORDS Mirjana Bozic1, Lorraine K.
Tyler2, William D. Marslen-Wilson1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge UK, 2Centre for Speech,
Language and the Brain, University of Cambridge — Lexical complexity plays a prominent role in modulating
the activity of fronto-temporal language networks. Studies with regularly inflected words (jumped,
smiled) show that the presence of morpho-phonological complexity (stem + inflectional affix) activates leftlateralised areas, while lexical-semantic complexity (presence of competing alternatives due to embedded
stems, e.g., claim(clay), ramp(ram), etc) engages bilateral inferior frontal regions. The current efMRI experiment asked whether similar left-lateralised decomposition and bilateral competition processes hold for
derivationally complex words (darkness, warmth), where the stem-affix relationship is strongly lexicalised
and less semantically predictable. In a set of single spoken words we manipulated the presence of embedded stems and derivational suffixes with varying degrees of productivity, forming a gradient in the extent
that the stimuli are predicted to trigger competition and decomposition processes. Words were contrasted
with a complex auditory baseline that does not trigger a speech percept (‘musical rain’, Uppenkamp et al,
2006). We found that the presence of competing embedded stems engages bilateral fronto-temporal language regions, comparable to the results observed previously. In contrast, derivational affixes do not seem
to selectively activate a left-lateralised subsystem. This is arguably because derivational affixes do not trigger decompositional processes in the same way as inflectional affixes. We suggest a neuro-cognitive
account of the representation and processing of derivationally complex forms in English.
INVESTIGATING OCCIPITO-TEMPORAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO READING WITH TMS Keith J. Duncan1,2,
Chotiga Pattamadilok1,3, Joseph T. Devlin1,2; 1Cognitive, Perceptual and Brain Sciences, UCL, 2Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, UCL, 3Fonds de la Recherache Scientifique-FNRS & Universite Libre de Bruxelles — The
debate regarding the role of ventral occipito-temporal cortex (vOTC) in visual word recognition arises in
part from difficulty delineating the functional contributions of vOTC as separate from other areas of the
reading network. Here we investigated the feasibility of using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to
stimulate vOTC in order to specifically explore its contributions to visual word recognition. Three visual
lexical decision experiments were conducted using neuro-navigated TMS. The first two used repetitive
TMS to demonstrate and confirm that repetitive stimulation of vOTC slowed word, but not non-word,
responses and that the effect was specific to vOTC. The third used paired-pulse TMS to investigate the time
course of vOTC processing for words and revealed activation starting as early as 80-120msec post-stimulus
onset – significantly earlier than that expected based on electrophysiological and magnetoencephalography studies. Taken together, these results clearly indicate that TMS can be successfully used to stimulate
parts of vOTC previously believed to be inaccessible and provide a new tool for systematically investigating the information processing characteristics of vOTC. In addition, the findings provide strong evidence
that lexical status and frequency significantly affect vOTC processing, findings incompatible with pre-lexical accounts of vOTC function.
CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE ANTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBE TO SENTENCE COMPREHENSION: A LESION
STUDY Corianne Rogalsky1, David Driscoll2, Jessica L. Wisnowski1, Steven W. Anderson2, Gregory Hickok3;
1Brain and Creativity Institute & Dana and David Cognitive Neuroscience Imaging Center, University of Southern
California, 2University of Iowa, Neurology, 3Center for Cognitive Neuroscience & Cognitive Sciences, University of
California, Irvine — Broca's area has long been implicated in syntactic processing, while lesion evidence has
suggested that the anterior temporal lobe (ATL) is involved in lexical retrieval. Thus, one would hypothesize that damage to either region would result in sentence comprehension difficulties, but for different rea-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

17

Saturday, March 21, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A

Slide Sessions

sons. However, a number of recent functional neuroimaging studies have found that portions of the ATL
respond preferentially to structured sentence-level stimuli (in contrast to word-lists, for example), while
Broca's area activity does not track with the presence of syntactic structure. If the ATL contains sub-regions
that are involved in sentence-level structure processing (and not just lexical retrieval), the sentence comprehension abilities of subjects with ATL damage should decrease as a function of sentence complexity.
The present study explored this possibility by measuring sentence comprehension abilities of subjects with
left frontal-insular and/or ATL lesions. Subjects completed a psycholinguistic battery to assess their phonological, lexical, and sentence-level speech comprehension and production abilities. In support of the
ATL contributing to sentence processing via lexical access, the sentence comprehension (as measured by a
semantic plausibility task) was positively correlated with object naming performance for subjects with
damage restricted to the ATL. However, their performance declined for the most complex sentences,
object-relative clause sentences, compared to subject-relative clause sentences matched for semantic content and length. Conversely, the frontal-insular patients did not demonstrate this complexity effect,
although naming and sentence comprehension performances were positively correlated. These preliminary results indicate that ATL sub-regions do contribute to sentence-level structure processing. Supported
by NIH-DC03681.
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF COREFERENTIAL PROCESSING IN LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION Peter
Gordon1, Natalie Kacinik2, Tamara Swaab3; 1University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2Brooklyn College,
CUNY, 3University of California, Davis — In previous work, we have shown that general memory mechanisms do not always guide language processing: The use of repeated names to establish relationships in
discourse contexts induces processing difficulty when coreferentially repeated names are preceded by an
antecedent name in discourse focus (e.g., John went to the store because John…”). This repeated name penalty (RNP) manifests as an N400 effect in ERP research. A critical question is whether different classes of
corefential expressions (e.g., reflexives, pronouns, names) are allowable in terms of their syntactic relationship to their antecedents as formulated by linguistic theory. Alternatively, distinctions between types of
coreference may depend on linguistic structure but not on the class of referring expression involved. To
test this, we compared ERPs elicited by repeated names following prominent antecedent names that had
been presented in the same clause or in a different clause with ERPs in control conditions with non-prominent antecedent names but matched syntactic structure (e.g., Suzy/Suzy’s brother went to the pet store to
buy/so that Suzy…). For names repeated within the same clause, significant P600s were observed, a pattern that matches those reported previously for ungrammatical reflexives. In contrast, for names repeated
across different clauses, we replicated the N400 RNP effect. This shows that a single method of producing
difficult-to-process coreference, repetition of a prominent name, elicits different ERP components depending on how the antecedent and repeated name are related grammatically, indicating distinct patterns of
language processing in the brain that differ from those expected under standard linguistic theory.
MEG-EVIDENCE FOR MODAL AND AMODAL SEMANTIC REPRESENTATIONS IN LANGUAGE
Christian
Dobel2,3,
Pienie
COMPREHENSION: TIME TELLS THE DIFFERENCE Gerrit
Hirschfeld1,3,
1,3; 1University of Muenster, Psychology, 2Institute for Biomagnetism and Biosignalanalysis, University
Zwitserlood
of Muenster, 3Otto Creutzfeld Center for Cognitive and Behavioral Neurosciences — Since its discovery, the N400
has shaped our thinking about semantics in profound ways. Its elicitation by multiple violations (at word,
sentence, discourse, world-knowledge levels) in different modalities (visual or auditory words, pictures,
sounds, videos) highlights the role of amodal representations in language comprehension. Recent theories
suggest a perceptual basis of such representations (e.g. Barsalou, 1999), which we investigated with an
MEG experiment with spoken sentences as contexts for picture processing. Participants listened to sentences and verified if the following picture depicted an object mentioned in the sentence or not. Targets
were pictures of different objects, each photographed in two states, associated with different global object
shapes (e.g. a flying duck vs. a sitting duck). Each target picture (e.g. the flying duck) appeared in three
contexts: (1) a match sentence about a duck in the air, (2) a mismatch sentence about a swimming duck, and
(3) an unrelated sentence without any ducks. Source localization (L2 minimum norm estimates) of the
MEG data revealed a clear dissociation between late (300-450 ms) amodal effects in the left temporal lobe
and early (120-145 ms) perceptual effects in the occipital cortex. The late N400 interval showed higher
activity for the unrelated compared to the two related conditions, while the early interval showed
enhanced activation for the match compared to the other two conditions. Our findings show specific and
early top-down influences of language on perception and argue in favor of modal semantic representations
preceding amodal ones.

18

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Slide Sessions

Saturday, March 21, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom A

EFFECTS OF VISUAL DEPRIVATION ON ACTION VERB REPRESENTATIONS IN THE LATERAL-TEMPORALCORTEX: EVIDENCE FROM CONGENITALLY BLIND ADULTS Marina Bedny1,2, Alfonso Caramazza3, Talia
Konkle2, Alvaro Pascual-Leone1, Rebecca Saxe2; 1Berenson-Allen Center for Noninvasive Brain Stimulation, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 3Harvard
University — How does our sensory experience shape conceptual representations during development?
According to one hypothesis, the neuroanatomical organization of concepts is determined by the sensory
modalities through which we learn them. For example, the meaning of the word “kick” is represented near
visual motion regions activated during the visual observation of kicking. Previous research has found that
conceptual and perceptual representations of actions in the lateral-temporal-cortex are distinct but occupy
neighboring brain regions. In this project we investigated whether the proximity of verb regions to motion
perception regions depends on having learned the meanings of our first verbs through sight. We addressed
this issue by considering the neural organization of verbs in congenitally blind individuals. In Experiment
1, participants listened to auditory motion: receding or approaching tones and footsteps. In Experiment 2,
participants made relatedness judgments on verb-and noun-pairs. We find that the visual motion perception system is functionally reorganized in congenitally blind adults: motion regions respond to sound in
congenitally blind, but not sighted individuals. In contrast, regions that respond to verbs are unaffected by
visual deprivation. We conclude that the neuroanatomical organization of event concepts is not determined by the sensory modality of learning. Instead, it is either innately specified or determined by nonsensory aspects of experience.
FMRI EVIDENCE FOR THE ACTIVATION OF MODALITY-SPECIFIC IMAGES DURING NARRATIVE
COMPREHENSION Christopher Kurby1, Jeffrey Zacks1; 1Washington University — Perceptual theories of language comprehension argue that readers generate perceptual simulations of the events described by text
(Barsalou, 1999; Zwaan, 2004). This predicts that readers engage in imagery processes routinely during
comprehension and that the images should reflect the perceptual modality implied by the text. As such, we
used event-related functional MRI to ask whether modality-specific representations are activated during
the silent reading of extended naturalistic narratives. Participants’ brain activity was recorded while reading narrative texts one word at a time. Based on separately collected imagery norms, we coded the high
imagery clauses with respect to whether they elicited motor, auditory, or visual imagery. Clauses rated as
producing high imagery in the motor modality selectively activated the left postcentral sulcus (somatosensory cortex). Clauses with auditory imagery selectively activated posterior regions including Wernicke’s
area, and anterior regions including Broca’s area and adjacent regions of lateral frontal cortex, and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex. (This activation was bilateral, including the right-hemisphere homologs of
Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas.) Clauses with high visual imagery activated left fusiform gyrus. These
results support the hypothesis that modality-specific perceptual simulations are a concomitant of ongoing
narrative comprehension.
SEX INFLUENCES SOCIAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING: A MATTER OF EMPATHY Danielle van den Brink1,2,
Jos van Berkum1,3, Marcel Bastiaansen1,3, Jan Buitelaar2, Peter Hagoort1,3; 1Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition
and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Psychiatry, The
Netherlands, 3Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands — When a 6-year-old girl
claims that she cannot sleep without her teddy bear, hardly anybody will look surprised. However, when
an adult male says the same thing, this is bound to raise some eyebrows. Language interpretation, thus,
relies upon context-bound aspects of language, relevant for social discourse purposes. The present eventrelated brain potential (ERP) study investigated inter-individual differences in the cognitive processes that
mediate the integration of social information in a linguistic context. Participants (n = 36; 18 female) heard
Dutch utterances with a content that either did or did not fit probabilistic inferences about the speaker’s
sex, age, and social-economic status, as could be inferred from the speaker’s voice. Whereas women
showed brain reactivity when probabilistic inferences about a speaker conflicted with the content of the
message, men did not. This sex-based difference in social information processing can be explained by a
specific cognitive trait, one’s ability to empathize. Individuals who empathize to a greater degree revealed
larger N400 effects, as well as a larger increase in gamma-band power (45-60 Hz) to socially relevant information, indicating they are more sensitive to social aspects of language.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

19

Saturday, March 21, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

S l i d e S e s s i on 2

Slide Sessions

Working memory and executive functions
Saturday, March 21, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B
Chair: Silvia Bunge
Speakers: Antonio Lara (GSP Winner), Simon van Gaal (GSP Winner), Yee Lee Shing,
Mary Askren, Sari Karlsson, Sam Doesburg, Jacquelyn Gamino, Marieke van Vugt
A B S T R A C T S
ENCODING OF GUSTATORY WORKING MEMORY IN ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX Antonio Lara1, Steven
Kennerley1, Jonathan Wallis1,2; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 2University
of California, Berkeley — There are two competing models regarding the organization of working memory
(WM) in prefrontal cortex (PFC). The domain-specific model states that PFC areas that receive direct projections from a sensory modality maintain and manipulate that modality in WM. The operational model
postulates that mid-dorsolateral (DLPFC) and ventrolateral (VLPFC) manipulate and maintain respectively all sensory information within WM. Previous studies focused on modalities that project directly to
VLPFC making it difficult to distinguish the two models. Gustatory information enters PFC via orbitofrontal cortex (OFC). Thus, the domain-specific and the operational models predict that OFC or VLPFC respectively should maintain gustatory information in WM. Determining the locus of gustatory WM would help
distinguish these two models. We recorded activity of PFC neurons from two animals while they performed a gustatory delayed match to sample task. Subjects had to maintain the identity of a juice in WM
during a three second delay period. We delivered a water drop as a distractor halfway through the delay.
During the pre-distractor delay, neurons in both VLPFC (11%) and OFC (21%) encoded the juice. After the
distractor, however, more neurons in OFC (18%) continued to encode the juice compared to VLPFC (9%).
Furthermore, the strength of selectivity was significantly greater in OFC relative to VLPFC. These results
indicate that the OFC encodes gustatory information in WM more robustly than VLPFC in accord with the
domain-specific model. The maintenance of reward in WM may be an important function of OFC and contribute to its role in decision-making.
UNCONSCIOUS ACTIVATION OF THE FRONTOPARIETAL NO-GO NETWORK Simon van Gaal1,2, Steven
Scholte1, Richard Ridderinkhof2, Johannes Fahrenfort1,2, Victor Lamme1,3; 1Cognitive Neuroscience Group,
Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, 2Amsterdam Center for the Study of Adaptive
Control in Brain and Behavior (Acacia), Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands,
3Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Amsterdam, the Netherlands — Inhibitory control, as measured with
the Go/No-Go task, is consistently associated with the prefrontal cortex (PFC), particularly the right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). Here, we investigated to what extent invisible No-Go stimuli are capable of reaching cortical areas involved in inhibitory control. To do this, we recorded fMRI signals while participants
performed a Go/No-Go task that included visible (unmasked) No-Go trials, invisible (masked) No-Go trials as well as Go trials. Behaviorally, participants inhibited approximately 70% of their responses to visible
No-Go trials. Invisible No-Go signals did not trigger full-blown inhibition, but instead caused a substantial
slow-down of responses. Replicating typical neuroimaging findings, conscious response inhibition was
associated with a right-lateralized frontoparietal “inhibition network”. Interestingly, invisible No-Go signals did not trigger the entire conscious inhibition network, but only a specific subset of nodes therein. This
"unconscious inhibition network" included the right inferior, middle and superior frontal gyrus along with
superior and inferior parietal cortices. Activity in the right IFG correlated strongly with individual variability in RT slowing to invisible No-Go trials, suggesting that this area plays a crucial role in unconscious inhibition. Though some suppose that the PFC is solely involved in conscious information processing, these
results demonstrate that unconscious information is able to influence high-level control operations in the
PFC. In addition, differences between conscious and unconscious control are revealed.
MODELING AGE AND INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN WORKING MEMORY WITH TIME-ACCURACY
FUNCTIONS Yee Lee Shing1,2, Florian Schmiedek1,2, Martin Lövdén1, Ulman Lindenberger1; 1Max Planck
Institute for Human Development, Center for Lifespan Psychology, 2Humboldt University, Berlin — Working
memory (WM), a system for the simultaneous storage and processing of information, declines with
advancing adult age (Park et al., 2002). In this study, we use time-accuracy function (TAF) to characterize
age-related declines in WM, and delineate potential mechanisms underlying this decline. By capturing
individuals’ processing rates and performance asymptotes as distinct parameters, TAFs provide a joint
description of speed and accuracy (Verhaeghen, 2000). Hundred-one younger adults (YA; 20-30 years) and
103 older adults (OA; 65-80 years) completed three WM tasks, i.e., spatial n-back, numerical memory-

20

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Slide Sessions

Saturday, March 21, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

updating, and verbal alpha-span. For each task, difficulty was manipulated by varying stimuli presentation times. Accuracy was modeled as a negatively accelerated function of presentation time using multilevel nonlinear modeling. In all three tasks, OA reached significantly lower asymptotes than YA. In
memory updating, OA also showed significantly slower processing rates than YA. The task-general difference in asymptotes demonstrates that age-related deficits in WM cannot be remediated by longer presentation times. We conclude that core processes of WM, such as the coordination of binding and updating
operations, are compromised in normal aging. In additional analyses, we find that the observed agerelated decline in asymptotic WM performance is robust against large amounts of practice (100 sessions).
Neuronally, age-related decline in WM asymptotes and plasticity may reflect deficient hippocampal binding (Mitchell et al., 2000) and striatal updating operations (Dahlin et al., 2008). We are currently testing this
interpretation by relating the TAF parameters to available covariates and fMRI data from the same participants.
ACETYLCHOLINE AND COGNITIVE CONTROL: DONEPEZIL MODULATES PREFRONTAL AND DEFAULTMODE REGIONS IN A TASK-SWITCHING PROCEDURE Mary Askren1, Elise Demeter1, Stephan Taylor1,
Martin Sarter1, Cindy Lustig1; 1University of Michigan — Combining drug manipulations with functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) can reveal how neurotransmitter systems drive task-related activations. The present experiment used a task-switching procedure to vary demands for cognitive control and
donepezil hydrochloride (an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor) to vary extracellular acetylcholine levels. In the
low control-demand conditions, participants performed the same task from trial to trial. In the high control-demand condition, the correct task rule switched unpredictably, so that participants had to adjust their
responses accordingly. Young adults (age 18-30, n = 20 per group) performed the task-switching procedure
at baseline and then were scanned 3 hours after receiving a placebo pill, 5 mg donepezil, or 10 mg donepezil. Drug administration did not influence behavioral performance: All groups showed equivalent
demand-related slowing. Placebo participants showed task-related activations in prefrontal regions, particularly left inferior frontal gyrus, and task-related deactivations of default-mode regions including posterior
cingulate and medial frontal cortex. Administration of 5 mg donepezil increased the demand-sensitivity of
prefrontal activations, and reduction or even reversal of demand-related deactivations of the default-mode
regions. The 10 mg group’s activation patterns were intermediate between the placebo and 5 mg groups,
suggesting a U-shaped dose-response curve. Mild enhancement of cholinergic function may potentiate
attention to task-relevant information and the retrieval of task rules in the high-demand condition,
whereas higher doses may disrupt these processes.
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN TRAIT- AND STATE-DEPENDENT DOPAMINE D1 BINDING AND FUNCTIONAL
BRAIN ACTIVITY IN A SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY TASK Sari Karlsson1, Lars Nyberg2, Håkan Fischer1,
Yvonne Brehmer1, Anna Rieckmann1, Petra Thilers1, Per Karlsson3, Lars Farde3, Lars Bäckman1; 1Aging Research
Center, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Umeå University, Integrative Medical Biology & Radiation
Sciences, Sweden, 3Psychiatry Section, Karolinska Hospital, Clinical Neuroscience, Stockholm, Sweden — Several
lines of research (animal, molecular imaging, genetic, computational modelling) have demonstrated a link
between dopamine (DA) functions and higher-order cognitive processing. In this study, we used multimodal brain imaging, molecular PET imaging and fMRI, in the same participants in order to directly demonstrate a link between DA D1 binding and functional brain activity during a spatial working memory
(SWM) task. Relationships between striatal trait-dependent and state-dependent DA function and BOLD
activation during a SWM task were investigated in 20 younger (20-30 years) participants. Participants
underwent two [11C] SCH23390 PET measurements, one while resting and one while performing a cognitive task taxing inhibitory functioning, and they also underwent an fMRI scan while performing a SWM
task. Trait-dependent DA was defined as D1 binding at resting state and is thought to reflect general level
of receptor function. State-dependent DA was defined as the difference between D1 binding at resting state
and D1 binding during the inhibition task and is thought to reflect DA release during cognitive activity.
Trait-dependent striatal DA binding was positively related to prefrontal BOLD signal, whereas statedependent striatal D1 binding was positively related to temporal lobe activity during SWM performance.
This pattern of data suggests that both trait- and state-dependent DA activity are implicated in SWM performance, but may contribute in different ways.
MEG REVEALS GAMMA-BAND ACTIVATION IN PREFRONTAL AND VISUAL CORTEX DURING VISUAL
SHORT-TERM MEMORY MAINTENANCE IN CHILDREN Sam Doesburg1,2, Urs Ribary2,3,4, Anthony
Herdman3, Teresa Cheung4,5, Hal Weinberg3, Mario Liotti3, Ruth Grunau1,2; 1University of British Columbia,
Pediatrics, 2Child and Family Research Institute, 3Simon Fraser University, Psychology, 4Down Syndrome Research
Foundation, 5Simon Fraser University, Physics — The retention and manipulation of visual information in
short-tem memory engages a network of brain regions including visual cortex and prefrontal cortex. In

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

21

Saturday, March 21, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

Slide Sessions

adults, electroencephalography (EEG) has revealed increased gamma-band activation over frontal and
posterior regions during the delay period of visual delayed-matching-to-sample task. This is consistent
with the notion that gamma-band synchronization is relevant to active processing in task-relevant cortical
areas, which in the context of short-term memory maintenance include prefrontal and visual cortex.
Gamma-band synchronization is relevant to a variety of cognitive and perceptual processes, and the
appearance of certain perceptual capacities during typical development coincides with the expression of
gamma-band synchronization characteristic of those processes. It remains unclear, however, how gammaband neural synchronization relevant to short-term memory processing is expressed during childhood. To
investigate this, magnetoencephalographic (MEG) recordings were taken while children 6-10 years of age
performed a visual short-term memory task. Preliminary beamformer source localization results indicate
increased gamma-band activity within prefrontal and visual cortex during the retention of visual information. This confirms that gamma-band synchronization is relevant to maintenance of visual information in
short-term memory and that these oscillations originate from a network of prefrontal and visual cortical
areas. These preliminary results also expand our knowledge of the developmental continuity of oscillatory
dynamics relevant to cognition and will provide a normative basis to characterize the neurocognitive
development of special populations, which we will use in an ongoing study investigating visual short-term
memory in children born very preterm.
NEW HOPE FOR EXECUTIVE FUNCTION AND REASONING REMEDIATION IN CHILDREN WITH ADHD:
STRATEGIC MEMORY AND REASONING TRAINING (SMART) Jacquelyn Gamino1, Sandra Chapman1, John
Hart1, Sandra Vanegas1, Elizabeth Hull1, Lori Cook1; 1The University of Texas at Dallas, Center for BrainHealth —
In spite of the prevalence of poor academic performance in children with ADHD, interventions predominately address medication effectiveness and behavioral issues, not learning. Thus, little is known regarding
the remediation of learning impairment and, more specifically, the efficacy of metacognitive instruction in
children with ADHD. Recently, we found many children with ADHD have impaired strategic learning.
Strategic learning is the process of abstracting gist-based concepts from information and is related to Barkley’s concept of reconstitution (2001). Evidence for robust memory for gist-based concepts suggests this
ability facilitates learning. We developed the Strategic Memory and Reasoning Training (SMART) program
to investigate potential remediation of these impairments. Fifty children with ADHD between the ages of 8
and 17 participated in this study. Twenty children were included in the SMART 12-week individual intervention and 30 children participated in an intensive 2-week SMART Camp. Over the course of the intervention, the children learned metacognitive strategies that included goal setting and planning. We found
that strategic learning performance significantly improved in both cohorts of the SMART intervention. In
addition, the 30 children who participated in the SMART Camp showed significant improvement in working memory, initiation, organization of materials, behavioral regulation, and metacognition as measured
by the Behavioral Rating Inventory of Executive Function (BRIEF). This study provides the first known evidence that teaching children with ADHD specific metacognitive strategies has the potential to improve
strategic learning and executive function. SMART participants will be followed for one year to determine
the transferability of the intervention to academic performance.
THE INFLUENCE OF MINDFULNESS MEDITATION TRAINING ON VISUAL WORKING MEMORY Marieke
van Vugt1, Anastasia Kiyonaga2, Ling Wong3, Amishi Jha2; 1Princeton University, 2University of Pennsylvania,
3University of California, Davis — Recent studies suggest that training in mindfulness meditation improves
attention (e.g., Jha et al, 2007). Given the close relationship between attention and working memory (WM),
we investigated how intensive meditation training (MT) may affect WM. Participants (N= 29) were tested
on a delayed-recognition task before (T1) and after (T2) participation in an intensive one-month mindfulness meditation retreat. The primary mindfulness practice required attending to present moment experience using the breath as the anchor of attention. Their performance was compared to an age- and
education-matched control group (N=29) who received no training. Overall accuracy and d’ were greater
and the variability in RT was reduced for the training vs. control group at T2. To determine how decision
processes in WM might be affected by MT, we applied a drift-diffusion model (Wagenmakers et al, 2007) of
decision making. This model parses behavioral results into 3 latent measures: amount of information
required to make a decision (decision boundary), rate of information accumulation, and non-decision factors. The modeling results revealed that the rate of evidence accumulation increased and the decision
boundary decreased in the MT but not control group over time. These modeling results, together with
improvements in d’ scores in the MT group at T2, suggest that information may be of higher quality after
MT. Thus, intensive MT may improve WM via alterations in the mnemonic representations themselves, as
opposed to alterations in decisional or non-specific factors.

22

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Slide Sessions

S l i d e S e s s i on 3

Sunday, March 22, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

Long-term memory
Sunday, March 22, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B
Chair: Roberto Cabeza
Speakers: Stephen J. Gotts, Tyler Davis, Jennifer D. Ryan, Youssef Ezzyat, Andrew Butler
(GSP Winner), Melanie Cohn, Erika Nyhus, Ken A. Paller
A B S T R A C T S
CONCEPTUAL BROADENING OF OBJECT REPRESENTATIONS REVEALED THROUGH FMRIADAPTATION Stephen J. Gotts1, Shawn C. Milleville1, Alex Martin1; 1Laboratory of Brain and Cognition,
NIMH/NIH, Bethesda, MD — A fundamental question for cognitive neuroscience is how neural representations are altered by experience. In monkeys, extended experience with visual objects can lead single neurons to respond more selectively to particular objects, referred to as “sharpening” of neural representations
(Grill-Spector, Henson, & Martin, 2006, TICS). However, this mechanism does not make a great deal of
sense for conceptual representations: a sharpening mechanism makes representations more distinct by
decreasing their neural overlap, and semantic memory requires “broad”, overlapping representations
among associates. We have evaluated the extent to which experience with visual objects leads to sharpening versus “broadening” of neural representations by employing an fMRI-Adaptation paradigm with pictures of living things. Neural tuning was assessed along a conceptual dimension by rapidly adapting
neural activity to one picture (e.g. cow) and measuring the recovered response to a different, "deviant" picture that shared a conceptual relationship to the adapted picture at one of 3 levels: exemplar (different
cow), semantic associate (horse), and unrelated (lobster). The effect of experience on tuning was assessed
by pre-exposing half of the adaptation stimuli in a picture-naming task prior to fMRI. Our results suggest
that naming pictures leads to increased rather than decreased neural overlap among the representations of
conceptual associates in left inferior frontal cortex and the fusiform gyrus, bilaterally. We suggest that this
"conceptual broadening" phenomenon is consistent with an incremental learning mechanism that gradually creates and maintains overlapping neural conceptual representations in cortex, permitting similarity
based recall of information and generalization to newly encountered objects.
THE NEURAL BASIS OF LEARNING EXCEPTIONS TO A CATEGORY RULE Tyler Davis1, Bradley C. Love1,
Alison R. Preston1,2; 1University of Texas at Austin, Psychology, 2University of Texas at Austin, Center for
Learning and Memory — A critical capacity of all organisms is the extraction, representation, and exploitation of regularities in the environment. However, it is also crucial to recognize occasions for which these
regularities will not hold. Rule-plus-exception tasks have been used to study processes involved in learning items that deviate from learned regularities. In these tasks, participants learn to categorize items into
categories based on the perceptual features of items while receiving feedback. The majority of items can be
categorized according to a rule, however some items are exceptions to this rule and may thus be learned
and represented separately. Behaviorally, such exception items are associated with enhanced recognition
memory as well as elevated arousal. Recently, Love & Gureckis (2007) used model-based evidence to suggest that a network consisting of the hippocampus, surrounding medial temporal lobe (MTL) cortices, and
prefrontal cortex (PFC) is engaged when learning items that are rule exceptions. Consistent with this
model-based approach, the current fMRI study demonstrated greater activation in MTL and PFC when
participants categorized items as exceptions than when items were categorized according to the rule. The
results further revealed that correctly classifying exception items resulted in greater activation in areas of
the ventral striatum that have been associated with feedback-based learning, suggesting that interactions
between striatum, MTL and PFC regions may be essential to exception learning. Finally, analysis of the
within-trial time series indicated that activation in these regions shifted dynamically during learning from
feedback early in learning to stimulus onset late in learning.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL SUBSTRATES UNDERLYING RELATIONAL AND TEMPORAL BINDING
Jennifer D. Ryan1,2, Lily Riggs1,2, Christina Villate1, Esther Oziel1, Steve Ly1, Tim Bardouille1,2, Anthony T.
Herdman3; 1Rotman Research Institute, 2University of Toronto, 3Simon Fraser University — The construction of,
and subsequent access to, representations regarding the relative spatial and temporal relations among
sequentially presented objects was examined in separate studies using either eye movement monitoring or
magnetoencephalography. Participants were presented with a series of single objects. Subsequently, a test
display revealed the objects simultaneously and participants judged whether the relative relations were
maintained. Eye movements revealed the binding of relations across study images; eye movements transitioned between the location of the presented object and the locations that were previously occupied by

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

23

Sunday, March 22, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

Slide Sessions

objects. During test image viewing, eye movements distinguished intact displays from manipulated
images through an increase in viewing to the now-empty, altered region, and through alterations in the
temporal order by which objects were scanned. Significant neural responses related to the onset of the
study images were found in the medial temporal lobe region, including the parahippocampus, as well as
regions within the parietal and frontal cortices within 400 ms. Significant neural responses related to the
onset of the test images were found in medial temporal, superior temporal, parietal and frontal cortices
within 500 ms. The present findings suggest that memory representations of the visual world include information regarding the relative spatial and temporal relations among objects. Eye movements may be the
conduit by which information is integrated into a lasting representation, and by which current information
is compared to stored representations. Binding of, and subsequent access to, temporal and spatial relations
is related to rapid engagement of the medial temporal, parietal and frontal cortices.
EVENT PERCEPTION INFLUENCES THE ORGANIZATION OF LONG-TERM MEMORY Youssef Ezzyat1, Lila
Davachi1,2; 1New York University, Psychology, 2New York University, Center for Neural Science — Cognitive
psychological research has shown that people can easily and reliably segment continuous action into units
called “events” (Newtson 1976). Previous research has also shown that event segmentation influences the
online processing of stimuli. Specifically, perception of event boundaries has been shown to render previously encoded information less accessible in working memory (Morrow 1989; Speer 2005; Zwaan 1998).
However, it is unclear how this processing during encoding might affect long-term memory for the events.
The purpose of the present study was to test the effects of event segmentation on long-term memory and to
examine the neural processing that occurs at event boundaries. While scanned using fMRI, participants
read narratives containing event boundaries and were later given a recall test for information in the narratives. At test, event boundaries served as better recall cues than control sentences; at encoding, event
boundaries activated right dorsolateral and anterior prefrontal cortex, as well as the left hippocampus.
These results show that event segmentation influences long-term memory and suggest that brain activity
at event boundaries may serve to organize stimulus information for long-term memory encoding.
CUED RETRIEVAL OF NOVEL AUDITORY OR VISUAL STIMULI ACTIVATES MODALITY SPECIFIC CORTICES
REGARDLESS OF CORRECT PERFORMANCE Andrew Butler1, Dylan Bargatze1, Ryan Stevenson1, Karin
James1; 1Indiana University — In this work, we investigated the effects of associating novel items that were
presented in different modalities (visual and auditory) on brain activation patterns during both encoding
and cued recall. Subjects were presented with cue-target associations comprised of pairs of nonsense
objects, pairs of nonsense sounds, objects paired with sounds, and sounds paired with objects. Subsequently, they were required to recall the modality of the target given the cue. Because both stimuli were
novel, we were assured that no known associations with a given modality would influence the results. We
measured both accuracy and BOLD activation during encoding and retrieval sessions. Results replicate
previous studies showing that successful retrieval of an auditory or visual target was associated with
modality specific BOLD activation in the auditory (superior temporal gyrus) or visual (posterior occipital
gyri) cortices, respectively. We extended these findings, however, and also showed that a) when a subject
recalled the target modality incorrectly, they still had increased BOLD activation in the modality specific
cortex associated with the falsely recalled target; and b) that retrieval of information from cross-modal
associations activated the hippocampus, whereas within-modal associations did not. Together these findings suggest that retrieval of an auditory or visual target, regardless of whether it was correct or not, activates modality specific cortical regions. Additionally, cross-modal associations may require hippocampal
involvement more than within-modal associations.
THE HIPPOCAMPUS SUPPORTS CONVERSION FROM FAMILIARITY TO RECOLLECTION Melanie Cohn1,2,
Ayelet Lahat2, MaryPat McAndrews1,2, Morris Moscovitch2,3; 1Krembil Neuroscience Centre, University Health
Network, 2University of Toronto, Psychology, 3 Baycrest Centre for Geriatric Care, Rotman Research Institute,
Psychology — The role of the hippocampus in recognition memory is debated. One view proposes that the
hippocampus is crucial to recollection (i.e., retrieval of contextual information), but not familiarity (i.e.,
decontextualized feeling of ‘oldness’). Another view proposes that hippocampal involvement is related to
memory strength, irrespective of whether or not retrieval is accompanied by recollection of context. The
current study aimed to test these proposals using event-related fMRI. We compared brain activation to
items before provision of a context cue when they are judged familiar and after the cue was presented
when some of the same items are judged as recollected. Participants studied pairs of words (A-B) and were
scanned while performing a recognition task for the first member of the pairs (A). An uncued item, either a
studied (A) or new word (C) was presented and participants indicated whether the item was new, familiar
or recollected. A cued trial followed immediately, in which intact pairs (A-B) or new-old pairs (C-B) were
presented; the recognition decision was again to be based only on the first item (A or C). Increased hippoc-

24

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Slide Sessions

Sunday, March 22, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

ampal activation (cued > uncued) was found only for items that became recollected, and not for items that
remained familiar. As the only difference between those conditions was subjective experience, given that
items and context cues were identical, our results are more consistent with the view that the hippocampus
is selectively involved in supporting recollection per se rather than retrieval of strong memories.
RECOLLECTION REVEALED BY ITS ABSENCE: MIDAZOLAM-INDUCED AMNESIA REDUCES MEMORY FOR
DETAILS AND THE ERP CORRELATE OF RECOLLECTION Erika Nyhus1, Tim Curran1; 1University of Colorado
at Boulder — Dual process models suggest that recognition memory is supported by familiarity and recollection processes. Previous research administering amnesic drugs and measuring event related potentials
(ERPs) during recognition memory have provided evidence for separable neural correlates of familiarity
and recollection. The benzodiazepine midazolam, which causes anterograde amnesia, has been shown to
predominantly influence recollection, with limited effects on familiarity. In addition, it has been proposed
that the FN400 component indexes familiarity, and the parietal old/new effect indexes recollection. The
present study examined the effect of midazolam-induced amnesia on memory for details and the proposed
ERP correlates of recognition. Midazolam or saline was administered while subjects studied oriented pictures of common objects. ERPs were recorded during a recognition test one day later. During the recognition test subjects were shown studied pictures in the original orientation, studied pictures in the opposite
orientation, and new pictures; and judged whether each picture was “Old Same Orientation”, “Old Different Orientation”, or “New”. Subjects' discrimination of old and new pictures was worse when they were
administered midazolam than saline; and discrimination of same orientation and different orientation old
pictures was at chance when studied under midazolam, but above chance when studied under saline.
Although the FN400 was similar under midazolam or saline, the parietal old/new effect was decreased
with the administration of midazolam. These results provide converging pharmacological and electrophysiological evidence that recollection supports recognition for details and adds to previous research
showing separable neural correlates of familiarity and recollection.
THE ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY OF REMEMBERING AND KNOWING WITH CONCEPTUALLY IMPOVERISHED
KALEIDOSCOPE IMAGES Ken A. Paller1, Joel L. Voss1; 1Northwestern University — Contemporary memory
theories distinguish between contextual recollection and acontextual familiarity as two fundamentally different types of recognition memory. It is currently unclear whether recollection and familiarity are supported by two corresponding retrieval mechanisms, or whether the same type of retrieval processing
supports both phenomena through varying contributions from retrieving item and context/source information. Electrophysiological findings in humans have widely been cited as support for the two-process
position, in that late-onset parietal “LPC” potentials have been linked to recollection and early-onset frontal “FN400” potentials to familiarity. However, recognition memory is generally studied using conceptually rich stimuli such as words, which leaves open an alternative interpretation that one or both of these
electrophysiological signals reflect implicit conceptual processing distinct from recollection and familiarity
per se. We tested this hypothesis using conceptually impoverished kaleidoscope images, such that opportunities for conceptual processing were minimized. Recollection-based and familiarity-based recognition
in a remember/know paradigm were both indexed by LPC potentials. Old/new amplitude differences
were greater for recollection compared to familiarity. Despite ample familiarity-based recognition, FN400
old/new effects were not observed, consistent with the contention that these potentials index conceptual
processing rather than familiarity. These results cast doubt on interpretations of prior electrophysiological
evidence obtained using conceptually rich stimuli as dissociating neural mechanisms of recollection and
familiarity. We also found that neural events during encoding differentially predicted later recollection
versus later familiarity, which suggests that the engagement of distinct encoding processes can preferentially lead to recollection versus familiarity.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

25

Monday, March 23, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

S l i d e S e s s i on 4

Slide Sessions

Emotion
Monday, March 23, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B
Chair: Kevin Ochsner
Speakers: Joan Y. Chiao, Roma Vasa, Virginie Czernecki, Tor Wager, Kateri McRae,
Katja Spreckelmeyer, Julie L. Hall (GSP Winner), Jamil Zaki
A B S T R A C T S
CULTURAL VARIATION IN AMYGDALA RESPONSE TO EMOTIONAL SCENES Joan Y. Chiao1, Ahmad R.
Hariri2, Tokiko Harada1, Hidetsugu Komeda3, Todd B. Parrish4, Norihiro Sadato3, Tetsuya Iidaka5; 1Northwestern
University, Psychology, 2University of Pittsburgh, Psychiatry, 3National Institute for Physiological Sciences,
4Northwestern University, Radiology, 5Nagoya University, Psychiatry — Culture affects how people perceive
and experience the emotional salience of events, such as threat in the environment. The human amygdala
is critical to the evaluation of and response to threat-relevant signals. Although much is known about the
role of the amygdala in emotional evaluation and response, very little is known about how culture affects
amygdala response to threat-relevant signals in the environment. To examine the effect of culture on
amygdala response to emotion, in Study 1 we used cross-cultural neuroimaging at 3T to measure neural
response within the human amygdala and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) during emotional evaluation and cognitive inhibition in Caucasian-Americans (CA) and native Japanese (JP). Results indicated
greater bilateral amygdala response during evaluation of negative emotional scenes, but not cognitive inhibition, in JP relative to CA participants. There was no cultural variation in VLPFC during either emotional
evaluation or cognitive inhibition. To determine whether the cultural variation observed in Study 1 was
due to race rather than cultural environment per se, in Study 2, we measured neural response within the
human amygdala and VLPFC during emotional evaluation and cognitive inhibition in Japanese-Americans (JA). Results showed no difference in bilateral amygdala or VLPFC response during emotional evaluation and cognitive inhibition between CA and JA participants. Critically, JP showed significantly greater
response within bilateral amygdala during emotional evaluation, but not cognitive inhibition, compared to
JA participants. Taken together, these findings provide convergent evidence of cultural variation in human
amygdala response that is emotion-specific.
FMRI STUDY OF DEVELOPMENTAL DIFFERENCES IN NEURAL PROCESSING OF PICTORAL STIMULI Roma
Vasa1, Daniel Pine2, Tess Nelson1, Eric Nelson2, Christopher Monk3, Monique Ernst2, Maggie Bruck4, Stewart
Mostofsky1; 1Kennedy Krieger Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 2Mood and Anxiety
Disorders Program, National Institutes of Mental Health, 3University of Michigan, Psychology, 4Johns Hopkins
Hospital, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — Adult neurobiological studies consistently implicate
activity within the amygdala and prefrontal structures in response to emotional stimuli. Yet, data on
involvement of these structures, particularly the amygdala, in pediatric emotional processing are inconsistent. Understanding age-related neural differences in emotion processing is crucial for developing hypotheses about risk factors and mechanisms for psychopathology across development. This study used eventrelated fMRI to compare the neural responses to positive and negative pictures in 18 adults and 12 adolescents. A surprise memory test was given thirty minutes postscan. The main contrasts compared brain
activity associated with picture viewing versus control state as well as subsequently recalled versus not
recalled pictures. During positive picture viewing, adolescents activated the right amygdala and orbitofrontal (OFC) whereas adults activated the left hippocampus and right OFC. When viewing negative pictures, adolescents activated bilateral amygdalae, the left hippocampus, right anterior cingulate and OFC.
Adults similarly activated the left amygdala and bilateral hippocampi and OFC. No group contrasts were
significant. The memory data revealed that adolescents, but not adults, exhibited greater activity in bilateral amygdalae and hippocampi, the right OFC and anterior cingulate when viewing subsequently recalled
positive pictures compared with not recalled pictures; the groups displayed comparable memory performance. These data indicate that adolescents and adults both engage amygdala-OFC circuitry when
responding to emotional pictures. Adolescents, however, exhibited greater limbic activity to positively
recalled pictures; this finding may have implications for the increased reward and novelty seeking behavior observed during this developmental period.
INSULAR LOBE AND MULTIMODAL EMOTIONAL PROCESSING INTEGRATION: EVIDENCE FROM BRAINDAMAGED PATIENTS Virginie Czernecki1, Didier Grandjean3, Sylvain Delplanque3, Laurent Capelle2, Carine
Karachi2, Bruno Dubois1; 1Inserm U610, IFR70, Neurology, Salpetriere Hospital, Paris, France, 2Inserm U679,

26

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Slide Sessions

Monday, March 23, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

IFR70, Neurosurgery, Salpetriere Hospital, Paris, France, 3Swiss Center for Affective Sciences, University of
Geneva, Swiss — A growing body of evidence in social affective neuroscience highlights the involvement of
the insular lobe in both experiencing and observing negative emotions. The contribution of the anterior territory of insula during the recognition of emotional facial expressions and observation of emotional scenes
evocating disgust or fear has been well demonstrated. Moreover, functional brain imaging studies in
healthy participants have shown insular activations during the inhalation of odorants producing a strong
feeling of disgust. Here we used a multimodal emotional battery in a group of fifteen patients with glioma
affecting the right or left anterior part of insula before and/or after a surgical resection. Positive and negative emotions were investigated in three different ways including olfactory stimuli, facial emotional
expression stimuli and words (using an emotional stroop task). All patients showed altered pattern of emotional evaluation odours evocating a strong sensation of disgust in healthy participants regardless of the
side of the insular lesion. The identification of facial expressions of disgust, fear and anger was also
strongly disturbed. The implicit emotional reactivity to negative words is blunted whatever the laterality
and the side of the lesion. These preliminary results provide evidence that the insular lobe is a crucial part
of a distributed neuronal network involved in emotional processing independently of the visual or olfactory modality and probably related to visceral/autonomic perception. The integrity of the anterior insula
seems necessary to experience unpleasant feelings, particularly disgust induced through olfactory modality, and to decode facial expressions and emotional semantic meaning of words.
ANTICIPATORY BRAIN ACTIVITY PREDICTS PLACEBO ANALGESIA AND IS MEDIATED BY LIMBIC
RESPONSES DURING PAIN Tor Wager1, Lauren Leotti1, Lauren Atlas1; 1Columbia University, Psychology —
Placebo analgesia is a model paradigm for studying the effects of expectations on affective states. Previous
studies have shown placebo-induced increases in fMRI activity in dorsolateral prefrontal (DLPFC) and
orbitofrontal (OFC) cortices when anticipating pain, as well as opioid release in orbitofrontal and limbic
cortices. In this study, we re-analyzed data from two fMRI studies of placebo analgesia (combined N = 45),
focusing on how anticipatory fMRI activity relates to placebo effects in both brain responses to pain and
reported analgesia. In the combined sample, we identified a number of brain regions in which anticipatory
activity predicted placebo analgesia. Multivariate clustering analyses identified three independent networks among these regions that were each independently predictive of placebo analgesia. Together, these
three networks explained 77% of the variance in placebo analgesia across individuals. In two networks--a
fronto-parietal network including bilateral DLPFC and parietal cortices, and another network including
dorsomedial PFC and frontal pole--anticipatory increases (Placebo - Control) were associated with more
profound placebo analgesia in reported pain. The third network included bilateral SII, a well-known
region implicated in pain processing; in this network, anticipatory decreases were associated with placebo
analgesia. Anticipatory activity was mediated by changes during pain in ventral striatum, but not SII,
insula, cingulate, and other "pain processing" regions. Overall, the results suggest that anticipatory brain
processes play a central role in placebo analgesia, and that these effects are mediated by changes in pain
processing in limbic brain systems rather than those traditionally associated with nociception.
BOTTOM-UP VERSUS TOP-DOWN EMOTION GENERATION: IMPLICATIONS FOR EMOTION
REGULATION Kateri McRae1, Supriya Misra1, Aditya K. Prasad1, Sean C. Pereira1, Benjamin Edwards1, James J.
Gross1; 1Stanford University — Current theories of emotion suggest that emotions may be generated in at
least two different ways: bottom-up and top-down. Bottom-up emotion generation involves the perception
of low-level features of the stimulus itself (e.g., properties of the eyes and mouth in an emotional face).
Top-down emotion generation involves the appraisal of the meaning of a stimulus considering the larger
context within which an individual is operating (e.g., knowledge that a neutral face hides great disappointment). The present study tested the hypothesis that top-down emotion regulation strategies are more effective when emotions are generated top-down than when emotions are generated bottom-up. In particular,
we focused upon cognitive reappraisal, which has been shown to decrease self-reported negative affect
and BOLD signal from the amygdala. Twenty-four women were scanned on a 3-Tesla GE magnet while
viewing top-down and bottom-up emotional stimuli under instructions to respond naturally or to use cognitive reappraisal to decrease negative affect. Measures of self-reported negative affect indicated that topdown emotions were more successfully regulated than bottom-up emotions. BOLD signal from the
amygdala also showed this interaction, but paradoxically, amygdala activation was greater during regulation of bottom-up stimuli than during natural responding to bottom-up stimuli. In addition, medial prefrontal regions previously implicated in reappraisal showed greater activation during natural responding
to top-down generated emotions and during reappraisal of both top-down and bottom-up generated emotions, but were not recruited during bottom-up emotion generation. This implies that the type of emotion
generation moderates the success of top-down emotion regulation strategies.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

27

Monday, March 23, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

Slide Sessions

DISSOCIATION OF NEURAL NETWORKS FOR ANTICIPATION AND CONSUMPTION OF MONETARY AND
SOCIAL REWARDS Katja Spreckelmeyer1, Lena Rademacher1, Sören Krach1,2, Gregor Kohls3, Arda Irmak1, Tilo
Kircher1, Gerhard Gründer1; 1RWTH Aachen University, Germany, Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 2Central
Service Facility, 3RWTH Aachen University, Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Child Neuropsychology Section,
Germany — Reward processing can be dissected into phases of reward anticipation and reward consumption. It is currently a matter of debate whether these processes are mediated by the same or different neural
networks. Previous research has identified the ventral striatum as key structure in reward anticipation.
However, its role in reward consumption is disputed. Here, we examined the neural basis of reward anticipation vs. consumption in an incentive delay task offering either money or social approval. In both conditions participants (N=28) were given a cue indicating potential reward. In order to receive reward, a target
button had to be pushed within a certain time window (adapted for individual reaction time). Reward (pictures of coins or approvingly smiling faces) was presented for 1650 ms 300 ms after target time onset. Monetary or social conditions were alternated sessionwise. Imaging was performed on a 1,5 Tesla Siemens
scanner in an event-related design. Anticipation of reward resulted in activation of mesolimbic brain structures, including the ventral striatum, independent of incentive type. In contrast, consumption of monetary
or social reward resulted in individual activation patterns, neither of which included the striatum. Among
other structures, monetary reward specifically activated the thalamus, while social reward specifically activated the amygdala. Our results corroborate the role of the ventral striatum as modality-independent
mediator of reward anticipation but cast doubt on its importance for reward consumption. Moreover, the
findings implicate that the neural mechanisms underlying reward consumption are more modality-specific
than those for reward anticipation.
PUT YOUR MONEY WHERE YOUR HEART IS: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF AFFECTIVE INFLUENCES ON
FINANCIAL INVESTMENT DECISIONS Julie L. Hall1, Richard Gonzalez1, Oliver C. Schultheiss1; 1University of
Michigan — Traditional economic models assume that individuals are always rational when they make
financial decisions. However, the current study suggests that emotions may play an important role in
financial decisions. Our goal was to investigate whether affective primes could influence risk taking and
anticipatory neural activation during financial decisions. Using fMRI, 24 participants viewed happy,
angry, and neutral affective primes presented under subliminal and supraliminal conditions followed by
an investment task where they had to decide between risky, high-payoff stocks and safe, low-payoff bonds.
Our results indicate that both subliminal and supraliminal presentations of affective primes influence
financial investment decisions and anticipatory neural activation in the NAcc and anterior insula. As predicted, participants showed greater NAcc activation and were more likely to make risky investment decisions after happy versus neutral face primes in both the subliminal and supraliminal presentation
conditions. In addition, participants also showed greater anterior insula activation and made slightly less
risky investment decisions after angry versus neutral face primes during supraliminal presentation conditions. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that facial expressions of emotion, even when they are not
consciously perceived, can influence investment decisions and suggest that the inclusion of affect may lead
to more accurate models of economic decision making, which better explain irrational financial behavior.
They also suggest that affective states during pre-choice stages of the decision making process may alter
the perception of benefits relative to costs, leading to changes in financial risk taking depending on
whether the affective state is positive or negative.
Jochen
THE NEURAL BASES OF EMPATHIC ACCURACY AND AFFECTIVE EXPRESSIVITY Jamil
Zaki1,
Weber1, Niall Bolger1, Kevin Ochsner1; 1Columbia University, Psychology — How do people understand the
thoughts and feelings of others, and effectively communicate their own internal states? While much
research in cognitive neuroscience has addressed the mechanisms involved in sharing the sensory and
emotional states of others, the mechanisms underlying accurate understanding those states have remained
largely unexplored. We used a novel empathic accuracy (EA) paradigm to address this gap in extant
knowledge. Brain activity was recorded from 16 perceivers using fMRI while they watched videos of social
targets describing emotional autobiographical events, and continuously rated how positive or negative
they believed targets felt. Correlations between these ratings and targets’ own affect ratings served as measures of EA, and were used as predictors in subsequent fMRI analyses. This allowed us to explore brain
activity tracking with perceivers’ accuracy in understanding target affect. We found that periods of accurate – as opposed to inaccurate – inferences were supported by frontal and parietal activity associated with
mental state attribution, and sensorimotor structures within the mirror neuron system. Furthermore, targets who scored high on a trait measure of emotional expressivity were more affectively “readable” – that
is, they produced higher levels of EA across perceivers – and this was in part because target expressivity
predicted the magnitude of perceivers’ neural activity in several brain regions related to mental state attribution. Overall, these data demonstrate that multiple social cognitive processes are employed in concert to
understand the emotions of others, and that the characteristics of social targets affect perceivers’ neural
and cognitive processes.
28

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Slide Sessions

S l i d e S e s s i on 5

Monday, March 23, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

Attention
Monday, March 23, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B
Chair: B. J. Casey
Speakers: Nathan Parks, Jaap Munneke (GSP Winner), Mark Stokes, Jane Couperus,
Aarlenne Khan, Søren K. Andersen, Kathy Niu, Richard Young
A B S T R A C T S
STEADY-STATE SIGNATURES OF PERCEPTUAL LOAD, NEURAL COMPETITION, AND MULTIMODAL
DISTRACTOR FILTERING Nathan Parks1, Matthew Hilimire1, Paul Corballis1; 1Georgia Institute of
Technology — The perceptual load theory of attention posits that the level of selection is dependent upon
the perceptual demands (load) of the task, with early selection occurring under high load and late selection
under low load. Using a steady-state evoked potential (SSEP) paradigm we investigated 1) the modality
specificity of distractor filtering, 2) the effect of perceptual load on target-specific processing, and 3) neuralcompetitive interactions between target and distractor stimuli. Participants performed a central RSVP task
that varied in perceptual load, requiring identification of a feature singleton under low load and a feature
conjunction under high load. The RSVP task was performed in isolation and in the presence of irrelevant
visual and auditory distractors. Task, visual distractor, and auditory distractor stimuli were modulated at
unique frequencies (2.5 Hz, 8.5 Hz, and 40.0 Hz, respectively), allowing the cortical response of each to be
tracked independently in the frequency-domain. Analysis of frequency-domain signal strength revealed: 1)
High perceptual load decreased signal strength of within-modality visual distractors but had no effect on
between-modality auditory distractors, suggesting perceptual-level distractor filtering is modality-specific;
2) High load increased task-specific parietal signal strength, consistent with top-down modulation of perceptual processing by a frontal-parietal network; 3) Within-modality visual distractors attenuated taskrelated signal strength, suggesting mutual suppression of target and distractor stimuli through neural
competition. This competition further interacted with perceptual load such that signal suppression was
present only under low load, a result suggesting that increased perceptual load biased competition in favor
of task-relevant stimuli.
RETINOTOPIC ACTIVATION IN PRIMARY VISUAL CORTEX DURING SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY Jaap
Munneke1, Dirk Heslenfeld1, Jan Theeuwes1; 1VU University, Amsterdam — Prior research indicated that spatial working memory and spatial selective attention share a distributed large-scale cortical network consisting of fronto-parietal regions. Similar patterns of neural activity have been observed in these regions
during these tasks. We investigated whether the overlap in neural structures could be extended to the
visual regions of the occipital cortex and in particular to primary visual cortex (V1). In the current study,
participants conducted a spatial working memory task and a spatial attention task while the BOLD
response was measured. While the instructions in both tasks differed, the trials were basically identical.
Our results indicated that (1) the neural overlap between spatial working memory and spatial selective
attention extends beyond the fronto-parietal network and can be observed in the visual cortex as well. (2)
The primary visual cortex is involved in both tasks, indicating that V1 is more than a simple relay station
passing on information coming from the retina and that top-down procedures can modulate the neural
response in early visual cortex. The current results fit with a hypothesized model of working memory,
claiming that shifts of spatial attention are required for maintenance during spatial working memory.
SELECTIVE ACTIVATION OF STIMULUS-SPECIFIC POPULATION CODES IN VISUAL CORTEX DURING TOPDOWN ATTENTIONAL CONTROL Mark Stokes1,2, Russell Thompson2, Anna Christina Nobre1, John Duncan2;
1Oxford University, Experimental Psychology, 2MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge University —
Previously, we demonstrated that top-down control mechanisms can access stimulus-specific population
codes in high-level visual cortex (Stokes et al., 2008). Using multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA), we found
that visual imagery activates content-specific perceptual representations stored in visual cortex, even in the
complete absence of differential visual input. Here, we further examine top-down control over visual cortex for non-spatial selective attention. During fMRI, participants were cued via an auditory tone to attend
to either the letter “X”, or the letter “O”, on a trial-by-trial basis. During a pattern localiser condition, participants were also scanned whilst viewing either the letter “X” or “O”, thereby enabling us to define the
neural signature pattern for the visual codes corresponding to the contents of visual attention. Consistent
with the well-established capacity of MVPA to resolve differential activation profiles that index distributed
population coding, we could reliably differentiate between the patterns of visual activity associated with
the two alternative perceptual states. Unique to the current study, however, we also found that pattern

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

29

Monday, March 23, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

Slide Sessions

analysis of the same areas in visual cortex that code for visual perception also differentiate between the corresponding attentional states: attending for either the letter “X” or the letter “O”. We conclude that topdown mechanisms for selective attention can accurately modulate activity in visual cortex to bias functionally distinct, yet spatially overlapping, neural populations.
SEPARABLE MECHANISMS OF SIGNAL ENHANCEMENT AND SIGNAL SUPPRESSION DURING VISUALSPATIAL SELECTIVE ATTENTION Jane Couperus1, George R. Mangun2; 1Hampshire College, 2University of
California Davis — Selective attention modulates activity at early levels of visual processing, as is reflected
in changes in the P1 event-related potential (ERP) component. Although some have suggested that the process of selection involves primarily signal enhancement (e.g., Mangun et al., 1991), others have suggested
that it involves both the enhancement of the signal of the attended stimulus as well as suppression of the
unattended stimulus (e.g., Awh, Matsukura, and Serences 2003; Dell’Acqua et al., 2007). Using a spatial
cuing paradigm, we examined target and distracter processing as a function of the expectancy of distracter
presence versus absence. In Experiment 1, in different blocks of trials, distracters appeared frequently (70%
of trials) or infrequently (30% of trials). Analysis of distracter-present displays (consisting of two stimuli,
the attended target and unattended distracter in the opposite visual hemifield) showed that in addition to
target enhancement of the occipital P1 (F(1,18)=17.22, p=.001)in the hemisphere contralateral to the target,
processing of distracters was reduced in the frequent condition as compared to the infrequent condition
(F(1,18)=5.54, p=.03) in the hemisphere contralateral to the distracter. Experiment 2 replicated these findings with the presence of the distracter cued from trial-to-trial rather than within a block design
(F(1,19)=13.58, p=.002 and (F(1,19)=5.71, p=.027) respectively) . These findings suggest that both active
enhancement and active suppression are involved in visual-spatial selective attention. Moreover, the
engagement of suppression mechanisms may be critically dependent on distracter presence, that when
anticipated results in the use of suppression mechanisms.
SACCADE PLANNING IS DISSOCIATED FROM PRE-SACCADIC ATTENTIONAL FACILITATION AFTER
DAMAGE TO THE POSTERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX Aarlenne Khan1, Annabelle Blangero2, Yves Rossetti2,
Romeo Salemme2, J. Luaute2,3, Heiner Deubel4, Werner Schneider4, N. Laverdure2, Gilles Rode2,3, Laure Pisella2;
1Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Institute, San Francisco, California, 2INSERM U864, Espace et Action, Bron,
France; Université Claude Bernard, Lyon 1; Institut Fédératif des Neurosciences de Lyon (IFNL), Lyon, France,
3Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 4Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Psychology, Germany —
Numerous studies have suggested that saccades to a location trigger an automatic attentional shift to the
saccade goal, which enhances perceptual processing at that location. Here, we argue for a functional dissociation between pre-saccadic perceptual enhancement and saccade planning. A patient with a lesion in the
right posterior parietal cortex participated in a dual saccade and letter discrimination task. The patient
made saccades to the left or right visual field. During the saccade latency a letter was briefly presented at
the saccade goal and the patient was asked to discriminate the letter after he completed the saccade. The
patient was able to make the normal saccades to the left, impaired visual field that could not be distinguished from saccades to the right, healthy, visual field. However, he was unable to discriminate the letters
presented at the saccade goal on his left visual field whereas his performance was excellent in his right
visual field. By presenting letter changes at locations that were either closer to or further away from to the
saccade goal location, we also tested whether this inability to discriminate a letter at the saccade goal in the
impaired visual field was attributable to a distorted attentional shift. The patient performed at chance for
all letters presented in the contralesional visual field. We conclude that the leftward saccades were made
without an anticipating attentional shift, whereas the rightward saccades were accompanied by a normal
attentional shift.
A SPLIT SPOTLIGHT OF FEATURE-SELECTIVE ATTENTION? Søren K. Andersen1; 1Institut für Psychologie I,
Universität Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany — Previous studies have demonstrated that spatial attention can be
‘split’, i.e. divided between non-contiguous locations. Here we asked the question whether feature-selective attention can be split in an analogous way. Two completely overlapping random dot kinematograms
(RDKs) of two different colors were presented on either side of a central fixation cross. Sustained attentional selection was measured by means of steady-state visual evoked potentials (SSVEPs) elicited by these
frequency-tagged RDKs. Participants performed a divided attention task, in which they had to attend to
two RDKs, one each side of fixation. We compared conditions in which both to-be-attended RDKs had the
same color with conditions in which the colors of both RDKs were different. While the ‘same’ conditions
were characterized by good behavioral performance and clear enhancement of SSVEP-amplitudes to
attended stimuli, behavioral performance in the ‘different’ conditions was strongly reduced and there were
no effects of attentional selection on SSVEP-amplitudes. This clearly shows that it is not possible to simultaneously direct attention to different features at different locations. This is in line with previous studies

30

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Slide Sessions

Tuesday, March 24, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

that have reported a global effect of feature-selective attention, i.e. features are selected across the entire
visual field. Our results provide evidence that global selection is not only the modus operandi of the visual
system but that such selection can not be prevented even when it explicitly conflicts with task demands.
AUDIOSPATIAL ATTENTION EVOKES SIMILAR BRAIN ACTIVATION PATTERN TO VISUALSPATIAL
ATTENTION Kathy Niu1, Ben Davis1, Chris Rorden1; 1University of South Carolina, Columbia — Neuroimaging studies suggest that a fronto-parietal network is activated when we expect visual information to appear
at a specific spatial location. Here, we examine whether a similar network is involved for auditory. We
used a block design, continuous functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiment to infer brain
activation while participants performed spatial and temporal order judgment (TOJ) tasks with auditory
stimuli. Each trial presented two different sounds (a viola and a bassoon) that were separated perceptually
in time and space. During the TOJ task, participants identified which of the two sounds came first. For the
spatial task, half of the participants were instructed to select the sound that appeared further to the left in
space, and half were instructed to select the one further to the right. Crucially, the same stimuli were presented for both tasks, and the same motoric mapping was used for responses (index finger for bassoon,
middle finger for viola). Thus, the statistical contrasts of the spatial blocks with the TOJ blocks should give
a pure measure of task-related differences, uncontaminated by differences in low-level perception or
motoric response. Furthermore, task difficulty was controlled as measured by response time and accuracy.
More activation was observed for the spatial task than the TOJ task in the bilateral temporal parietal junctions (TPJ), bilateral superior frontal regions near the frontal eye fields (FEFs), and bilateral intraparietal
sulci (IPS), as well as bilateral occipital temporal junctions. These regions are similar to those reported for
spatial attention for visual stimuli.
VALIDATION OF DRIVING STUDIES FROM THE LAB TO THE ROAD USING ERPS Richard Young1,2, Li
Hsieh2,3, Sean Seaman2,3,4; 1Wayne State University, School of Medicine, Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences,
2Wayne State University, Institute of Cognitive and Applied Neuroscience, 3Wayne State University,
Communication Sciences and Disorders, 4Wayne State University, Psychology — Most investigations into driving performance involve the use of simulators, and this is especially true of neuroscience studies of driving
performance (e.g., Hsieh et al., 2008; Bowyer et al., 2008). What is often lacking, especially in the neuroscience domain, is a validation of these simulators using neuroscience tools, which is especially important
given 1. the cognitive complexity of a real-world driving task and 2. the policy implications of driving performance research. In this study, we used EEG and an array of behavioral measures to estimate the effects
of a simulated cellular phone conversation on driving performance. EEG was measured in the vehicle
using a laptop computer, a battery-powered 64-channel amplifier, and a shielded EEG cap. Participants
drove on real roads in a test vehicle, and responded to simulated road events using light stimuli positioned
around the driver’s field of view in the vehicle. In the lab, this was simulated using a steering stimulator
and light events presented on a computer. In both environments, participants’ reaction times to visual
events were assessed, and ERPs were recorded to the visual events. While driving, participants answered
pre-recorded questions to simulate a cellular phone conversation. The goal of the study was to evaluate the
reliability of both behavioral and EEG measures. Results show that behaviorally, the effects of conversation
on the road and in the lab were consistent, showing a small increase in RTs and negligible patterns of inaccuracy in both environments. ERPs also show consistency across sites.

S l i d e S e s s i on 6

Perception
Tuesday, March 24, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B
Chair: Reiko Graham
Speakers: Dominique Vuvan (GSP Winner), Bradford Mahon (GSP Winner), Emily S. Cross,
Lawrence Ward, Jessica Wisnowski, Jessica Cantlon, Psyche Loui, V. S. Ramachandran
A B S T R A C T S
THE COGNITIVE-PERCEPTUAL EFFECTS OF AUDIO GAME TRAINING Dominique Vuvan1, Claude Alain1,2;
1University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, 2The Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, Toronto, Canada — The
study reported here was designed to explore whether playing an audio game can yield improvements in
auditory perception, attention, and memory. All participants underwent two laboratory assessments 14
days apart. These assessments included four tests of basic auditory function (pure tone thresholds, speech
in noise, mistuned harmonic detection, and gap detection), and two cognitive-perceptual tasks (auditory

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

31

Tuesday, March 24, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

Slide Sessions

working memory and auditory attentional blink). Auditory event-related brain potentials were recorded
during the cognitive-perceptual tasks. Half of the participants were asked to play Troopanum 2.0 (a complex audio game designed for the blind that is analogous to “Space Invaders”) for 30 minutes per day over
the 14 days between assessments. The other half served as a control group and did not undergo training.
On the second test session, participants who played the audio game showed greater improvements in performance on both the working memory and attentional measures than those who did not play the game.
These performance gains were mirrored by changes in sensory and cognitive ERPs. In addition, trained
participants also exhibited a significant decrease in mistuned harmonic detection thresholds relative to
controls. No corresponding improvements were seen for the three remaining basic psychophysical measures. The results from this study show that playing audio games may lead to enhanced auditory perceptual and cognitive skills, and parallel findings from research in the visual domain.
CATEGORY-SPECIFIC ORGANIZATION IN THE HUMAN BRAIN DOES NOT DEPEND ON VISUAL
EXPERIENCE Bradford Mahon2, Stefano Anzellotti2, Jens Schwarzbach1, Massimilano Zampini1, Alfonso
Caramazza2; 1Center for Mind/Brain Sciences (CIMeC), University of Trento, Italy, 2Harvard University,
Psychology — Functional imaging studies of the normally developing human brain have shown that lateral
regions of ventral occipital-temporal cortex show neural specificity for living things (faces, animals) while
medial regions show neural specificity for nonliving things (tools, houses). The neural principles that give
rise to this lateral-to-medial organization by semantic domain within ventral occipital-temporal cortex are
actively debated. Here we show using fMRI that the same regions of occipital-temporal cortex that exhibit
neural specificity for artifacts and animals in sighted adults exhibit neural specificity for the same categories in congenitally and late blind adults. Sighted and blind participants performed a size judgment task
over animal and nonliving stimuli. Stimuli consisted of auditory words, and were blocked by semantic category (animal vs. nonliving) into twenty second blocks. Sighted participants also viewed pictures corresponding to the same animal and nonliving stimuli in a subsequent localizer scan. For the size judgment
task over auditory stimuli, regions within the medial fusiform gyrus were more activated in all groups of
participants (sighted, late and congenitally blind) for nonliving compared to living stimuli. In contrast,
regions within lateral occipital-temporal cortex were more activated for all groups of participants for animal stimuli compared to nonliving stimuli. The same regions were identified based on the picture-viewing
localizer for the sighted subjects. These findings demonstrate that category-specificity within the human
visual system does not depend on visual experience, and suggest the operation of innately determined
domain-specific constraints on the organization of object knowledge.
NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF STATIC PLAUSIBLE AND IMPLAUSIBLE BODY POSTURES Emily
S.
Cross1,2, Emilie C. Mackie3,4, George Wolford4, Antonia F. de C. Hamilton2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive & Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2University of Nottingham School of Psychology, Nottingham, UK,
3University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 4Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Dartmouth College, Hanover,
NH, USA — Understanding other’s movements and interacting socially require a representation of other
people’s bodies. Research into the neural underpinnings of body representation implicates several regions
in this kind of processing. One set of such regions, known as the mirror neuron system (MNS), comprises
premotor and parietal cortices and responds to dynamic and familiar stimuli, especially moving bodies of
other people. Another brain region, the extrastriate body area (EBA), is located within the lateral occipital
cortex and is activated when viewing static body postures. It is less clear how these regions respond to
unfamiliar contorted body postures. We examined which brain regions show viewpoint-independent
responses to static images of plausible and implausible body postures, using a repetition suppression
design in functional magnetic resonance imaging. Participants were scanned while observing static images
of a contortionist in either plausible postures or in contorted, implausible postures. Greater activity
emerged in bilateral EBA when participants viewed plausible compared to contorted postures. The inverse
contrast revealed greater activity within the middle frontal gyrus. Repeated presentation of the same body
posture lead to suppressed responses in inferior frontal gyrus and inferior parietal lobe, two regions classically associated with the MNS. These regions did not distinguish the plausibility of the posture. Overall,
our data demonstrate that both the MNS and EBA are involved in static body posture coding. These results
contrast with some previous studies of the neural representation of possible and impossible actions, and
thus present new challenges for theories of body representation in the human brain.
RHYTHMS OF CONSCIOUSNESS: BINOCULAR RIVALRY REVEALS LARGE-SCALE OSCILLATORY
NETWORK DYNAMICS MEDIATING VISUAL AWARENESS Lawrence Ward1,2, Sam Doesburg3, Jessica
Green4, John McDonald4; 1University of British Columbia, Psychology, 2Brain Research Centre, University of
British Columbia, 3University of British Columbia, Pediatrics, 4Simon Fraser University, Psychology — Consciousness has been proposed to emerge from functionally integrated large-scale ensembles of gamma-syn-

32

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Slide Sessions

Tuesday, March 24, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

chronous (30-50 Hz) neural populations that form and dissolve at a theta band (4-7 Hz) frequency. We
propose that discrete moments of perceptual experience are implemented by transient gamma-band synchronization of relevant cortical regions, and that disintegration and reintegration of these assemblies
occurs according to an ongoing theta oscillation. In support of this hypothesis we provide evidence from
64-channel EEG data recorded from 14 subjects during binocular pattern rivalry. We measured phase-locking values, calculated from phases measured by the Hilbert transform-analytic signal method, between
narrow-band signals from dipole sources seeded in brain regions located using BESA beamformer. We
report that (1) rivalrous perceptual switching is time-locked to theta-modulated gamma-band synchronization, indicating that the onset of new conscious percepts coincides with the emergence of a new gammasynchronous assembly that is locked to an ongoing theta rhythm; (2) the recurrent generators of these
gamma rhythms are in prefrontal and parietal brain regions; (3) theta-modulated gamma-band phase synchronization is observed between these activated brain regions. These results suggest that ongoing theta
modulated-gamma mechanisms periodically reintegrate a large-scale prefrontal-parietal network critical
for perceptual experience. Moreover, activation and network inclusion of inferior temporal cortex and
motor cortex uniquely occurs on the cycle immediately preceding responses signaling perceptual switching. This suggests that the essential prefrontal-parietal oscillatory network is expanded to include additional cortical regions relevant to tasks and perceptions furnishing consciousness at that moment, here
image processing and response initiation.
IS DAMAGE TO THE FUSIFORM FACE AREA SPECIFICALLY RELATED TO FACE RECOGNITION
IMPAIRMENTS? Jessica Wisnowski1, David Rudrauf2, Sonya Mehta2, Thomas Grabowski2, Daniel Tranel2,
Steven Anderson2, Hanna Damasio1; 1Brain and Creativity Institute and the Dana and David Dornsife Cognitive
Neuroscience Imaging Center, University of Southern California, 2Division of Behavioral Neurology and Cognitive
Neuroscience, Department of Neurology, University of Iowa — An important and still unanswered question in
cognitive neuroscience is whether the Fusiform Face Area (FFA), a small region in the right posterior temporal-occipital gyrus, has evolved to specifically process facial information or whether it is involved more
generally in the visual recognition of concrete entities. We employed a novel approach to test the specificity of FFA by utilizing voxelwise logistic regression to analyze visual recognition data pertaining to the categories of famous faces, animals, fruits/vegetables and tools/utensils in 191 patients with focal brain
lesions. This approach allowed us to identify regions where damage was significantly associated with
impairments in the recognition of faces, after removing the variance that could be attributed to impairments in the other categories. The areas where damage was relatively specific for face recognition impairments were: the right lateral temporal-parietal-occipital junction, the right mesial temporal pole, and areas
in the white matter underlying and interconnecting those areas. FFA was not included. We then examined
a subgroup of 19 patients whose damage likely included FFA and found that they were impaired at recognizing animals (mean z-score = -4.5), fruits/vegetables (-5.0) and faces (-2.6), but not tools/utensils (-0.67).
Finally, five patients with the largest lesions in FFA all performed poorly on the recognition of fruits/vegetables and animals; however, only 3 were impaired in the recognition of faces while 2 were entirely normal.
We conclude that FFA is part of the system involved in visual recognition, but that it is not a neural substrate specifically subserving unique facial recognition.
CORTICAL ORGANIZATION OF VISUAL CATEGORIES IN EARLY CHILDHOOD Jessica Cantlon1,2, Kevin
Pelphrey2; 1Duke University Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, 2Yale University, Psychiatry — Cortical regions
along the inferior temporal and fusiform gyri exhibit greater responses to images of real objects compared
with scrambled images and the like (e.g., Grill-Spector, Knouf, and Kanwisher, 2004). Within these cortical
regions, certain object categories such as faces, houses, and symbolic strings evoke preferential responses
in predictable subregions. How does this category-selective pattern of neural activity develop? We
recorded brain activity (using fMRI) in four- to five-year-old children (N=14) and adults (N=14) as they
passively viewed images from each of four categories (faces, numbers, letters, and shoes) in addition to
their scrambled image counterparts. Four- to five-year-olds exhibited a similar degree of selectivity in the
fusiform gyrus and occipito-temporal cortex to adults for faces and objects. Moreover, voxels that exhibited
the strongest response to faces in children were within the typical adult fusiform face-selective region
whereas voxels that responded more strongly to symbols (letters and numbers) were in the typical adult
fusiform/inferior temporal word form area. Interestingly, the visual word form region that exhibited a
response bias for both letters and numbers in children exhibited a bias only for letters in adults—perhaps
because experience attunes this brain region to the specific symbolic elements relevant for reading words.
These findings suggest that category-selectivity already may be developing by four years of age but it is
not fully mature. The degree of category-selectivity in the ventral stream may be important for the development of adult-like visual recognition.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

33

Tuesday, March 24, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

Slide Sessions

CORTICAL HYPERCONNECTIVITY IN ABSOLUTE PITCH MUSICIANS Psyche Loui1,2, Charles Li1, Anja
Hohmann1, Gottfried Schlaug1,2; 1Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 2Harvard Medical School — The ability
to categorize sound is crucial for language, music, and effective functioning in the environment. Sound categorization recruits temporal lobe structures and is extraordinarily accurate among possessors of Absolute
Pitch (AP), who can name the appropriate pitch category of any given tone without a reference. While the
incidence of AP is rare in the general population (< 1%), its prevalence depends inversely on age of exposure to pitch information (i.e. via musical training and/or tonal languages), suggesting that heightened
pitch exposure may either trigger the development of neural circuitry essential for sound categorization, or
may interfere with developmental pruning of naturally-present circuitry. Using Diffusion Tensor Imaging
(DTI), we tested the hypothesis of heightened neural connectivity in superior temporal regions of AP possessors. Tractography was conducted using bilateral seed regions of interest in the superior temporal gyrus
(STG) and middle temporal gyrus (MTG). AP possessors had significantly higher-than-control volume of
white matter tracts connecting the left STG and MTG. Furthermore, the leftward asymmetry of white matter volume connecting perception and categorization areas (STG and MTG) was significantly correlated
with the degree of AP possession (AP1 vs. AP2) as defined by behavioral performance on a pitch naming
task. The present finding of hyperconnectivity within temporal regions of AP musicians extends previous
research showing increased superior temporal lobe asymmetry in AP and provides a new model for studying the neuroplasticity and heightened local connectivity that have been proposed as possible biological
bases of savant skills and cases of exceptional creativity.
TREATMENT OF INTENSE LEFT HEMI-FACIAL PAIN OF TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA USING MIRROR VISUAL
FEEDBACK V. S. Ramachandran1, Eric Altschuler1,2; 1UCSD, Center for Brain and Cognition, 2UMDNJ,
PM&R — A gentleman had been suffering from left hemi-facial pain (tic douloureux) for nearly 12 years
and had gone through numerous conventional treatments which proved to be completely ineffective.
Indeed, this pain is often considered intractable. Following a suggestion from one of us (VSR), the gentleman looked at his face in a double reflecting mirror. Unlike a normal mirror, a double-reflecting mirror
(two mirrors taped at right angles) does NOT optically reverse your face. So, if you look in the mirror and
someone touches the actual RIGHT side of your face it creates the illusion that the LEFT side of your face is
being touched (because the normal “expected” reversal doesn’t occur). The patient made ingenious use of
the technique: Obviously he couldn’t massage the left side of the face; the very attempt to get close to it or
actually touching it lightly provoked excruciating pain. He looked in the mirror watched his wife’s hand
massaging his right face so he SAW his left (painful) side being “massaged” without provoking pain;
thereby progressively causing the “learned pain” to be unlearned. Astonishingly, the pain dropped from
about 6 down to zero after 10 minutes and with repeated 10 minute treatments stayed at zero for months.
Massage applied to the right face WITHOUT looking in a mirror was completely ineffective. The patient
reports that the mirror procedure has changed his life. Controlled studies of mirror visual feedback for
hemi-facial pain, and, if effective, the neurophysiologic correlates underlying the treatment, may be warranted.

S l i d e S e s s i on 7

Reasoning and decision making
Tuesday, March 24, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B
Chair: Chair: Kalina Christoff
Speakers: Roi Cohen Kadosh, Marinella Cappelletti, Oshin Vartanian, Adam Green,
Elizabeth O'Hare, Amitai Shenhav (GSP Winner), Leonhard Schilbach, Penelope Lewis
A B S T R A C T S
MODULATING NUMBER-SPECIFIC NEURONS IN THE HUMAN PARIETAL CORTEX Roi Cohen Kadosh1, Neil
Muggleton1, Juha Silvanto2,3, Vincent Walsh1; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London,
London, UK, 2Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Laboratory of Noninvasive Brain
Stimulation, Boston, USA, 3Psychology, University of Essex, Colchester, UK — Numbers can come in many
forms; we can represent the same quantity, as a verbal number "TWO", a digit (2), in Roman numerals (II),
non-symbolically (??), in a temporal series, or with other verbal numbers (pair, duo, brace). The question of
how we represent numbers and whether there is a unitary cognitive and neuronal basis for all forms of
numerical representation (i.e., abstract representation) is therefore an important problem in numerical cognition, neuronal specialisation, education, and remediation from dyscalculia. To examine the commonly
held view that numbers are represented in an abstract fashion in the intraparietal suclus, a core area for

34

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Slide Sessions

Tuesday, March 24, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

numerical representation we used a novel transcranial magnetic stimulation adaptation (TMSA) paradigm.
TMSA provides superior functional resolution by allowing one to selectively stimulate even within overlapping populations of neurons. We show that the intraparietal suclus, an area that is believed to hold an
abstract numerical representation, is equipped with a specialized non-abstract representation. Moreover,
we show here that, akin to similar results in single-cell neurophysiology in monkeys, TMSA modulated
neurons with preference for the adapted digit, a symbolic, acculturated number, in the parietal lobes of
numerate humans, and this TMS effect decreases as the numerical distance from this digit increases.
THE ROLE OF THE RIGHT AND LEFT PARIETAL LOBES IN THE CONCEPTUAL PROCESSING OF NUMBERS
Marinella Cappelletti1, Hwee Ling Lee3, Elliot D. Freeman1,4, Cathy J. Price2; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
University College London, 17 Queen Square, London, UK, 2Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuro-imaging, Institute of
Neurology, University College London, London, UK, 3MPI for Biological Cybernetics, Max Planck Institute for
Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany, 4Brunel University, Psychology, School of Social Psychology,
Uxbridge — Neuropsychological and functional imaging studies have associated the conceptual processing
of numbers with bilateral parietal regions (including the intraparietal sulcus, IPS). However, the processes
driving these effects remain unclear because both left and right posterior parietal regions are activated by
many other conceptual, perceptual, attention and response-selection processes. To dissociate parietal activation that is number-selective from parietal activation related to other stimulus or response-selection processes, we used fMRI to compare numbers and object names during exactly the same conceptual and
perceptual tasks while factoring out activations correlating with response times. We found that right parietal activation was higher for conceptual decisions on numbers relative to the same tasks on object names,
even when response-time effects were fully factored out. In contrast, left parietal activation for numbers
was equally involved in conceptual processing of object names. We suggest that left parietal activation for
numbers reflects a range of processes, including the retrieval of learnt facts that are also involved in conceptual decisions on object names. In contrast, number-selectivity in the right parietal cortex reflects processes that are more involved in conceptual decisions on numbers than object names. Our results generate
a new set of hypotheses that have implications for the design of future behavioural and functional imaging
studies of patients.
THE ROLE OF RIGHT PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN REAL-WORLD PLANNING Oshin Vartanian1,2, Vinod Goel2,
Angela Bartolo3, Lila Hakim2, Anna Maria Ferraro2, Carla Budriesi4, Ildebrando Appollonio5, Valeria Isella5, Paolo
Nichelli4; 1DRDC Toronto, 2York University, 3Université Charles-de-Gaulle Lille III, 4University of Modena and
Reggio Emilia, 5University of Milano - Bicocca — While much evidence has linked injury to the prefrontal cortex (PFC) to impairments in planning, much less is known about the underlying cognitive processes that
are compromised as a consequence of PFC damage. In addition, the differential contributions of left and
right PFC to planning remain controversial. To address these issues, we administered a real-world travel
planning task to thirty participants comprised of six patients with focal frontal lesions to left PFC, six
patients with focal frontal lesions to right PFC, six patients with posterior lesions, and twelve normal controls. Furthermore, we employed the methodology of verbal protocol analysis, enabling us to go beyond
simple task performance and to analyze the underlying cognitive processes and strategies that underlie
plan formulation. The results revealed that patients with right PFC lesions formulated significantly worse
plans than patients with left PFC lesions and normal controls. No other comparison reached significance.
To explore the underlying reasons for the planning impairment exhibited by right PFC patients, we computed the ratio of concrete to abstract problem-solving statements between the groups. The results demonstrated that right PFC patients had a significantly higher concrete-to-abstract ratio of problem-solving
statements than left PFC patients and normal controls. No other comparison reached significance. We conclude that the role of right PFC in real-world planning involves the formulation and maintenance of
abstract ideas as a function of task demands.
ANALOGICAL REASONING ABILITY MEDIATES THE RELATION BETWEEN INTELLIGENCE AND
CREATIVITY Adam Green1, Joseph Kim1, Michael Cohen1, Colin DeYoung2, Jeremy Gray1; 1Yale University,
2
University of Minnesota — People who are intelligent are often creative as well. However the relationship
between intelligence and creativity is not well understood. One likely mediator is Analogy. Analogy, a
form of relational reasoning, is related to crystallized and especially to fluid intelligence. Analogy is also
widely indicated to be an important cognitive mechanism for supporting creative insight and innovation.
Work in our laboratory and elsewhere has reliably implicated frontopolar cortex in the neural implementation of analogy. Here, we tested whether a form of analogical reasoning that preferentially engages frontopolar cortex mediated the relation between intelligence and creativity in 160 participants. Analogical
reasoning ability was measured by a task in which participants selected word-pairs to correctly complete
four-word propositional analogies of the general form, ‘A is to B as C is to D’ (i.e., participants were pro-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

35

Tuesday, March 24, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

Slide Sessions

vided with A:B and asked to select C:D from a list). Analogical reasoning ability significantly mediated the
effect of intelligence (a latent variable comprising full-scale I.Q., and d-prime for verbal 3-Back performance) on creativity (a latent variable comprising the Creative Achievement Questionnaire, and creative
verb generation). Notably, this mediation effect was driven by performance on cross-domain (semantically
distant) analogies, a type of analogy for which frontopolar cortex shows preferential recruitment. These
data provide new evidence that analogy is a key mechanism by which intelligence supports creativity, and
indicate the intriguing hypothesis that frontopolar cortex mediates the link between intelligence and creativity.
MAPPING RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN CORTICAL THICKNESS AND FLUID REASONING IN TYPICALLY
DEVELOPING CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS Elizabeth O'Hare1, Kirstie Whitaker1, Zdena Op De Macks2,
Brian Johnson1, Emilio Ferrer3, Silvia Bunge1,4; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California,
Berkeley, 2Leiden University, Developmental Psychology, The Netherlands, 3Dept. of Psychology, University of
California, Davis, 4Dept. of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley — Fluid reasoning, or the ability to
solve novel problems, is a core component of human cognition. Functional brain imaging studies in adults
and children have implicated anterior prefrontal and inferior parietal regions in reasoning and relational
integration. To date, however, no studies have examined potential brain structural correlates of fluid reasoning ability in a developmental population. We studied typically developing children and adolescents
(ages 6-18) with high-resolution MRI at 3 Tesla (current N=18). All participants performed a series of fluid
reasoning tasks. Semi-automated methods were used to match cortical geometry across subjects and to
measure cortical thickness at every surface vertex. We then computed statistical maps of the correlation
between thickness and cognitive performance at matched anatomical points. Statistical maps demonstrated that increased cortical thickness was significantly correlated with better performance on measures
of fluid reasoning in left supramarginal gyrus (BA 40), independent of age (peak vertex, r=0.70, p=0.001).
Additional correlations between cortical thickness and fluid reasoning ability were observed in left ventrolateral and left anterior prefrontal cortex (BA 10), where decreased thickness correlated with better reasoning performance (peak vertex r=-0.61, p=0.006). These results suggest that brain structure in prefrontal and
inferior parietal regions correlates with fluid reasoning ability in children and adolescents. Furthermore,
the observation of a significant relationship between fluid reasoning and cortical thickness in inferior parietal cortex that is independent of differences associated with age suggests that this region is a key source of
individual differences in fluid reasoning ability during development.
UTILITARIAN CALCULATIONS, EMOTIONAL ASSESSMENTS, AND INTEGRATIVE MORAL JUDGMENTS:
DIFFERENTIATING NEURAL SYSTEMS UNDERLYING MORAL DECISION-MAKING Amitai Shenhav1, Joshua
D. Greene1; 1Harvard University, Psychology — Recent research suggests that moral judgments are influenced by utilitarian reasoning (e.g. judging it acceptable to save five lives at the cost of one because of the
net benefits) as well as automatic emotional responses that, in some cases, favor non-utilitarian judgments
(e.g., judging it unacceptable to sacrifice one life to save five). When utilitarian reasoning conflicts with
automatic emotional responses, a more integrative “all things considered” judgment may require the
engagement of moral judgment processes that go beyond simple utilitarian calculations and automatic
emotional responses. The present study aims to better isolate the neural bases of these distinct components
of moral judgment using fMRI. In a within-subject design, participants undergoing fMRI were presented
with moral dilemmas in which maximizing the number of lives saved requires harming one ore more individuals. After reading each dilemma, subjects responded by indicating which of the two available options
(a) will produce better overall results (utilitarian calculation), (b) evokes more negative feelings (emotional
assessment), or (c) is more morally acceptable (integrative moral judgment). We found that fast emotional
assessments recruited bilateral amygdala and hippocampus more strongly than fast integrative moral
judgments, but that fast integrative moral judgments and utilitarian calculations more strongly recruited
bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex.
MINDS MADE FOR SHARING: INITIATING JOINT ATTENTION RECRUITS REWARD-RELATED
NEUROCIRCUITRY Leonhard Schilbach1, Marcus Wilms2, Simon Eickhoff2, Sandro Romanzetti2, Ralf Tepest1,
Gary Bente3, Nadim Shah2, Gereon Fink2,4, Kai Vogeley1,2; 1University of Cologne, Psychiatry, 2Institute of
Medicine, Research Centre Juelich, 3University of Cologne, Social Psychology, 4University of Cologne,
Neurology — The ability and motivation to share attention with someone is a unique aspect of human cognition. To investigate the neural correlates of joint attention we made use of a novel, interactive research
paradigm in which participants’ gaze behavior - as measured by an eyetracking device - was used in real
time to control the gaze behavior of a computer-animated character. Convinced that the character on the
stimulus screen was controlled by a real person outside the scanner, 21 participants interacted with the virtual other while undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Experimental variations

36

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Slide Sessions

Tuesday, March 24, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

focused on leading vs. following the gaze of the character when fixating one of three objects also shown on
the screen. Results demonstrate, firstly, that following someone else’s gaze and engaging in joint attention
recruits the ventral portion of medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) known to be involved in the supramodal
coordination of perceptual and cognitive processes. Secondly, directing someone else’s gaze towards an
object activated the ventral striatum which – in light of ratings obtained from participants – appears to
underlie the hedonic aspects of sharing attention. The data supports the idea that other-initiated joint attention relies upon recruitment of MPFC previously related to the ‘meeting of minds’. In contrast, self-initiated joint attention leads to a differential increase of neural activity in reward-related brain areas which
might contribute to the uniquely human motivation to engage in the sharing of experiences.
NEUROANATOMICAL CORRELATES OF HIGH ORDER Penelope Lewis1,2, Roozbeh Rezaie3, Rachel Browne4,
Neil Roberts5, Robin Dunbar6; 1School of Psychological Sciences, University of Manchester, 2Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, University College London, 3Health Science Center at Houston, University of Texas, 4MARIARC,
University of Liverpool, 5Division of Medical and Radiological Sciences, School of Clinical Sciences and Community
Health, University of Edinburgh, 6Institute of Cognitive & Evolutionary Anthropology, University of Oxford —
The Social Brain Hypothesis proposes that mammalian brain size has evolved to support the demands of
managing increasingly large numbers of complex social relationships in bonded groups. Underpinning
this are 2 assumptions: that the number of social relationships is a function of neural processing power,
and that evolutionary increases in prefrontal cortex volume have been driven, in part, by increased
demand for this type of processing. This study tested the related prediction that people capable of a higher
degree of intentionality processing have larger prefrontal grey matter volume (GMV). We used 5 stories
followed by T/F questions to determine the intentionality and working memory ability level (failure point
on a continuous scale of levels 2-6 intentionality/working memory) of 45 subjects. A separate questionnaire determined social group size. We obtained anatomical MRI scans for all subjects and used optimised
voxel-based morphometry (VBM) to test for correlations between GMV and these measures. Behaviorally,
we observed a positive correlation between intentionality ability and social network size (p<0.04). Anatomically, we observed a correlation between GMV and intentionality but not working memory ability in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (s.v.c. p<0.05). Furthermore, GMV in right orbitofrontal and subgenual cingulate
correlated with sympathy group size (s.v.c. p<0.05). Finally, a conjunction analysis revealed that GMV in
orbitofrontal cortex and right hemispheric tempero-parietal junction correlated both with intentionality
score and sympathy group size (p<0.005 uncorrected). These findings support a link between intentionality, social network size, and prefrontal cortex, and are in keeping with the Social Brain Hypothesis.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

37

Poster Schedule

Poster Schedule
The presenting author must be present at least one full hour during the assigned session and
the other authors should be present during the remaining time. You may post your materials
on the board assigned to you at any time after the "Set-up Begins" time (listed above), but
before the beginning of the assigned poster session. You must remove your poster promptly no
later than the time listed above in "Take-down Complete." Any posters left up after the "Takedown Complete" time may be discarded. Do not leave personal items in the poster room.
On Saturday, the doors to the poster room close and lock at 8:00 pm. On Sunday-Monday the
doors close and lock at 7:30 pm. On Tuesday, the doors close and lock at 5:15 pm. No attendee
or exhibitor will be allowed to enter the exhibit hall once the doors are locked.
Poster
Session

Date & Time

Set-up Begins

Session Begins

Session Ends

Take-down
Complete

A

Saturday 3/21/09

5:00 pm

5:30 pm

7:30 pm

7:45 pm

B

Sunday 3/22/09

*7:30 am

8:00 am

10:00 am

11:30 am

C

Sunday 3/22/09

11:30 am

1:00 pm

3:00 pm

3:30 pm

D

Sunday 3/22/09

3:30 pm

5:00 pm

7:00 pm

7:30 pm

E

Monday 3/23/09

*7:30 am

8:00 am

10:00 am

11:30 am

F

Monday 3/23/09

11:30 am

1:00 pm

3:00 pm

3:30 pm

G

Monday 3/23/09

3:30 pm

5:00 pm

7:00 pm

7:30 pm

H

Tuesday 3/24/09

*7:30 am

8:00 am

10:00 am

12:30 pm

I

Tuesday 3/24/09

12:30 pm

3:00 pm

5:00 pm

5:15 pm

* Please note that only scheduled poster presenters may enter the exhibit hall during the early morning
set-up time. All other attendees may only enter when the exhibit hall opens at 8:00 am.

38

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A
Attentional processes: Auditory
A1
INDEPENDENT FACILITATION AND INHIBITION MECHANISMS
IN AUDITORY SELECTIVE ATTENTION Constanze Mikyska1, Aurelie
Bidet-Caulet1, Robert T. Knight1,2; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute,
University of California, Berkeley, CA, 2University of California, Berkeley,
CA — In a recent intracranial study, auditory selective attention has been
shown to operate not only by enhancing the sensory responses to relevant
sounds, but also by reducing these responses to irrelevant information in
auditory cortices (Bidet-Caulet et al., 2007). Previous work in the visual
modality indicates that cognitive load differentially affects facilitation vs
inhibition. We employed a working memory load manipulation to assess
whether facilitation and inhibition represent a unique gain control mechanism or two independent mechanisms in audition. We adapted the classic
auditory selective attention paradigm employing a two selection task
(Hansen & Hillyard, 1980) by adding a third condition (control condition)
in which all sounds received the same amount of attention. Subjects had to
detect deviants in the right or left ear or binaural targets (control condition) while they were keeping in memory a short auditory sequence to perform an easy or difficult acoustic comparison. We recorded EEG at 64 scalp
electrodes in 16 subjects and compared event-related potentials (ERP) to
the same sounds when they were attended, ignored or heard. We found
differential effects of memory load on attention mechanisms. An early sensory ERP (P50) was inhibited only under memory load condition. A late
negative frontal ERP (200-300 msec) showed less inhibition in the high
memory load compared to the low memory load. The present results
reveal evidence of independent excitatory and inhibitory mechanisms and
support perceptual and cognitive load theories.
A2
SELECTIVE ATTENTION TO SPEECH IN MULTI-TALKER
ENVIRONMENTS ACTS AS CONTINUOUS GAIN CONTROL Jess
R. Kerlin1, Antoine J. Shahin1, Lee M. Miller1; 1Center for Mind and Brain, UC
Davis — Our ability to actively select a single talker in an environment
with multiple competing speech sounds is a remarkable perceptual feat
that serves a critical social function. Although many studies of auditory
selective attention in the brain have been conducted for decades, there
remains an ongoing debate about the neural mechanisms of sustained
selective attention. One idea is that attention acts as a gain-control of bottom-up processing. Alternately, it may be a process without gain, but
rather a redirecting of attention to stable bottom-up content. Furthermore,
very few studies have addressed the unique nature of the selection of
speech as a temporally extended and complex auditory object. We hypothesized that sustained selective attention to a particular speech stream in a
multi-talker environment would act as a gain control mechanism on the
early auditory cortical representations of speech. Using high-density electroencephalography and a template-matching method novel to the field,
we discovered a signal of selective gain to the continuous speech content
of the attended speaker, greatest at a frequency of ~2-6 Hz, in auditory cortex. This measure of attention, which appears to be related to the temporal
speech envelope, may offer greater insight into the content-specific process
of selective attention to speech.

A3
ANTICIPATION RELATED ALPHA DESYNCHRONISATION IN
AUDITORY CORTEX FOLLOWING VISUAL CUES Nadia Müller1,
Winfried Schlee1, Thomas Hartmann1, Isabel Lorenz1, Nathan Weisz1;
1University of Konstanz — In most daily life situations we can anticipate
external events and prepare our neuronal system for efficient processing.
One way how the responsiveness of the brain is adjusted involves changes
in oscillatory ongoing alpha activity: Alpha power decreases have been
shown to be functionally related to an increased excitability of the accordant brain area. However, these observations mainly stem from the visual
and somatosensory/motor modality whereas the mechanisms in the auditory system are largely unknown. Recent results point to a role of alpha in
auditory attention, but cannot disambiguate alpha to be exclusively topdown modulated, e.g. in absence of acoustic stimulation. By recording
MEG we here investigated alpha power changes in the auditory cortex in
response to visual cues. Thereby, we ruled out the possibility that bottomup processing of the cue stimulus had an effect on the reported results.
Time Frequency Analysis of the induced responses show prominent alpha
power decreases peaking around 10Hz, in the second part of the cue-target
period. These reductions in alpha power were then localized to auditory,
left motor (emerging from subsequent right hand button press) and occipital cortex. Interestingly, following right cue presentation, alpha power was
significantly reduced in both auditory cortices whereas after left cue presentation just a trend towards an alpha power reduction in the right auditory cortex was observed. To conclude, the responsiveness of the auditory
cortex is indeed top-down modulated and shaped by the side of the cue.
Finally, the functional relevance of occipital regions has to be further
investigated.
A4
ERP COMPONENTS REFLECTING THE FOCUSING OF
ATTENTION WITHIN AUDITORY SCENES Marissa L. Gamble1,2,
Steven J. Luck1,2; 1University of California, Davis , 2Center for Mind and
Brain — Humans must often focus attention onto a relevant sound source
in the presence of simultaneous irrelevant sounds. In the visual domain,
this has been extensively explored with the N2pc component, a negativity
occurring approximately 200-300 ms over posterior scalp sites contralateral to a target within a bilateral stimulus array. In the present eventrelated potential studies, we searched for an analogous neurophysiological
correlate of auditory attention. In experiment 1, two sounds were presented simultaneously for 750 ms, one from each of two laterally placed
speakers. For each trial, participants indicated whether one of the two
sounds was a pre-defined target. We found a negativity contralateral to the
target at anterior and central sites. Further analyses indicated that this contralateral negativity was actually composed of two separate contralateral
negativities. We observed a left anterior negativity for right-side targets
starting approximately 100 ms poststimulus and a right antero-central
negativity for left-side targets starting approximately 200 ms poststimulus.
In addition, we observed a contralateral positivity over occipital cortex
starting approximately 300 ms poststimulus, perhaps reflecting a link
between visual and auditory orienting. In experiment 2, using a similar
experimental design with different stimuli, we were able to replicate these
effects. This set of contralateral-ipsilateral differences could be used to
study selective attention within auditory scenes containing multiple simultaneous stimuli, just as the N2pc has been used to study the operation of
attention within visual scenes.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

39

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

A5
TIME-FREQUENCY ANALYSIS OF MEDITATION DURING
AUDITORY ODDBALL PROCESSING: THETA, ALPHA, AND
GAMMA FINDINGS B. Rael Cahn1,2,3, Arnaud Delorme4,5, Mark Geyer1,
Franz Vollenweider6, John Polich3; 1UCSD, Psychiatry, 2UCSD Stein Institute
for Research on Aging, 3The Scripps Research Institute, 4UCSD Institute for
Neural Computation, 5UCSD Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience,
6University of Zurich, Psychiatry — A three-stimulus auditory oddball
series was presented to experienced Vipassana (mindfulness) meditators
during meditation and a control thought period to elicit event-related
brain potentials (ERPs) in the two different mental states. The stimuli
consisted of a frequent standard, an infrequent oddball, and an infrequent distracter, with all stimuli passively presented. We have previously
reported on the ERP findings wherein meditation compared to control
state effects occurred most strongly for the distracter stimuli with frontal
N1 amplitude, P2 amplitude, and P3a amplitude all decreased during
meditation. We now report on the time frequency analysis of these data.
We again found the greatest change in attention-related activity for the
distracter stimuli with decreased stimulus-induced theta power induction. We also found a significant alpha desynchronization to the standard
stimuli during the thought condition, but not the meditation condition,
indicating less processing demands on the brain imposed to the frequent
standards during meditation. We also found greater differential gamma
activity in meditation compared to control period during the first 100
msec post-stimulus across stimuli, suggesting that the meditation state
may involve greater sensitivity to the sensory surround at the early preattentive level of processing but decreased engagement of attentional circuits to such stimuli. Finally, meditation also increased broadband intertrial coherence to the standards implying more stable entrainment of
brain activity to the frequent standards. We discuss the relevance of such
findings to the reported outcomes of meditation including enhanced self
awareness and decreased distractibility and emotional reactivity.
A6
SYNCHRONOUS
INTERACTIONS
AND
FUNCTIONAL
ORGANIZATION OF AUDITORY CHANGE DETECTION
Shannon MacLean1, Lawrence Ward1; 1University of British Columbia — The
cortical dynamics underlying the process of auditory change detection
are poorly understood. This high density electroencephalography (EEG)
study comparing two auditory oddball tasks (passive listening/active
identification) revealed the spatiotemporal interactions of active cortical
sources through a modern approach of EEG analysis using independent
component analysis. Our results establish active regions in the superior
temporal gyrus (STG), inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), precentral gyrus
(PCG) and cingulate cortex (CC) for both listening conditions. This demonstration of oscillatory dynamics between sources provides a measure
of functional organization for change detection in the human auditory
system. Synchronization in the beta-band between the CC and generators
in the frontal and temporal regions was significantly enhanced for the
identification task requiring attention compared to passive listening.
Change detection processing appears to consist of initial detection in the
primary auditory cortex, detailed analysis in the STG, and monitoring of
task performance in the CC for the allocation of attentional resources in
the IFG.
A7
OSCILLATORY BRAIN NETWORKS FOR THE ATTENTIONAL
CONTROL OF COMPLEX AUDITORY PROCESSING MEASURED
WITH MEG Anthony Kaveh1,2, Corby Dale1, Felix Darvas3, Tracy Luks1,
Darren Weber4, Robert Zatorre5,6, Gregory Simpson1; 1University of California,
San Francisco, 2University of California, Berkeley, 3University of Washington,
4
Buck Institute, 5Montreal Neurological Institute, 6McGill University — Neural mechanisms of auditory attention hypothesize coordinated activity
between frontal and parietal control regions and auditory sensory
regions, orchestrated in a cortical network. We recorded whole-head
magnetoencephalography (MEG) from 9 healthy volunteers while per-

40

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

forming a discrimination task that required processing linguistic information with simultaneous suppression of tonal pattern information, and
vice versa. To examine oscillatory activity in control and sensory regions
of interest, we utilized cortically-constrained minimum norm methods
(Brainstorm) to reconstruct images of the neuronal currents specific to the
anatomy of each subject (Freesurfer), applied wavelet transforms, and
analyzed spectral data in six frequency bands. Synchronization of oscillatory activity within (spectral power) and between (phase locking) brain
regions was calculated to determine involvement in auditory attention
and selective processing of complex auditory stimuli. Results revealed
statistically significant increases in local neural synchronization in frontal, parietal and sensory regions, showing dynamic asymmetries indicative of increased right hemisphere activity. Frequency-specific
asymmetries in high alpha (12-14 hz) and theta (3-7 hz) bands also
occurred in control and sensory regions. Increased communication
between regions, measured by phase locking, was found both between
frontal and parietal control regions and between control regions and
auditory sensory cortex. Analysis of the relation between performance
and synchronization between control and sensory regions revealed statistically significant correspondence between performance and phase locking values. The results support a critical role for oscillatory brain activity
in auditory processing, and for functionally interconnected control and
sensory regions that form networks to produce successful auditory attention.

Attentional processes: Other
A8
CROSS-MODAL CUEING OF ATTENTION ALTERS VISUAL
APPEARANCE AND EARLY CORTICAL PROCESSING Viola
Störmer1, John McDonald2, Steven Hillyard3; 1International Max Planck
Research School "The Life Course: Evolutionary and Ontogenetic Dynamics”
(LIFE) School MPI Berlin, 2Simon Fraser University, 3University of California
San Diego — Recent psychophysical evidence suggests that visual cues
can alter the appearance of subsequent visual objects (e.g. Carrasco, Ling,
& Read, 2004). Here, we investigated whether cross-modal cueing can
also alter the appearance of visual objects. We found that a reflexive shift
of attention to a lateralized sound enhances the perceived contrast of a
spatially co-incident visual object. Following the general design used by
Carrasco et al., (2004), a bilateral pair of Gabor patches (8°x 8°1cpd) presented to the left and right of fixation was preceded by a spatially nonpredictive sound on either the left or right side at one of the target
locations. Target stimuli varied in relative contrast, orientation and phase
and observers reported the orientation of the target that appeared to be
higher in contrast. Target stimuli that were presented on the cued side
appeared to be higher in contrast on the majority of the trials. To determine whether this apparent boost in perceived stimulus contrast was due
to an effect of cross-modal cueing on early sensory processing, we
recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) to equal-contrast targets (50% of
trials). Cross-modal attention cueing led to enhancement of ERP activity
over the occipital scalp beginning 90 ms after target onset, and the magnitude of this enhancement was predictive of the degree to which the cuedside target appeared higher in contrast. We conclude that the boost in
perceived stimulus contrast by the cross-modal cueing of attention arises
from increased signal strength in the early visual pathways.
A9
SPECIFIC ATTENTIONAL PROFILE IN PURE DEVELOPMENTAL
DYSCALCULIA Sarit Ashkenazi1, Avishai Henik1; 1Ben Gurion
University, Beer Sheva, Israel — Fourteen university students diagnosed as
suffering from Developmental Dyscalculia (DD) [IQ and reading abilities
in the normal range and no indication for ADHD (Attention-Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder) [and 14 matched controls were examined with
the ANT-I (Attentional Network Test - Interactions). This test was

Poster Session A

designed to investigate three different attentional networksóexecutive,
orienting, alertingóand the interactions between them. The results
revealed deficits in those with DD in the alerting network (DD participants showed a larger alerting effect than controls) and the executive
function network (DD participants showed a larger congruity effect). The
interaction between these networks (alerting and executive function) was
also modulated by group. These results imply specific attentional deficits
in the executive function and alertness network in those with pure DD.
This indicates that people having DD suffer from difficulties in recruiting
attention, in addition to the deficits in numerical processing. Moreover,
this suggests that DD is a non-unitary deficit.
A10
CROSS-MODAL AND ATTENTIONAL MODULATION EFFECTS
IN THE THALAMUS AND EARLY SENSORY CORTICES David
Fegen1,2, Taraz Lee1,3, Jesse Rissman4, Bradley Buchsbaum1,3, David Badre5,
Mark D.Esposito1,2,3; 1Henry H. Wheeler Jr. Brain Imaging Center, University
of California, Berkeley, 2Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of
California, Berkeley, 3University of California, Berkeley, 4Stanford University,
5
Brown University — Previous studies have found that attention can modulate activity in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus.
However, almost no studies have examined how different perceptual
modalities interact in the thalamus as a function of one’s attentional
goals. We aimed to examine the effects of modality-specific attention and
cross-modal conflict within the thalamus using high-resolution fMRI.
Eighteen participants viewed a moving Gabor patch that was presented
simultaneously with the sound of a musical instrument. In high-conflict
blocks, participants were instructed to make either an auditory or visual
speed judgment, which often were mapped to competing response alternatives. In low-conflict blocks, subjects had to make a visual width discrimination or an auditory instrument discrimination. In these blocks, the
semantic decision space did not overlap between sensory channels. fMRI
analyses revealed trend-level attentional modulation in LGN, as well as
significant modulation of early visual areas, when visual stimuli were relevant targets versus irrelevant distractors. In contrast, a conflict-dependent suppression was only revealed in LGN and not other early visual
areas. This suppression effect is difficult to explain through a simple
attentional vigilance account, since LGN showed the lowest activity in
the most difficult condition (as confirmed by behavior). This effect may
be due to cross-modal interactions between thalamic nuclei, as predicted
by single-unit studies. In conclusion, these findings confirm that modality-specific attentional modulation occurs at multiple levels of early sensory processing and further suggest that the thalamus may serve as a
gatekeeper to help mitigate cross-modal conflict.
A11
NEUROFEEDBACK TRAINING ENHANCES THE EFFICIENCY OF
CORTICAL PROCESSING IN NORMAL AGING Elena K. Festa1,
William C. Heindel1, Nina C. Connors1, Lawrence Hirshberg1, Brian R. Ott1;
1Brown University — The goal of the present study was to examine the
efficacy of neurofeedback training (NFT) in improving selective neurocognitive measures of attention and sensory processing in normal
aging. Healthy elderly subjects received either: a) real-time feedback
linked to their individual brain activity (real-NFT group); or b) playback
recordings of the actual feedback obtained from demographicallymatched participants in the real-NFT group (mock-NFT group). Neurofeedback was based on a global z-score protocol in which participants
trained to normalize quantitative brainwave parameters across four central posterior sites (C3, C4, P3, P4) that existed outside of a threshold as
determined by a normative database. All participants were administered
eight NFT sessions across four to six weeks, with mood and arousal measures and EEG recordings of resting brain activity obtained both immediately before and after each training session. To evaluate the effect of NFT
on cognitive functioning, a battery of neuropsychological tests, neurocognitive tests of attention and sensory integration, and EEG recordings of
resting brain activity were obtained both prior to and after the eight train-

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

ing sessions. For the real-NFT participants, neurofeedback produced a
selective improvement in the efficiency of processing within the posterior
sensory cortical network, but not in those selective attention and executive control processes associated with more anterior cortical networks.
The mock-NFT participants showed either no change or a selective
impairment on all outcome measures. Taken together, these results indicate that neurofeedback training can be effective in inducing changes in
cortical processing associated with improvements in specific aspects of
cognitive functioning.
A12
THE EFFECT OF AROUSAL ON HEMISPHERIC ATTENTION
Michael Minnema1, Eran Zaidel1; 1University of California, Los Angeles —
INTRODUCTION: The two normal cerebral hemispheres constitute two
independent cognitive systems, each orchestrated by its own attentional
networks. We explored the effect of arousal on the attentional networks
of the two hemispheres. We used a truncated, lateralized version of Posner’s Attention Network Test. Our test measures three networks of attention in each hemisphere: (1) executive attention/Conflict Resolution, (2)
spatial Orienting Cost and (3) spatial Orienting Benefit. METHOD: Fortyfive undergraduates completed the task under conditions of high, mild,
and no social arousal. Arrow targets pointing up or down were presented
tachistoscopically up or down to only one hemisphere. Targets were
flanked by congruent or incongruent arrows (Conflict) and preceded by
valid, invalid, or central/neutral cues. The advantage of valid relative to
neutral cues defines Orienting Benefit and the cost of invalid relative to
neutral cues defines Orienting Cost. Subjects had to indicate unimanually
the direction of the target arrow. RESULTS. There was a significant interaction of Arousal x Conflict, showing that Conflict decreased (improved)
under mild arousal, but increased under high arousal. There was also a
significant interaction of Arousal x target Visual Field (left, right) x spatial Orienting, showing a larger Orienting Benefit and a lower Orienting
Cost in the right than the left hemisphere. CONCLUSION: Arousal followed the Yerkes-Dodson law for Conflict in both hemispheres. However, arousal affected selectively spatial Orienting in the right
hemisphere. This conforms with the differential deficits in spatial attention observed in patients with left or right parietal lesions.
A13
VISUAL ATTENTION INTERACTS WITH CONGRUENCY OF
LETTER/SOUND COMBINATIONS IN LATE AUDITORY ERPS
Ulrike Zimmer1, Suksun Itthipanyanan1, Marty Woldorff1; 1Center of
Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC — Reading of written letters can be slowed by incongruent, but speeded up by congruent,
letter-sound combinations. Neuroimaging studies, using attended taskrelevant stimuli, have revealed higher brain activity for incongruent than
congruent stimulation in auditory cortex. In contrast, studies using passive (i.e., "unattended") stimulation have found the opposite pattern.
However, these studies have all examined congruency effects for exclusively attended or unattended stimuli. Here, we specifically asked how
selectively focused visual-spatial attention modulates ERP brain-activity
patterns for congruent versus incongruent letter-sound pairs. Subjects
attended to one of two concurrent streams of visual letters presented to
the left and right fields. On some stimulus trials, a task-irrelevant letter
sound was presented centrally, the responses to which were extracted by
a series of subtractions for the different conditions. The modulation of the
central-auditory letter-sound responses due to visual attention (i.e., being
presented with an attended versus unattended lateral visual letter) differed as a function of congruence, but only at later latencies. First, at
~250-300ms, a frontal negativity was elicited only by incongruent auditory-letter sounds concurrent with attended visual-letter stimuli, consistent with an anterior-cingulate conflict response. Second, at ~500-550ms,
another frontal negativity was observed revealing an attentional modulation interaction for incongruent versus congruent auditory ERPs. More
specifically, the pattern suggests that if a visual letter is attended, a synchronous incongruent letter sound seems to act as a distracter that cap-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

41

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

tures attention, evoking conflict detection in the ACC, followed by other
cortical increases of activity that may reflect suppression of the distracting sound input.
A14
INHIBITION
OF
RETURN
ACROSS
MODALITIES:
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR CROSSMODAL
BIASING OF ATTENTION Jessica Green1, John McDonald1; 1Simon
Fraser University — Recent work in our lab has associated inhibition of
return (IOR) - the slowing of responses to stimuli that appear at previously attended spatial locations - with a reduction of the N2pc component of the visual event-related potential (ERP). The N2pc, which reflects
attentional processing of a visual stimulus, was reduced in amplitude
when the target appeared at the same location across successive trials
compared to when the target appeared at a new location. Here we
adapted our paradigm to investigate audiovisual IOR. We used a targettarget paradigm in which visual (V) and auditory (A) target trials were
intermixed, resulting in consecutive targets in the same (VV and AA) or
opposite (AV and VA) modality. Within each of these conditions the target could appear at the same or opposite location on successive trials.
Both the N2pc to visual targets and a contralateral negativity to auditory
targets were reduced for same location trials, regardless of the modality
of the preceding target, highlighting the role of a location-based attentional bias in IOR. We then used distributed source modeling to estimate
which brain areas were activated in each condition. We observed attention-related activities in regions of medial and lateral prefrontal cortex
that were common to all conditions, suggesting the involvement of a
supramodal attention system in producing IOR. In addition, in sensoryspecific auditory and visual cortices we observed activities that reflected
attentional processing of the current target as well as activities that
reflected the suppression of the previous target location and modality.
A15
MIND WANDERING AND EARLY ATTENTIONAL SELECTION:
ERP EVIDENCE FOR CROSS-MODAL EFFECTS Julia W. Y. Kam1,
Todd C. Handy1; 1University of British Columbia — Mind wandering has
been associated with reduced cognitive and sensory analysis of external
visual events. However it is unclear whether the attenuation of sensory
responses is restricted to the visual modality. This study examined
whether mind wandering is associated with reduced early attentional
sensory responses in both the visual and auditory modality. Participants
performed a target detection task at fixation while event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded. Interspersed with each target were a taskirrelevant probe in the visual periphery, and a task-irrelevant tone, presented in a randomized order. At the end of each trial block, participants
self-reported on whether or not they had been mind wandering at the
conclusion of the trial block. The ERPs to the visual and auditory probes
were then examined as a function of whether or not they immediately
preceded a report of mind wandering versus on task. Data analysis found
that the visual sensory-evoked P1 and auditory sensory-evoked N1 ERP
components both showed decreased amplitude during periods of mind
wandering relative to being on-task. Our data thus suggests that the
effect of mind wandering on early attentional selection is cross-modal in
nature, equally affecting both visual and auditory inputs.
A16
THE IMPACT OF AGING ON SLIPS OF ACTION IN EVERYDAY
LIFE Amanda Clark1, Eric Roy1, Daniel Smilek1, James Lyons2; 1University
of Waterloo, 2McMaster University — Many of our daily activities are successfully achieved through goal-oriented routines. This is an illustration
of the adaptability and efficiency of information processing but nevertheless, slips of attention and action do occur. This study was designed to
determine if slips of action can be induced in a well learned task and if so,
how these slips are impacted by aging. We induced action errors in both
younger and older adults by occasionally altering a routine action
sequence and measured the frequency of errors in addition to reaction
(RT) and movement times (MT). Participants also completed the Atten-

42

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

tion-Related Cognitive Errors Scale (ARCES), a measure of attention failures in daily life and the Sustained Attention to Response Task (SART).
Numerous slips were committed by both participant groups but the older
adults were surprising more accurate in the face of alterations to the routine. Also, while errors on the SART were highly predictive of slips, the
ARCES only predicted errors on trials that did not require a change in the
routine action sequence. By understanding the mechanisms through
which slips are induced and how they relate to both errors in everyday
life and aging, we hope to be able to use our slip induction task to identify individuals who are prone to attention failures and equip them with
strategies to protect themselves in activities of daily living.
A17
THE DECOUPLED MIND: PHYSIOLOGICAL AROUSAL AND THE
FOCUS OF ATTENTION DURING VIGILANCE Jonathan
Smallwood1, Michael Franklin1, Jonathan Schooler1; 1University of California,
Santa Barbara — States of imaginative thought occupy a large proportion
of our waking life and yet little is known about how different foci of
attention are associated with physiological changes. This study employs
novel statistical techniques to examine how different physiological measures (including skin conductance and heart rate) relate to the effectiveness of external attention. The results demonstrate how components of
physiological arousal differentially relate to the focus of attention and
suggests that physiological changes could be critical in understanding
how internal and external focus of attention emerge.

Attentional processes: Visual
A18
SUPPORTING THE LINK BETWEEN THE LOCUS COERULEUS NOREPINEPHRINE SYSTEM, THE P300, AND THE ATTENTIONAL BLINK Christopher Warren1; 1University of Victoria — This
poster presents evidence in support of the hypothesis that the locus coeruleus - norephinephrine (LC-NE) system is the neurophysiological basis
of both the attentional blink (AB) and the event related potential (ERP)
component known as the P300. The LC-NE system is thought to provide
a brief burst of processing facilitation in response to motivationally
salient events. The AB refers to decreased accuracy for reporting the second of two targets (T1 and T2) inserted into a rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP). The LC-NE account of the AB holds that the AB is the result
of a refractory-like period in LC-NE activity. The LC-NE account of the
P300 suggests the P300 is the electrophysiological manifestation of the
activity of the LC-NE system. The proposed three-way link between these
different aspects of brain activity is supported by work showing that subjects who show a larger amplitude P300 response to T1 (T1-P300) in the
AB paradigm demonstrate a greater deficit for reporting T2 (Shapiro et
al., 2006). Until the work reported here, this relationship has not been
shown within subjects, across trials. I ran a typical AB experiment and
used single trial analysis of the P300 in response to T1 (T1-P300) to categorize trials into low- and high-amplitude trials. The high-amplitude T1P300 condition showed a greater T2 deficit. Consistent with the LC-NE
theory of the AB, I conclude that T1-P300 amplitude indexes the investment of NE facilitated processing to T1, with resulting cost to T2.
A19
THE ROLE OF THE LEFT AND RIGHT FEF IN VOLUNTARY
CONTROL OVER OCULOMOTOR REFLEXES; A TMS STUDY
Martijn G. van Koningsbruggen1, Alex List1, Robert D. Rafal1; 1School of
Psychology, Bangor University — TMS was used to investigate the role of
the left and right FEF in the voluntary control over oculomotor reflexes.
TMS was used to investigate the role of the FEF in the cognitive control of
oculomotor reflexes. The FOE, which is the difference in saccadic reaction
time between overlap and offset trials, is a measure of the amount of
influence an external fixation point has over oculomotor behaviour. For
example, the FOE is larger when executing pro-saccades, than anti-sac-

Poster Session A

cades. The reduced FOE during anti-saccades reflects an increase in voluntary control over the fixation reflex. It has been shown in monkeys
that, in order to suppress reflexive saccades when anti-saccades are
required, the preparatory set increases fixation related activity. Due to
this increase in activity of fixation related process, the oculomotor system
is less influenced by the presence or absence of an external fixation point,
i.e. reducing the size of the FOE. Patients with unilateral lesions in the
Frontal Eye Fields are impaired in controlling their oculomotor reflexes
as measured by the FOE. In the present study, we investigated whether
TMS over either the left or right FEF has the same effect in healthy controls. We measured the size of the Fixation Offset Effect (FOE) during
both a block of Pro-saccades and Anti-saccades, while TMS was applied
over either the left, or right FEF, or a sham control side. So far (N=4),
results suggest that TMS over the FEF results in a loss of voluntary control over oculomotor reflexes.
A20
LINKING THE OCULAR MOTOR SYSTEM AND REFLEXIVE
ALLOCATION OF ATTENTION: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION Shai
Gabay1, Yoni Pertzov2, Libe Gradstein3, Avishai Henik1, Galia Avidan1;
1Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, BeerSheva, Israel, 2Interdisciplinary Center For Neural Computation, The Hebrew
University, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Soroka Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel — It
is generally accepted that eye movements and covert attention are closely
related but the exact association between these two processes is still
under debate. We addressed this issue by investigating a patient (GS)
with Duane Retraction Syndromeóa congenital impairment in executing
horizontal eye movements affecting only the left visual field in her left
eye. GS and control participants performed Posner’s exogenous cuing
task during an fMRI scan. The experiment was repeated twice, each time
with only one eye open. Behavioural results revealed an exogenous validity effect for controls in both eyes and both visual fields. Importantly
however, a reversed pattern was found in GS's restricted visual field,
even though no eye movements were required or preformed during the
task. fMRI data revealed lower activation for GS in the left intraparietal
sulcus (IPS), known to be involved in orienting of attention, when cues
were presented in the restricted visual field. That is, GS presented intact
behavioural performance and brain activation when viewing stimuli in
the healthy visual fieldóevidence for normal development of attention. In
spite of this, covert orienting depended on the ability to execute appropriate eye movements even when they were not explicitly required. This
result provides evidence for a strong linkage between the reflexive orienting system and the ocular motor system.
A21
THE CAUSAL ROLE OF THE DORSOLATERAL FRONTAL
CORTEX IN THE STROOP COLOR-NAMING TASK Eishi Asano1,
Shin-ichiro Koga1, Robert Rothermel1, Csaba Juhasz1, Miho Fukuda1, Masaaki
Nishida1, Sandeep Sood1; 1Children's Hospital of Michigan, Wayne State
University — Previous human studies using functional MRI demonstrated that a Stroop color-naming task induced greater cortical activation in the left dorsolateral-frontal region, compared to a word-reading
task. In the present study, we evaluated event-related gamma-oscillations
(80 - 100 Hz) during the Stroop color-naming and word-reading tasks in
two epileptic patients who underwent intracranial electrocorticography.
Using our in-vivo animation technique (Brown et al, NeuroImage 2008;
Fukuda et al, Brain 2008), we delineated ’how’ color-naming-specific
gamma-augmentation involved the left dorsolateral-frontal region. Both
Stroop color-naming and word-reading tasks commonly induced
gamma-augmentation in the posterior-inferior temporal region immediately following presentation of colored-word stimuli. Both Stroop colornaming and word-reading tasks also commonly induced gamma-augmentation in the inferior Rolandic region immediately prior to and during overt responses. In addition, the Stroop color-naming task specifically
induced gamma-augmentation in the left dorsolateral-frontal region
approximately 500 - 300 msec prior to overt responses. Electrical stimula-

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

tion of the site showing color-naming-specific gamma-augmentation
resulted in temporary naming impairment in both patients. The present
study has provided further evidence that the left dorsolateral frontal
region plays a causal role in the Stroop color-naming task.
A22
PRISM ADAPTATION REVERSES THE LOCAL PROCESSING BIAS
IN PATIENTS WITH RIGHT TEMPORO-PARIETAL JUNCTION
LESIONS Janet Bultitude1, Robert Rafal1,2, Alexandra List1; 1School of
Psychology, Bangor University, 2Wolfson Centre for Clinical and Cognitive
Neuroscience — Lesions to the right temporo-parietal cortex commonly
result in hemispatial neglect. Lesions to the same area are also associated
with hyperattention to local details of a scene and difficulty perceiving
the global structure. This local processing bias is an important factor contributing to neglect and may contribute to the higher prevalence of the
disorder following right compared to left hemisphere strokes. In recent
years promising evidence has emerged for improvements in neglect
symptoms following adaptation to rightward-shifting prisms. Explanations for these improvements have generally described a leftward
realignment of attention, however the present investigation provides evidence that prism adaptation reduces the local processing bias. Five
patients with right temporal-parietal junction lesions were asked to identify the global or local components of hierarchical figures before and after
undergoing visuo-motor adaptation to rightward-shifting prisms. Prior
to prism adaptation the patients had difficulties inhibiting the local elements when identifying the global component compared to ten age- and
gender-matched controls. Following prism adaptation, however, this pattern was reversed, with greater global interference during local identification. The results suggest that prism adaptation may improve nonspatially lateralised deficits that contribute to the neglect syndrome.
A23
HOW DO WE LOOK AT FACES? Aurelie Porcheron1, Walter Jenner2,
Juergen Pripfl2, Maja Pivec2, Michael Binder3, Erwin Tschachler1,3, Frederique
Morizot1; 1CE.R.I.E.S, Neuilly sur Seine, France, 2University of Applied
Sciences FH JOANNEUM, Information Design, Graz, Austria, 3Medical
University of Vienna, Dermatology, Vienna, Austria — Facial appearance is
an important source of social affective information. Face perception and
visual attention play an important role in the judgement of social characteristics. The analysis of gaze behaviour provides information on how we
are looking at faces. The objective of the present study was to determine
the facial areas used for age estimation. The eye movements of women
exposed to faces demonstrating different signs of aging was tracked.
Twenty two women aged between 39 and 45 were exposed twice to 48
female facial pictures: a first time without any instruction, and a second
time with the instruction to estimate the age of the faces shown. Images of
the faces showing different signs of aging were from women of three age
groups: young (30 to 39), middle (40 to 49) and old (50 to 59). We
observed a common behaviour in the group of viewers exposed to female
faces whatever the instructions. When subjects were instructed to rate the
age of a face, their eyes remained fixated within an area which covers the
eyes, the nose and the middle upper part of the mouth. More than 75,5%
of all fixations fall within this area, whereas when subjects were
instructed to just look at the faces, this area demanded only 64,7% of all
fixations. Our results suggest that we mainly look at internal features
when estimating the age of a face and we strongly focus on the eyes.
A24
PARIETAL CORTEX REPRESENTATION OF VISUAL PRIORITY:
EVIDENCE FROM SPATIAL NEGLECT Masud Husain1,2, Victoria
Singh-Curry1,2, Jon Driver1, Paul Bays1,2; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
University College London, UK, 2Institute of Neurology, University College
London, UK — Where we look is determined both by our current intentions and by the tendency of visually salient items to ’catch our eye’. This
normal process of directing attention can be profoundly impaired by
damage to parietal cortex, resulting in visual neglect of the contralesional
hemispace. Here we use neglect patients’ (n=5) eye movements in a

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

43

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

visual search task to separately evaluate impairments in goal-directed
orienting to targets and in stimulus-driven orienting to salient distractors. These deficits are shown to be identical in both magnitude and spatial distribution. The findings appear consistent with damage to a single
topographically-organized ’priority map’ in posterior parietal cortex, representing both the goal-relevance and the visual salience of items in the
visual scene. According to this hypothesis, left neglect occurs when righthemisphere damage leaves left hemispace under-represented in the priority map, resulting in a pathological bias of attention towards ipsilesional space. However, because targets of attention are chosen by
competition within the map, shifts of attention to left hemispace should
still be possible if the leftward input is strong enough to overcome the
over-representation of right space. We used an adaptive algorithm to systematically vary the distribution of distractor luminance in a search
array, searching for a display that will normalize a patient’s exploratory
behaviour. Consistent with the priority-map hypothesis, we demonstrate
that the rightward bias in neglect can indeed be eliminated and even
reversed by biasing the distribution of visual salience towards the left.
A25
DISTRIBUTION OF GAZE AND ATTENTION DURING FACIAL
IDENTITY AND EXPRESSION TASKS Susan M. Letourneau1, Teresa
V. Mitchell2; 1Brandeis University, 2E.K. Shriver Center, University of
Massachusetts Medical School — Two studies compared the distribution of
gaze and attention during emotion and identity judgments. We hypothesized that the top and the bottom of the face would vary in salience
depending on the type of judgment being made. Subjects learned names
for a set of faces, and then were asked to make identity or emotion judgments of whole faces, isolated top halves, and isolated bottom halves of
faces. Eye-tracking data was gathered and accuracy was measured. Subjects were more accurate in both tasks when whole faces, rather than isolated top or bottom halves, were presented. Emotion was recognized
more accurately from the bottom of the face than the top, while the opposite was observed for identity judgments. Despite this difference, the top
of the face immediately captured subjects’ gaze in both tasks. Saccades
were made to the bottom half of the face only during the emotion task,
specifically from 500-1000ms after stimulus onset. In the second study,
subjects were asked to identify the name or emotional expression in the
top or bottom half of briefly presented composite faces (combining the
top of one identity or emotion with the bottom of another). Subjects more
accurate when judging emotion from the bottom halves of the stimuli,
and when judging identity from the top halves. In sum, while early gaze
fixations tend to fall on the top half of the face regardless of the task, later
fixations and attention patterns are highly dependent upon the task and
stimulus characteristics.
A26
DOES POWER SHIFT ATTENTION ON A VERTICAL
DIMENSION? AN EVENT RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Kiki
Zanolie1, Jasper Wijnen2, Saskia van Dantzig1,3, Inge Boot1, Diane Pecher1;
1
Erasmus University Rotterdam - Institute for Psychology, 2University of
Amsterdam, 3Leiden University Institute for Psychological Research — People
often use the spatial dimension up-down metaphorically when speaking
and thinking of power. Studies show that thinking of power automatically activates the 'power is up' metaphor. This raises the question
whether power stimuli can induce a shift of attention to the upper or
lower visual field. To address this question, Event Related Potentials
were recorded during a dual-task. Participants made power judgments to
words denoting powerful or powerless people (e.g. ’king’ or ’servant’),
presented centrally. Following each judgment, a target letter was presented in the upper or lower visual field. Findings of 15 participants
show an enhanced P1 and N1 amplitude when the spatial position of the
target is congruent with the metaphorical direction of the preceding
word (powerful-up, powerless-down). This result suggests that power
stimuli induce a spatial shift of attention corresponding to their implied

44

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

direction, providing further evidence that metaphors play a role in
grounding abstract concepts in sensorimotor processing.
A27
DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF EXOGENOUS AND ENDOGENOUS
ATTENTION ON PERCEPTUAL LEARNING Ikuko Mukai1, Kandy
Bahadur1, Leslie Ungerleider1; 1Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, NIMH,
NIH — Perceptual learning is a phenomenon in which one’s visual perception improves after repeated exposure to a visual stimulus. However,
large differences in the rate and extent of perceptual learning are often
observed among subjects, for unknown reasons. Based on results from
our previous study (Mukat et al., J. Neurosci 2007), we hypothesized that
attention plays a key role in facilitating perceptual learning. To manipulate spatial attention at different locations during training, we used exogenous and endogenous attention cues. Training stimuli (tilted Gabor
patches) were placed within four quadrants of the visual field. Subjects
decided if the Gabor patch at a task location was tilted to the right or left
from the vertical meridian. The contrasts of the stimuli were set at an
accuracy level of 75% correct, based on threshold measurements conducted before training. When we manipulated attention by exogenous
attention cues, we found a large improvement in accuracy and reaction
times at the cued location but no significant improvement at the uncued
location. On the other hand, when we manipulated attention by endogenous cues, improvements were observed at both cued and uncued locations, though accuracy was better and reaction times were shorter for the
cued location. One possible explanation for these results is that exogenous, but not endogenous, attention facilitates perceptual learning.
Another possibility is that our endogenous manipulation, specifically the
number of valid task trials, did not sufficiently control subjects’ attention
during training. We will investigate this further by increasing this number and seeing its effect on learning.
A28
DISCRIMINATING DIFFERENT ATTENTION LEVELS BY THE
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL AND BEHAVIORAL MEASURES YuChieh Chang1, Shwu-Lih Huang1,2, Ai-Ru Lee1, Huan-Chun Sun1; 1National
Chengchi University, 2Research Center for Mind, Brain & Learning, National
Chengchi University — The purpose of present study is to find out indices
which can discriminate different attention levels. Most of the previous
studies could hardly control perceptual content well while manipulating
attention levels. Thus the indices found may reflect a mixed effect from
perceptual content and attention levels. Therefore, the task was revised in
present study by equalizing perceptual content in different attention levels. A lot of measures such as electroencephalography (EEG), electrooculography (EOG), respiration and temperature were recorded
simultaneously while doing the task. Four conditions were manipulated
to induce different attention levels. In baseline condition, participants
took a rest, opened their eyes and being motionless. In control condition,
participants observed movie clips only. In low attention condition, participants observed the same clips and counted the easy target events
defined by one feature dimension only. In high attention condition, participants counted the difficult target events defined by two feature
dimensions conjointly. Based on the Feature Integration Theory, our high
attention condition consumes more attention resources than the low
attention condition. In order to equalize perceptual content in different
attention levels, movie clips used in our conditions of control, low attention, and high attention were totally identical. A MANOVA analysis
(N=24) of the data revealed that only power value of alpha band
(8.2~12.9Hz) and delta band (1~2Hz) of EEG and blink duration may
potentially discriminate different attention levels. The implications of
present findings in psychophysiology and cognitive neuroscience could
lead more explorative investigations in the future.

Poster Session A

A29
PRISMS IMPROVE BOTH ACTION AND PERCEPTION IN AN
ARTIST WITH NEGLECT James Danckert1, Nadine Quehl1, Colleen
Merrifield1; 1University of Waterloo — We recently tested the hypothesis
that prisms will influence dorsal but not ventral stream processing in
patients with neglect using the line bisection and landmark tasks. In two
patients with neglect we showed improvement in the line bisection task
but no change in the landmark task, which represents a perceptual variant of line bisection. Here we tested a patient who had been a graphic artist prior to suffering a right fronto-parietal stroke leading to dense
unilateral neglect. Prior to prisms he showed only a minor rightward bias
on the line bisection task and a marked leftward bias on the landmark
task (note: leftward biases on this task indicates that the patient perceives
the left half of the line to be shorter than the right even when they are of
equivalent lengths). After prisms the patient showed a significant leftward shift in line bisection mirroring the same effects observed in other
neglect patients. In contrast to our previous work, this patient also
showed a marked change in the landmark task such that he was no
longer biased toward perceiving the left end of the line as shorter (his
responses were more equally distributed towards left and right
responses). It may be the case that accomplished artists have far stronger
linkages between perception and action than do non-artists. Prisms may
have restored such linkages for our patient leading to improved perception and action.
A30
HIGH-FIELD
FMRI
REVEALS
CONTRALATERAL
AND
EGOCENTRIC-REFERENCE-FRAME
PROPERTIES
OF
THE
SUPERIOR COLLICULUS DURING SACCADE EXECUTION IN
HUMANS Ruth Krebs1,3, Marty Woldorff3, Claus Tempelmann1, Nils
Bodammer1, Toemme Neosselt1, Carsten Boehler2,3, Jens-Max Hopf1,2, Emrah
Duzel1, Hans-Jochen Heinze1,2, Ariel Schoenfeld1,2; 1Clinic for Neurology,
University of Magdeburg, Germany, 2Leibniz-Institute for Neurobiology
Magdeburg, Germany , 3Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University,
United States — Neural correlates of saccade execution in humans were
mapped using 7T high-field fMRI. Subjects performed centrally cued saccades to a left or right lateral target square (centrifugal saccade) and
maintained the new position until a second cue at that location indicated
to return back to the center (centripetal saccade). Activity in the superior
colliculus (SC) was significantly larger contralateral to the direction of the
saccade, providing direct evidence for the contralateral functional anatomy of the SC in humans. Additionally, the SC exhibited higher activity
for centrifugal compared to centripetal saccades, presumably reflecting
higher processing demands. Correspondingly, centrifugal saccades were
also associated with substantially greater deactivations in the defaultmode network than were centripetal saccades, further supporting the
notion that the return to the center of egocentric reference space is less
effortful. These differential reference-frame effects may be due to
reduced requirements for calculating the reference coordinates and thus
for attentional allocation during saccades that return to the center of egocentric space. More generally, the present data support the view that the
center of straight gaze, in which retinotopic and the egocentric frame are
aligned, might represent the natural default baseline value for eye movements from which the visual world can be explored.
A31
NEURAL MODULATION OF RHYTHM INDUCED TEMPORAL
EXPECTATIONS Gustavo Rohenkohl1, Anna Dal Molin1,2, Anna
Christina Nobre1; 1University of Oxford, 2University of Verona — Time is an
essential dimension of our experience, framing human behaviour at
scales ranging from the millisecond organization of motor actions to circadian rhythms cycle, and beyond. Nevertheless, the mechanisms by
which the brain keeps time and uses temporal information to organise
behaviour remain unknown. Whereas the principles of the organisation
of spatial cognition in the human brain are emerging, the same is not true
for temporal cognition. The current study tested the influence of tempo-

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

ral expectations on attentional orienting to moving targets. In this task, a
ball appeared at the left side of a screen and moved across the screen in
steps following either a regular or irregular rhythm. After reaching an
occluding band, the ball was temporarily occluded. When the ball reappeared, it contained either an upright (50%) or tilted (50%) cross. The task
involved making a speeded perceptual discrimination about the target
stimulus that reappears after the occlusion. The results indicated a strong
behaviour benefit from temporal orienting. We recorded ERPs elicited by
reappearance of the target stimulus, and investigated how temporal
expectations influenced perceptual (e.g., visual P1 potential) and motor
(lateralised readiness potential) stages of neural processing. The results
showed that temporal expectations facilitated both early visual (P1) as
well as motor (LRP) potentials. We are currently comparing induced frequency activity during the pre-occlusion and occlusion periods to look
for modulation of rhythmic activity in lower frequency bands related to
visual (alpha) and motor (mu) processing.
A32
DISTRACTIBILITY WITH ADVANCING AGE AND PARKINSON’S
DISEASE:
EVIDENCE
OF
DYSFUNCTIONAL
REACTIVE
INHIBITION Liana Machado1, Amy Devine1, Natalie Wyatt1; 1University
of Otago — Focused attention can be compromised by the neurodegenerative processes associated with both healthy aging and Parkinson’s disease (PD). Deficits in ignoring distractors with reflexive or overlearned
response links have been attributed to impaired inhibition. The current
research assessed whether similar deficits occur for distractors with
recently learned arbitrary response associations, for which sensorimotor
transformations are far less automatic and therefore considerably easier
to resist. We used a selective attention task that evaluated distractibility
and the use of distractor inhibition within the same context. The task
involved stimuli that were arbitrarily assigned to responses based on a
rule learned during the testing session. Performance showed that distraction increased with both healthy aging and PD. Moreover, these increases
in distraction were accompanied by decreases in overt evidence of distractor inhibition, which appear to reflect at least in part a failure of reactive inhibition. Removing the distractor prior to the appearance of the
target eliminated the age- and PD-specific increases in distractibility;
however, inhibitory deficits remained evident. Comparison of the two
groups indicates that the key differences reflect severity of symptoms,
rather than distinct symptoms, suggesting that the deficits stem from
neural changes associated with both advancing age and PD. These results
demonstrate that age- and PD-related hyper-distractibility and impaired
inhibition during focused attention affect stimuli without prepotent
response links, suggesting a critical role for dopaminergic networks in
the strategic control of arbitrary visuomotor transformations.

Emotion
A33
EMOTIONAL MEMORY CONSOLIDATION IN A CONDITIONAL
DISCRIMINATION PARADIGM USING FMRI IN HUMANS Amal
Achaibou1,2,3, Irina Constantinescu1,2,
David Sander2,3,1, Patrik
Vuilleumier1,2,3, Sophie Schwartz1,2,3; 1University of Geneva, 2Center for
Neuroscience, University of Geneva, 3Swiss Center for Affective Sciences,
University of Geneva — In classical aversive conditioning paradigms, a
neutral stimulus (conditioned stimulus, CS) is paired with an aversive
stimulus (unconditioned stimulus, US) and acquires an emotional
valence. A conditioned response (CR) is then observable after presentation of the CS alone. Extinction of the CR occurs when the CS is presented
alone for several trials, corresponding to a new safety-related memory
rather than to the forgetting the conditioning phase. While this has been
commonly used to assess fear inhibition, it remains difficult to disentangle between the "aversive" and "safety" signals associated with the CS.
We used a conditional discrimination paradigm, in 21 participants while

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

45

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

they viewed pairs of faces during fMRI. One pair (AX, excitatory) was
associated with an aversive noise (US) whereas another pair (BX, inhibitory) was never associated with the US. During a subsequent testing
phase, subjects viewed the same pairs and 2 additional pairs to test the
transfer of inhibition (AB) and of excitation (AC). Between sessions, participants took a 45-minutes nap while their EEG was recorded, allowing
us to assess any influence of sleep on emotional memory. Behaviorally,
preliminary results show increased pupil responses to AX as compared to
BX during testing, indicating efficient conditioning. In fMRI, we found
increased activity in the Insula for AX as compared to BX and in prefrontal, hippocampal and retrosplenial regions for BX as compared to AX,
suggesting a role of contextual memory systems for acquisition of safety
signals. Further analysis will focus on sleep influence on emotional learning and associated brain activity.
A34
EEG MEASURES OF ADULT RESPONSE TO INFANT EMOTION
Jeffrey K. Erbe1, Nicole Landi1,2,3, Julia R. Irwin2, W. Einar Mencl2, Jocelyn L.
Topf4, Mark N. Potenza4, Linda C. Mayes1; 1Yale Child Study Center, New
Haven, CT, 2Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, CT, 3University of Minnesota,
4Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT — At the earliest stages of infant
development, the primary way in which infants communicate with caregivers is through facial expression and vocalizations such as cries. Thus,
it is of great importance to understand how and when human caregivers
process this information. Two experiments were conducted to examine
EEG response to infant emotion in female adults. The first study compared processing of infant faces expressing happy, neutral or sad affect;
the second study compared processing of low distress and high distress
infant cries. We conducted temporal principle components analyses
(PCA) for each of a set of a priori defined scalp regions for each experiment, followed by a series of repeated measures ANOVAs. In the face
study we observed a large N170 effect in the right hemisphere occipital
parietal scalp region that was modulated by valence such that both
happy and sad faces produced more negative deflections than neutral
faces, consistent with theories that postulate that the N170 and not just
later components are sensitive to emotion (e.g., Blau et al, 2007). The cry
analyses revealed more negative N1 responses to high distress cries relative to low distress cries. Critically, this EEG response demonstrates that
the N1 is modulated by perceived distress level (previous research on
cries has shown that the N1 is more negative for cries relative to a neutral
sound, but has not examined distress level). Taken together these findings reveal that information about infant emotional valence is processed
at very early stages of visual face and auditory cry perception.
A35
FUNCTIONAL CORTICAL ACTIVATION ASSOCIATED WITH
PROCESSING OF INFANT EMOTIONAL STATES Nicole Landi1,2,3,
W. Einar Mencl2, Jeff Erbe3, Mark Potenza4, Julia Irwin2, Jocelyn Topf4, Linda
Mayes3; 1University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 2Haskins Laboratories,
New Haven, CT, 3Yale Child Study Center, New Haven, CT, 4Yale School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT — The nature of the bond between infant and
caregiver has important effects on children’s developmental trajectories.
Because this bond is formed very early in development, during a time
when the primary communication from the infant to the care-giver is
expressed via facial expression and vocalizations such as coos and cries,
it is of great interest to understand how care-givers process the emotional
content of these basic visual and pre-verbal communications. We used
event-related fMRI to examine the underlying neurocircuitry associated
with this process. Twenty adult females viewed infant faces expressing
happy, sad, or neutral emotion, and cries expressing high or low distress.
The comparisons of infant face processing revealed modulation of the
anterior cingulate (an area previously implicated in processing of infant
facial affect), with greater activation for sad relative to neutral faces. We
also observed differential processing for sad and happy faces in the globus pallidus, an area thought to be involved in integration of emotion
and body location. These findings reveal a circuit for processing of infant

46

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

facial emotion involving both cortical and subcortical regions. For auditory cries, more distressed/sad cries again produced greater activation in
the anterior cingulate, as well as the insula, another area implicated in
infant facial emotion processing. Together these findings indicate that
processing of infant facial emotion and cries reveals a partially overlapping network of regions that have been implicated previously in emotion
processing.
A36
ACTIVE SUPPRESSION OF FACIAL MOVEMENT DIMINISHES
BUT DOES NOT ABOLISH AUTOMATIC FACIAL MIMICRY
Sebastian Korb1,2, Didier Grandjean1,2, Klaus Scherer1; 1Swiss Center for Affective
Sciences, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University of Geneva, Switzerland — Automatic
facial mimicry is a well described phenomenon involving people’s reflexive tendency to display facial expressions they perceive in others. It has
also been proposed to be the main process underlying emotion recognition, emotional contagion, and empathy. In order to address the question
whether automatic facial mimicry persists despite voluntary, active inhibition of facial movements, we recorded facial electromyography (EMG)
in healthy participants during an emotional Go/NoGo task. In a withinsubjects design, participants were instructed to smile quickly to smiling
faces and to keep a neutral expression to neutral faces (congruent condition), or the reverse (incongruent condition). Activity of the left corrugator and zygomaticus muscles was measured with EMG. Results showed
significantly earlier activity of the zygomaticus for smiling in congruent
compared to incongruent Go trials, and a higher false-alarm rate for
incongruent compared to congruent NoGo trials. Moreover, activity of
the zygomaticus was significantly higher during response-free incongruent than congruent NoGo trials. These results suggest that facial mimicry
effects are present even at short intertrial intervals, and that they can survive participants’ active suppression of facial movement.
A37
REWARDS EARNED FOR OTHERS - AN FMRI STUDY OF THE
NEURAL CORRELATES OF ALTRUISM Jeff MacInnes1,2, R. McKell
Carter1,2, R. Alison Adcock1,2,3, Scott Huettel1,2,4; 1Center for Cognitive
Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham NC, 2Brain Imaging and Analysis
Center, Duke University, Durham NC, 3Duke University Medical Center,
Durham NC, 4Duke University, Durham NC — The anticipation of reward
has been reliably shown to elicit fMRI activations in the ventral tegmental
area (VTA) and nucleus accumbens (NAcc). However, previous research
has focused predominantly on rewards directly earned for oneself.
Humans often exhibit altruistic behavior engaging in actions that lead to
a reward for others, leaving an open question of whether these types of
rewards are processed by mirroring self-directed rewards. We compared
fMRI activations in 18 participants during a modified monetary incentive
delay (MID) task in which participants played to earn money for a charity
of their choosing. The experiment was divided into 2 block types, reward
and punishment, where participants played to earn money or avoid losing money, respectively. Within each block participants were cued on a
trial-by-trial basis whether they would be playing for themselves or for
the charity. Trial outcomes were based on reaction times to targets presented following the cue. Participants received feedback on each trial.
GLM analyses conducted in FSL examined fMRI activations during the
anticipation period between cue and target across the different test conditions. We find strong striatal activations for both charity and self conditions. Consistent with past research examining the representation of self
and other, an analysis comparing charity trial anticipation to self trial
anticipation revealed significant activation in the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) during both the reward and punishment blocks.
A38
REGULATING CRAVING FOR CIGARETTES AND FOOD: AN
FMRI STUDY OF CIGARETTE SMOKERS Hedy Kober1, Ethan Kross2,
Peter Mende-Siedlecki1, Kevin Ochsner1; 1Columbia University, 2University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor — A failure to regulate craving has been implicated
in substance abuse disorders and in post-treatment relapse. This under-

Poster Session A

scores the urgent need to understand the neural correlates of craving and
its regulation in substance abusing populations. Therefore, this study
used fMRI to examine the neural bases of craving for cigarettes and food,
as well as the regulation of craving using cognitive strategies in a nicotine-dependent population. Twenty-one cigarette smokers viewed
images of cigarettes and of delicious looking, unhealthy foods, and were
instructed to think about either the (a) immediate sensory experience (e.g.
increase craving), or (b) the long-term negative physical health implications associated with consuming each item (e.g. regulate craving). Subjective ratings indicated that participants experienced significantly less
craving for both cigarettes and food when considering the long-term consequences associated with consumption, suggesting that cognitive strategies can be used to effectively regulate craving for both food and
cigarettes (consistent with clinical data). On "increase craving" compared
to "regulate craving" trials, we observed activation in "reward" regions
including subgenual cingulate, ventral striatum, and ventral tegmental
area. This pattern was stronger for cigarettes compared to food, consistent with participants’ reports of greater craving for cigarettes compared
to food. Conversely, on "regulate craving" trials we observed activity in
"control" regions including the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex and inferior
frontal gyrus. This pattern was stronger for food compared to cigarettes,
suggesting a possible mechanism for the impaired regulation of cigarette
craving (compared to food craving) exhibited by these cigarette smokers
in everyday life.
A40
COULD THE CONTEXT BECOME A PREDICTOR OF AN
AVERSIVE STIMULUS? Marta Andreatta1, Andreas Muelberger1,
Cornelius Gross2, Peter Weyers1, Paul Pauli1; 1University of Wuerzburg,
2
European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) — After learning, a stimulus can signal that an expected aversive unconditioned stimulus (US) will
not occur and it induces inhibition of defensive responses. Urcelay et al.
(2006) in a study with rats found that context became a good predictor of
US when it was presented for short periods of time in the absence of US.
Thus, Pavlovian conditioned inhibition was disrupted because context
competed with the stimulus predicting US (i.e. excitor) and it decreases
inhibitory potential of the stimulus signaling the absence of US (i.e. inhibitor). Goal of the study is to investigate the conditions in which context
becomes a predictor of US in humans. In a between-subject design, we
compared Pavlovian inhibition with relatively spaced-trials (intertrial
interval - ITI - 25 s) to Pavlovian inhibition with relatively massed-trials
(ITI 7 s). A geometrical shape was associated with an aversive electrical
shock (US) and functioned as excitor (A+), whereas a compound shape
(AX-), which functioned as inhibitor, not. As index of inhibition startle
reflex, skin conduction and subjective ratings were assessed during a
summation test. According to animal data, we did not find conditioned
inhibition modulation, when participants underwent massed-trials training. However, we would expect a conditioned inhibitory response to AXcompared to control compound shape (AY) when participants undergo a
spaced-trials training. We conclude that context could work as predictor
of US in rats as well as in humans. In fact, context seems to compete with
the excitor and to down-modulate inhibitory effectiveness of AX-, when
ITIs were short.
A41
EYE GAZE AND PUPIL RESPONSE AS INDICES OF EMOTIONAL
RECOGNITION MEMORY Daniel Younglove1, Sara Bagley1, Tony
Buchanan1; 1Saint Louis University — Eye gaze and pupillometry have
been used to index both emotion and memory. There is not, however, a
reliable signature of gaze or pupil response patterns that predict recognition of emotional stimuli. Fifteen participants were shown 6 pleasant, 6
unpleasant, and 6 neutral pictures. Twenty-four hours later they saw
each of these pictures again along with a new picture matched for content
and valence in a two-alternative forced choice recognition memory task.
Eye tracking methodology was implemented to examine the latency of
the initial shift of gaze, duration of gaze on the initial fixation, and pupil

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

dilation. Participants were quicker to make their initial fixation to emotional compared to neutral picture pairs, with fixations to unpleasant pictures made the quickest, F(2,13) = 4.98, p = 0.025, eta-squared = 0.43.
There was no effect of prior viewing, as the latency of the first fixation did
not differ between new and old pictures. Participants fixated longer on
the 'old' neutral and pleasant pictures compared with the 'new' neutral
and pleasant pictures, but were quicker to avert their gaze from the 'old'
unpleasant pictures than from the 'new' ones, F(2,13) = 9.1, p = 0.003, etasquared = 0.5. A similar pattern was found with pupil diameter, such that
'new' unpleasant pictures elicited the greatest pupil dilation, F(2,13) =
6.68, p = 0.01, eta-squared = 0.51. These results suggest that gaze pattern
and pupil diameter may be useful implicit indicators of recognition memory for emotional stimuli.
A42
EMPATHIC NEURAL RESPONSE TO LIVING THINGS AS A
FUNCTION OF AGENCY AND EXPERIENCE Vani A. Mathur1,
Tokiko Harada1, Bobby K. Cheon1, Jason Scimeca1, Joan Y. Chiao1,2;
1Northwestern University, 2Northwestern Interdepartmental Neuroscience
Program — Living things in the natural world vary on their degree of
agency (e.g., how much control they have over their world) and experience (e.g., their capacity to feel). Prior research has shown that these
dimensions predict the extent to which humans infer that a living thing is
capable of internal states, such as suffering. Though empathy may be
defined as the human capacity to share and understand the internal states
of other humans, people also display empathic feelings for other living
things that vary in agency and experience such as animals and elements
in the natural world. Additionally, people exhibit prosocial intentions
and behaviors towards other biological entities, such as refusing to eat
meat or recycling trash. Although it is well-established that neural
regions within the pain matrix, such as anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
and bilateral anterior insula (AI) underlie empathy for other humans,
here we examined the possibility that distinct or shared neural circuitry
underlie empathic responses for biological entities in the world that vary
on agency and experience. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), we measured neural activity while participants viewed images of
humans, animals or nature in either egregiously negative (painful) or
neutral situations. Results indicate that empathic neural response within
the right AI varies as a function of agency and experience. Here we show
for the first time that empathy for the suffering of humans, animals and
nature relies on shared neural circuitry within the pain matrix.
A43
EMOTION-MODULATED VIEWING OF NEUTRAL FACES Lily
Riggs1,2, Douglas A. McQuiggan1,2, Jessica Chan2, Ella Pan1, Adam K.
Anderson2, Jennifer D. Ryan1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute, 2University of
Toronto — We examined whether memory for faces, as indexed via
changes in eye movement sampling behavior, could be modulated as a
consequence of the type of emotional information that is associated with
the face. During a study period, participants saw neutral faces presented
alone, and then paired with either a negative or neutral sentence, followed by a repeated presentation of the face alone. This procedure was
repeated across 5 study blocks. Viewing to particular face regions was
modulated by whether the face had been associated with neutral vs. negative information. Participants spent more time viewing the eyes, and
less time viewing the mouth, if the face had been associated with a negative sentence. During the test session, participants viewed displays of 3
faces presented simultaneously. The 3-face displays contained either 0, 1
or 2 faces previously paired with a negative sentence. Under free viewing
conditions, memory for the emotional valence of associated information
was assessed indirectly via eye movement monitoring. Sampling of the 3face displays was related to the number of faces present within the display that had been previously associated with emotional information. For
instance, the average fixation duration directed to the three faces
increased with an increasing number of faces that had been previously
paired with negative information; suggesting that associated emotional

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

47

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

information had been accessed during viewing of the faces. Altogether,
these findings suggest that the retrieval of associated emotional information can alter the manner by which a perceptually neutral item is processed, even when presented in isolation.
A44
INCREASED AMYGDALA RESPONSE TO EMOTIONAL STIMULI
DURING THE MID-LUTEAL PHASE OF THE MENSTRUAL
CYCLE Joseph Andreano1,2, Larry Cahill1,2; 1University of California,
Irvine, 2Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory — Previous
studies of emotional encoding have indicated opposing effects of the ovarian hormones estrogen and progesterone on arousal-related activity in
the amygdala, with emotional responses reduced during cycle phases
when estrogen levels are high (Goldstein et al., 2005), but increased by
progesterone treatments (Van Wingen et al., 2008). However, no study to
date has assessed the effects of endogenous progesterone on amygdala
activity in the context of a natural cycle, where progesterone release is
coincident with the release of estrogen. To address this question, 17 naturally cycling women were scanned using fMRI during 2 hormonally distinct phases of their cycles: the early follicular phase, when both estrogen
and progesterone are low, and the mid-luteal phase, when progesterone
is at peak levels, and estrogen levels are also relatively increased. During
both scans, participants viewed blocks of arousing negative images and
blocks of low-arousal neutral images, drawn from the IAPS set. The
results indicated significantly greater emotion-induced activity in the
mid-luteal phase compared to early follicular phase in both the right
amygdala and left hippocampus. These findings provide further support
for the view that the activity of regions involved in emotional memory
vary in women across the menstrual cycle due to modulatory influences
of ovarian hormones.
A45
HEIGHTENED
FUSIFORM
GYRUS
AND
AMYGDALA
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY DURING EMOTIONAL FACE
PROCESSING IN WILLIAMS SYNDROME Brian W. Haas1, Fumiko
Hoeft1, Ursula Bellugi2, Allan L. Reiss1; 1Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
2
Laboratory for Cognitive Neuroscience, Salk Institute for Biological Studies,
San Diego CA — Williams syndrome (WS) is a genetic disorder caused by
a hemizygous microdeletion on chromosome 7q11.23. WS is associated
with a compelling symptom profile characterized by relative deficits in
visiospatial function and relative strengths in face and language processing. Interestingly, WS is also characterized as being associated with a
heightened drive towards social engagement. Recent brain imaging studies have demonstrated atypical fusiform gryus and amygdala response to
emotional stimuli in WS. However, emotional processing is extremely
complex and involves a large neural network including the functional
connections between the fusiform gyrus, amygdala and other brain structures. Based on the established social/emotional phenotype of WS, we
predicted that the functional connectivity within this network would be
aberrant in WS during emotional face processing. We used fMRI to study
a sample of WS and typically developing (TD) participants who performed a gender discrimination task of emotional facial expressions
(happy, fearful and neutral). The WS sample exhibited greater functional
connectivity between the fusiform gyrus and medial prefrontal cortex
compared to the TD sample during emotional face processing (both
happy and fearful). The WS sample also exhibited greater functional connectivity between the amygdala and prefrontal cortex during happy face
processing compared to the TD sample. These findings provide evidence
that abnormal social/emotional processing in WS is in part due to atypical functional connectivity between a network of brain structures.
A46
CULTURAL VARIATION IN PERCEPTUAL STRATEGIES
UNDERLYING EMOTION REGULATION Genna Bebko1,2, Steven
Franconeri2, Kevin Ochsner3, Joan Chiao1,2; 1Northwestern University

48

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, 2Northwestern University,
3Columbia University — Norms for the experience, expression, and regulation of emotion vary widely between individualistic and collectivistic
cultures. Collectivistic cultures value conformity, social harmony, and
social status hierarchies, so attention is directed to contextual emotion
information and disruptive emotions may be suppressed. By contrast,
individualistic cultures valuing autonomy and the pursuit of happiness
are more likely to attend to central emotion information and to reappraise
emotions to promote positive emotional experience. Here we examined
how culture affects perceptual strategies employed during emotion regulation, particularly during cognitive reappraisal and emotional suppression. Eye movements were measured while healthy young adult
participants viewed negative IAPS images and regulated emotions by
using either reappraisal (19 Asian-American, 21 Caucasian-American) or
suppression (21 Asian-American, 23 Caucasian-American). After image
viewing, participants rated how negative they felt as a measure of subjective emotional experience. Consistent with prior studies, reappraisers
made lower negative valence ratings after regulating emotions than suppressers across both Asian-American and Caucasian-American groups.
Although no cultural variation was observed in subjective emotional
experience during emotion regulation, we found evidence of cultural
variation in perceptual strategies used during emotion regulation. During middle and late time periods, Asian suppressers made significantly
fewer fixations to emotionally salient areas than Caucasian suppressers.
These results indicate cultural variation in perceptual differences underlying emotional suppression, but not cognitive reappraisal.
A47
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF GUILT AND SHAME - AN FMRI
STUDY Ullrich Wagner1,2,3, Karim N'Diaye1,2,3, Thomas Ethofer1, Patrik
Vuilleumier1,2,3; 1University Medical School, University of Geneva, Switzerland,
2Center for Neuroscience, University of Geneva, Switzerland, 3Swiss Center for
Affective Sciences, University of Geneva, Switzerland — Within the relatively
new research field of "affective neuroscience" much progress has been
achieved in understanding the neural bases of fundamental emotions like
fear and disgust, but little research has been devoted so far to the more
complex "self-conscious" emotions like guilt, shame, and pride. These
emotions typically occur in interpersonal contexts and can constitute
important psychological factors guiding social behavior. Here, we use an
autobiographical memory paradigm to investigate the specific neural networks associated with the negative self-conscious emotions guilt and
shame by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). In a pre-scanning questionnaire, subjects defined situations from their personal life
that were associated with strong personal feelings of guilt or shame, as
well as situations of sadness (negative basic control emotion) and neutral
situations. For each situation, subjects provided general context information (place, time, other persons present) and four specific keywords.
These were later used as reminder cues in the scanner, where subjects
were asked to relive the personal situations and the associated feelings in
their mind as vividly as possible (block design: 4 blocks of 20s mental
imagery for each emotion condition). This is the first study that directly
compares the neural correlates of the closely related self-conscious emotions guilt and shame. Results point to distinct patterns of brain activation associated with these emotions mostly in prefrontal and temporal
areas. In particular, guilt more strongly than shame activated medial prefrontal brain areas related to self-referential processing, suggesting
higher self-relevance for guilt than shame.
A48
EMPATHIC NEURAL RESPONSES TO OTHERS’ PAIN ARE
MODULATED BY EMOTIONAL CONTEXTS Shihui Han1; 1Peking
University, China — Recent brain imaging studies indicate that empathy
for pain relies upon both the affective and/or the sensorimotor nodes of
the pain matrix. In addition, empathic neural responses are modulated by
stimulus reality [Gu and Han, 2007; Fan and Han, 2008], personal experience [Cheng et al., 2007], and perceived fairness of others [Singer et al.,

Poster Session A

2006]. The current work investigated whether and how empathic neural
responses are modulated by social emotional contexts. Using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we first showed that perceiving a
painful stimulation (needle penetration) applied to a face with neutral
expression induced activation in the anterior cingulated cortex (ACC) relative to non-painful stimulation. However, when observing the painful
stimulus delivered to a neutral face was intermixed with observation of
painful or happy faces, the ACC activity decreased whereas the activity
in the face area of the secondary somatosensory cortex increased to the
painful stimulation. Moreover, the secondary somatosensory activity
associated with the painful stimulation was decreased when the painful
stimulation was applied to faces with happy and painful expressions. The
findings suggest that observing painful stimuli in an emotional context
weakened affective responses but increased sensory responses to perceived pain and imply possible interactions between the affective and
sensory components of the pain matrix during empathy for pain.
A49
BRAIN REGIONS INVOLVED IN RESISTING EMOTIONAL
DISTRACTION Alan Anticevic1, Grega Repovs1, Jennifer Staplins1, Tara
Benesch1, Todd Braver1, Deanna Barch1; 1Washington University in St.
Louis — Emotional stimuli that communicate survival relevance often
demand immediate attention re-allocation. However, there are times
when emotional distractions need to be suppressed in the service of
ongoing goals. Human have the unique ability to resist distraction and
orient attention in a goal directed fashion. This ability involves a dorsal
frontal-parietal network that is engaged in a wide range of cognitive
operations. One such process is maintenance and manipulation of information in working memory (WM). In the context of WM function, previous work has shown that emotional distracters have a different effect on
dorsal and ventral prefrontal regions. However, one question not fully
explored is the relationship between signals in these cortical regions during emotional interference and behavioral performance. Here we examine these relationships using slow event-related fMRI at 3T allowing us to
discern signals at different phases of a WM task. First, we show that frontal, but not parietal nodes of the dorsal network show a within subject,
trial-by-trial relationship with performance during emotional distraction.
Specifically, less deactivation was associated with better performance.
Conversely, in ventral frontal regions more activation was associated
with better performance. Also, we demonstrate that, across-subjects, less
amygdala signal correlates with better performance during emotional
distraction. Lastly, using trial-based functional connectivity, we show
that amygdala signal is negatively correlated with frontal, but not parietal nodes of the dorsal network during emotional distraction. Together,
these finding suggest that the source of emotional regulation may originate from dorsal and ventral frontal, but not parietal cortical regions.
A50
REPETITION EFFECTS OF AFFECTIVE VISUAL STIMULI (IAPS)
ON ERPS Ryan Yee1, Bella Rozenkrants2, John Polich1; 1The Scripps
Research Institute, 2University of Southern California — Visual stimuli from
the International Affective Pictures System (IAPS) were presented as target stimuli in an oddball discrimination task, with a geometric figure as
the standard stimulus (n=16). Three repetitions of each picture occurred
sequentially, with varying numbers of standards between these target
stimuli. Stimulus pictures were chosen purposefully to reflect extreme
arousal (low, high) and valence (negative, positive). Participants were
instructed to press a button when a target occurred and to ignore standards. ERP waveforms were assessed systematically from early (N1, P2,
N2) and later (P3, SW1, SW2) components. Component amplitudes
increased across repetitions from P2 to SW1; amplitudes were larger for
high compared to low arousal stimuli for N2 through SW1; amplitudes
were larger for positive compared to negative valence stimuli only for
SW1, although arousal and valence demonstrated reliable statistical interactions for N2, P3, and SW2. These effects were generally consistent
across stimulus repetitions. Taken together, the visual affective stimuli

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

used in a simple discrimination task in which target stimuli are repeated
produce ERPs in which (1) stimulus repetition changes component magnitude, (2) arousal and valence characteristics differentially modulate
specific component amplitudes, and (3) stimulus repetition affects ERP
component amplitudes generally independent of affective condition.
A51
WHERE YOU LOOK AFFECTS VISUALLY-SPECIFIC MEMORY
Michael P. Blank1, Richard E. Biga1, Chad J. Marsolek; 1University of
Minnesota — Visual attention is more restricted when viewing emotional
scenes than when viewing non-emotional scenes (the "weapon focus"
effect; Loftus, 1979). Recently, we showed that this difference in attentional allocation during encoding affects visually-specific memory (VSM)
for both high-arousal, emotional scenes and low-arousal, less emotional
scenes (Blank & Marsolek, 2006). Specifically, when participants rated the
emotionality of scenes during encoding, broadening of attention (more
fixations of shorter duration) predicted subsequent VSM for low-arousal
scenes, whereas restriction of attention to emotionally salient parts predicted subsequent VSM for high-arousal scenes. In this study, we examined whether those results would be observed when participants freely
view the scenes during encoding rather than rate their emotionality. We
recorded eye movements while participants freely viewed high-arousal
and low-arousal scenes for two seconds each. Then, we measured VSM in
a recognition test by asking participants to decide whether briefly presented scenes were in the same orientation or mirror-reversed compared
with encoding. In contrast with the results from the previous study, a relative broadening of attention during encoding - more fixations of shorter
duration - predicted subsequent VSM for both low- and high-arousal
scenes (this pattern was previously observed only for low-arousal
scenes). Thus, an interesting difference in subsequent memory for lowand high-arousal scenes, previously observed when participants explicitly rated the emotionality of scenes during encoding, is not found under
more typical, everyday free-viewing conditions. If so, particular viewing
conditions and goals during encoding may alter the information stored in
memory representations of low- and high-arousal scenes.
A52
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EMOTIONAL INFLUENCES ON
ATTENTION Jamil Bhanji1, Jennifer Beer1; 1University of Texas at
Austin — Emotion may influence judgments by directing attention to
information that is the same valence as the emotional state experienced
by an individual. The current study examines neural activity associated
with the mood-congruent influence of emotion on attention. Participants
made judgments of ambiguously valenced pictorial compositions of
facial expressions after viewing negative or neutral word primes. Each
ambiguously valenced composition contained both a ’happy’ and an
’angry’ facial emotion expression overlayed on top of each other. These
stimuli were presented rapidly so that participants only had time to see
one of the facial expressions clearly. The participants indicated which
emotion they saw in the picture, thus revealing which emotion they preferentially attended to while viewing the picture. Behavioral data showed
that participants attended to ’angry’ expressions more frequently when
the pictures were preceded by negative word primes compared to neutral
word primes. Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data revealed
regional neural activity that was associated with this mood congruent
influence of the negative primes on the ambiguous judgments. Activity in
ventromedial prefrontal cortex and insular cortex was associated with
mood-congruent attention to the ambiguously valenced composition.
Discussion focuses on how regional neural activity associated with the
word primes may modulate neural activity associated with the subsequent viewing of the ambiguously valenced composition.
A53
SEROTONIN TRANSPORTER GENE VARIATION MODERATES
ACTIVITY IN REGIONS INVOLVED IN THE COGNITIVE
CONTROL OF EMOTION Peter C. Clasen1, Christopher G. Beevers1,
Cristina Benavides1, John E. McGeary3,4, David M. Schnyer1,2; 1The University

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

49

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

of Texas at Austin, 2Imaging Research Center, The University of Texas at
Austin, 3Research Service, Providence VA Medical Center, 4Center for Alcohol
and Addiction Studies, Brown University — Evidence suggests that genetic
variation in the serotonin transporter-linked polymorphic region (5HTTLPR) is associated with individual differences in the activity of brain
regions underlying emotional regulation (Hariri & Holmes, 2006). A common polymorphism of this gene results in long or short alleles and it has
been shown that short allele carriers demonstrate hyper-reactive
amygdala response to negative faces (e.g. Hariri et al., 2005). However,
this evidence relies on tasks that elicit emotional reactivity incidentally.
Therefore, it is unclear whether genetic status also moderates activity in
regions associated with the conscious regulation of emotion. Using a task
where participants actively regulate emotional appraisal (Ochsner et al.,
2002), we tested whether 5-HTTLPR variation moderates functional patterns of activation in brain regions previously associated with the cognitive control of emotion. Participants genotyped for the 5-HTTLPR
polymorphism (N = 12) were asked to either "decrease" their emotional
response to a series of negative pictures or simply "look" at the pictures
while undergoing fMRI scanning. Examining activity in lateral prefrontal
cortex regions associated with the cognitive control of emotion indicated
the expected finding of greater activity when participants were asked to
"decrease" their emotional response. Short allele carriers (N = 6) demonstrated higher levels of activity in these regions compared to long allele
homozygotes (N = 6). These preliminary findings indicate that genetic
variability associated with the serotonin transporter gene alters activity
in brain regions associated with the cognitive control of emotion.
A54
EFFECTS OF REGULATION ON POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE
EMOTIONS:
A
STUDY
OF
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
RESPONSES Chun-Yu Chen1, Nai-Shing Yen1,2, Hsuan-Yu Lin1;
1National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Research Center for Mind,
Brain, and Learning, National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan — The
aim of the current study is to investigate the effects of emotion regulation
on the electrophysiological responses. In the present study, subjects’
emotion was elicited by presenting affective pictures (positive, negative,
and neutral), and emotion regulation was manipulated by providing
instructions (attend, enhance, and reappraisal). In both "enhance" and
"reappraisal" conditions, subjects were instructed to imagine the events
or images which related to the presenting pictures. In the behavioral
results, the subjective valence rating changed differently according to the
instructions which delivered to subjects. The facial electromyogram
(EMG) showed that the activity of corrugator, which correlates negatively with the valence of the subjects’ emotional response, reduced when
subjects were instructed to reappraise the emotion after the presenting of
negative pictures. For the heart rate data, the heart rate change reduced
during 3.5 to 4 second after presenting the instruction under the reappraisal conditions. For skin conductance response (SCR), the differences
of SCRs before and after the presenting of the emotion regulation instruction were larger under the reappraisal conditions. Event-related potential
(ERP) showed that, at site Pz, the amplitude at 400ms after the instruction
was more positive going under the "enhance" condition than under the
"attend" condition. In summary, behavioral and electrophysiological data
showed different effects of emotion regulation, and the subjective valence
rating went with the electrophysiological responses consistently.
A55
WHAT’S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT? NEURAL CORRELATES OF
LONG-TERM PAIR-BONDING IN HUMANS Bianca
Acevedo1,3,
Arthur Aron1, Helen Fisher2, Lucy Brown3; 1State University of New York at
Stony Brook, 2Rutgers University, 3Albert Einstein College of Medicine — This
study investigated the neural correlates of romantic love among individuals in long-term marriages (> 10 years) using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI; BOLD response). Ten females and seven males
(mean ages: 51 and 55 years, respectively) who reported being intensely
in love with a long-term spouse (married mean of 21.4 years) underwent

50

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

fMRI scanning while they viewed headshots of their partner and a
highly-familiar neutral person (HFN), interspersed with a distractionattention task. Group activation specific to the long-term partner compared to the HFN occurred in dopamine-rich mesolimbic areas involved
in early-stage romantic love (1-17 mos.; Aron et al., 2005; Bartels & Zeki,
2000) in humans. In addition, consistent with research on monogamous
pair-bonding in voles and primates, responses to the long-term partner
were displayed in oxytocin and vasopressin-rich regions. Correlations of
brain activity with self-report measures of romantic love and passionate
love showed significant neural activity in the caudate body and left angular gyrus, replicating findings from previous studies of early-stage
romantic love (Aron et al., 2005; Ortigue et al., 2007). Correlating neural
activity and marital satisfaction scores displayed significant activations in
areas involved in reward processing and decision making; empathy; and
social cooperation. We discuss implications of these results and conclude
that regions of the mesolimbic reward system—rich in dopamine, oxytocin, and vasopressin—are part of a network that influence the establishment, conservation, and enhancement of pair-bonds in humans.
A56
IS SELF-FACE RECOGNITION SPECIAL? EVIDENCE FROM THE
RECOGNITION OF FACIAL EMOTIONS Yuan Hang Li1, Shu-wen
Wang1, Eran Zaidel1,2; 1UCLA, Los Angeles, CA , 2Brain Research Institute,
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA — INTRODUCTION: Is Self-face recognition different from face recognition in general? The majority of faces we see convey emotion, and the neural mechanisms for processing emotions and
faces may partly interact. Consequently, we used emotional face stimuli
in a face or emotion identification task in normal participants. METHODS: Forty five undergraduates from the University of California at Los
Angeles (UCLA) completed two tasks. The tasks were either to judge the
identity of the face or the emotion of the face. Stimuli were presented
tachistoscopically to the left or right visual hemifield. RESULTS: An
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) of Task (Face, Emotion) x Face Type (Self,
Familiar) x Emotion (Happy, Sad) x Visual Field (VF) (Left, Right)
showed significant interactions between Face Type and Emotion in accuracy and latency. Participants were significantly faster and more accurate
at identifying their friend’s sad face compared to their friend’s happy
face. At the same time, participants were significantly faster at identifying their own happy face compared to their own sad face. This pattern
held true for both tasks and VFs. DISCUSSION: This evidence suggests
that Self-face recognition differs from general face recognition in the
effect of emotional valence on face processing. Furthermore, the recognition of Self-Happy and Familiar-Sad faces in the left VF correlated most
strongly with the Sad General Situations subscale of the Social Anxiety
Scale for Adolescents (SASA). This suggests one way in which elevated
levels of social anxiety influences processing of emotional faces, both self
and familiar other, in normal individuals.
A57
ACTIVITY IN MEDIAL PREFRONTAL AND POSTEROMEDIAL
CORTICES CORRELATE WITH PSYCHOPATHIC TRAITS:
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE RESTING STATE NETWORK Tong
Sheng1,2, Anahita Gheytanchi4, Lisa Aziz-Zadeh2,3; 1Neuroscience Graduate
Program, University of Southern California, 2Brain and Creativity Institute,
University of Southern California, 3Division of Occupational Science and
Occupational Therapy, University of Southern California, 4Pacific Graduate
School of Psychology — The medial prefrontal (mPFC) and posteromedial
(PMC) cortices have been implicated in a number of studies investigating
executive and emotional functions in both healthy and clinical populations. The mPFC is generally considered to be involved in response control while the PMC is commonly associated with self-referential
processes. In the current fMRI study, we investigated whether activity in
these regions is functionally distinguishable by correlating them with different interpersonal and behavioral factors of psychopathy. Subjects were
instructed to either produce or not produce speech depending on a visual
cue. During rest conditions as compared to task conditions, activity was

Poster Session A

observed in the mPFC and the PMC, in accordance with previous
research on the resting state network. We tested the hypothesis that the
mPFC and PMC are functionally dissociable by correlating their hemodynamic responses during rest conditions with different scales of the Psychopathic Personality Inventory-Revised. As predicted, we found that
activity in the PMC positively correlates with a scale relating to narcissism and social dominance (Machiavellian Egocentricity; ME). Furthermore, mPFC activity correlated positively with a scale relating to
spontaneity (Carefree Non-planfulness, CN). These results offer preliminary support for the idea that different components within the resting
state network can be functionally dissociated.
A58
IMPAIRED AVERSIVE LEARNING IN NARCOLEPSY WITH
CATAPLEXY PATIENTS - A FMRI STUDY Aurelie Ponz1, Ramin
Khatami2, Rositsa Poryazova2, Esther Werth2, Peter Boesiger3, Claudio Bassetti2,
Sophie Schwartz1; 1Neurosciences, Center for Neuroscience, University of
Geneva, 2Neurology, University Hospital Zurich, 3Biomedical Engineering,
University of Zurich & Swiss Federal Institute of Technology — Narcolepsy
with cataplexy (NC) is characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness, cataplexy episodes, caused by a deficiency in hypocretin/orexin (HCRT).
Recent animal studies suggest that this hypothalamic neuropeptide may
also be involved in incentive motivation. Our previous functional MRI
findings (fMRI) demonstrated that NC-patients present an abnormal
emotional response to positive stimuli within limbic and reward brain
circuits. In the present fMRI study, we tested whether the HCRT system
plays a general role in regulating emotional learning. We scanned nine
unmedicated NC-patients and nine matched controls while they performed a fear conditioning paradigm. Participants saw visual shapes in
two different possible colors: one color (CS+) signaled a possible upcoming aversive unconditioned stimulus (US; painful electrical stimulation);
another color was never associated with any emotional stimulation (CS-).
Our results reveal that both NC-patients and control activated the pain
matrix during the presentation of the CS+/US (anterior cingulate, insula,
somatosensory cortex, amygdala). However, while controls showed
increased activation in the amygdala for the CS+ alone, as expected in
this aversive conditioning paradigm, NC-patients did not show any conditioned response in the amygdala. Our new fMRI results thus provide
evidence that the HCRT system can affect amygdala activity related to
aversive emotional learning. These findings confirm that the Hcrt system
is not only involved in sleep-wake regulation, but also in emotion regulation, thus establishing a close connection between both systems.
A59
COORDINATION OF BRAIN ACTIVITY ACROSS MULTIPLE
TIMESCALES BY EXCERPTS OF POPULAR MUSIC Petr
Janata1;
1UC Davis, Center for Mind and Brain — Tonal structure in music unfolds
on multiple timescales. Our perception of it is influenced by local contexts generated by transitions from one chord/harmony to the next as
well as more global contexts that provide a sense of key. In this study I
examined tonality-tracking responses in the whole-brain BOLD data of
13 subjects, each of whom listened to thirty 30 s excerpts of popular
music that was largely familiar and/or autobiographically salient to
them. The dynamics of the tonal structure were modeled on three timescales that ranged from the moment-to-moment chord changes to the
more stable sense of tonal center that might be used for determining
whether a piece is in a major or minor key. A region of the dorsal medial
prefrontal cortex (MPFC) that was modulated by the overall degree of
autobiographical salience of an excerpt exhibited tonality tracking at
every timescale. Other brain areas exhibited preferential sensitivity to different timescales in the tonal structure. Posterior temporal and occipital
areas exhibited tonality tracking on the fastest time scale, whereas left
VLPFC, DLPFC, and ventral MPFC responded preferentially to the
slower timescales, with the most ventral excursion of activity in MPFC on
the slowest timescale. Given the role of ventral MPFC in emotional regulation, these results are consistent with the idea that the gross tonal char-

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

acteristics, e.g. the major or minor quality of a piece, shape mood states
across tens of seconds. Multiple timescales in music may serve to bind
memories, mental images, and emotion into a cohesive experience.
A60
INDEPENDENT INFLUENCES OF PERCEPTUAL LOAD AND
EMOTIONAL STIMULI ON THE AMYGDALA AND MOTION
AREA V5/MT+ Catherine Hindi Attar1,2, Matthias M. Müller1, Christian
Büchel2, Michael Rose2; 1Institute of Psychology I, University of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany, 2University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany — There is an ongoing debate over the extent to which selective
attention can impede the processing of task-irrelevant emotional stimuli.
In this fMRI study subjects had to attend to a display of moving random
dots which were superimposed upon happy, fearful or neutral faces. The
attentional task required subjects to detect short intervals of coherent
motion under two levels of perceptual load. Faces in the background
were always task-irrelevant and were not to be attended. For emotional
compared to neutral faces we observed a stronger decrease in activation
within motion-sensitive area V5/MT+. Likewise, the amygdala showed
significantly stronger responses to fearful relative to neutral faces. Most
importantly, these emotion effects were independent of the amount of
perceptual load associated with the attentional foreground task. A notable finding was that an effect of load was also observed in the amygdalohippocampal region which yielded stronger responses to low relative to
high load conditions. Since low load conditions were perceptually more
salient than high load conditions this might implicate a broader role of
the amygdala as salience detector and challenges the widely held view of
its fear specificity. To date, these findings demonstrate for the first time
that task-irrelevant emotional stimuli receive prioritized processing independently of varying perceptual load demands of the attentional task at
hand. This strongly implies that attentional and emotional modulations
originate from distinct neural sources and act in parallel upon specific
visual processing areas.
A61
EMOTION IMPROVES AND IMPAIRS EARLY VISION Bruno
R.
Bocanegra1, René Zeelenberg1; 1Erasmus University, Rotterdam — Recent
studies indicate that emotion enhances early vision, but the generality of
this finding remains unknown. Do the benefits of emotion extend to all
basic aspects of vision or are they limited in scope? Our results show that
the brief presentation of a fearful face, compared to a neutral face,
enhances sensitivity for the orientation of subsequently presented lowspatial-frequency (LSF) stimuli, but diminishes orientation sensitivity for
high-spatial-frequency (HSF) stimuli. This is the first demonstration that
emotion not only improves but also impairs low-level vision. The selective LSF benefits are consistent with the idea that emotion enhances magnocellular processing. Additionally, we suggest that the HSF deficits are
due to inhibitory interactions between magnocellular and parvocellular
pathways. Although not predicted by previous data and models, the
observed pattern of benefits and deficits shows that the neural mechanisms underlying emotional vision sacrifice the detection of fine visual
details for the processing of coarse information. Our results suggest an
emotion-induced trade-off in visual processing rather than a general
improvement. The magnocellular pathway plays an important role in the
perception of motion, depth, direction, global configuration and allows
for faster processing than the parvocellular pathway, all of which are
potentially important for the detection of threat in the environment.
Thus, this trade-off may benefit perceptual dimensions that are relevant
for survival at the expense of those that are less relevant.
A62
SELECTIVE ATTENTION MODULATES THE EMOTIONAL
EVALUATION OF FACES Sonia Doallo1, Jane E. Raymond2, Monika
Kiss3, Kimron L. Shapiro2, Martin Eimer3, John G. Taylor4, Anna C. Nobre1;
1
University of Oxford, 2University of Wales, Bangor, 3Birkbeck College,
University of London, 4King’s College London — Recent evidence indicates
that attentional selection of stimuli affects their subsequent emotional

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

51

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

evaluation, such that previously unattended stimuli are valued more
negatively than previously attended stimuli ("Distractor Devaluation
Effect"). In this study, we used event-related functional magnetic resonance (fMRI) to examine the brain activity associated with this emotional
devaluation effect. Participants were asked first to perform a Go/No-Go
task involving Asian and Caucasian faces, making a motor response to
faces of one race (Go), and refraining from responding to faces of the
other race (No-Go). In a subsequent evaluation task, a trustworthiness
rating for each face was required. A region-of-interest (ROI) approach
was used to measure neural activity during the evaluation task in areas
involved in the emotional and perceptual processing of faces (i.e.
amygdala and fusiform gyrus). Behavioral data showed that previous
No-Go faces were rated as less trustworthy than previous Go faces. Functional imaging data revealed increased activity in the right amygdala
along with the left fusiform gyrus for low-rated faces relative to highrated faces. Furthermore, this emotional response in the amygdala was
significantly modulated by attention and race, with greater activity to
low-rated (versus high-rated) Asian faces when they were previously
presented as No-Go stimuli. These findings indicate that attentional
selection has consequences for the social-emotional evaluation of faces, in
part by modulating the activity in emotion-related areas, and provide
additional evidence that other relevant social signals in faces, such as the
race, may play an important role in mediating these effects.
A63
ANTICIPATION OF MONETARY AND SOCIAL REWARD
DIFFERENTLY ACTIVATES MESOLIMBIC BRAIN STRUCTURES
IN MEN AND WOMEN Lena Rademacher1, Sören Krach1,2, Gregor
Kohls3, Arda Irmak1, Tilo Kircher1, Kerstin Konrad3, Gerhard Gründer1, Katja
Spreckelmeyer1; 1RWTH Aachen University, Germany, 2Central Service
Facility, RWTH Aachen University, Germany, 3Child Neuropsychology
Section, RWTH Aachen University, Germany — Social reward has been
identified as a strong incentive for goal-directed behavior. The aim of the
present study was to examine if the neural mechanisms underlying the
anticipation of monetary rewards would also apply to the anticipation of
social feedback in the form of friendly faces. Based on previous findings
indicating a linear relation between reward value and striatal activation
for monetary rewards, we expected to find a similar relationship for
social incentives. Furthermore, gender was introduced as an additional
factor, postulating greater sensitivity to social stimuli in women than
men. Sixteen male and 16 female participants performed two tasks on a
1.5 Tesla scanner: the "monetary incentive delay" paradigm (Knutson et
al., 2000) and an adaptation of the former, termed "social incentive delay"
task, replacing monetary by social rewards (smiling faces). In both conditions a cue indicated potential reward. In order to receive reward a target
button had to be pushed within a certain time window. fMRI recording
during the anticipation phase revealed proportional activation of neural
structures constituting the human reward system for increasing levels of
reward, independent of incentive type. However, turning our attention to
gender effects showed differences in brain activation between male and
female participants: in men activation was strong in the prospect of monetary rewards but weak for social rewards, while in women activation
level was intermediate, but equally strong for both incentive types. The
results suggest a common neural basis but gender-specific activation
intensities for the anticipation of monetary and social rewards.
A64
FACIAL EMOTION RECOGNITION DEFICITS IN PARKINSON’S
DISEASE
ARE
NOT
MODULATED
BY
DOPAMINE
REPLACEMENT THERAPY Alison Simioni1, Lesley Fellows1; 1McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada — Although the basal ganglia are
thought to play a critical role in the ability to recognize emotions from
facial expressions, there is little consensus regarding the contribution of
dopamine to this ability. There are conflicting data on the effects of Parkinson’s disease (PD) on facial emotion recognition, with some studies
suggesting deficits in specific emotions, and others reporting intact per-

52

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

formance. Differences in disease severity, and medication status, as well
as in the sensitivity of the tasks used across studies, may explain this lack
of consensus. Here we examined both the effects of PD, and of dopamine
replacement therapy, on facial emotion recognition, using a sensitive and
well-validated task. Twenty-one non-demented patients with mild-moderate Parkinson’s disease were tested twice, once while taking their usual
dopamine replacement therapy, and once after an overnight medication
washout, and compared to 18 demographically-matched healthy control
participants The task featured morphs between an emotionally neutral
face and an emotional expression posed by the same individual and
asked participants to rate each face on the degree of all 6 cardinal emotions, one at a time. Patients with PD showed selective impairments in
the ability to recognize sadness and anger in these subtle morphs. However, dopamine replacement therapy did not modulate the ability to
detect any of the emotions studied. These findings support an effect of
PD on emotion recognition from faces, at least for certain emotions. However, the lack of effect of the medication manipulation argues that
dopamine depletion is not the basis for this deficit.
A65
TRAIT ANXIETY PREDICTS PULVINAR AND AMYGDALA
REACTIVITY TO BACKWARD MASKED FEARFUL FACES Joshua
Carlson1, Tsafrir Greenberg1, Lilianne Muijica-Parodi1; 1State University of
New York at Stony Brook — Previous research suggests that backward
masked fearful faces are processed through a subcortical fear network
consisting of the thalamic pulvinar and amygdala. Additionally, there is
evidence that anxiety is associated with heightened amygdala reactivity
to masked, but not unmasked, fear stimuli in both clinical and nonclinical
populations. However, while amygdala reactivity to masked fear appears
to be correlated with anxiety, the relationship between anxiety and pulvinar reactivity to masked threat is unknown. Therefore, the aim of the current study was to examine the extent to which trait anxiety predicts
pulvinar and amygdala responses to masked and unmasked fearful faces.
Participants completed the Trait Anxiety Inventory and an event-related
fMRI passive viewing backward masking task. Each trial began with a
fixation cue (1000ms) that was immediately followed by an initial face
(33ms)-mask face (167ms) pairing. Trial types included fearful-neutral
(masked fear), neutral-fearful (unmasked fear), and neutral-neutral.
Amygdala and Pulvinar ROIs were created using MARINA. Results
revealed that higher levels of trait anxiety coincided with greater subcortical activity in the pulvinar and amygdala during masked, but not
unmasked, fearful face processing. Additionally, masked and unmasked
fearful faces appear to differentially influence functional connectivity
within a broader neural network. The results are consistent with an
amygdala-pulvinar network involved in the processing of crude representations of fearful faces and activity in this network is associated with
an individual’s level of trait anxiety.
A66
THAT’S ONE ANGRY EYEBROW: SEMANTIC PROCESSING OF
EMOTIONAL FACIAL EXPRESSIONS IN EMPATHY Alicia
Hofelich1, Stephanie Preston1; 1The University of Michigan — Humans
are
highly attuned to facial emotions, likely because they provide important
information about another’s internal state. Prior research has shown that
people mimic others’ facial emotions, even when subliminally presented
(Dimberg et al., 2000). This effect is higher for those with high trait empathy (Sonnby-Borgstrom, 2002). People also spontaneously access semantic emotion categories when viewing facial emotions, even when the face
is irrelevant to the task (the Emostroop Effect; Preston & Stansfield, 2008).
However, it is unknown whether subliminal face perception also activates semantic knowledge, and if the extent of semantic activation is
related to trait empathy. To test this, participants who are high versus
low on trait empathy were compared on three different emotional Stroop
tasks: 1) A supraliminal Emostroop task where congruent and incongruent emotion adjectives were overlaid on facial expressions (replicating
the 2008 study), 2) A subliminal Emostroop where emotional faces were

Poster Session A

presented for 13ms, then masked by an emotion adjective overlaid on a
neutral face, and 3) An intrusive cognitions task (McKenna & Sharma,
1995). Participants were instructed to categorize the emotion adjective
into the corresponding basic emotion. The supraliminal task replicated
the Emostroop Effect with slowed responses on incongruent trials.
Results in all three emotional Stroop tasks suggest that highly empathic
participants process emotional adjectives faster than low empathy participants, and may be more affected by subliminal perception of emotional
faces. These findings suggest that individual differences in empathy may
emanate from differences in the tendency to access semantic information
when perceiving other’s states.
A67
WHAT? AND HOW GOOD?: DISTINCT NEURAL MECHANISMS
ENCODE REWARD AND IDENTITY PREDICTION Cendri
Hutcherson1, Antonio Rangel1; 1California Institute of Technology — In order
to adaptively respond to its environment, an organism needs to learn
which cues are associated with the most reward. A considerable amount
of evidence has shown that such learning can be accomplished through
the computation of reward prediction errors, which respond to the unexpected delivery or omission of reward, and that BOLD response in the
ventral striatum is correlated with this type of signal. However, because
the value of a particular outcome can vary with context, organisms need
to learn not only stimulus-reward associations (how good?), but also
stimulus-outcome associations, in which the organism learns to predict
reward indirectly by first representing the identity of an outcome
(what?). In most previous learning studies, prediction errors of reward
and identity are perfectly correlated, making it impossible to identify
their unique or overlapping neural basis. We present the results of a
novel experimental setting designed to dissociate the neural representation of these two types of signals using human functional magnetic resonance imaging. Our results suggest that the two learning signals have
common and dissociable components in regions of the ventral striatum
and orbitofrontal cortex.

Memory: Memory systems
A68
PARIETAL LOBE MEMORY RETRIEVAL MECHANISM: IS THE
EPISODIC BUFFER HYPOTHESIS A FEASIBLE ACCOUNT?
Marian E. Berryhill1, 2, Ingrid R. Olson1, 2; 1Temple University, 2University of
Pennsylvania — A current question of interest in the memory field is the
role of posterior parietal cortex (PPC) in memory. PPC damage does not
cause severe memory deficits, yet PPC activations are consistently
observed in neuroimaging studies of episodic retrieval. The ’episodic
buffer’ hypothesis proposes that something analogous to the episodic
buffer, whose function is to temporarily maintain and/or manipulate
retrieved multisensory, multidimensional information, resides in the
inferior parietal lobe (Vilberg & Rugg, 2008). Several of our prior findings
can be interpreted as supporting this hypothesis: PPC damage can cause
impaired autobiographical free recall (Berryhill et al., 2007) and diminished visual short-term memory (Berryhill et al., 2008). Here, we directly
test one prediction of the episodic buffer hypothesis, that PPC damage
will impair memory for narratives when tested immediately or after a
delay. Two patients with bilateral PPC damage were tested in immediateand delayed- recall of short narratives. Findings provide partial support
for the episodic buffer hypothesis, indicating that this hypothesis has
merits but will require modifications to fully account for emerging findings.

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

A69
IMPROVING THE PERFORMANCE OF PARKINSON’S DISEASE
PATIENTS
ON
A
SELECTIVE-ATTENTION-DEMANDING,
CATEGORY-LEARNING TASK Shawn Ell1, Lacey Favreau2; 1University
of Maine, 2FHC, Inc. — Numerous studies have demonstrated a categorylearning impairment in Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients. The most consistent findings have been on selective-attention-demanding, categorylearning tasks where patients attempt to learn to categorize based upon a
subset of the possible stimulus information. The goal of the present study
was to investigate the efficacy of training PD patients on a category learning task with low selective-attention demands on the subsequent performance of a category learning task with high-selective attention demands.
Participants were assigned to one of two training conditions that varied
in selective-attention demand. In the low selective-attention (LSA) condition, the stimuli varied only along the relevant dimension. In the high
selective-attention (HSA) condition, the stimuli also varied along an irrelevant dimension. Following training, all participants completed a categorization test phase using the HSA condition categories. Preliminary data
was collected from PD patients in the LSA and HSA conditions, as well as
age- and education-matched, healthy control participants in the HSA
condition. Consistent with previous work, patients in the HSA condition
were impaired relative to controls. The accuracy of PD patients in the
LSA condition, but not the HSA condition, was indistinguishable from
controls by the end of the test phase. These results suggest that categorization training with low selective-attention demand improves the subsequent performance of PD patients on a categorization task with high
selective-attention-demand. Basic research studies such as these are a
necessary step in the development of successful interventions that will
improve cognitive functioning in PD patients.
A70
AN FMRI EXAMINATION OF THE EFFECTS OF AGING ON
MEMORY
MONITORING
FOR
SOURCE
AND
ITEM
RECOGNITION Jennifer Pacheco1, Natalie Dailey1, Maria Olivares1,
Caitlin Tenison1, David M. Schnyer1; 1The University of Texas at Austin —
Evidence has shown that memory monitoring in older adults is impaired
in a domain-specific manner. The neural activity associated with memory
monitoring ability was assessed in a group of older adults (61-74 years
old) and younger adults (20-30 years old) using retrieval confidence ratings in an item and source recognition memory fMRI paradigm. Participants were shown a series of sentences read aloud by a male or female
speaker and their memory for both the sentence and speaker was tested;
participants also reported ratings of ’certain’ or ’probable’. Both young
and older adults showed highly accurate item recognition performance
as well as accurately calibrated monitoring assessments - higher accuracy
rates for those items rated ’certain’ verses ’probable’. Performance for
source memory was lower than item memory for both groups, significantly worse for older adults compared to younger adults. Younger
adults maintained calibrated source monitoring ratings but elderly subjects demonstrated significantly less accurate source memory monitoring.
Functional MRI images collected during the test phase of the experiment
were analyzed using standard methods in FSL. Bilateral medial temporal
lobe, right frontal, and left parietal activation is seen in the younger
adults for accurate ’certain’ responses when compared to inaccurate ’certain’ responses; dissociable frontal activation is seen for accurate versus
inaccurate ’probable’ responses, with less significant MTL activation.
These results suggests a network of frontal and MTL regions that contribute to the accuracy of source memory monitoring in young adults, we
expect to be able to uncover differences in this network for older adults.
A71
THE DEVELOPMENT OF BRAIN SYSTEMS FOR EPISODIC
MEMORY RETRIEVAL Noa Ofen1, Xiaoqian J. Chai1, John D.E. Gabrieli1;
1Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA — Multiple
brain
regions are involved in episodic memory retrieval in adults, but the brain
regions that support episodic memory retrieval in children have not been

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

53

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

identified. This study investigated the development of brain regions
involved in episodic memory retrieval. Participants (age range 8-24, n =
73) studied 140 pictures of indoor and outdoor scenes and then were
given a recognition test while being scanned with 3T MRI scanner. Participants made old/new decisions for the previously studied pictures and
140 new pictures. Participants correctly recognized 0.52 ±0.14 of the studied pictures (Hit rate, mean ±SD) and correctly gave a ’new’ response to
0.75 ±0.12 of the new pictures (CR rate). Recognition accuracy (Hit + CR)
increased with age (r = 0.50, p < 0.001). Frontal, parietal and temporal cortical regions and medial temporal lobe (MTL) and basal ganglia regions
were active for successful retrieval (Hits > CR). Within these regions activations associated with successful retrieval increased with age in left lateral parietal cortex (BA 7/40), left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC)
(BA 8/9), left ventrolateral PFC (BA 46), bilateral inferior frontal gyri (BA
47) and basal ganglia. Activation for both Hits and CR decreased with
age in regions of the MTL, but, these age dependent reductions in activation were not selective to successful memory retrieval. These results suggest that with age, frontal, parietal and basal ganglia regions are
progressively recruited to reach adult-like pattern of brain activation during episodic memory retrieval. Age-related changes in MTL activation
during episodic memory retrieval may however, be independent of successful memory retrieval.
A72
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EMOTIONAL AROUSAL AND
SEMANTIC PROCESSING DURING MEMORY FORMATION: A
LEVELS-OF-PROCESSING APPROACH Maureen Ritchey1,2, Sheldon
Rudisill1, Kevin S. LaBar1,2, Roberto Cabeza1,2; 1Center for Cognitive
Neuroscience, Duke University, 2Duke University — Results from the animal and human literatures have highlighted the amygdala and its interaction with the MTL memory system as supporting improved
consolidation for emotional memories. However, behavioral and neuroimaging results in humans have also implicated emotion-driven
enhancements during encoding as predicting improvements in subsequent memory. In particular, it has been proposed that emotional stimuli
are subject to deeper semantic processing during encoding, evidenced by
the presence of greater memory-related activity in the left inferior prefrontal cortex (LIPC), a region frequently associated with semantic processing, during emotional relative to neutral memory encoding. This
hypothesis, however, has not yet been explicitly tested. In the present
study, participants were scanned using fMRI while encoding emotional
and neutral images. Half were encoded with a semantic description task
and half with a non-semantic perceptual feature task. Behavioral results
indicate an interaction between emotion and task: the enhancement of
emotional over neutral memory was strongest for items encoded in the
non-semantic task. Neuroimaging results likewise suggest that the
amygdala best distinguishes between remembered and forgotten emotional items in the non-semantic condition. Although the LIPC is overall
more activated during semantic encoding, it similarly distinguishes
memory best in the non-semantic condition. These results support the
hypotheses that amygdala engagement benefits emotional memory most
when encoding resources are diminished, and that under these circumstances, emotional items may also benefit from incidental semantic
encoding. These mechanisms thereby serve to protect emotionally arousing items from the mnemonic consequences of shallow encoding.
A73
REWARD MODULATION OF MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE
SUBREGIONS DURING ASSOCIATIVE ENCODING AND CUED
RECALL Sasha M. Wolosin1,2, Dagmar Zeithamova1,2, Nicolaus T.
Schmandt1,2, Alison R. Preston1,2; 1The University of Texas at Austin, TX,
2Center for Learning and Memory, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
TX — The medial temporal lobe (MTL) is critical for episodic memoryómemory for individual events. Emerging data suggest that MTL processing is modulated by midbrain regions under conditions of reward
resulting in enhanced episodic encoding. Current theories further sug-

54

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

gest that MTL subregional function may be differentially influenced by
midbrain inputs that signal reward. Using high-resolution fMRI, the
present study characterized MTL subregion function during associative
encoding under reward as well as reward-related effects on later cued
recall performance. During associative encoding, high- and low-value
monetary cues preceded paired associates indicating potential reward for
successful retrieval. At test, participants performed cued recall followed
by match (correct association) or mismatch (incorrect association) probe
decisions and received feedback on their performance. Behaviorally,
cued recall performance was superior for pairs preceded by high reward
cues at encoding relative to pairs preceded by low reward cues. Initial
analyses revealed successful memory formation associated with activation in hippocampus, perirhinal cortex, and midbrain regions that was
modulated by reward with greater subsequent memory effects observed
for high relative to low reward pairs. Successful memory retrieval during
cued recall was further modulated by reward status where correct relative to incorrect retrieval was greater for high relative to low reward pairs
in hippocampal and perirhinal regions. Moreover, hippocampal and
midbrain activation differentiating associative novelty at probe (mismatch vs. match) was greater for high relative to low reward pairs. These
findings suggest that motivation during learning affects MTL-based
memory formation as well as later retrieval processes through interactions with midbrain regions.
A74
SYSTEMS CONSOLIDATION OF LONG-TERM REAL-LIFE-LIKE
MEMORY: A FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING STUDY Orit
Furman1, Yadin Dudai1; 1Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel — Systems consolidation is a hypothetical slow process of reorganization
whereby memory storage and retrieval come to rely on different brain
systems with the passage of time. Of particular relevance is the relationship between declarative memory retrieval and the involvement of
medial temporal lobe (MTL) over time. The present study aims to characterize systems consolidation of declarative memory, using a novel moviememory paradigm we recently devised for the study of long-term and
remote memory under real-life-like conditions (Furman et al., Learning &
Memory 14, 457, 2007; Hasson et al., Neuron, 57, 452, 2008). A 27-min
documentary movie (created in-house specifically for memory research)
was the memoranda, and a computerized questionnaire was used to
assess recall and recognition of events sampled every ~20 sec of the
movie. Metamemory was also assessed. Three groups of subjects were
scanned in a 3T MRI scanner during both movie viewing and memory
testing, allowing comparison of neural activity during retrieval at three
different study-test intervals: 3 hours (N=13), 3 weeks (N=15) and 3
months (N=14). Participants in a control group (N=13) completed the
questionnaire without viewing the movie. While involvement of a distributed neural network remained similar over time, MTL activation during recognition was significant only when memory was recent (3 hours, 3
weeks) but not remote (3 months). During recall tasks, which involved
instructions to imagine movie episodes, MTL activation was significant
in all groups, including control, suggesting this area's time-independent
involvement in re-experiencing or mental imagery of complex events.
A75
UTILIZATION
OF
CONTEXTUALLY
GENERATED
EXPECTATIONS Elissa Aminoff1, Michael Miller1; 1University of
California Santa Barbara — Repeated exposure to typical environments
(e.g., restaurant) allows one to generate expectations about objects likely
to be encountered in that context (e.g., a menu). This can be advantageous to subsequent cognition, e.g., faster at recognizing related objects
(Biederman et al., 1982); but can also lead to subsequent cognitive errors,
e.g., false recognition of related objects (Aminoff et al., in press). Is it possible to control the use of contextually generated expectations? The current experiment tests this by having participants name two sequentially
presented objects. The objects were either contextually related (e.g., cow
and tractor), or contextually unrelated (e.g., bed and acorn). On each trial,

Poster Session A

a cue indicated how likely the second object was related to the first:
highly likely (70%), or unlikely (30%). Using the cue, we expected participants to modulate how much they utilized contextually relevant expectations. Behavioral results indicate that when objects were contextually
related, participants were significantly faster at naming the second object
if it was cued to be highly likely related to the first object compared to
when the second object was most likely unrelated to the first object. Furthermore, in the unlikely cued condition, participants were significantly
slower at naming a related object compared to naming an unrelated
object. Although this trend was significant in the group, variability
revealed individual differences in the control and use of contextual
expectations. What these results reveal about the mechanism underlying
contextual processing, and how neural activity sensitive to contextual
associations can predict these results, will be discussed.
A76
SYMPATHETIC AND PARASYMPATHETIC EFFECTS ON
COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE Shannon McCoy1, Brandon Cosley1,
Shawn Ell1; 1University of Maine — Recent research in cognitive neuroscience has shown that social pressure may enhance performance on certain cognitive tasks (Markman et al., 2006). One reason social pressure
may lead to differences in cognitive performance may be linked to its
effects on physiological arousal or stress. When the body responds to
psychosocial stressors the primary system that leads to increases in
arousal is the sympathetic nervous system. Conversely, the parasympathetic nervous system acts to attenuate the arousing effects of the sympathetic system helping the body return to homeostasis. Drawing on this
research, we hypothesized that when the sympathetic nervous system is
aroused explicit reasoning processes are impaired. In contrast, the inhibitory effects of increases in parasympathetic activation are predicted to
help restore explicit reasoning. In order to assess these differential effects
of the two branches of the autonomic system on cognitive performance,
participants performed an information-integration category learning task
and a uni-dimensional task following a 20 minute social stressor (i.e.
TSST; Krishbaum et al., 1993). In information-integration tasks, optimal
performance requires the integration of information from two or more
stimulus dimensions, and is not highly dependent upon explicit reasoning. In uni-dimensional tasks, optimal performance requires hypothesis
testing strategies to determine the dimension of categorization. As predicted, the more participants experienced sympathetic arousal the better
their performance on the information integration task. Conversely,
greater influence of the parasympathetic system was found to be positively related performance on the uni-dimensional task.
A77
LEARNING MORE, KNOWING LESS: REPETITION MODULATES
MEDIAL
TEMPORAL
LOBE
AND
BASAL
GANGLIA
CONTRIBUTIONS TO LEARNING AND GENERALIZATION
Nathaniel Clement1, Karin Foerde1, Daphna Shohamy1; 1Columbia
University — Studies of the neural bases of learning and memory suggest
that the medial temporal lobe (MTL) and basal ganglia support distinct
memory systems. The MTL supports rapid learning and creates flexible
memories that can be easily generalized, while the basal ganglia support
gradual learning of inflexible stimulus-response associations that do not
generalize. This predicts that extended learning experience may lead to
knowledge that is less generalizable. The goal of this study was to test
this prediction by examining how experience during learning impacts
generalization. We used functional imaging (fMRI) to examine MTL and
basal ganglia activity while subjects engaged in a two-phase learning and
transfer task. Subjects engaged in feedback-based learning of associations
that repeated either many times (high-repetition condition) or few times
(low-repetition condition). Next, subjects were asked to generalize their
learned knowledge to novel stimulus combinations. We predicted that
fewer repetitions would permit greater generalization. Results indicated
that learning of trained associations was similar for both conditions, but
generalization was greater for the low-repetition condition. FMRI data

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

revealed that MTL regions showed greater activation to low-repetition
stimuli during learning than to the high-repetition stimuli; furthermore,
the magnitude of that difference was related to better generalization for
the low-repetition condition. The basal ganglia showed decreased activation over learning, across both conditions. These findings are consistent
with the idea that the basal ganglia support iterative learning while the
MTL supports the generalization of learned associations, and suggest
that interactions between these systems over learning have implications
for subsequent representations.
A78
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE THAT EXEMPLAR-SPECIFIC
REPRESENTATIONS
SUPPORT
VISUAL
OBJECT
CATEGORIZATION AND IMPLICIT MEMORY AFTER 200 MS
Stephen Maher1, Haline Schendan1; 1Tufts University — The timing and format of visual knowledge representations supporting object categorization are largely unknown. Previous event-related potential (ERP)
research indicates that visual object representations that are view- but not
contour-specific are activated between 200 and 400 ms, indexed by a frontopolar N350, and support object model selection from a perceptual representation system in occipitotemporal cortex to enable a category
decision. This experiment investigated whether these and later representations are specific to the particular exemplar of a basic level category
experienced and vary with exemplar typicality (e.g., cell vs. rotary
phone). People categorized objects during an indirect memory test in a 3
study (same or different exemplars of repeated categories, new category)
x 2 typicality (high, low) design. Repetition effects showed that, regardless of typicality, knowledge underlying the N350, as well as a later parietal P600 implicated in post-model selection processes, was specific for
the same exemplar. A centrofrontal FN400, implicated in conceptual
implicit memory with some perceptual information, demonstrated perceptual specificity but also generalization to different exemplars. These
findings support and extend a two-state interactive account of visual
object knowledge and multiple memory systems theories. After 200 ms, a
perceptual representation system for model selection during the N350
also stores perceptual implicit memory, coding each view of a category
exemplar. Afterwards, conceptual knowledge representations shared by
multiple exemplars and implicated in conceptual implicit memory are
activated during the FN400. Finally, memory during the P600 is highly
specific for the local contours in a specific view of a category exemplar.
A79
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF IMPLICIT PROBABILISTIC
SEQUENCE LEARNING IN AGING Jessica R. Simon1, Eric R.
Murphy1, Chandan J. Vaidya1,2, James H. Howard Jr.1,3, Darlene V. Howard1;
1
Georgetown University, 2Children’s Research Institute, Children’s National
Medical Center, 3Catholic University of America — Implicit sequence learning, an acquired sensitivity to regularities without explicit awareness,
requires a high level of functional integration among underlying neural
networks. We used functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to
identify age differences in functional connectivity, i.e. temporal correlation between distinct brain regions, during an implicit probabilistic
sequencing task. fMRI is increasingly being used to study functional connectivity, but this analysis has rarely been applied to study aging. Over 3
fMRI runs, 11 young and 12 healthy old adults viewed a series of three
sequential stimuli: 2 cues and 1 target. Participants responded to only the
target stimulus using a corresponding button. Unbeknownst to them, the
first cue’s location predicted one target location for most trials (High
Probability) and another location for the rest (Low Probability). Both age
groups demonstrated learning (e.g. faster responses to High vs. Low
Probability trials). To investigate age differences in functional connectivity as modulated by cognitive events, we conducted a voxel-based correlation analysis. Given the striatum’s importance in processing sequential
and probabilistic information, we used the peak caudate voxel in each
subject as a seed for psychophysiological interaction analysis and performed a brain-wide search for voxels where BOLD covaried signifi-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

55

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

cantly with this interaction term. Learning was supported by different
patterns of functional integration in young and old adults; for example,
in Run 3, caudate connectivity was greater with the putamen and cerebellum for the young but the hippocampus in the old. These findings may
reflect age-related compensation and/or changes in white-matter integrity.
A80
AN FMRI STUDY OF ITEM, ASSOCIATIVE, AND INTEGRATIVE
EPISODIC MEMORY PROCESSING Scott M. Hayes1,2, James Kragel1,2,
Roberto Cabeza1,2; 1Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University,
Durham, NC, 2Duke University, Durham, NC — Regions within both prefrontal cortex (PFC) and the medial temporal lobes (MTL) are thought
make distinct contributions to item and associative memory. According
to some dual-process models of memory, forming associations between
distinct items relies on the hippocampus, whereas item memory is
thought to be mediated by rhinal cortex. More recently, it has been suggested that perirhinal cortex processes item details and that it may play a
critical role in processing integrated or unitized stimuli. To examine this
issue, we collected whole-brain fMRI data during encoding and retrieval
of abstract figures. Participants studied monochromatic abstract figures
(Item condition), multi-chromatic abstract figures (Integrative condition),
or pairs of monochromatic abstract figures (Associative condition). At
test, participants made old/new recognition judgments using a fourpoint confidence scale (definitely old, probably old, probably new, definitely new). Results of fMRI analyses revealed bilateral prefrontal cortex
activation during both Associative and Integrative retrieval relative to the
Item recognition. Within the medial temporal lobes, preferential activation was observed in the hippocampus during Associative retrieval relative to the Integrative and Item conditions. Overall, these data are
consistent with the idea that different PFC and MTL regions contribute to
item and associative memory.
A81
TOP-DOWN MODULATION OF MEDIAL TEMPORAL ACTIVITY
DURING EPISODIC RETRIEVAL Norbou Buchler1, Ian Dobbins,2,
Roberto Cabeza1; 1Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University,
2Washington University in St. Louis — It is generally assumed that medial
temporal lobe (MTL) activity during episodic retrieval reflects the recovery of memory traces, and hence, it is mainly driven bottom-up by the
recovered memories. However, MTL activity could also reflect the intention to remember, and be partly driven top-down by memory control
processes mediated by the prefrontal cortex (PFC). To investigate these
issues we conducted an fMRI study in which we manipulated top-down
processes by varying intention to remember, and bottom-up processes,
by varying stimulus oldness. While in the scanner, previously studied
words and new words were presented in an incidental non-memory or
an intentional memory task. Our design first examined the patterns of
MTL and PFC activity that are elicited automatically in a non-memory
lexical decision task, and then examined the patterns of activity associated with intentional uses of memory, such as recognizing old and new
words, and also the retrieval of more specific source information. Our
data demonstrated bottom-up influences in the non-memory task, that
MTL activity can be elicited automatically, independently of whether
there is intention-to-retrieve. Top-down influences were observed across
types-of-tasks for intentional remembering and were associated with
greater PFC and MTL activity. Pure top-down influences were observed
by varying instructional emphasis on recognizing new or recognizing old
words, resulting in greater PFC and MTL activity to new or old stimuli,
respectively. The finding that MTL activity can be modulated top-down
by retrieval intentions indicates that MTL activations cannot be simply
attributed to memory recovery.

56

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

A82
VALUE
GENERALIZATION
IN
CONDITIONING:
BRAIN
MECHANISMS
SUPPORTING
HUMAN
SENSORY
PRECONDITIONING WITH MONETARY REINFORCEMENT G. Elliott
Wimmer1, Michael Szeto1, Daphna Shohamy1; 1Columbia University — When
pairs of stimuli are related through coinciding experiences - say, a new
couple that one has become acquainted with - how does learning new
value information about one pair member impact the value of the other?
This value generalization effect, referred to as sensory preconditioning,
has been known experimentally since the early days of conditioning
research. However, the neural and cognitive mechanisms supporting
sensory preconditioning remain largely unknown. Guided by recent animal research, we hypothesized that sensory preconditioning may depend
on multiple cognitive processes and neural systems: the dopamine-innervated basal ganglia may support initial value learning, while the medial
temporal lobe may be necessary for successful generalization of value. To
test this hypothesis, we used fMRI and a newly developed monetary
reinforcement sensory preconditioning paradigm. In the task, stimuli are
first incidentally paired (with no reinforcement). Then, one stimulus from
each pair is used as a predictor of monetary reinforcement (gain, loss, or
null outcome). Behavioral results show that the primary conditioning
procedure was effective, as evidenced by significant changes in stimulus
liking ratings and strong post-conditioning forced-choice preference for
the reward-predicting stimulus over the punishment-predicting stimulus. Importantly, this acquired value also transferred to the paired stimuli
that were never conditioned, and thus had no reward history of their
own. Functional magnetic resonance imaging analyses provide insight
into the neural substrates underlying successful value generalization in
sensory preconditioning, with particularly important roles for the basal
ganglia in value prediction and for the medial temporal lobe in generalization.
A83
PARIETAL CORTEX TRACKS THE AMOUNT OF INFORMATION
RETRIEVED FROM MEMORY EVEN WHEN IT IS NOT THE BASIS
OF A MEMORY DECISION Scott Guerin1, Amy Frithsen1, Michael
Miller1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara — A growing number of
fMRI studies are raising the prospect that the parietal cortex may play a
role in memory. In recognition memory studies, regions of the parietal
cortex appear to track the amount of information retrieved from memory
and the participant’s subjective impression that an item is old. Since parietal cortex tracks the subjective impression that an item is old, it may be
encoding the decision variable that determines the outcome of the decision process: if activity in this region exceeds a certain threshold, the participant responds "old"; otherwise, the participant responds "new". We
used a frequency discrimination paradigm to dissociate the amount of
information retrieved from memory and the decision variable. In this
task, the participant studies a series of stimuli that repeat a variable number of times. Then, in the memory test, the participant is presented with
two items, one of which was presented more frequently than the other
during the study session. The participant’s task is to choose the stimulus
that was presented more frequently. In yes/no recognition, the decision
is based on the absolute amount of information retrieved. In frequency
discrimination, the decision is based on the relative amount of information retrieved. Nonetheless, we observed that activation in the angular
gyrus and precuneus tracked the absolute amount of information
retrieved, even when it was not the basis of the participant’s decision.
This suggests that parietal cortex does not encode the decision variable
that underlies recognition decisions.
A84
EPISODIC MEMORY FOR FEEDBACK EVENTS DURING
PROBABILISTIC LEARNING Karin Foerde1, Nathan Clement1, Daphna
Shohamy1; 1Columbia University — Multiple systems in the brain support
learning and memory. Feedback-based, incremental learning of stimulusresponse associations is supported by the basal ganglia. A distinct mem-

Poster Session A

ory system supports rapidly formed memories of single-trial episodes
and depends on the medial temporal lobes. The present study tested the
hypothesis that a critical factor driving learning to depend on one system
or the other is the timing of response-contingent feedback. To test this
prediction, participants underwent functional imaging (fMRI) while
engaged in a feedback-based probabilistic learning task that included a
trial-by-trial measure of episodic memory. Participants learned to associate abstract symbols with a category outcome, using trial-by-error feedback that was delivered either immediately, or after a 3 or 6 second delay.
The feedback was provided in the form of trial-unique scene photographs. Outside the scanner participants were given a surprise memory
test: they classified all the encountered feedback images and an equal
number of novel images according to whether they had seen them during
scanning or not, and additionally indicated their confidence in the decision. Subjects performed the learning task equally well after learning
with varying feedback delays. However, subsequent memory performance was impacted by the timing of the feedback: longer delays during
learning resulted in enhanced subsequent memory of the feedback
events, in particular for negative feedback. During learning, greater activity was seen in the parahippocampal gyrus for negative compared to positive feedback events. These results suggest that the timing of responsecontingent feedback during learning affects the systems that support
learning and memory.
A85
DIFFERENCES IN BRAIN ACTIVITY DURING ENCODING AND
RETRIEVAL OF WORDS AS A FUNCTION OF STRATEGY,
COGNITIVE STYLE, AND STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY
Danielle R. King1, Christa-Lynn Donovan1, Michael B. Miller1; 1University of
California, Santa Barbara — Episodic memory is by nature an unconstrained and strategic task. There has been little investigation of how
mnemonic strategies used spontaneously by learners relate to brain activity patterns in episodic memory tasks. To test whether different strategies
engage different networks, 20 subjects were scanned during intentional
encoding and retrieval of highly imageable words. Subjects completed a
visualizer/verbalizer test battery, from which visual and verbal factor
scores were computed to reflect the subject’s tendency to process information visually/verbally. Subjects also reported their encoding strategy,
which was subsequently classified as "visual" or "verbal." Subjects were
then subdivided into groups based on their reported strategy. A twosample t-test was conducted to identify regions differentially active
between groups. This identified several right-lateralized regions in the
prefrontal and temporal cortices, and a left-lateralized region in the precuneus. Regions of interest (ROIs) were then defined functionally using
clusters identified in the 2-sample t-tests. To test whether the laterality of
these activations was associated with differences in connectivity across
the corpus callosum (CC), mean fractional anisotropy (FA) values were
computed in each subject for the anterior CC, which connects the prefrontal regions, and the posterior CC, which connects temporal/parietal
areas. A correlation analysis assessed the relationships between mean
FAs, activity in the ROIs, reported strategy and visual and verbal factor
scores. Results show that differences in strategy and cognitive style are
associated with different functional activity during encoding and
retrieval and that these differences may be related to the structural connectivity of the individuals’ brain.
A86
INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY IN BRAIN ACTIVITY DURING
EPISODIC ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL: WITHIN- AND
BETWEEN-SUBJECTS VARIABILITY OVER THE COURSE OF ONE
YEAR Christa-Lynn Donovan1, Meghan Roarty1, Michael B. Miller1;
1University of California, Santa Barbara — We have previously shown
extensive individual variability in brain activity during episodic retrieval.
The purpose of this study was to compare sources of within- and
between-subject variability during encoding and retrieval. Of particular
interest was to what degree variability in brain activity was related to dif-

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

ferences in mnemonic strategy and further, how does this compare to
variability related to differences in anatomy, physiology and other
sources of individual differences? Twelve participants were scanned with
functional MRI while they intentionally encoded lists of highly and lowly
imageable words and completed subsequent recognition memory tests.
After scanning, subjects were asked to report their strategy, and to complete a Visualizer-Verbalizer test battery and personality questionnaire.
Subjects returned 4 more times within one year. Each time, they performed the same tasks (with new stimuli). Our results show how
between-subjects variability relates to differences in brain anatomy, connectivity, coherence of the default network at rest, reported mnemonic
strategy, memory performance, visualizing/verbalizing trait and personality. Further, it’s shown that within-subjects variability is predicted by
changes in mnemonic strategy over time. Our results demonstrate that
individuals can recruit widely dispersed brain regions during an episodic
memory task, that individuals patterns of activity are relatively stable
over time and that interindividual differences in activity patterns are
related to a number of factors including anatomical features of the individual’s brain, the individual’s unique mnemonic strategy as well as trait
factors such as visualizing/verbalizing ability and personality.
A87
THE HUMAN HIPPOCAMPUS AND RECOGNITION MEMORY:
EVIDENCE FROM YES/NO TESTS AND FORCED-CHOICE TESTS
WITH EITHER CORRESPONDING OR NON-CORRESPONDING
LURES Annette Jeneson1, C. Brock Kirwan1, John T. Wixted1, Larry R.
Squire1,2; 1University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 2VA Healthcare
System, San Diego — The hippocampus has been proposed to support
both recollection and familiarity. Alternatively, it has been suggested that
the hippocampus selectively supports recollection and that adjacent cortex can support familiarity. The latter view has led to two suggestions: (a)
both recollection and familiarity are involved in yes/no recognition but
familiarity can support forced-choice recognition, at least when the targets and lures are quite similar; and (b) familiarity is better able to support good recognition performance when targets are presented with
highly similar lures (termed corresponding lures) than when targets are
presented together with lures that are similar to other targets (termed
non-corresponding lures). By this view, patients with hippocampal
lesions should exhibit a greater impairment in yes/no recognition than in
forced-choice recognition tests that use corresponding lures. Second,
patients with hippocampal lesions should benefit more from a forcedchoice test that uses corresponding lures than from a forced-choice test
that uses non-corresponding lures. We administered yes/no, forcedchoice corresponding, and forced-choice non-corresponding tests to five
memory-impaired patients with circumscribed hippocampal lesions and
14 controls. In recognition tests of photographs of objects as well as in recognition tests of silhouette images, hippocampal lesions impaired performance on all three tests (yes/no, forced-choice corresponding, and
forced-choice non-corresponding). For silhouettes, the pattern of performance across the three tests was similar in patients and controls. For
objects, patients tended to perform better on the forced-choice corresponding test than on the other tests, though this effect depended largely
on the performance of a single patient.
A88
OSCILLATORY CORRELATES OF EPISODIC RETRIEVAL DURING
ITEM AND SOURCE MEMORY CONFIDENCE JUDGMENTS
Andrew J Watrous1, Richard J Addante1, Andrew P Yonelinas1,2, Charan
Ranganath1,2; 1Neuroscience Graduate Group, University of California-Davis,
2
University of California-Davis — A significant question regarding episodic memory is whether recollection and familiarity are unique, qualitatively distinct processes, or if they reflect a single process along a graded
strength continuum. In accord with the dual process account, some findings from event-related potential studies indicate that recollection and
familiarity may have dissociable neural correlates. However, much less is
known about the oscillatory correlates of episodic memory. For example,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

57

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

in both animals and humans, theta oscillations arising from the hippocampus have been implicated in memory processes, but the exact role of
theta oscillations in episodic memory processing remains controversial.
We sought to further characterize this relationship by recording scalp
electroencephalography (EEG) data during encoding and retrieval of verbal material. During encoding, participants made animacy or pleasantness judgments. During each retrieval test, studied and unstudied words
were presented and participants made confidence judgments as to
whether the item was previously studied and as to which task was performed with each item. We have employed time-frequency analysis techniques to elucidate which frequency bands are associated with episodic
memory processes. Initial analyses of data during the retrieval phase
show that power in the theta band was modulated by successful recognition of studied items. Further analyses will characterize and compare
oscillatory correlates of recollection and familiarity during retrieval.
A89
ERP CORRELATES OF RECOLLECTION AND FAMILIARITY: ITEM
AND SOURCE MEMORY CONFIDENCE Richard James Addante1,2,
Andrew P. Yonelinas1,2,3, Charan Ranganath1,2,3; 1University of California Davis, 2Center for Neuroscience, 3Center for Mind and Brain — Memory
judgments can be based either on recollection of qualitative information
about a previous event or on rapid assessments of stimulus familiarity.
Evidence for this 'dual process' view is quite extensive, but a major competing 'single process' account is that recollection simply reflects stronger
memory traces than familiarity. We used a novel item and source recognition confidence method to provide behavioral measures of recollection
and familiarity that overcomes several limitations associated with prior
procedures, and recorded Event-related potentials (ERPs) during
retrieval. Subjects studied words under conditions of pleasantness or animacy judgments, then made item recognition and source recognition confidence judgments at test. Event-related potentials (ERPs) during
retrieval revealed two different effects that differentiated between old
and new items: an early mid-frontal negativity, and a later onsetting,
parietally-distributed effect. Examination of the data as functions of both
item and source memory judgments indicated that the mid-frontal effect
was correlated with familiarity, whereas the parietal effect was correlated
with recollection. Moreover, the results from the item confidence analysis
and the source contrasts provided convergent results. The parametric
confidence approach used reveals a number of further findings that
would not have been apparent using standard methods for both item recognition and source monitoring. The results support dual process models
of recognition memory and additionally show the utility of acquiring
continuous measures of memory confidence in neuromonitoring studies.
A90
NEURAL CHANGES DURING THE DEVELOPMENT OF
AUTOMATICITY IN PERCEPTUAL CATEGORIZATION Jennifer
G. Waldschmidt1, Jessica Roeder1, Maria Schellenberger1, F. Gregory Ashby1;
1University of California, Santa Barbara — This study used fMRI to examine changes in neural activation that accompanied the development of
automaticity in a difficult perceptual categorization task. Each participant
completed 20 sessions of training in an information-integration categorization task (approximately 12,000 trials). Sessions 2, 4, 10, and 20 were
completed inside the scanner. Stimuli were circular sine-wave gratings,
each category had hundreds of exemplars, and category membership was
determined by a rule that required integrating perceptual information
about bar width and bar orientation in a way that could not be described
verbally. At the behavioral level, accuracy gradually increased to near
perfect levels and response times decreased to a low nearly constant
value. Both results are classic markers of automaticity. The fMRI data
generally supported a recent computational model called SPEED (Subcortical Pathways Enable Expertise Development; Ashby, Ennis, & Spiering, 2007, Psychological Review), which assumes that the development of
automaticity is mediated by a transfer of control from a subcortical pathway through the basal ganglia to a faster purely cortical pathway from
sensory association cortex to the relevant areas of premotor and motor
cortex.
58

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

A91
UNIQUE NEURAL CORRELATES OF AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL
MEMORY AND THEORY OF MIND Jennifer S. Rabin1, Donald T.
Stuss2,3, Asaf Gilboa4, Raymond A. Mar1, R. Shayna Rosenbaum1,2; 1York
University, Toronto, Canada, 2Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, Toronto,
Canada, 3University of Toronto, Neurology, Rehabilitation Sciences, Canada,
4University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Israel — Neuroimaging studies report
a common network of brain regions involved in thinking about one’s
own past experiences during autobiographical memory (AM) and other
people’s current experiences during theory of mind (ToM). However,
lesion data show that amnesics have intact ToM, suggesting that distinct
neural mechanisms support the two abilities. This study examined the
brain regions and processes involved in imagining one’s own and other
people’s experiences using a real-world ’family photos’ test. Participants
were scanned with fMRI as they recollected past events in response to
personal photos (’AM’ condition) and generated possible events in
response to strangers’ photos (’ToM’ condition). Content and vividness
were matched across the AM and ToM photos. Analyses revealed a common network of brain regions, including bilateral medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), inferior frontal gyrus, medial temporal lobes (hippocampus,
parahippocampus), posterior cingulate/retrosplenial cortex, temporal
poles, and middle temporal gyrus. However, activity within the entire
network was greater during AM except for left inferior frontal gyrus,
which was greater during ToM. More specific analyses of event construction and elaboration revealed greater mPFC and hippocampal activation
during elaboration for both conditions, although the precise location of
activity within these regions differed across conditions. Moreover, right
temporal-parietal junction (rTPJ) activation was unique to ToM during
event elaboration. These data suggest that differences in AM and ToM
emerge when vividness is taken into account, particularly during event
elaboration. Furthermore, mPFC and rTPJ, but not the hippocampus,
may be needed for ToM, given that this ability is intact in amnesics.
A92
PREFRONTAL ACTIVATION DURING SUCESSFUL ENCODING
OF TASK-RELEVANT AND IRRELEVANT INFORMATION
Andrew Heusser1, Francis Richter1, Ian Ramsay2, Dan Ragland1,2, Cameron
Carter1,2, Charan Ranganath1,2; 1Center for Neuroscience, University of
California- Davis, 2Imaging Research Center, University of CaliforniaDavis — Regions in the lateral prefrontal cortex are critical for working
memory control processes that support selection of goal-relevant information. Activity in the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) has been
reliably linked with successful long-term memory encoding, but the role
of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) in encoding is unclear.
Some research suggests that DLPFC may represent abstract rules that
determine what information is task-relevant, whereas the VLPFC may
more specifically support the selection of relevant stimulus or response
information. Building on this idea, we conducted an event-related FMRI
study to test whether these regions differentially support long-term
memory formation. Subjects were scanned while performing a contextdependent encoding paradigm with two different conditions. On blocks
of 'no rule' trials, participants were told to make animacy judgments on a
series of words. On 'target/nontarget' blocks, participants were first
shown a target color (orange or green) and instructed to make animacy
judgments for words shown in the target color or to make a non-target
response for words in the other color. Following scanning, participants
were given a recognition test consisting of all words, along with unstudied foil items. Behavioral data demonstrated that recognition memory
was better for words from no-rule blocks than for words from target/
nontarget blocks, and that recognition was superior for target words than
for non-target words. Preliminary FMRI analyses revealed that prefrontal
activation was modulated by task condition and successful encoding.
Further analyses will assess interactions between task and subsequent
memory status and activity in DLPFC and VLPFC.

Poster Session A

A93
PERSPECTIVE
DIFFERENTIALLY
MODULATES
NEURAL
ACTIVATION DURING REMEMBERING AND IMAGINING
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL EVENTS Christine L. Cox1, Lynn Nadel1, Lee
Ryan1; 1Cognition and Neuroimaging Laboratories, University of Arizona — The
perspective from which autobiographical memories (AM) are retrieved
can influence their subjective experience. Participants report reduced
detail, emotionality, and sense of reliving for AMs recalled from thirdperson "observer" perspective (3pp) compared to those recalled from
first-person "field" perspective (1pp; Berntsen & Rubin, 2006; McIsaac &
Eich, 2002). Recent studies indicate that recalling AMs and imagining fictitious autobiographical events (FAE) recruit largely overlapping neural
networks (Addis et al., 2007; Hassabis et al., 2007). Despite evidence that
perspective is important in AM retrieval, and that recalling AMs and
imagining FAEs engage similar processes, the effects of perspective on
the neural correlates of these tasks are currently unknown. Participants in
the present study underwent fMRI scanning while retrieving AMs and
imagining FAEs, subsequently indicating from which perspective (1st/
3rd) they saw themselves in each event. Parametric modulation analyses
were performed, determining brain regions whose activation was modulated by differences in perspective. Results indicated that while 1pp modulated activity in medial prefrontal cortex during AM retrieval, activity in
lateral parietal cortex and the cerebellum was modulated during FAE
imagination. And while 3pp modulated activity in dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex and the precuneus during AM retrieval, activity in anterior prefrontal cortex, premotor cortex, basal ganglia, and lateral parietal cortex
was modulated during FAE imagination. These findings suggest that
recalling and imagining oneself from the first and third person differentially engage brain regions implicated in self and other processing, motor
planning, and spatial cognition, demonstrating the important role played
by perspective in the (re-)construction of autobiographical events.
A94
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PERCEPTUAL/CONCEPTUAL
PRIMING EFFECTS AND REPETITION SUPPRESSION IN
POSTERIOR/FRONTAL CORTICAL REGIONS Chun-Yu Lin1, Lee
Ryan1; 1University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ — Priming refers to the change
in speed, accuracy or bias in processing a stimulus following prior exposure to the same stimulus. Neuroimaging studies have revealed that
behavioral priming is typically accompanied by reduced activity (i.e. repetition suppression, or RS) in several cortical regions. When a perceptual
priming task is used, RS is usually found in posterior cortical regions,
and when a conceptual priming task is used, RS is normally found in
frontal regions. It is hypothesized that RS may be the neural basis for
behavioral priming. If this is the case, the magnitude of behavioral priming (i.e. the amount of facilitation in reaction time) should correlate with
the magnitude of RS. However, reviews showed that so far several studies have reported frontal RS correlated with behavioral conceptual priming effects, but no strong evidence has been published yet supporting the
correlation between posterior RS and perceptual priming effects. Therefore, the main goal of the present functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) study was to examine the relationship between posterior/ frontal
RS and perceptual/conceptual priming. Each participant performed
three perceptual priming tasks (symmetry judgment on novel shapes or
known objects, and picture naming on known objects) and one conceptual priming task (natural or man-made judgment on known objects).
Results showed that more posterior than frontal RS effects were found in
perceptual priming tasks, and the magnitude of behavioral perceptual
priming also correlates with the extent of posterior RS, supporting the
view that posterior regions are important for perceptual priming.

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

A95
DISTINCT PATTERNS OF FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
BETWEEN PERIRHINAL CORTEX AND OTHER CORTICAL
REGIONS IN RECOGNITION MEMORY AND PERCEPTUAL
DISCRIMINATION Edward ONeil1, Anthony Cate2, Jordan Poppenk3,4,
Stefan Köhler1; 1The University of Western Ontario, 2VA Research Service,
Martinez, CA , 3University of Toronto, 4Rotman Reseach Institute — The prevailing view of the medial temporal lobe (MTL) holds that its structures
are dedicated to declarative memory. Recent evidence challenges this
position, suggesting that perirhinal cortex (PRc) in the MTL may also
play a role in online processing of objects when perceptual discriminations of stimuli with highly overlapping visual features are required.
Here, we conducted an fMRI experiment to compare functional interactions of PRc with other cortical regions in recognition memory and in
perceptual discrimination. The perceptual task required an ’oddball’
judgment on sets of morphed faces. The memory task involved forcedchoice recognition of a studied face among similar morphed lures. In previously reported analyses, we identified a right PRc region whose activity
was related to accuracy in both tasks. In our new analyses, we aimed to
determine whether these accuracy effects involved distinct interactions
between PRc and other cortical regions. Specifically, we tested whether
these patterns included (i) correlations between PRc and prefrontal
regions previously implicated in retrieval monitoring that were specific
to recognition memory, and (ii) correlations between PRc and ventral
visual-pathway regions previously implicated in face perception that
were specific to perceptual discrimination. A multivariate partial leastsquares (PLS) analysis with a seed in the critical PRc region uncovered
distinct patterns of functional connectivity that confirmed our hypotheses. Together these findings suggest that it is not engagement of PRc as
such, but its pattern of interactions with other cortical regions that is
uniquely associated with successful performance in recognition memory
as compared to online processing of objects.
A96
LONG-TERM REPRESENTATIONS OF FAMILIAR LANDMARKS
AND SCENES AS REVEALED BEHAVIOURALLY AND WITH EYE
MOVEMENTS Sabrina Agnihotri1,2,3, Jennifer D. Ryan2,3, Morris
Moscovitch2,3, Gordon Winocur2,3, Marie-Eve Couture2, R. Shayna
Rosenbaum1,2; 1York University, 2Rotman Research Institute: Baycrest
Hospital, 3University of Toronto — Research suggests that spatial memory
representations of familiar environments are organized as schematic cognitive maps that preserve the gist of the environment without rich contextual details that may be necessary for re-experiencing it. In this sense,
remote spatial memories can be considered similar to remote semantic or
context-free memories, which can be retrieved independently of the hippocampus. It has also been suggested that, under certain conditions, eye
movements are sensitive markers of hippocampal activity. To better
understand long-term spatial memory representations and retrieval, the
current study examined the ability to detect modifications to well-known
landmarks located in downtown Toronto in a group of healthy young
adults with extensive experience navigating in that environment. In general, participants demonstrated great difficulty identifying scenes containing altered landmarks, even if the modification was to the relative
size of landmarks, to their internal features, or to the surrounding context. Their performance was best when a landmark was transposed to a
different location. This pattern was reflected in the eye movement data,
suggesting that there was a change in viewing time only in response to
the few modifications for which participants were aware. These results
support the contention that very familiar landmarks are strongly integrated within the spatial context in which they were first experienced,
and that as long as the overall spatial configuration of landmarks remain
intact, changes to fine or incidental details can go unnoticed.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

59

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

A97
EXPLORING THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF CORTICOSTRIATAL
LOOPS TO CATEGORIZATION LEARNING USING TEMPORAL
DIFFERENCE
MODELING
AND
GRANGER
CAUSALITY
MODELING Carol Seger1, Erik Peterson1, Dan Lopez-Paniagua1, Corinna
Cincotta1; 1Colorado State University — We used multiple fMRI analysis
methodologies to identify the roles of three corticostriatal loops in categorization: the motor loop connecting putamen with motor cortex, the
visual loop connecting caudate with visual cortex, and the motivational
loop connecting ventral striatum with ventromedial frontal cortex. Subjects viewed a face or house, responded whether it belonged to category
A or category B, and received feedback. Stimuli were arbitrarily assigned
to categories and category assignment could not be learned via a rule or
pattern. We performed three analyses: (1) General linear model (GLM)
contrasts identifying activity specific to correctly categorized trials (2)
Regression analysis using temporal different model predictors of the
error function (identifying regions sensitive to feedback processing and
expectancy) and the value function (identifying regions coding correct
category response) (3) Granger causality modeling (GCM) to identify
directed influences between regions. GLM analyses found that striatal
regions in both the motor loop (putamen) and visual loop (caudate) were
associated with categorization learning. However, the putamen was sensitive to the value function and exerted directed influence on motor cortex, whereas the caudate received directed influence from visual cortex
regions. These results indicate that the motor loop is involved in motor
responding and the visual loop is involved in visual analysis during categorization. Activity in the ventral striatum was predicted by the error
function, which is consistent with this region playing a role in reward
and feedback processing within the motivational corticostriatal loop.
A98
SOURCE MEMORY AND FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY Paul
Metzak1,2, Elton Ngan1, Liang Wang1,2, Jen Whitman1,2, Todd Woodward1,2;
1University of British Columbia, 2Provincial Health Services Authority, BC
Mental Health and Addictions Research Institute — Previous fMRI research
on source memory suggests that this process is associated with dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activity. In the current study, we sought to investigate the functionally connected neural networks underlying source
memory task performance, and their temporal progression throughout a
trial. Twenty-four healthy participants were scanned while presented
with words they had seen during training. Specifically, they were asked
to recall whether, for a given word, they had (1) quietly read it, (2) provided an associated word, (3) said it themselves as the solution to a word
puzzle, or (4) heard it as a digitized sound file solution to a word puzzle.
Using a Finite Impulse Response (FIR) basis set modelling the peristimulus time points in conjunction with constrained principal component
analysis (cPCA) for fMRI data, we extracted 3 functionally interacting but
separate components. In the first component, the highest loadings were
found bilaterally in the hippocampus and in the cerebellum. In the second component, the highest loadings were found in the visual cortex. In
the third component, the highest loadings were found bilaterally in the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and in the dorsal anterior cingulate. The
importance of each component over peristimulus time was computed
and subjected to a test of statistical significance. The interaction between
memory performance (miss/recall) and time point was found to be significant for all three components, indicating that all three neural networks are associated with successful source memory performance.
A99
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL AND BEHAVIORAL MEASURES OF
SWITCHING BETWEEN MEMORY TASKS Kristine A Wilckens1,
Eric D Signoff1, Ashley J Abraham1, David A Wolk2, Mark E Wheeler1;
1
University of Pittsburgh, 2University of Pennsylvania — Cognitive set, or
retrieval orientation, can influence the effectiveness and accuracy of
memory retrieval. To test the extent to which behavioral and electrophysiological measures of retrieval performance are influenced by orientation,

60

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

we used a task-switching paradigm in which subjects were cued on every
trial to perform either a semantic (living or nonliving) or an episodic (old
or new) memory task. Here we report preliminary data (n = 5) from a
study that will ultimately compare older and younger adults on behavioral and neural measures of retrieval orientation. Stimuli consisted of
common visual objects, and studied (old) and non-studied (new) items
were intermixed randomly at test. We were interested in the degree to
which event related potential (ERP) old/new effects were modulated by
the need to either switch from one task to another (switch) or to continue
performing the same task on the previous one (stay) and two (stay+1) trials. We also tested for retrieval orientation effects by comparing ERPs of
new items following either semantic or episodic cues. Behaviorally, subjects were slowest on switch trials and fastest on stay+1 trials. ERP data
showed an old/new effect in left posterior superior (LPS) sites. Further,
there appeared to be a step-wise increase in the old/new effect across
switch, stay, and stay+1 conditions which corresponded with the behavioral data. Moreover, we found differences between processing of new
stimuli following episodic vs. semantic task cues, which may reflect
retrieval orientation. These data suggest that processing of a stimulus differs when switching between memory tasks.
A100
INTERACTIVE CORTICAL AND SUBCORTICAL STRUCTURES
SUPPORT DIFFERENT TIME SCALES IN MOTOR SEQUENCE
LEARNING Nicholas F. Wymbs1, Scott T. Grafton1; 1University of
California, Santa Barbara — Nonlinear performance changes during
sequence learning suggest that motor skills may be acquired on multiple
time scales. We hypothesized that the underlying neural substrates supporting learning reflect these multiple time scales. It was predicted that
prefrontal and rostral premotor areas and their basal ganglia (BG) projections support initial improvement, whereas caudal premotor and motor
cortex and their BG connections support slow improvement. We used a
cued sequence production task and functional magnetic resonance imaging. Participants translated a visually instructed explicit 12-element
sequence into responses by the four fingers of the left hand. The entire
sequence was presented at once, which served as the imperative to
respond. Participants practiced three sequences frequently (189 trials/
sequence), three occasionally (27 trials/sequence), and nine additional
sequences rarely (8 trials/sequence) over the course of three sessions
completed within five days, allowing us to use frequency of exposure to
identify brain areas that are sensitive to the amount of training. Analyses
of BOLD activity identified transient activity in prefrontal cortex and rostral basal ganglia for rare sequences, consistent with a novelty effect.
Sequences that were practiced occasionally recruited pre-SMA, rostral
PMd and associated BG that diminished with frequent practice. In parallel, there was a progressive increase of activity in caudal PMd, SMA,
motor cortex and sensorimotor BG with frequent practice. Different brain
regions are more prominent at particular times during motor learning,
with a shift of recruitment from rostral to caudal premotor and associated
subcortical areas.
A101
EEG CORRELATES OF PROCESSING THREATENING VISUAL
STIMULI Clifford Calley1, Matthew Brier1, Thomas Ferree2, Rajen Patel1,
Yana Gelman1, Gail Tillman1, Michael Kraut3, John Hart1; 1Center for
BrainHealth: University of Texas at Dallas, 2University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, 3Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — An organism’s ability to rapidly detect threatening stimuli is crucial to its survival.
Previous fMRI studies of pictures of threatening and nonthreatening
stimuli across a variety of categories demonstrated differential signal
change of BA 18 and 19 for threatening compared to non-threatening
stimuli. The fMRI data, however, were uninformative as to the timing of
whether the para-striate visual regions was being activated directly from
feed-forward connections of striate cortex or late through feedback from
more rostral cortical regions. To address this issue, we recorded surface
EEG as subjects performed the same task used for the fMRI experiment

Poster Session A

noted above. Subjects were shown threatening and non-threatening
images, as well as their phase-scrambled equivalents. Time-frequency
analysis was performed using 0.25-sec moving windows. For threatening
versus non-threatening stimuli, there were differences in the theta band
EEG power in the left occipital-temporal region at about 1 sec and in the
fronto-central region at about 1.3 sec. The findings support the contention
that the previously observed BA 18 and 19 fMRI signal changes reflect
feedback activation as opposed to direct feedforward information flow,
which is consistent with axonal connections from the amygdala to visual
regions which have been shown to influence processing in visual cortices.
The finding of theta-band activity involved in threat detection in humans
is consistent with previous findings in animals for threat recognition in
the amygdalo-hippocampal circuit.
A102
PROCESSING OF SOUNDS DURING SLOW WAVE SLEEP IN
HUMANS: AN EEG/FMRI STUDY OF AUDITORY STIMULATION
IN NON-REM SLEEP Manuel Schabus1,2, Thanh Dang-Vu2, Melanie
Boly2, Anabelle Darsaud2, Genevieve Albouy2, Virginie Sterpenich2, Christophe
Phillips2, Pierre Maquet2; 1University of Salzburg, Austria, Division
Physiological Psychology, 2University of Liege, Belgium, Cyclotron Research
Centre — The present study aimed at identifying the neurophysiological
responses associated with auditory stimulation during deep non-rapid
eye movement (NREM) sleep using simultaneous EEG/fMRI recordings.
It was reported earlier that auditory stimuli produce bilateral activation
in auditory cortex, thalamus, and caudate during both wakefulness and
NREM-sleep (Portas et al., 2000). However, due to the spontaneous membrane potential fluctuations cortical responses may be highly variable
during NREM. Here we now examine the modulation of cerebral
responses to tones depending on the phase of the slow oscillation. Up to
now 7 healthy young subjects were scanned successfully during slow
wave sleep in the first half of the night in a Siemens-Allegra-3T scanner
(EPI sequence:32 slices, TR:2460ms). Subjects were not sleep-deprived
and sounds which were occurring around the peak negativity of NREM
slow-waves were identified. These detected sounds were then entered as
regressors of interest in fMRI analyses. Results are consistent with the
hypothesis that brain responses during deep NREM-sleep vary as a function of the fluctuating state of thalamo-cortical circuits. In accordance
with Massimini and colleagues (2003) larger evoked responses are
observed at the negative slope of the slow oscillation. The presence of
short temporal windows during which the brain is open to external stimuli is consistent with the fact that even during deep sleep meaningful
events can be detected. Altogether, brain responses during NREM sleep
appear to be non-stationary and highly dependent upon the phase of the
slow oscillation which may also determine the faith of incoming stimuli
while asleep.
A103
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF THE DISTRIBUTED PRACTICE
EFFECT Michael Mozer1, Harold Pashler2; 1University of Colorado,
2
University of California, San Diego — When individuals learn facts (e.g.,
foreign language vocabulary) over multiple study sessions, the temporal
spacing of study has a significant impact on memory retention. Behavioral experiments have shown a nonmonotonic relationship between
interstudy interval (ISI) and retention, with intermediate ISIs yielding
better performance than short or long ISIs, and the optimal ISI strongly
depending on the retention interval. Many theories have been proposed
to explain these effects, but none captures the wealth of data. We propose
a hybrid theory that combines features of three existing models: Anderson and Milson (1989), Raaijmakkers (2003), and Staddon, Chelaru, and
Higa (2002). Our theory is cast as a neural network, and is based on the
notion that items are encoded with a time-varying contextual representation, of the sort that has been proposed to reside in the dentate gyrus of
the hippocampus (Aimone, Wiles, & Gage, 2006). The similarity of the
contexts at study and test determines the probability of retrieval success.
Extending previous models, our theory posits a context that wanders on
multiple time scales. The model can fit data over a range of interstudy
intervals from minutes to months. Moreover, the model has strong pre-

Saturday March 21, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

dictive power: Given the forgetting function for a set of items studied
once, the model successfully determines the spacing of study sessions
that yields optimal retention.
A104
THE EFFECT OF SLEEP ON TEMPORAL ORDER IN EPISODIC
MEMORIES Andrea Hoffmann1, Kerstin Hoedlmoser1, Hermann
Griessenberger1, Wolfgang Klimesch1, Manuel Schabus1; 1University of
Salzburg, Division Physiological Psychology — Meanwhile there is plenty of
evidence indicating that sleep has a beneficial effect on declarative and
procedural memory consolidation. Here we study the influence of sleep
versus sleep deprivation on temporal order in episodic memories. 34
young participants either slept or had to stay awake during the whole
night after learning various stories. Each story consisted of 12 pictures (6
faces and 6 objects) presented in sequence and participants had to invent
a story with themselves being a part of it. In addition to a previous
screening/adaptation night the "sleep group" slept in the sleep laboratory
after learning with full polysomnography attached. Retest was done the
next morning, as well as after 2 recovery nights in order to circumvent
fatigue effects of the sleep-deprived group. Results revealed that performance in temporal order memory was only deteriorated in the post-training sleep deprived group. Furthermore, we report a positive relationship
of rapid eye-movement (REM) sleep after learning and performance in
temporal order recall. Last but not least we could confirm earlier findings
reporting positive association of (fast) non-REM sleep spindles and cognitive abilities (as revealed by the Wechsler Memory Scale- revised and
Raven`s Advanced Progressive Matrices). This repeatedly found general
association might indicate that sleep spindles are a good indicator for
cognitive capability because they allow a rough estimation about the
degree of thalamocortical connectivity.

Memory: Other
A105
RECOLLECTION BENEFITS AND THE REACTIVATION OF
SENSORY-SPECIFIC BRAIN REGIONS DURING THE RETRIEVAL
OF CONTEXT INFORMATION Erin Skinner1, Myra Fernandes1,
Cheryl Grady2,3; 1University of Waterloo, Ontario, 2Rotman Research Institute,
Baycrest Center for Geriatric Care, Toronto, Ontario, 3University of Toronto,
Ontario — The neural correlates underlying the retrieval of contextual
details during recollection were investigated using event-related fMRI.
Previous work suggests that participants can use contextual detail provided at study to benefit later memory performance (Skinner &
Fernandes, in press). We examined whether such a benefit is associated
with the reactivation of sensory-specific brain regions. The fusiform face
area was localized in fourteen younger adult participants, who subsequently performed three study-test sessions. During study, participants
viewed words presented with pictures of faces, or scrambled faces, and in
a subsequent scanned recognition test made remember, know, or new
judgments to the words presented alone. Overall, behavioural results
showed no difference in recognition performance for words studied with
faces or scrambled faces. Neuroimaging data, however, showed higher
fusiform activation during remember responses to words studied with
faces as compared to words studied with scrambled faces. In a further
analysis, we divided the participants based on behavioural performance:
8 participants who gave more remember responses to words studied with
faces than scrambled faces (Context-benefit group) and 6 participants
who did not show this pattern (Context-neutral group). Whereas the
Context-benefit group showed higher fusiform activation during remember responses to words studied with faces as compared to scrambled
faces, the Context-neutral group did not. The results suggest that the
retrieval of contextual detail during recollection is associated with the
reactivation of sensory-specific brain regions, and that this is supported
by processes that bind item and context information at study, improving
subsequent recollection.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

61

Poster Session B
Cognitive and brain development
B1
NEURAL CORRELATES OF AUDITORY PHONOLOGICAL
PROCESSING IN TYPICAL READING DEVELOPMENT AND
DYSLEXIA Elizabeth S. Norton1,2, Ioulia Kovelman1, Nadine Gaab3,4, Joanna
A. Christodoulou4,1, Dan A. Lieberman5,1, John Lymberis1, Susan WhitfieldGabrieli1, Maryanne Wolf2, John D.E. Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 2Tufts University, 3Children's Hospital Boston/Harvard Medical
School, 4Harvard University Graduate School of Education, 5Harvard Medical
School — Phonological awareness (PA), our ability to manipulate the phonemic units of language, is predictive of successful reading acquisition.
Children with dyslexia are often impaired on PA tasks. Neuroimaging
studies find differences in brain function between typical and dyslexic
readers using visual (written text) PA tasks. Although deficits in visual PA
tasks are thought to originate from diminished auditory language PA, little is known about auditory PA brain differences between typical and dyslexic children. We compared neural correlates of auditory PA in typicallydeveloping and dyslexic children. METHOD: Dyslexic readers (n=13, ages
7-12), age-matched typical readers (n=13), and kindergarteners, PA abilitymatched to dyslexics (n=10, ages 5-6), completed word-rhyming PA and
word-matching control tasks during fMRI. RESULT: Age-matched typical
readers exhibited left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) activation for
word-rhyming relative to word-matching. Activation was significantly
greater than in dyslexics, who did not exhibit DLPFC activation. Kindergarteners exhibited left DLPFC activation similar in magnitude to the typical readers. CONCLUSIONS: Left DLPFC appears to support PA for
auditory language in typically developing children before (kindergartners)
and during (age-matched readers) reading instruction. Dyslexic readers do
not appear to engage DLPFC for PA. These findings suggest that auditory
PA is important for successful reading acquisition, that left DLPFC plays a
role in auditory language PA, and that dyslexics have differences in
DLPFC function that cannot be accounted for by reading or PA proficiency. Rather, these differences in the left DLPFC region supporting auditory PA may play a critical role in the etiology of dyslexia in many
children.
B2
THE ROLE OF INDIVIDUATION VERSUS CATEGORIZATION IN
THE DEVELOPMENT OF PERCEPTUAL EXPERTISE Lisa
Scott1;
1
University of Massachusetts Amherst — Prior research investigating the
acquisition of perceptual expertise in adults suggests that increased expertise is exhibited in those who are trained to discriminate at more specific
levels. It is possible that the manner in which perceptual expertise is
acquired in adults is similar to the manner in which face expertise is
acquired through experience during development. Here it was predicted
that experience discriminating novel types of faces and objects at the individual level, but not the category level, during the first year of life, will
lead to specialized processing for those trained stimuli. Four groups of
infants completed pre-training (6 months) and post-training (9 months)
behavioral (Visual-Paired Comparison) and electrophysiological (EventRelated Potentials) assessments, which indexed face and object discrimination. Following the pre-training assessment, two groups of infants were
sent home with training books of monkey faces or of strollers, which were
labeled at the individual level (i.e. all faces and strollers had individual
names). Two more groups of infants were sent home with books of monkey faces or strollers labeled at the category level (i.e. all faces were named
’monkey’ or ’stroller’). Infants returned at 9-months and results revealed

62

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

both behavioral and electrophysiological (N290; P400) differences from 6
to 9 months, and between training conditions such that infants trained at
the individual level exhibited a differential pattern of neural activity relative to those trained at the category level. These results are discussed in
relation to visual perceptual narrowing and the development of face processing.
B3
DO INFANTS SHOW THE COMPATIBILITY EFFECT? AN EVENTRELATED
POTENTIAL
STUDY
OF
GAZE-EMOTION
INTERACTION Silvia Rigato1, Teresa Farroni1,2, Mark H. Johnson1; 1Centre
for Brain and Cognitive Development, School of Psychology, Birkbeck College,
London, UK, 2Dipartimento di Psicologia dello Sviluppo e della Socializzazione,
Universita' di Padova, Italy — Event related potentials were recorded from
four-month-old infants while they viewed pictures of faces with direct or
averted gaze displaying happy, fearful, and angry expression. We predicted differential emotional expression processing, at least between certain facial expressions, at the infant face sensitive ERP components (N290,
P400) and at the negative component (Nc). Further, we expected to
observe modulation by gaze direction for happy and angry expressions.
Electrophysiological activity was recorded by using 128 channels Hydrocel Geodesic Sensor Net, while infants were seated on their mum’s lap in
front of a 40X29 cm monitor. Their attention was drawn to the middle of
the screen by a colour cartoon, which lasted between 1400-1800 ms, and
then a face replaced it for 1000 ms. Face stimuli were counterbalanced, presented in random order and with equal probability for as long as the
babies were willing to look at them. 42 babies participated in the study.
Analysis showed that the Nc is affected by emotional expression, with
larger amplitudes for happy and angry than fearful face stimuli. Significant gaze effects were found at the Nc in response to angry expressions,
and at the frontal sites for happy faces only. Our results suggest that
infants’ brain responses differ between emotional expressions, showing
larger activation to happy and angry expressions, possibly reflecting a
greater allocation of attention. Infants discriminate gaze direction in these
emotions revealing an interaction between emotion and gaze direction in
approach-oriented emotions.
B4
FACE-SPECIALIZED CORTICAL AREAS EMERGE SLOWLY: A
DEVELOPMENTAL FMRI STUDY Kathrin Cohen Kadosh1, Frederic
Dick1,2, Roi Cohen Kadosh3, Richard N. A. Henson4, Mark H. Johnson1; 1Centre
for Brain and Cognitive Development, School of Psychology, Birkbeck College,
University of London, UK, 2Center for Research in Language, University of
California, San Diego, CA, 3Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University
College London, London, UK, 4MRC Cognition & Brain Sciences Unit,
Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK — Faces are complex social stimuli
that convey much information, such as for example the identity, or the
emotional state of a person. Several studies have shown that children’s
abilities to process different facial features are delayed in comparison to
other objects categories (Carey & Diamond, 1977; Mondloch et al., 2003).
Recent fMRI evidence suggested that immature behavioural abilities
might be related to the slow emergence of face-sensitive cortical areas
(Scherf et al., 2007). In the current study we evaluated the neuro-cognitive
mechanisms of different facial features as a function of development. Forty
participants (14 adults, 12 children (7-8 years), 14 children (10-11 years))
had to detect a specific identity, emotional expression, or direction of eye
gaze in a stream of consecutively presented faces. The adult participants
showed comparable performance for all tasks, while the neural processing
of the different facial features varied as a function of task and facial fea-

Poster Session B

ture, in particular in the fusiform gyrus, the inferior occipital gyrus and
the superior temporal sulcus. The children’s performance varied significantly depending on the specific facial feature and age, and neural activation showed reduced functional integration between the facial features,
as both children groups relied on additional frontal and parietal brain
areas. Thus, our findings suggest that previous reports on improvements
in behavioural abilities for face processing observed between 7-11 years
of age, are mirrored by slowly changing neuronal activation patterns that
depend on task requirements and the specific facial feature investigated.
B5
NEUROBIOLOGY OF SEX DIFFERENCES IN PARIETAL LOBE
DEVELOPMENT Joel Salinas1,2, Peg Nopoulos2; 1Doris Duke Clinical
Research Fellowship Program, University of Iowa, 2University of Iowa —
Structural MRI studies continue to provide evidence for sexual dimorphism in the human brain, especially overall cerebral volume. Previously, our lab found adult males to have parietal lobe surface area
proportionately greater than females; however, females had a greater
ratio of parietal lobe cortex to parietal lobe white matter. To our knowledge there are no studies examining this sexual dimorphism of parietal
lobe structure in younger populations or in the context of development
and aging. This study evaluates structural differences of the parietal lobe
in younger males and females (ages 7-18). Also, by adding the cohort of
previously studied adults (ages 18-50), sexual dimorphism of parietal
lobe morphology was examined across ages 7-50. In the youth sample,
we found that the ratio of parietal cortex to parietal white matter was
greater in girls compared to boys. Unlike the adult sample, however,
there was no sexual dimorphism in the parietal surface area. When examining the youth and adult samples together, though, parietal surface area
was found to have a significant sex by age interaction. Both sexes had linear decreases in parietal surface area over time, but the slope was significantly steeper for females compared to males. Therefore, in youth,
parietal surface area is not significantly different between the sexes, but,
in adults, males end up with larger parietal surface area. These findings
support the notion of clear structural sexual dimorphism in the parietal
lobe, not only in the context of cross sectional assessment, but also in
terms developmental trajectories.
B6
THE ONTOGENY OF HANDEDNESS: EVIDENCE FROM THE KISS
SYNDROME Sebastian Ocklenburg1, Corinna Buerger1, Christine
Westermann1, Daniel Schneider1, Heiner Biedermann2, Onur Guentuerkuen1;
1
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany,
2Private Practice, Cologne, Germany — The ontogeny of functional lateralisation and especially of handedness has often been explained with
genetic models. In birds, however, it has been shown that epigenetic factors also play a critical role in the development of lateralisation. In
pigeons and chicks a skewed visual input during development has been
found to modulate morphological and functional asymmetries. To test
the hypothesis that epigenetic factors, especially visual experience, may
also modulate human functional lateralisation, children with the KISS
(Kinematic imbalances due to suboccipital strain) syndrome were tested.
These children have a permanently fixed asymmetric posture of the head
due to a functional disorder of the occipito-cervical region. This head tilt
can be to the left or to the right side, leading to opposing asymmetries in
visual experiences of the two hands. We compared functional asymmetries in children with a left- or right-sided KISS syndrome with those in
healthy controls. Childrens’ individual handedness, footedness and eyepreference were assessed using behavioural tasks. Right-handedness was
more frequent in children with a head tilt to the left than in control children. Children with a head tilt to the right, in turn, had a lower frequency
of right-handedness than controls. For footedness and eye-preference no
differences between the three groups were observed. These findings
show a clear influence of an epigenetic factor on handedness and therefore strongly suggest a combined genetic-epigenetic model for its development.

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

B7
DEFAULT NETWORK FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY DEPENDS
ON WHITE MATTER MATURATION Evan Gordon1, Philip Lee2, Jose
Maisog2, Jennifer Foss-Feig2, Michael Billington2, John VanMeter2, Chandan
Vaidya2,5; 1Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience, Georgetown University
Medical Center, 2Georgetown University, 3Children’s Research Institute,
Children’s National Medical Center — Functional connectivity measured
between the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and the posterior cingulate
cortex (PCC), known collectively as the ‘default network’, is correlated in
adults with the structural integrity of the cingulum white matter bundle
which runs between these two regions. While previous work in children
has demonstrated that functional connectivity within the default network
increases with age, it is not known whether this developmental increase
correlates with an increase in white matter integrity; nor are the behavioral correlates of these connectivity increases well characterized. We
examined the relationship between default network functional and anatomic connectivity in fourteen boys age 9 to 12 years who had been
assessed with a neuropsychological battery. We measured both functional connectivity between the network components (as indexed by the
coherence of the fMRI signal during rest) and the structural integrity of
the cingulum bundle (as measured by the mean Fractional Anisotropy
within the cingulum, obtained via Diffusion Tensor Imaging). We found
a significant positive relationship between the integrity of the white matter in the cingulum bundle and the functional connectivity between the
mPFC and the PCC (r(12)=.55, p = .05). Behaviorally, functional connectivity in this network correlated positively with cognitive processing
speed (r(12)=.62, p<.05), but not with motor processing speed (p=.28) or
with executive function (p=.31). Thus, the functional integrity of the midline default network relies upon maturation of the underlying white matter and influences efficiency of information processing. Funded by
MH65395.
B8
HEMISPHERIC LATERALIZATION OF VERBAL AND SPATIAL
WORKING MEMORY EXISTS IN DEVELOPING YOUTH Megan
M. Herting1, Damien Fair1, Richard Bruno1, Bonnie J. Nagel1; 1Oregon Health
and Science University — Adult functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) literature suggests that a left-right hemispheric dissociation may
exist between verbal and spatial working memory (WM), respectively.
However, investigation of this type has been obscured by incomparable
verbal and spatial working memory tasks and/or visual inspection at
arbitrary thresholds as means to assess lateralization. Furthermore, it is
unclear if hemispheric lateralization exists in youth, or when during
development this pattern emerges. This study, therefore, used comparable verbal and spatial WM n-back tasks during fMRI and a bootstrap
analysis approach to calculate lateralization indices (LI) across several
thresholds to examine the potential of a left-right WM hemispheric dissociation in youth ages 10 to 15 (verbal WM: n=38; M=13.04, SD=1.63; spatial WM: n=31, M=13.31, SD=1.58). By applying a bootstrap algorithm to
our group statistical maps, we were able to generate mean LIs and mean
weighted LIs (LIW) for each task that do not rely on qualitative visual
inspection or arbitrary thresholds (Wilke & Schmithorst, 2006). We found
a significant hemispheric lateralization (p=.003) for both verbal (left,
LI=.16, p<.05; LIW= .27) and spatial WM (right, LI= -.11, p<.001; LIW= .18). Although no relationship was observed between LI and age, significant age-related activations were seen within regions of lateralized WM
activity. Our findings highlight the importance of utilizing non-biased
statistical methods and comparable tasks for determining patterns of
functional lateralization. Our findings also suggest that, while a left-right
hemispheric dissociation of verbal and spatial WM is present by early
adolescence, age-related functional activations during WM are present.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

63

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

B9
DEVELOPMENTAL
TRAJECTORIES
OF
MAGNITUDE
PROCESSING AND INTERFERENCE CONTROL: AN FMRI
STUDY Guilherme Wood1, Anja Ischebeck2, Florian Koppelstaetter2,
Thaddaeus Gotwald2, Liane Kaufmann2; 1University of Salzburg, Austria,
2
Innsbruck Medical University, Austria — Neurodevelopmental
changes
regarding interference and magnitude processing were assessed in three
age groups (children n=10, young adults n=11, elderly n=9) by using an
fMRI version of the numerical Stroop task. Behaviorally, comparable distance and size congruity effects were found in all three age groups. Distance effects were most pronounced in the more difficult numerical task,
while size congruity effects were comparable across tasks. Imaging
results disclosed an almost age-linear trend in the pattern of activation
observed in left and right prefrontal and inferior temporal regions of the
brain. This implicates that with increasing age interference control
requires increasing effort (possible explanations for children’s relatively
lower interference effects are provided). In contrast, the distance effect
produced a negative linear trend in right prefrontal, SMA and intraparietal cortex. This suggests that relative to old adults, children and young
adults had to recruit a larger network upon processing magnitude. The
latter findings are even more remarkable considering that the behavioral
effects were similar across groups.
B11
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF INFANT MEMORY:
NOVELTY, FAMILIARITY, OR RECENCY? Kelly Snyder1, John Garza1,
Liza Zolot1, Anna Kresse1; 1University of Denver — Event-related potential
(ERP) studies of memory in young infants have shown that prior experience with a visual stimulus modulates the amplitude of a late slow wave
(LSW) component. In a previously unrelated line of research, intra-cellular recordings in non-human primates have demonstrated that different
populations of neurons in the temporal lobe encode information regarding stimulus novelty, familiarity, and recency of occurrence (Xiang &
Brown, 1998). We used high-density electroencephalography to investigate the functional significance of the LSW in 6-month-olds by examining
effects of repetition of highly familiar and novel stimuli on the amplitude
of the LSW. Twenty-four familiar pictures (pictures of items from the
infant’s home such as people, pets, and toys) and twenty-four novel pictures (pictures of similar items from another infant’s home) were each
repeated exactly once while ERPs were recorded. We found that (a)
immediate repetition caused equivalent suppression of LSW amplitude
for familiar and novel stimuli [Repetition x Lead interaction at central
leads, F(2,44) = 3.79, p = .03; LSW amplitude was smaller in response to
repeated stimuli at right-central leads, paired-t (22) = 2.50, p = .02], and
(b) there were no effects of repetition on the LSW when there was a single
intervening item between the first and second presentations of a stimulus. These effects are most consistent with the response properties of
recency neurons in inferio-temporal cortex, suggesting that the LSW may
reflect neural activity associated with the incidental encoding (or updating) of the immediate visual environment into a short-term perceptual
store.
B12
CROSSMODAL SYNCHRONY AND ASYNCHRONY PERCEPTION
IN 6-MONTH-OLD INFANTS Franziska Kopp1, Claudia Dietrich1,
Ulman Lindenberger1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Development,
Berlin — Close temporal proximity of sensory modalities is an important
prerequisite for intersensory integration to form a coherent percept. In
contrast to adults, the temporal threshold to detect intersensory asynchrony is higher in infants. The aim of the present study was to investigate brain dynamics related to perception of audio-visual synchrony and
asynchrony in 6-month-old infants using event-related potentials (ERP).
In a behavioral experiment, infants were habituated to a synchronous
social stimulus. Once infants met the habituation criterion, an asynchronous test trial of the same stimulus was presented in which the visual
stream was delayed to the auditory stream by 400 ms. Only infants who

64

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

discriminated this change in temporal alignment on behavioral level
were included in further EEG assessment. The EEG experiment varied
between two conditions: In the synchronous condition the visual and
auditory stream were in synchrony, whereas in the asynchronous condition the visual stream was delayed to the auditory stream by 400 ms. ERP
data showed longer latencies of the Nc component in the asynchronous
condition. An additional negative component peaking between 300 and
400 ms after stimulus onset was identified only in asynchronous stimuli.
Furthermore, the auditory P2 component showed significantly longer
latencies in asynchronous as compared to synchronous trials. Because
auditory stimulation occurred at the same point in time in both conditions, this result indicates that a temporal delay of activity might be an
adequate mechanism of the infant brain to integrate both modalities.
B13
INFANTS’ EYE MOVEMENTS DURING FAMILIARIZATION WITH
AN OBJECT CATEGORY: A TRANSITION FROM SALIENCYDRIVEN TO OBJECT-BASED LOOKING PATTERNS Nadja
Althaus1, Denis Mareschal1; 1Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development,
School of Psychology, Birkbeck, University of London — Past research has
shown that infants’ perceptual category formation in familiarization paradigms depends on the feature distributions present in the familiarization set (Mareschal, French, & Quinn, 2000). However, infants’ processing
of the stimuli during familiarization has rarely been studied directly and
therefore there is no account of the learning process as such: evidence for
perceptual learning would involve a change in infants’ looking patterns
across familiarization. The current study therefore uses eye tracking to
investigate the impact of bottom-up saliency, as measured by saliency
maps based on neural processing principles, on infants’ fixation targets
over the course of familiarization with a category (color images of deer).
Twenty-five 12-month-olds and 34 4-month-olds were presented with a
sequence of eight images of deer, followed by a test trial consisting of a
novel deer paired with a horse. Category learning was successful in both
age groups, as indicated by infants’ preferential looking at the horse. In
order to investigate to which degree infants’ eye movements were driven
by bottom-up saliency, i.e. initiated by early visual brain areas, we compared recorded fixation locations to a saliency map of the corresponding
stimulus image (Itti & Koch, 2001; Kienzle, Wichmann, Schoelkopf, &
Franz, 2007). Results show that for both age groups the impact of bottomup saliency on infants’ fixation targets is large prior to learning, but much
lower after familiarization. This indicates that infants' looking is initially
driven by bottom-up saliency, but increasingly influenced by categorization-based higher-level visual processing as learning progresses.
B14
THE RIGHT INFERIOR OCCIPITOTEMPORAL CORTEX: A
CONVERGENCE ZONE FOR READING-RELATED COGNITIVE
ABILITIES Stefan Heim1,2,3, Marion Grande2, Elisabeth Bay1,2, Helen
Schreiber1,2, Simon B. Eickhoff1,2,3, Juraj Kukolja4, Nadim J. Shah1, Katrin
Amunts1,2,3; 1INB3-Medicine, Research Centre Jülich, 2Medical Faculty,
RWTH Aachen University, 3Medical Faculty, JARA, RWTH Aachen
University, 4University Hospital Bonn — Successful reading depends on a
number of cognitive functions, including phonological awareness and
visual attention. In this fMRI study, we demonstrate that the neural basis
underlying the influence of these cognitive variables on reading is
located in the right inferior occipitotemporal cortex (IOTC). 38 children
(mean age: 9 years; 19 dyslexics, 19 controls) read aloud German words.
Reading-related brain activation in the right IOTC, overlapping with
cytoarchitectonic area hOC4v, was modulated by scores for phonological
awareness and visual attention. This modulation was stronger for controls than for dyslexic readers. In two additional fMRI studies we further
demonstrated that in right IOTC, reading ability modulates the activation
during phonological decisions and visual attention. Together, these findings indicate that different cognitive influences on reading converge in
the right IOTC, contralateral to the visual word form area, and thus con-

Poster Session B

tribute to understanding the neurocognitive basis of reading and dyslexia.
B15
MAPPING
DA-RELATED
GENETIC
VARIATION
INTO
ATTENTION-RELATED BRAIN ACTIVATION IN 5 YEAR-OLD
CHILDREN M. Rosario Rueda1, Purificacion Checa1, Pascale Voelker2;
1
Universidad de Granada, Spain, 2University of Oregon — The sequencing of
the human genome has allowed examination of the genetic basis of cognitive functions in the past several years. Recent studies have shown that
the executive control of cognition and action is among the highest heritable psychological functions (Friedman et al., 2008 JEP:G). Performance of
conflict tasks such as Stroop and flanker has been related to activation of
the executive attention network which involves the anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC) and lateral prefrontal areas and appears to be modulated by
dopamine (Posner, Rueda & Kanske, 2007 Handbook Psychophy). Variations in particular genes affect dopaminergic pathways in the brain
through different molecular mechanisms (Diamond, 2007 CeCortex). We
have looked at polymorphisms in several genes thought to influence
dopaminergic pathways (DAT1, COMT and DRD4) in a group (n=37) of
children. Then, we examined EEG activation during performance of a
flanker task in relation to genotype. Children having the 9-repeat polymorphism in the DAT1 gene showed smaller flanker interference than
children homozygous for the 10-repeat polymorphism. Smaller flanker
effects (although not statistically significant) were also observed for children with the 7-repeat in the DRD4 gene, as well as those with at least
one Val allele of the COMT gene. Better performers also showed larger
negative amplitudes for the incongruent trials at the frontal midline
leads. Further analysis of brain activation using source-localization models suggest that the pattern of activation shown by good performers is
due to greater differentiation of activation in the medial frontal gyrus for
incongruent compared to congruent trials.
B16
DOES REASONING ABILITY IN CHILDREN IMPROVE WITH
TRAINING? Allyson Mackey1, Susanna Hill1, Natalie DeShetler1, Carter
Wendelken1, Silvia Bunge1; 1University of California, Berkeley — We present
encouraging preliminary data suggesting that fluid reasoning, an ability
critical for academic achievement, can be trained in children. In a pilot
study, children ages 5 to 10 (n=6) played a variety of store-bought computerized games and board games for one hour a day, for 16 to 24 days,
over the course of 6 weeks. Children who played the game with the strongest problem solving demands (n=3) exhibited a mean increase of 7
points in performance IQ as measured by the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale
of Intelligence. This change seemed to be driven by improvements in the
Block Design component of the scale, which improved an average of 4.25
points, while scores on Matrix Reasoning remained steady. In addition to
these standardized measures, children also performed a relational integration task modified from Smith et al., 2007 pre- and post-training. Interestingly, accuracy on one-relational items did not improve with training,
but accuracy on two-relational problems improved on average 23%.
These children participated in the same number of training sessions on
average (22) so outcome differences were not due to training duration.Differences are also not explained by improvements in visual processing, because performance on the Rapid Visual Information
Processing task from the CANTAB did not improve. In summary, children who played a complex problem solving game improved in measures of visual spatial reasoning and relational integration. A larger study
is currently underway to compare gains in reasoning ability from reasoning training (n=15) with speed of processing training, an active control
(n=15).
B17
EFFECT OF DOPAMINE TRANSPORTER GENOTYPE ON
CAUDATE VOLUME IN CHILDHOOD ADHD AND CONTROLS
Devon Shook1, Colin Brady1, Philip Lee1, John VanMeter3, Edwin Cook4, Mark
Stein4, Laura Kenealy2, Chandan Vaidya1,2; 1Georgetown University,

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Washington DC, 2Childrens National Medical Center, Washington, DC,
for Functional and Molecular Imaging, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Washington, DC, 4University of Illinois, Chicago, IL — Structural
neuroimaging studies of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD) have identified grey matter volumetric reductions in prefrontal
striatal regions. While multiple neurotransmitter systems influence prefrontal function, striatal regions such as the caudate are primarily
dopaminergic. Striatal dopamine levels are regulated by the dopamine
transporter. The present study examined differences between alleles of
the dopamine transporter genotype (DAT1) on caudate volume, a
nucleus shown to differ functionally between ADHD and control children. We hypothesized that caudate volume would differ by DAT1 functional polymorphism and diagnosis. We performed structural magnetic
resonance imaging (MPRAGE) in 7-13 year old children with either two
copies (10/10) or 1 copy (9/10) of the 10 repeat allele of DAT1. Using a
region of interest (ROI) approach, we compared caudate volumes in a
DAT1 (10/10, 9/10) X Diagnosis (ADHD, Controls) X Hemisphere (Left,
Right) ANOVA. Results showed main effects of diagnosis indicating
smaller caudate volumes in ADHD compared to controls, and DAT1
indicating smaller caudate volumes in 10/10 compared to 9/10 children.
Further, a DAT1 X Hemisphere interation indicated that caudate differences by DAT1 were driven by differences in the left rather than right
hemisphere. Genotypic differences did not vary by diagnosis. Thus,
structural striatal maturation is influenced by genetic differences in
dopamine transporter function. Funded by NIMH MH065395
3Center

B18
ASSOCIATIONS
AMONG
MORPHOMETRIC
MEASURES,
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORTICAL
RESPONSES
AND
LANGUAGE ABILITIES IN CHILDREN: PREDICTING FROM 6
MONTHS TO 24 MONTHS OF AGE Silvia
Ortiz-Mantilla1,
Judy
1
1
2
Flax , Cecylia K. Chojnowska , Myong-sun Choe , P. Ellen Grant2, April A.
Benasich1; 1Center for Molecular & Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers
University, Newark, NJ, 2Center for Morphometric Analysis, Neuroscience
Center, Massachusetts General Hospital at Harvard Medical School —
Recently, there has been much interest in identifying relations among
morphometric indices (e.g. brain volumes), electrophysiological
responses (EEG/ERPs) and measures of language and cognition across
early development. In this study, structural MRIs and high-density EEG/
ERPs to complex tone-pairs were collected in normally developing children at 6 months of age. Standardized language and cognitive assessments were administered at 24 months. We found that children with
larger right amygdala (RA) volume at 6 months had lower expressive (r =
-.55, p = .015) and receptive (r = -.51, p = .027) language scores at 24
months. Children that at 6 months had larger N2 amplitude at left frontal
channels scored higher on expressive (r = -.74, p = .001) and receptive (r =
-.54, p = .025) language. Infant RA size and N2 amplitude together predicted performance at 24 months on both expressive (F = 6.47, p = .010)
and receptive (F= 15.6, p = < .001) language. At 24 months, 41% of variance in expressive language was accounted for by RA size (24%) and
amplitude of N2 (17%). Similarly, for receptive language, 65% of variance
was explained by RA size (23%) and N2 amplitude (42%) at 6 months.
These results suggest that the amygdala plays a significant role during
early language acquisition, although the mechanisms involved are as yet
unclear. Further, links among amygdala volume, auditory cortical
responses in infancy and later language abilities are identified, emphasizing the importance of using converging methodologies to elucidate the
course of infant development.
B19
DEVELOPMENTAL
CHANGES
IN
BRAIN
MECHANISMS
UNDERLYING RECIPROCITY Wouter van den Bos1,2, Michiel
Westenberg1,2, Eric van Dijk1, Serge A. R. B. Rombouts1,2,3, Eveline A.
Crone1,2; 1Leiden University, Institute for Psychological Research, Leiden, the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

65

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Netherlands, 2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, Leiden, the Netherlands,
3Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands — Reciprocity, or
repayment of what others have provided us, is an important aspect of
social exchange and undergoes changes until late adolescence. Prior studies have demonstrated a network of brain regions important for social
exchange and reciprocity, including the anterior medial prefrontal cortex
(amPFC) and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), but the developmental trajectories of these regions are currently unknown. In this
event-related functional MRI study we examined behavioral choices and
neural responses in a variant of the Trust Game (Berg et al., 1995), in 54
participants between ages 12-22 (12-14-years, n=21, 15-17-years, n=15, 1822-years, n=18). Participants were playing numerous one-shot games
with unknown age-matched peers and were trusted money on a proportion of trials. We examined whether on those trials, participants reciprocated trust by sharing a large proportion of the money with the trustor, or
defected by sharing a small proportion of the money but maximizing
their own gains. FMRI data were analyzed for reciprocal and defective
choices and resulted in two main findings. First, bilateral anterior insula
and anterior cingulate cortex were positively correlated with reciprocity
behavior, and this pattern was similar for all age groups. Second, our
analysis revealed an age-related decrease in the amPFC for reciprocate
choices and an age-related increase in DLPFC for reciprocate and defect
choices. These results were interpreted to suggest increased selectivity for
self referential thought across adolescent development (Amodio & Frith,
2006). The current findings will be discussed vis-à-vis current theories of
social cognitive brain development and psychopathology.
B20
HOW NATURE SHAPES NURTURE: A COMPUTATIONAL
ACCOUNT OF GENETIC INFLUENCES ON THE NEURAL
SUBSTRATES OF FACE PROCESSING Lee Newman1, Thad Polk1;
1University of Michigan — A number of findings suggest that genetics
play a more important role in shaping the processing of faces compared
with other visual stimuli. For example, brain damage immediately after
birth can produce lasting, selective deficits in face recognition (Farah et
al., Cogn Neuropsy, 17:117, 2000), but there are no similar reports of early
brain damage producing selective deficits in the recognition of other categories like cars or birds. Patterns of cortical activation evoked by face processing are also more similar in monozygotic twins than in dizygotic
twins, but that is not true for patterns evoked by other visual stimuli such
as words and chairs (Polk et al., Jnl Neurosci, 27:13921, 2007). By what
mechanism could genetics influence the cortical processing of faces more
than the processing of other visual stimuli? We hypothesize that an
innate subcortically-driven preference to look at faces in early development (Johnson, Nature Rev Neurosci, 6:766, 2005) interacts with established principles of cortical self-organization to lead to the observed
effects. We present a neural network model that makes explicit how this
hypothesis could work. In particular, we demonstrate that manipulating
the similarity of initial connectivity patterns in different models (to simulate the effect of zygosity) has a much bigger effect on the similarity of
activity patterns evoked by faces than by other visual stimuli. The model
therefore provides a computationally explicit account of the observed
effects of zygosity on neural activation patterns in human twins and,
more generally, explains how genetics could influence face processing
preferentially.
B21
AN ODDBALL INVESTIGATION OF MONOLINGUAL AND
BILINGUAL INFANTS’ PHONETIC DISCRIMINATION USING
FUNCTIONAL NEAR-INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY (FNIRS)
Matthew Dubins1, Melody S. Berens1, Ioulia Kovelman2, Mark Shalinsky1,
Laura-Ann Petitto1; 1University of Toronto, 2Massachusetts Institute of
Technology — For decades, behavioral data have not adjudicated the
question of whether infants use general-auditory or language-specific
mechanisms to learn the set of phonetic units that comprise their native
language. Here we ask this question by using functional Near-Infrared

66

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

Spectroscopy (fNIRS, Hitachi ETG-4000) to investigate the neural correlates of language processing in monolingual and bilingual infants. Using
an Oddball/Event paradigm, monolingual and bilingual Young infants
(age 2-6 months, n = 19), Older infants (age 10-14 months, n=14), and
Adults (n=38) were presented with nonlinguistic Tones, and linguistic
syllables that differed by one phonetic feature in English, and in Hindi,
while undergoing fNIRS. fNIRS measures hemodynamic change (deoxygenated, oxygenated, total hemoglobin), is child-friendly, quiet, portable,
and tolerates movement. Its temporal resolution (10-Hz) and spatial resolution (~3-4 cm depth) are excellent for cortical studies of language.
Results: Specific neural tissue classically associated with language processing was recruited differently across ages, reflecting maturational
changes corresponding to universal linguistic timing milestones. Young
monolingual and bilingual infants recruited Left Broca, and bilateral
STG, while listening to native and non-native contrasts. Remarkably, all
Older infants showed decreased neural recruitment of Left Broca for
native English relative to non-native Hindi contrasts. Conclusions: The
findings provide first-time imaging evidence that infants use languagespecific tissue when learning the set of phonetic units in their native language. Significance: fNIRS allowed examination of the neural underpinnings of phonetic learning in infants, providing important information
about the interplay between biology and experience in the developing
brain. Funding-Petitto (P.I.): NIHR21HD05055802. NIHR01HD04582203.
B22
WHITE MATTER DIFFERENCES IN FRONTAL REGIONS
PREDICTS
COGNITIVE
VULNERABILITY
TO
SLEEP
DEPRIVATION Matthew Rocklage1, Victoria Williams1, Jennifer Pacheco1,
David Schnyer1; 1University of Texas at Austin — The corpus callosum (CC)
has been implicated in a number of important aspects of interhemispheric processes. Indeed, research has indicated that the CC in general
and the genu in particular is important for tasks utilizing the prefrontal
cortex (PFC) (Narberhaus et al., 2007). Using diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI), we examined whether there were microstructural differences in
the CC that predicted a person’s vulnerability to the effects of sleep deprivation (SD). To this end, participants were asked to complete a simple
visual-motor control task both before and after a span of 36 hr without
sleep. A median split analysis was conducted using the percent change in
accuracy from pre-SD to post-SD on this visual-motor control task to separate participants into susceptibility groups. A 25 direction DTI scan was
acquired from each participant and fractional anisotropy (FA) was calculated and examined across 3 regions of the CC. The results revealed a
relationship between a participant’s susceptibility to SD and FA values in
the genu of the CC, where vulnerable had significantly lower FA values
relative to non-vulnerable. There were no differences in either the body
or splenium of the CC between the two groups, thus demonstrating the
specificity of the anterior CC. These results indicate that differences in the
development of cross cortical communication pathways contribute to a
person’s ability to function effectively when sleep deprived.
B23
EVIDENCE FOR A LARGE IMPROVEMENT IN INTERFERENCE
CONTROL OVER MIDDLE CHILDHOOD Pedro M. Paz-Alonso1,3, Jon
Lovas2, Chris Blais1, Silvia A. Bunge1,2; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute,
University of California, Berkeley, 2University of California, Berkeley,
3University of Granada, Spain — We sometimes experience difficulty distinguishing memories pertaining to the present from memories pertaining to the past, such as where we parked the car today. The ability to
overcome interference from previously encountered information is a key
component of executive functioning. Age-related increases in the ability
to limit interference in working memory have been documented across
childhood and adolescence. Here, we tested children aged 7-12 and
young adults on a continuous recognition paradigm that places heavy
demands on interference control (current N = 20). This task was originally developed by Schnider et al. (1996) to characterize monitoring deficits in confabulating patients. Participants must indicate whenever an

Poster Session B

image is repeated within a run, which becomes more difficult as familiarity with the images increases from run to run. In the present study, four
runs containing the same set of 110 pictures were presented. Preliminary
results shown that increases in memory false alarms (FA) from run to run
varied with age. 7-8-year-olds exhibited strong initial FA increases from
Run1 (M = 6.20%) to Run2 (M = 30.33%), which diminished slightly in
Runs 3-4 (M = 27.15%). 10-12-year-olds and adults both showed a gradual
increase of FA from Run1 (M = 5.71%) to Run4 (M = 20.02%). These findings suggest that a large improvement in interference control occurs during middle childhood. For children but not adults, FA rate on the
recognition task was positively correlated with response inhibition errors
on a Go/No-Go task, suggesting that impulsive responding may influence memory monitoring failures observed during childhood.
B24
NEURAL CORRELATES OF FAIRNESS IN SOCIAL DECISIONMAKING ACROSS ADOLESCENCE AND ADULTHOOD Berna
Guroglu1,2,3, Wouter van den Bos1,2,3, Serge Rombouts1,2,3, Eveline Crone1,2,3;
1Leiden University, Institute for Psychological Research, 2Leiden Institute for
Brain and Cognition, 3Leiden University Medical Center — Displays of fair
behavior play a crucial role in collaboration and reciprocal exchange in
social interactions. The concerns for self versus other change across adolescence but the neural mechanisms that contribute to these developmental changes are currently unknown. The Ultimatum Game (UG), in which
a responder can accept or reject an offer made by a proposer, is a wellestablished tool to study fairness concerns. In this study we have used an
adapted version of the UG, the mini-UG, which is better suited for examining fairness and intentionality considerations in social exchanges (Falk,
Fair, & Fischbacher, 2003). Prior neuroimaging studies based on the UG
in adults have demonstrated that the insula is activated when unfair
offers are rejected, whereas the lateral prefrontal cortex (lat-PFC) is activated when unfair offers are accepted and the tendency to reject unfair
offers is overridden (Sanfey et al., 2003). We tested whether these brain
areas are sensitive to low offers per se, suggesting self-oriented concerns,
or to unfairness, suggesting self-other concerns, and the developmental
time courses of these brain areas in participants between ages 12 and 25
(current n = 40). Preliminary results show that insula and lat-PFC activity
associated with rejection of unfair offers is intention-dependent. Rejection
of unfair offers when the proposer did not have a better (fairer) alternative was specifically associated with insula activity. Findings on age differences will be discussed based on the development of perspectivetaking across adolescence.
B25
THE SHARED GENETIC UNDERPINNINGS OF IQ AND BRAIN
STRUCTURE DECREASE WITH AGE DURING CHILDHOOD AND
ADOLESCENCE Greg Wallace1, Eric Schmitt2, Rhoshel Lenroot1, Philip
Shaw1, Kenneth Kendler2, Michael Neale2, Jay Giedd1; 1Child Psychiatry
Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, 2Virginia Institute for Psychiatric
and Behavioral Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University — Our understanding of the relationship(s) between genes/environment, brain, and
behavior remains relatively limited, particularly within the context of
child and adolescent development. Given that both intelligence and brain
structure are highly heritable, determining whether intelligence and neuroanatomic endophenotypes have shared genetic underpinnings has
been a central question to cognitive neuroscience. However, most studies
have indicated that the phenotypic correlations between intelligence and
brain endophenotypes are surprisingly small. Using data from pediatric
twins, siblings, and singletons (n=600) in an extended twin design, we
evaluated the shared genetic and environmental correlations between
brain structure (i.e., cortical thickness from MRI) and intelligence (measured by age-appropriate Wechsler Intelligence Scales) and how these
relationships changed during the child and adolescent years. Within targeted brain areas (predominantly frontal regions) in which intelligence
was related to cortical thickness in an age-dependent fashion (Shaw et al.,
2006), we predicted and found higher shared genetic mediation of corti-

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

cal thickness and intelligence than found in the remaining cortical
regions. Moreover, despite small phenotypic and genetic correlations
between intelligence and cortical thickness, we observed strong and statistically significant genetically mediated relationships when age was
incorporated into the analysis. Children with high intelligence appear to
have substantially higher genetic variance in cortical thickness, but only
during the first decade of life. Our findings indicate that like many
aspects of neurodevelopment, the associations between genes/environment, brain structure, and intelligence must be considered dynamic processes in order to fully understand their relationships in children and
adolescents.
B26
DEVELOPMENTAL EFFECTS OF NEURAL ACTIVITY ON
LANGUAGE PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM FMRI Owens
Elizabeth1, Aznar-Besé Noemí1, Meschyan Gayane1, Hernandez Arturo1;
1
University of Houston — The purpose of the present study was to compare neural mechanisms in bilingual children and adults, and to examine
the effects of language proficiency level on neural activity during a single
word, reading task. All participants were early Spanish-English bilinguals, having learned English by age 7, and having learned Spanish prior
to learning English. During the functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) experiment, a list of 60 very simple words, 30 English and 30
Spanish, were presented on a screen one at a time. Participants were
instructed to read the words silently and to press a hand-held button
when they had finished reading each word. Significant differences in
neural activity were found between children and adults. Adults showed
increased activity in precentral and middle-frontal gyri compared to children when reading in English. In addition, children showed greater activity in the amygdala, precentral, and postcentral gyri than adults when
reading in Spanish. Furthermore, hemispheric differences emerged with
activity being more left-lateralized in adults and right-lateralized in children. Taken together these results suggest that word reading progresses
from a basic, emotional process to a more integrated, cognitive process as
language proficiency changes across development.
B27
REACHING EXPERIENCE AND PERSONALITY INFLUENCE
FACE-PREFERENCE - AN EYE-TRACKING STUDY OF INFANTS
AND ADULTS Klaus Libertus1, Amy Needham1; 1Duke University — Newborn infants show preferential tracking of moving face-like stimuli
(Johnson, Dziurawiec, Ellis, & Morton, 1991). This preference disappears
over the course of the first month. Using static images, young infants
show a preference for patterns and only around 4-5 months start to prefer
faces (Keller & Boigs, 1991). What factors influence this face-preference
and how does this behavior relate to infants’ own abilities? Here we
present two eye-tracking experiments that 1) replicate previous findings
on young infants’ face preference and also test older infants and adults
using the same paradigm, 2) show how a simple motor manipulation simulated reaching experience - is able to influence this preference, and 3)
show correlations between face-preference and infant and adult personality scores. Without motor training, pre-reaching 3-month-old infants
show no preference for images of faces over images of toys across two
experiments (both p>0.5). However, age-matched infants who received
two weeks of object-directed reaching training behave differently and do
show a preference for faces (p=0.028), similarly to older infants between
4-14 months. Further, face-preference and parent-reported activity level
(e.g. unfocused activity like kicking and squirming) show a negative correlation in infancy (p<0.02) while adults show a positive correlation
between face-preference and the self-consciousness score on the IPIP personality inventory (p<0.03). Our findings suggest a relation between
focused motor abilities and attention towards social stimuli in early
infancy. Infants who experience being able to independently act on
objects may – similar to adults – look towards faces for signs of social
encouragement.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

67

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

B28
GENETIC POLYMORPHISMS AFFECTING DOPAMINERGIC
ACTIVITY PREDICT SPONTANEOUS BLINK RATE IN YOUNG
CHILDREN David Lindenbach1, Courtney Stevens1, Jeff Currin2, Ted Bell2,
Helen Neville2; 1Willamette University, 2Brain Development Lab, University of
Oregon — Eye blink rate (EBR) has been shown in a variety of experiments to be a marker of central dopamine activity, with higher blink rate
associated with higher levels of dopamine (e.g., Deuschl & Goddemeier,
1998; Jutkiewicz & Bergman, 2004). Related research suggests that EBR is
associated with performance on some cognitive tasks, including executive functioning in adults (Muller et al, 2007; Dreisbach et al., 2005) and
theory of mind in children (Lackner et al., 2008). The present study investigated the relationship between EBR, performance on cognitive tasks,
and genetic polymorphisms in young children aged 3-5 years. Eighty
children completed an ERP and behavioral battery as part of a larger
study. EBR was measured from a 5-minute segment of the EOG/EEG
data collected while children passively viewed a short cartoon. The
behavioral battery included measures of executive function, theory of
mind, and nonverbal intelligence. In addition, children were genotyped
for a small set of genes affecting dopaminergic activity, including DAT1,
DRD2, and DRD4. Results indicated that children’s EBR was associated
with their genotype and performance on some cognitive tasks. The largest association was between children’s EBR and polymorphisms of the
DRD4 gene, with presence of the 7 repeat associated with higher EBR.
These findings suggest that EBR is related to both genetic variation and
performance on cognitive tasks in young children.
B29
DIFFERENT
AGES,
DIFFERENT
STAGES:
A
NEURODEVELOPMENTAL AGE-BASED DATABASE OF NORMAL
BRAIN
DEVELOPMENT
FOR
MAGNETIC
RESONANCE
IMAGING Carmen Sanchez1, Alexandra Basilakos1, John Richards;
1University of South Carolina — The NIH Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI) study of normal brain development recently documented normal
brain maturation in children ages 4 years, 6 months to 18 years (Evans,
2006). Using MRIs obtained from the Brain Development Cooperative
Group’s MRI database, this investigation explored the utility of developing brain templates based on age increments of 6 months. The main goal
of the work was to create a database of age-normed MRI volumes and
stereotaxic atlases for use with MRI and other forms of neuroimaging.
Participants included 860 children and adolescents ranging from 4.5
years to 19.0 years and were divided into age groups by 6 month increments (i.e., children 4.5 to 5.0 years combined as one group). FSL was
used to analyze all MRI Volumes. A ’pipeline’ was created that produced
T1-weighted, T2-weighted, brain and material-segmented (gray matter,
white matter, CSF) files for each participant. Following the methods set
forth by Evans, et al. (1993), each MRI volume was standardized to the
appropriate age norm, and the individual MRIs were registered
(’warped’) to the age norm average, and then a final average was made.
This average was used to develop average T1-Weighted, T2-Weighted,
normed MRI volumes in six-month increments from 4.5 to 19 yrs. This
database is available for use by qualified laboratories doing this kind of
work and can be useful in identifying differences in normed data and in
typical MRI work. Several aspects of the database were also examined
with respect to known characteristics of brain development.
B30
IS
FRAGILE
X
SYNDROME
AN
APPROPRIATE
NEUROANATOMICAL MODEL FOR AUTISM? Elizabeth
Walter1,
Fumiko Hoeft1, Joseph Piven2, Allan Reiss1; 1Stanford University, Center for
Interdisciplinary Brain Sciences Research (CIBSR), 2University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, Neurodevelopmental Disorders Research Center — Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common known genetic cause of autism.
However not all individuals with FXS are diagnosed with autism (AUT)
and it is not presently clear whether FXS provides a helpful neuroanatomical model for AUT. If FXS is a good model for AUT, then both disor-

68

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

ders should show similar anatomical differences from the brains of
control participants, even from an early age. In order to explore this possibility, we performed voxel-based morphometry to compare the neuroanatomy of boys between the ages of 1.5 and 4 years old who were
diagnosed with FXS or AUT (with no diagnosis of FXS), with a control
sample comprised of typically developing (TD) and developmentally
delayed (DD) boys (FXS: n=52; AUT: n=63; TD: n=31; DD: n=19). We
found that FXS and control participants were maximally different in a
region comprising bilateral basal ganglia, cingulate cortex and insula. In
contrast, differences between AUD and controls were seen primarily in
the cerebellum and ventral temporal lobe as well as bilateral inferior frontal gyrus. In addition, support-vector machine (SVM) analyses designed
to maximally differentiate groups were best able to discriminate FXS
brains from AUT, and FXS from control participants. The SVM was not
very accurate at discriminating AUT from controls. This analysis provides further evidence that neuroanatomical development in FXS follows
a trajectory that differs from boys with autism, as well as from control
participants. In short, FXS may not provide a helpful anatomical model of
autism, at least at this young age.
B31
REWARD SENSITIVITY AND RISK TAKING IN ADOLESCENT
DEVELOPMENT Linda Van Leijenhorst1,2,3, Bregtje Gunther Moor1,2,3,
Michiel Westenberg1, Serge Rombouts1,2,3, Eveline Crone1,2,3; 1Leiden
University, Institute for Psychological Research, 2Leiden Institute for Brain and
Cognition, 3Leiden University Medical Center — Previous studies on adolescent decision-making have suggested that the protracted development of
prefrontal relative to limbic brain regions could bias adolescents to focus
on potential rewards and engage in risky behavior. This hypothesis is
based on imaging studies using simple reward paradigms. How these
regions contribute to decision-making on a trial-to-trial basis has not yet
been tested in this age group. We collected event-related fMRI data in 46
participants aged 8 to 25 using a task in which participants repeatedly
chose between safe gambles, associated with a 67% chance of winning 1
Euro, and risky gambles, associated with a 33% chance of winning 2, 4, 6
or 8 Euros. This design enabled us to examine brain regions sensitive to
reward magnitude and their contribution to risk taking throughout adolescence. Behavioral data show that all participants chose more risky
gambles as rewards were higher. Participants were increasingly risk
averse, and differentiated more between reward amounts with age,
which indicates strategy differences. Analysis of brain activation preceding choices revealed that in adults risky gambles were associated with
decreased lateral prefrontal activation, whereas in adolescents risky gambles were accompanied by increased activation in the ventral striatum.
We suggest that children and adolescents adopt an explorative strategy
in contrast to an exploitative strategy used by adults because of immature
contribution of prefrontal cortex regions. We are currently testing
whether neural activation predicts risk taking in different age groups,
and can increase our understanding of the role of reward sensitivity in
adolescent decision-making under risk.
B32
WHITE
MATTER
MATURATION
SUPPORTING
THE
DEVELOPMENT OF FLUID REASONING Kirstie Whitaker1, Elizabeth
O’Hare1, Zdena Op de Macks2, Brian Johnson1, Emilio Ferrer3, Silvia Bunge1,3;
1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 2Leiden
University, The Netherlands, 3University of California, Davis — Little
is
known about the changes in connections between brain regions that
underlie cognitive development. The goal of this study (current N=24) is
to investigate the structural integrity of white matter tracts using diffusion tensor imaging. We hypothesize that strengthened connections
between frontal and parietal cortices are critical for the development of
higher cognition. Here we present cross-sectional data from a longitudinal study examining how white matter development contributes to fluid
reasoning ability, a key construct in human intelligence. Participants
aged 6 to 19 years were scanned at 3T with a 64-direction diffusion-

Poster Session B

weighted acquisition. These subjects also completed performance IQ
(block design, matrix reasoning) subtests of WASI and the verbal IQ
(vocabulary) subtest. Whole-brain correlations show strong age-related
increases in FA throughout the brain. Functionally-derived regions of
interest (ROI) in rostrolateral prefrontal cortex from our prior fMRI
research on reasoning development (Wright et al., 2008) revealed a strong
positive correlation between FA and age, but not with age-corrected IQ
measures. We also created an ROI in left inferior parietal cortex based on
our recent finding of an age-independent positive relationship between
cortical thickness and fluid reasoning ability in left inferior parietal cortex
(O’Hare, CNS abstract submission, 2009). In the white matter regions surrounding these coordinates, we saw a significant correlation between
mean FA and age-corrected scores on block design (r = 0.411, p = 0.023).
In this limited sample, structural changes in parietal cortex are most predictive of individual differences in fluid reasoning from age 6 to 19.
B33
DOPAMINERGIC MODULATION OF SPATIAL WORKING
MEMORY PERFORMANCE IN ADOLESCENCE: A MOLECULAR
GENETIC APPROACH Monica Luciana1,2, Dustin Wahlstrom1,2, Tonya
White1,2; 1University of Minnesota, 2University of Minnesota, Center for
Neurobehavioral Development — Dopamine modulates cognitive processes
that are prefrontally and striatally-mediated, including spatial working
memory. This modulatory role has been studied in animals using lesion
and pharmacological approaches and confirmed in adult humans using
pharmacological probes. It is unknown whether dopamine modulates
behaviors prior to adulthood in a manner that is similar to its role in adult
behavior. We have assessed dopamine's modulation of spatial working
memory in human adolescence (broadly defined) using a molecular
genetic approach focusing on single nucleotide polymorphisms that regulate various aspects of dopamine activity: catabolism (COMT Val/Met
158/108), postsynaptic receptor activity (DRD2 Taq1A allele),and presynaptic regulation/transporter mechanisms (DAT). Participants, (n=182,
ages 9 to 23), provided a DNA sample and completed neurocognitive
tasks, including a visuomotor spatial delayed response task requiring
participants to recall spatial locations after delays of 0, .5 and 8 seconds.
Task performance improves until age 13 and stabilizes thereafter. Performance is modulated by the COMT and DRD2 genotypes, which interact
with age to influence performance. Individuals who are Val-Val homozygotes for COMT and possess the low receptor activity DRD2 allele perform worst when working memory demand is high. The influence of
COMT on working memory likely occurs through prefrontal mechanisms; the D2 receptor system’s influence on spatial working memory
more strongly involves striatal versus frontal regions. Thus, dopamine
activity in both regions contributes to spatial working memory performance as adult levels of performance are being attained. Findings will be
discussed in relation to mechanisms that underlie adolescents' vulnerabilities to impairments in executive function.
B34
THE EFFECT OF SYNTACTIC COMPLEXITY AND SENTENCE
LENGTH ON ORAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING IN CHILDREN: A
FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING STUDY Jason Yeatman1, Michal
Ben-Shachar2,3, Gary Glover1, Heidi Feldman1; 1Stanford University, School of
Medicine, 2Stanford University, 3Gonda Brain Reseach Center, Bar Ilan
University — Though language is conceptualized as a left lateralized
brain function, adult neuroimaging studies document bilateral activation
for sentence comprehension when task demands are high. We sought to
describe changes in neural networks of children comprehending sentences of varying length and syntactic complexity. Participants were 11
through 14 year olds (n=8) with normal language abilities. Functional
magnetic resonance imaging data were collected on a 3T scanner using a
spiral in/out sequence. Each subject completed four runs of an eventrelated, sentence verification task with 24 different sentences presented in
random order. A general linear model was estimated for each subject;
contrasts were generated for syntactically hard > easy and long > short

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

sentences. These contrasts were used in a random effects analysis to generate group maps. The hard > easy contrast showed significant peaks
(p<0.001) in the right insula and right occipital lobe (lingual gyrus) for the
group. The long > short contrast showed significant peaks in the left and
right superior and middle temporal gyri, with more significant voxels on
the right side for the group. 2 out of 8 subjects showed significant peaks
(p<0.01) in the inferior frontal gyrus on hard > easy and 3 out of 8 on the
long > short contrast. Right hemisphere regions appear to play a greater
role in understanding spoken language for children, as syntactic complexity and sentence length increase. Future studies will determine if
children’s language abilities are related to individual differences in active
brain regions.
B35
PARENT TRAINING INTERVENTIONS ENHANCE SELECTIVE
AUDITORY ATTENTION IN 3- TO 5- YEAR OLD CHILDREN Jeff
Currin1, Jessica L. Fanning1, Scott R. Klein1, Helen J. Neville1; 1University of
Oregon, Institute of Neuroscience — The development of selective attention skills begins at an early age and continues through early adulthood.
Evidence suggests that proper development of selective attention skills is
crucial for self-regulation abilities and academic achievement. Research
has shown event related brain potentials (ERPs) can be used to index
mechanisms of selective attention in 3- to 5- year old children (Sanders et
al 2005). Additionally, Stevens et al.(in press) reveals that children from
low socio-economic status (SES) backgrounds have reduced amplitude
selective attention effects compared to higher SES children. This study
investigates the effectiveness of an attention-training program designed
for typically developing, economically disadvantaged children and families to improve cognitive performance and attention. Prior to the sevenweek training period, parents were randomly assigned to a control group
or to receive training. Training consisted of eighteen hours over seven
weeks of discussion on parenting methods and strategies. The training
also included seven hours of attention building activities for children.
Children were tested before and after the training period on an array of
behavioral assessments and ERP paradigms. Specifically, children participated in a Hillyard type auditory selective attention task while ERPs
were recorded to attended and unattended stimuli. Children in the training group revealed significant increases in ERP amplitudes as well as a
more global distribution of the attention effect when compared to controls. Gains in a variety of behavioral tests were also observed. This evidence suggests that modifications in parenting behavior and child
attention training lead to marked enhancements in children’s cognitive
function.
B36
MEG MEASURES OF NEURAL SYNCHRONY AND PERCEPTUAL
REPRESENTATION IN AUDITORY LANGUAGE CORTEX IN
CHILDREN WITH AUTISM AND TYPICALLY DEVELOPING
CHILDREN Nicole Gage1, A. Lisette Isenberg1, Paul Fillmore1, Kathryn
Osann1, M. Anne Spence1; 1University of California, Irvine — We used Magnetoencephalography (MEG) to assess neural synchrony and activation
levels in auditory language cortex in children with autistic disorder (AD)
and typically developing (TD) controls. Previously, we reported reduced
hemispheric synchrony in left and right M100 peaks in children with AD
vs. controls. Here we recorded M100 latency and amplitude in response
to speech (consonant-vowel syllables) to assess hemispheric synchrony
and neural activation levels over time during brief (4m) scans. Our sample included 10 boys (5 AD, 8-12 years). For each child, the recorded scan
was divided into 4 equal blocks representing the first, second, third, and
final 100 epochs. We assessed the time course of neural processing by
measuring M100 latency and amplitude for each block. Hemispheric
symmetry: TD - M100 LH-RH latencies were tightly coupled in time and
decreased from the 1st (19.5ms) to final block (12.5ms). AD - M100 latencies were more offset and this increased from the 1st (26 ms) to the final
(35.8) block. Neural activation: TD - M100 amplitude increased 20% from
initial to final block. AD - M100 amplitude decreased -0.04% from first to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

69

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

final block. Results provide evidence that TD children have LH and RH
responses that are initially tightly coupled in time and become more synchronized, with increased neural activation levels, over time. In sharp
contrast, children with AD have LH and RH responses that are initially
offset in time and become more dyssynchronous, with decreased activation levels, over time.
B37
ADOLESCENT DEVELOPMENT AND PRISONER’S DILEMMA
TASK
STRATEGIES:
COGNITIVE,
PERSONALITY,
AND
PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES Elizabeth Olson1, Paul
Collins1, Monica Luciana1; 1University of Minnesota — The
Prisoner’s
Dilemma is a task that reflects decision-making in social circumstances in
which choice behavior affects not only oneself but also a partner. We
have previously reported findings regarding cognitive, personality, and
psychophysiological correlates of Prisoner’s Dilemma task behavior in
college-aged students (Olson et al., CNS poster, 2006). The present analysis will expand upon this work by presenting developmental changes in
younger adolescents’ strategic approaches to the Prisoner’s Dilemma task
as compared to college students. Both overall cooperation rates and trialby-trial responses to ongoing interactions are examined. Relationships
between Prisoner’s Dilemma behavior and impulsive decision-making on
a delay discounting task are reported. Task performance is evaluated
with respect to performance on measures of intelligence, executive functioning (Iowa Gambling Task, Go-NoGo task), and personality factors on
the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire (MPQ). Skin conductance and heart rate data are examined for physiological correlates of task
performance. Individual differences in skin conductance responses to
feedback predict task strategies. Results are discussed in terms of the relative rates of maturation during adolescence of ventral versus dorsal prefrontal cortices, regions that support social decision-making processes.
B38
CONNECTING THE DOTS: HOW LOCAL STRUCTURE AFFECTS
GLOBAL INTEGRATION IN INFANTS Melanie Palomares1, Mark
Pettet1, Vladimir Vildavski1, Chuan Hou1, Anthony Norcia1; 1The SmithKettlewell Institute — Glass patterns are moirés created from a sparse random dot field paired with its rotated, expanded or translated copy.
Because discrimination of these patterns is not based on local features,
they have been used extensively to study global integration processes.
Here, we investigated whether 4-5.5 month old infants are sensitive to the
global structure of Glass patterns by measuring Visual Evoked Potentials
(VEPs). Although we found strong responses to the appearance of the
constituent dots, we found sensitivity to the global structure of the Glass
patterns in the infants only over a very limited range of spatial separation. In contradistinction, we observed robust responses in the infants
when we connected the dot pairs of the Glass pattern with lines. Moreover, both infants and adults showed differential responses to exchanges
of between line patterns portraying different global structures. A control
study varying luminance contrast in adults suggests that infant sensitivity to global structure is not primarily limited by reduced element visibility. Together our results suggest that the insensitivity to structure in
conventional Glass patterns is due to inefficiencies in extracting the local
orientation cues generated by the dot pairs. Once the local orientations
are made unambiguous or when the interpolation span is small, infants
can integrate these signals over the image.
B39
CORTICAL SOURCES OF INFANT VISUAL PREFERENCES Greg
Reynolds1, John Richards2, Mary Courage3; 1University of Tennessee,
2
University of South Carolina, 3Memorial University — The major goal of
this study was to identify the cortical sources of infant visual preferences.
Paired-comparison trials were embedded within the modified-oddball
ERP procedure in order to assess the distribution of infant visual preferences throughout ERP testing. The cortical sources of ERP components
associated with visual preferences were localized with equivalent current
dipole (ECD) analysis. Forty-seven infants were tested at 4.5, 6, or 7.5

70

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

months of age. Infants were videotaped during testing and high-density
EEG was recorded. Paired-comparison trials were embedded within the
modified-oddball ERP procedure. This involved blocks of brief stimulus
ERP presentations of frequent familiar, infrequent familiar, and infrequent novel stimuli, alternated with a single paired-comparison between
stimulus types. Looks were coded to determine visual preferences. A spatial Independent Component Analysis (ICA) was run on the EEG data.
The location of cortical sources from the ICA weights was estimated with
ECD analysis. The cortical source models for the ECD analysis used
’finite-element model’ (FEM) mapping to map the source locations onto
anatomical MRIs obtained from infant participants. The cortical sources
for the 4.5-month-olds were scattered across the medial-lateral aspects of
the basal prefrontal cortex. There was an increasing trend with increased
age for infants to show a larger proportion of active midline areas. The
best fitting areas in common between the brief stimulus and paired-comparison procedures were in the inferior prefrontal regions. This common
activation indicates that these areas of the brain are involved in infant
visual preferences and the allocation of attention toward a given stimulus.
B40
ASSOCIATIONS OF EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL MEASURES
OF COGNITIVE CONTROL WITH NEUROIMAGING-DERIVED
INDICES OF STRUCTURAL BRAIN DEVELOPMENT IN
ADOLESCENCE Paul Collins1, Kristin Sullwold1, Ryan Muetzel1, Kelvin
Lim1, Monica Luciana1; 1University of Minnesota — Studies of adolescent
brain development have documented age-related changes in eventrelated potentials (ERPs) associated with response monitoring and cognitive control, such as the stimulus-locked N2 and the response-locked
error-related negativity (ERN). Neuroimaging research has demonstrated
that maturational changes in cortical structure continue throughout adolescent development, including age-related decreases in gray matter and
increases in white matter. This study used ERP time and frequency analyses to investigate response monitoring and inhibitory control during a go
no-go task performed by adolescents and young adults (n=50; age range
11-25 years, median age 17 years). Participants also completed a structural MRI protocol, including a T1 scan that was processed to derive cortical thickness measures for a broad set of parcellated anatomical regions.
As expected, ERN amplitude was greater in older participants while N2
amplitude was greater for younger participants, effects that were particularly pronounced in theta-band frequencies. Additionally, ERN and N2
amplitudes in both the time and theta-band frequency domains were
associated with cortical thickness in the middle cingulate cortex, as well
as in immediately adjacent cortical regions (e.g., postcentral gyrus). The
results will be interpreted in relation to interactions involving structural
and neurophysiological brain development during adolescence within
regions that modulate cognitive control.
B41
THE DEVELOPMENT OF COGNITIVE CONTROL IN CHILDREN
AND ADOLESCENTS WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS
Marjorie Solomon1,2,3, Stanford Ly1, Cameron Carter1,3; 1University of
California, Davis, 2MIND Institute, 3Imaging Research Center — Individuals
with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) exhibit impairments in cognitive
control. As yet, there has been little study of the developmental trajectory
of the neural correlates of cognitive control in these individuals. Participants included 4 groups of 15 individuals with ASDs and typical development (TYP), divided into younger (12-15) and older (16-18) ages. Slow
event-related fMRI was used to examine differences in performance
between the groups in the Preparing to Overcome Prepotency task, a
stimulus response incompatibility paradigm. Beta series correlations
were used to investigate developmental changes in functional connectivity during the task in frontal regions including anterior PFC (aPFC) and
DLPFC using a method adapted from Dosenbach et al., (2008). Younger
individuals exhibited higher levels of brain activation in frontal and parietal brain regions than older ones. The TYP group exhibited increases in

Poster Session B

functional connectivity with increased cognitive control demands over
time for regions of the aPFC and the DLPFC. In TYPs, aPFC connections
were limited in younger children, however integration with occipital cortex became evident for older ones. For the DLPFC, younger TYPs exhibited connectivity with aPFC, thalamus and temporal parietal junction.
Older TYPs did not exhibit DLPFC connectivity. For the young ASD
group, connectivity with aPFC and DLPFC was limited, however, by the
older age period, the ASD group demonstrated patterns of regional connectivity comparable to younger TYPs. In ASDs, connectivity patterns
show a delayed developmental trajectory compared to TYPs. Further
studies are needed to determine whether functional brain integration
may catch up in ASD's.

Higher level cognition: Other
B43
ESCAPING THE PRISONERS DILEMA: AN FMRI STUDY OF
SOCIAL COOPERATION IN A COORDINATION GAME Timothy
Hodgson1, Francesco Guala2, Tim Miller3, Hannah Enke1, Ian Summers4;
1Exeter Centre for Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology, University of
Exeter, UK, 2School of Humanities & Social Sciences, University of Exeter, UK,
3
School of Business & Economics, University of Exeter, UK, 4Peninsula MR
Research Centre, School of Physics, University of Exeter, UK — Previous
studies have used the prisoners dilema task to study brain mechanisms
involved in social cooperation. But is life really a prisoners dilema? We
suggest that strong mutual incentives usually exist which bias behaviour
towards social cooperation. Opportunities to break cooperative conventions only occur infrequently in the real world. We report the results of an
fMRI study of a ’coordination game’ in which pairs of participants make
a choice to press one of two response buttons. On most rounds participants receive monetary reward only when they choose the same response
key. These coordinating or ’normal’ rounds are interspersed with ’special’ rounds on which the participant in the scanner is given an incentive
to defect (analogous to breaking a social convention). Compared to normal rounds the decision period on special rounds was associated with
increased activity in widespread areas of the prefrontal cerebral cortex.
Regions which showed greater activity for defect compared to cooperate
decisions included the caudate nucleus and the orbitofrontal cortex. On
rounds for which participants opted to continue cooperation, activity was
observed in inferior (BA47) and rostral medial (BA10) prefrontal cortex
along with more ventral areas of the striatum. The number of rounds of
successful coordination prior to the first special round was a significant
predictor of anterior cingulate activity during decision periods. We conclude that periods of successful cooperation modify the degree of decision conflict when defection opportunities arise. Participants who sustain
cooperation engage mentalising processes which bias decision making
against responses based on proximal rewards.
B44
NEURAL SYSTEMS CODING WHO IS THE ACTOR IN GOALDIRECTED ACTION Richard Ramsey1, Antonia Hamilton1; 1School of
Psychology, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, UK —
The identity of other people is critical for the meaning of social interactions. For example, handing #10 to a shop-keeper or to a man with a knife
are two very different things. That is, the meaning of a simple, goaldirected action can vary depending on the identity of the actors involved.
Research examining action understanding has identified a mirror neuron
system (MNS) in the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and inferior parietal lobe
(IPL) which encodes action features such as goals and kinematics. However, it is not yet known how the brain represents actor identity within
the context of goal-directed action. In the present paper, we used a repetition suppression (RS) paradigm during functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) to examine the neural representation of actor identity
within the context of goal-directed actions. Participants watched video

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

clips of two different actors with two different goals. Repeated presentation of the same actor suppressed the blood oxygen level-dependent
(BOLD) response in right middle frontal gyrus (MFG), a region superior
to the classic MNS region of IFG. This data suggests that right MFG contains a population of neurons that encodes the agent of action - that is;
they encode who is performing goal-directed action. Our data support
the hypothesis that the MNS is agnostic with respect to who is performing the action, and other brain regions are needed to make complete
sense of social situations. These results advance our understanding of the
neural basis of social cognition.
B45
TUNING IN: PREFERRED MUSICAL RHYTHMS BOOST
PREMOTOR ACTIVITY Katja Kornysheva1, D. Yves von Cramon1,2,
Thomas Jacobsen3, Ricarda I. Schubotz1,2; 1Max Planck Institute for
Neurological Research, Cologne, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 3BioCog-Cognitive and
Biological Psychology, Institute of Psychology I, University Leipzig,
Germany — Recent studies showed that motor-related areas become
involved both during rhythm tasks and preference-related responses to
music. Does attention to preferred rhythms increase activity in the motor
system? Our goal was to determine whether the BOLD-response in the
motor system is enhanced by preferred compared to not preferred rhythmic musical rhythms and whether this activity can be traced back to the
most important timing-related preference, namely tempo (i.e., beat frequency). Based on the subjects' aesthetic judgments, individual preferences were determined for the different constituents of the systematically
controlled musical rhythms. Results demonstrate activity in several
motor-related areas to be elevated by preferred musical rhythms and
reveal a central role of the ventral premotor cortex (PMv) in timingrelated preference, specifically during attention to preferred tempo.
B46
PRESTIMULUS EEG FRONTAL THETA AND OCCIPITAL ALPHA
ACTIVITIES
REFLECT
PRESTIMULUS
TOP-DOWN
PROCESSING Byoung-Kyong Min1,2, Jae-Jin Kim1,2,3, Hae-Jeong Park1,2,3;
1
Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea, 2Nuclear Medicine and Research Institute of
Radiological Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea,
3
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea — The
prestimulus
reflection of poststimulus events was recently reported in human EEG
alpha activity. Nevertheless, it still remains unclear whether other oscillatory activity can reflect top-down processing, even before stimulation.
Since theta activity has been implicated in working memory processing,
we investigated whether EEG theta activity reflects top-down inhibitory
control in advance of stimulus onset. EEG was recorded from 15 healthy
controls performing a color and a shape discrimination task. Both tasks
required inhibition of the task-irrelevant feature. To investigate the time
course and power of oscillatory activity, EEG signals were convolved
with Morlet wavelets. We observed that the amount of both frontal theta
and occipital alpha power in the prestimulus period was modulated by
subsequent task relevance. Taken together with behavioral results, the
difficult task (shape task) was preceded by significantly higher occipital
alpha and frontal theta power compared to the easy task (color task).
Since such task-differences were already reflected in prestimulus alpha
and theta power, not only prestimulus alpha but also prestimulus theta
activity may convey a top-down preparation of the subsequent task performance.
B47
SOCIAL AND SEMANTIC PROCESSING IN THE ANTERIOR
TEMPORAL LOBES: EVIDENCE FROM AN FMRI CONJUNCTION
TASK Lars A. Ross1,2, Marian Berryhill1,2, David Drowos1,2, Ingrid
Olson1,2; 1Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, 2University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA — The anterior temporal lobes (ATL) have been hypothesized to have semantic memory functions and social-emotional functions,
such as theory of mind (ToM). Insufficient discourse between different

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

71

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

divisions of the literature has motivated recent attempts to reconcile these
distinct functions. In the fMRI experiment reported here we contrasted
conditions that have been found to stimulate ATL activity in past experiments in order to investigate overlap between activations evoked by
stimuli of vastly different nature. Since functional imaging of the ATL’s
often suffers from signal dropout due to their proximity to the nasal
sinuses, we used an optimized pulse sequence and small voxel size. Our
findings are discussed in reference to recent evidence of the involvement
of the ATL’s in social semantic processing and neuropsychological data
from patients with frontotemporal dementia.
B48
RHYTHM EVOKES ACTION: PROCESSING OF METRIC
DEVIANCES IN EXPRESSIVE MUSIC BY EXPERTS AND LAYMEN
REVEALED BY ELECTRICAL NEUROIMAGING Clara E. James1,2,
Christoph M. Michel1,3, Juliane Britz1,3, Patrik Vuilleumier1,3, Claude-Alain
Hauert1,2; 1Geneva Neuroscience Center, Switzerland, 2Faculty of Psychology
and Educational Sciences, University of Geneva, Switzerland, 3Fundamental
and Clinical Neurosciences, University of Geneva, Switzerland — Within
expressive classical piano compositions, temporal expectancies were
manipulated by alternating conventional masculine cadences at metrically strong positions with less common feminine or metrically unaccented cadences. Interspersed pieces terminating on conventional and
deviant cadences were presented to 13 expert pianists and 13 musical laymen while high density EEG was recorded. D-prime scores revealed that
experts detected deviant cadences better than laymen. An early positive
frontal ERP component was elicited by both conventional and deviant
closure (~ 150-300 ms) in both groups; analyses on a large array of ERP
difference waves (deviant minus conventional) showed stronger amplitudes at frontal and parietal electrodes in experts. An ANOVA on Global
Field Power (GFP) for this time window exhibited a Group X Condition
interaction; contrasts confirmed stronger GFP in experts for metric deviance. Using an ERP source imaging approach, we localized putative contributive sources for this component by means of statistical parametric
mapping. In a subset of 50 regions of interest, activated by both groups,
including bilateral supplementary motor areas, posterior cingulate cortex, right (pre)cuneus and right medial temporal areas, experts manifested overall stronger activation. Later on (470-600 ms), posterior
cingulate cortex was exclusively activated in experts. Like in a previous
study, using harmonically incongruent cadences with the same participants and compositions, stronger right medial temporal activations
occurred early in time in experts. However, differences were overall
much larger for harmonic than for metric deviances. In conclusion the
broadly distributed concurrent motor activations in response to metric
deviances suggest that rhythm particularly evokes action.
B49
ARE YOU LEFT BRAINED OR RIGHT BRAINED? DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS ON A POLITICAL
FLANKER Scott McLean1, Sandra Wiebe1, Michael Dodd1, John Hibbinig1,
Kevin Smith1, Kimberly Espy1; 1University of Nebraska-Lincoln — Recent
findings suggest a role for genetic factors in political attitudes (Alford et
al., 2005). Differences in political attitudes are also tied to neural and
behavioral performance in a go/no-go task tapping sensitivity to cues
altering a habitual response (Amodio et al., 2007). We used the Eriksen
flanker paradigm to measure interference control in another way, using
political stimuli (faces of current political figures) and non-political stimuli (happy and angry faces). Participants were 63 undergraduates at a
Midwestern university. In a pretest, participants reported their own
political affiliation and rated a battery of potential task stimuli in terms of
likability; the two highest-rated happy and own-party faces and the lowest-rated angry and other-party faces were used. In the flanker task, participants pressed one of two buttons indicating like/dislike of the center
target picture, flanked by either congruent or incongruent stimuli. Reaction time (RT) was averaged by target and flanker. For Democrats, a significant flanker congruency effect for RT occurred only for angry targets

72

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

with angry flankers (relative to angry flanked by happy; p=.03), whereas
for Republicans significant effects were found for Republican/Republican vs. Republican/Democrat (p=.002), happy/Republican vs. happy/
Democrat (p=.05), and happy/happy vs. happy/angry faces (p=.04). This
is consistent with previous findings suggesting politically conservative
individuals’ performance is more susceptible to interference from conflicting information. These results will be discussed in relation to neural
regions involved in the processing of conflict information.
B50
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS OF SUBJECTS WHO FEEL
STUDIED LARGELY DIFFER FROM THOSE OF SUBJECTS WHO
DO NOT HAVE THIS FEELING Marie
Prévost2,3,
J.
Bruno
1,2,3 1
2
Debruille
; McGill University, McGill University, Neurology and
Neurosurgery, 3Douglas Mental Health University Institute — The feelings
of being studied and submitted to magnetic or electrical fields could have
an impact on the way subjects process stimuli during fMRI or TMS experiments. The present study is a first attempt at exploring this impact. Subjects were placed behind a one way mirror and were told that electrical
fields could be emitted to temporarily change the way their brain functions. A short scale was created with three items to assess feelings of
being studied and two items to assess whether the subjects felt that their
functioning was changed. The event-related potentials (ERPs) of 38 subjects were recorded during a semantic categorization task. In the N400
time window, ERPs were more positive over left frontal electrodes in
subjects who felt studied than in subjects who did not feel studied. These
feelings did not impact the N400 amplitude over centro-parietal electrodes, where it is classically maximal. Interestingly, subjects who felt
studied had greater late positivities than those who did not and this large
difference was widespread over the scalp. The late positivity has been
proposed to reflect processing about the self and others. It is thus possible
that subjects who felt studied were more focused on the experimenters
and on themselves, as they were aware of the attention devoted to them.
In contrast, the feelings of having one’s functioning changed had no
impact on the ERPs. These results are of major importance for neuropsychological studies, as it is often assumed that all subjects react similarly to
the laboratory environment.
B51
MODULATIONS OF NEURAL RESPONSES TO FACIAL
ATTRACTIVENESS BY PERSON-KNOWLEDGE Jasmin Cloutier1,
William Kelley2, Todd Heatherton2; 1MIT, 2Dartmouth College — This study
examined how person-knowledge modulates the neural substrates
underlying the perception of facial attractiveness. Using fMRI, female
subjects were imaged while viewing faces varying on physical attractiveness. Prior to seeing the faces, participants were sometimes presented
with descriptive information (i.e., person-knowledge). Subjects were
instructed that, when available, they should use the person-knowledge to
form impressions of the subsequently presented faces. Importantly, this
information depicted the person in either a positive, neutral, or negative
light. Of interest was the neural activity to faces varying on attractiveness
as a function of the type of person-knowledge presented. Analyses
focused on brain areas previously shown to be sensitive to the reward
value of facial attractiveness (Cloutier, Heatherton, Whalen, & Kelley,
2008). Results revealed that the ventral striatum was only preferentially
responsive to attractive faces when no person-knowledge or when neutral person-knowledge preceded the faces. In contrast, ventral medial
prefrontal brain regions were preferentially recruited when viewing faces
preceded by positive information, irrespective of facial attractiveness.
B52
DEFAULT NETWORK FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IS MODULATED BY SMOKING Brett Froeliger1, Rachel Kozink1, Avery Lutz1, Jed
Rose1, F. Joseph McClernon1; 1Duke University Medical Center — Smoking
abstinence has been shown to result in persistent changes in spontaneous
brain activity using electroencephalographic measures (Gilbert et al.,
1999, 2004). Recently, fMRI and PET methods have elucidated correlated

Poster Session B

spontaneous brain activity in the absence of task demands in a network
of midline structures including the precuneus, medial prefrontal cortex
and anterior cingulate cortex. Functional connectivity (fc) of the ’default
network’ likely reflects non-goal directed, introspectively oriented cognition. The current study sought to evaluate the effects of smoking abstinence on the spatial distribution of this network. BOLD-fMRI images
were collected in smokers (n = 15) during a 5-minute eyes-closed resting
period during two sessions: once following 24 hr abstinence, and once
following smoking as usual. In each session, fc was observed between
brain regions previously identified as comprising the default network.
Session differences revealed increased default network fc during satiety
relative to abstinence in left caudate, while greater default network fc
during abstinence relative to satiety was observed in right superior temporal gyrus, left superior parietal and paracentral lobules. The caudate is
known to be highly innervated by dopaminergic neurons, and smoking
has been shown to increase dopamine release in the caudate. The present
findings suggest the caudate to be more functionally connected to the
default network during satiety than during abstinence. This shift to
increased caudate-default network connectivity during satiety may
reflect the reinforcing aspects of smoking addiction. Implications for
understanding the relationship between caudate and default mode
within the framework of smoking addiction will be discussed. Research
funded by a grant from the National Institute on Drug Abuse
(K23DA017261; FJM). CORRESPONDING AUTHOR: F. Joseph McClernon, Ph.D., Tobacco Research Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Duke University Medical Center, Box 2701, Durham,
NC 27708.
B53
GONADAL STEROID HORMONES MODULATE SUBGENUAL
ACTIVITY IN WOMEN DURING REST Shau-Ming Wei1, Erica B.
Baller1, Daniella Furman2, Philip D. Kohn1, Peter J. Schmidt1, Karen F.
Berman1; 1National Institute of Mental Health, National Institute of Health,
2Standford University — There is considerable evidence that gonadal steroids modulate neural circuits underlying cognitive and affective behaviors in humans. To further investigate the effects of gonadal steroids on
neural function, we used PET to assess resting regional cerebral blood
flow (rCBF) as a function of hormone condition. Twenty-five healthy,
regularly-menstruating women underwent two eyes-open resting PET
scans (10 mCi H215O IV per scan) during each of three different hormone
conditions: ovarian suppression (i.e. hypogonadism) induced by the
gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist leuprolide acetate (Lupron);
Lupron plus estradiol replacement; and Lupron plus progesterone
replacement. The two scans per hormone condition were averaged and
entered into a second-level random effects analysis (SPM5) to compare
across hormone conditions. Additionally, rCBF values extracted from a
sphere centered on the between-hormone-condition difference in subgenual cortex (BA25) were entered into a whole-brain cross-correlation analysis to assess BA25 connectivity. In the presence of estradiol and
progesterone, there was significantly increased (p<0.002, uncorrected)
activity in BA25 compared to Lupron treatment alone (i.e. in the absence
of ovarian hormones). With estradiol replacement, connectivity analysis
revealed positive functional interactions (p<0.002, uncorrected) between
BA25 and several regions highly associated with affective processing,
including anterior cingulate, left amygdala, hippocampus, and putamen. Our data demonstrate that the hormonal milieu is important for
regulating circuit-level activity including BA25. Since BA25 is known to
be important for pathophysiology and treatment of depression, our findings provide a framework for understanding affect control in general,
and, more specifically, hormonally-dependent conditions, such as perimenopausal, post-menopausal and menstrual-cycle-dependent mood
disorder.

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

B54
THE EFFECTS OF STIMULUS SALIENCE, ATTENTIONSWITCHING, AND WORKING MEMORY LOAD ON P3
AMPLITUDE IN A DECEPTION TASK: AN ERP STUDY Laura
Bradshaw-Baucom1, Scott Meek1, Michelle Phillips1, Jennifer Vendemia1;
1
University of South Carolina — Stimulus salience, attention-switching,
and working memory load mediate event-related potentials (ERPs) associated with deception. College-aged students (N=45) performed one of
three variations of a two-stimulus directed-lie task while ERPs were
assessed with a 128-channel sensor net. Two ERPs were examined, a
waveform related to workload and attention (P3b) and a waveform associated with attention-switching (P3a). Participants were assigned to
respond deceptively to 20%, 50%, or 80% of trials. Previous ERP research
suggests that P3b waveform amplitude decreases with increased working
memory load while it increases in response to highly salient stimuli (Kok,
2001). Switching from a difficult response to an easier response produces
an increase in amplitude of the P3a waveform (Comerchero & Polich,
1999). We expected to see a maximum decrease in P3b waveform amplitude when participants responded deceptively to 80% of trials due to
increased working memory load. P3b amplitude was expected to be
greatest when participants responded deceptively to 20% of trials due to
increased salience of the stimuli pertaining to deception. We expected to
see a maximum increase in P3a waveform when switching from making a
more difficult deceptive response to making an easier truthful response
when responding deceptively to 50% of trials. The findings are discussed
as they relate to the theoretical link between stimulus salience, attentionswitching, and working memory load in the formulation of deceptive
responses.
B55
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF REWARD PROCESSING IN
NICOTINE ADDICTION AND OBESITY Laura Martin1, Rebecca
Chambers1, Lisa Cox1, Joseph Donnelly2, Cary Savage1; 1University of Kansas
Medical Center, 2University of Kansas — Everyday individuals make decisions impacting health in which they weigh the benefits of short- versus
long-term rewards. The purpose of the current study was to examine the
similarities and differences between neural mechanisms of reward associated in nicotine addiction and obesity. The current study used fMRI to
examine brain responses during prediction, anticipation, and delivery of
monetary rewards and punishments in healthy weight (HW) non-smokers, HW smokers, and obese non-smokers. The task consisted of the presentation of cues predicting the delivery of a reward or punishment with
75% probability, followed by feedback for the current trial. To date, we
have collected data in 7 HW non-smokers, 6 HW smokers, and 7 obese
non-smokers. Preliminary results in smokers and obese participants
show increased activation to rewards compared to punishments in the
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), a region associated with reward processing and impulse control. Smokers showed greater activation to rewards
than punishments during prediction and anticipation and obese participants showed greater activation during delivery. By comparison, HW
non-smokers showed greater activation to the anticipation of punishments than rewards in areas of prefrontal cortex and medial orbitofrontal
cortex (OFC). These results demonstrate that smoking and obesity are
associated with increased brain activation during reward processing;
however, this difference is seen during anticipation for smokers and during delivery for obese individuals. HW non-smokers appear to be more
sensitive to signals of punishment. These results are consistent with
behavioral studies showing increased sensitivity to reward and
decreased sensitivity to punishment in impulsive individuals.
B56
THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT
MENTALIZING ARE DIFFERENTIALLY MODULATED BY GROUP
MEMBERSHIP Dylan D. Wagner1, William M. Kelley1, Todd F.
Heatherton1; 1Dartmouth College — Previous psychological research has
demonstrated an ingroup bias and outgroup deficit in the attribution of

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

73

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

complex emotions and mental states. Convergent evidence from brain
imaging has found either reduced or differential recruitment of regions
involved in mentalizing when making judgments about outgroup members. Based on previous work demonstrating spontaneous recruitment of
mentalizing areas when viewing rich social material, we reasoned that
recruitment of mentalizing regions when processing in- and outgroup
members would differ according to level of processing (implicit vs.
explicit). In the present study 14 participants made personality attributions or rated the degree to which a face was gender typical when the target was a racial ingroup or outgroup member. A subset of brain regions
associated with mentalizing demonstrated an interaction between group
status and level of processing. Dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (dMPFC),
left temporo-parietal-junction (TPJ), left fusiform and right temporal pole
did not distinguish between in- and outgroup targets during the explicit
mentalizing condition but demonstrated increased activity to ingroup
targets during the implicit condition. Additionally, the left temporal pole
showed greater activity for outgroup members during the explicit condition, but also favored ingroup members during the implicit condition.
These findings indicate that under explicit task demands participants are
equally as likely to recruit mentalizing regions for in- or outgroup targets
and may in fact show a bias in favor of outgroup members. However,
during implicit processing of targets, mentalizing regions favor ingroup
members.
B57
VENTROMEDIAL
PREFRONTAL
DAMAGE
INCREASES
UTILITARIAN MORAL JUDGMENTS FOR IMPERSONAL AND
PERSONAL MORAL DILEMMAS Bradley Thomas1, Katie Croft1, Daniel
Tranel; 1Division of Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Iowa — Previous
research has suggested that the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPC) is
involved in rejecting utilitarian moral judgments (or making non-utilitarian, deontological judgments) about personal, but not impersonal utilitarian moral dilemmas. Subsequent research examining patients with
VMPC damage confirmed the previous findings, but also indicated that
the VMPC is involved in high-conflict but not low-conflict personal
moral dilemmas. In a high-conflict dilemma, the relative value of the consequences of the two horns of the dilemma (e.g., letting 5 strangers die
versus killing your daughter) is difficult to compute in order to determine which horn is right.’ In this sense, the vast majority of impersonal
dilemmas so far examined in moral cognition research have been lowconflict. Thus, we sought to explore high-conflict impersonal dilemmas to
determine if the VMPC is crucially involved in making non-utilitarian
moral judgments of only high-conflict personal dilemmas, or of high-conflict dilemmas in general. We presented 8 high-conflict impersonal dilemmas to patients with circumscribed bilateral, adult onset VMPC lesions
(VMPC group; n=10), and demographically matched normal (NC group;
n=20) and brain damaged comparison participants (BDC group; n=5). As
predicted, the VMPC group was more likely than NC and BDC groups to
make utilitarian moral judgments of high-conflict impersonal dilemmas.
These findings suggest that the VMPC is crucially involved in rejecting
utilitarian judgments and making deontological judgments of high-conflict dilemmas in general.
B58
MOOD MODULATION OF INFERENCE PRIMING DURING
STORY COMPREHENSION Heather Mirous1, Mark Jung-Beeman1;
1
Northwestern University — When people comprehending stories hear a
premise state (John was wearing jeans) and later a changed state (John is
wearing a tuxedo), they bridge this gap by inferring a causal connection
(John changed). Drawing such causal inferences is often necessary to
maintain coherence during language comprehension. Mood, whether
assessed or induced, affects performance in a variety of cognitive tasks
that likely share some component cognitive processes with drawing
inferences. In the current study, before participants listened to stories, we
induced mood via film clips to examine the influence of positive affect
and anxiety on drawing causal inferences. We contrasted priming of

74

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

inference-related target words presented at an early time point (when the
inference is predictive and optional) and a late time point (when a bridging inference is necessary to maintain story coherence) after each mood
induction. Participants showed greater inference priming after positive
mood induction than anxious mood induction, especially at the later time
point. These results provide evidence that mood modulates inference
processing during natural story comprehension. It is not yet clear
whether mood is directly influencing the process of drawing inferences,
or if the influence of mood is mediated through another cognitive mechanism, such as attention or working memory, which is under investigation. Though preliminary, these results could have implications for
student learning.
B59
INVESTIGATING CONCEPTUAL PROCESSING WITH PICTURETO-PICTURE REPETITION PRIMING Eric S. Clapham1, Aaron T.
Karst1, C. Mark Wessinger1,2,3; 1University of Nevada, Reno, 2Charteroak State
College, 3Northcentral University — The current study uses a repetition
priming paradigm to investigate the extraction and encoding of conceptual information. The basic experimental trial began by exposing participants to briefly presented primes, followed by a target stimulus that
remains visible until the participant makes a decision. Prime and target
stimuli were drawn from a standardized pool of real world pictures. On
each trial the number of primes preceding the decision task varied from 1
- 4. Primes were presented with forward and backward masks in order to
limit processing to the specified exposure interval. Furthermore, the presentation time of each prime varied between 25 and 100 ms. Twenty-five
ms was shown to be below visual awareness in a separate picture identification task. To assess conceptual processing, the priming task required
participants to categorize target stimuli as natural or manufactured. In
general, the congruent conditions resulted in a facilitation of performance
in the form of reaction time gains. However, the gains tended to increase
when the prime interval was larger.
B60
SEX DIFFERENCES IN STRESS EFFECTS ON BRAIN
ACTIVATION AND BEHAVIOR DURING RISK TAKING Nichole
Lighthall1, Michiko Sakaki1, Sarinnapha Vasunilashorn1, Sangeetha Somayajula1,
Eric Chen1, Mara Mather1; 1University of Southern California — Sex
differences in financial risk taking are frequently observed (e.g., Jianakoplos &
Bernasek, 1998) and experimental research indicates that stress may
enhance these sex differences (Mather et al., in press; Preston et al., 2007).
Stress appears to activate prefrontal structures more in men and limbic
structures more in women (Wang et al., 2007). Thus, stress-induced sex
differences in risky behavior may stem from sex differences in how stress
affects analytical versus emotional processing. To test this, we investigated the neural mechanisms of stress-sex interactions in financial risk
taking by comparing stress effects on behavior and brain activation in 48
men and women during a computerized risk task. Prior to the risk taking
game, half of the participants were exposed to cold stress and the other
half completed a control condition. Functional imaging data was collected throughout the risk taking task; during the anticipated cortisol
peak. Men and women had similar behavior and activated similar brain
regions during the task under control conditions. However, stressed
males earned more money during the risk task and increased activation
in regions related to cognitive analysis such as the anterior cingulate, dorsolateral PFC, insula and medial PFC compared to control males,
whereas stressed women earned less money and showed less activity in
all of these regions but more activity in the amygdala and ventromedial
PFC than control females. These findings suggest that stress will enhance
decision making effectiveness in women when decisions benefit from
emotional processing and in men when decisions benefit from cognitive
analysis.

Poster Session B

B61
DEFAULT NETWORK RELATIONSHIPS TO INTELLIGENCE AND
CREATIVITY IN NORMAL SUBJECTS Leonard
Leyba1,
Andrew
1,4
1
1
Mayer , Alexandre Franco , Robert Chavez , Shirley Smith1,3, Alison
Marshall1, Ranee Flores1, Rex Jung1,2,3,4; 1Mind Research Network, University
of New Mexico, 2University of New Mexico, Neurosurgery, 3University of New
Mexico, Psychology, 4University of New Mexico, Neurology — Spontaneous
brain activity in the absence of a cognitive task may be related to intelligence (Song et al., 2008). Low frequency oscillations (0.01-0.1 hz) of this
spontaneous activity have been found to be consistent across subjects
(Damoiseaux et al., 2006) and may be important in cognitive processing
(e.g. Greicius et al., 2008). The present study examines whether the power
of spontaneous fluctuations in the DMN at rest is correlated with intelligence or creativity. Full Scale Intelligence Quotient (FSIQ) was assessed
with the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale; creativity was assessed with
measures of divergent thinking described previously (Miller & Tal, 2007),
from which a creative intelligence quotient (CIQ) was derived. Subjects
underwent a 5-minute resting fMRI scan. Data was motion correction,
placed in MNI stereotaxic space, and group ICA (GIFT matlab toolbox;
Calhoun et al., 2004) was used to identify 33 spatially independent components. Four components were selected having high spatial correlation
with anterior inferior, anterior superior, posterior inferior, and posterior
superior regions of the DMN network (Correa et al., 2006). The power
spectra of individual subject timecourses corresponding to these 4 spatial
components was used to calculate the proportion of total power in the
0.01-0.1 Hz range. This power was regressed against FSIQ and CIQ
scores. FSIQ had a correlation approaching significance (r=0.30, p=0.055)
with the power (0.01-0.1 Hz) of the spatial component representing the
posterior superior aspect of the DMN. The power spectra of no other
components were related to FSIQ or CIQ scores.
B62
EFFECT OF PHYSICAL WARMTH ON ECONOMIC DECISIONMAKING PROCESS Yoona Kang1, John Bargh1, Jeremy Gray1, Lawrence
Williams2; 1Yale University, 2Colorado University — Recent lines of evidence suggest a link between physical and emotional perceptions. People
rated others to have a warmer (colder) personality after incidentally
touching a warm (cold) coffee cup (Williams & Bargh 2008, Science), suggesting a relation between physical temperature and interpersonal
warmth (trust). Various studies indicate a possibility of a shared underlying mechanism for physical and interpersonal warmth. The insula, in
particular, is shown to activate in response to physical warmth as well as
perceived interpersonal trust. Using this paradigm, we tested whether
physical warmth will increase interpersonal warmth, which may influence one’s economic decision-making process. Study 1 was a behavioral
study designed to be compatible with the constraints of MR imaging. We
examined the effect of physical warmth (coldness) on participants’ economic decision in an investment game. Participants conducted an ostensive product evaluation, which involved touching either a warm or cold
therapeutic pack. In 29 individuals, those who touched a warm therapeutic pack entrusted significantly higher amount of money to their investment game partners than those who touched a cold pack. In addition, we
tested two participants using fMRI. In both subjects, experimentally
manipulated warmth led to greater activation in the anterior insula, consistent with prior work. Thus, we have found that perceptions of physical
temperature influenced one’s interpersonal economic decision making,
potentially through the involvement of a common underlying neural
mechanism.
B63
AGE DIFFERENCE IN THE MEDIATION OF COGNITIVE
PROCESSING SPEED BY PREFRONTAL CORTEX Michael
Motes1,2, Bharat Biswal3, Bart Rypma1,2; 1Center for BrainHealth, School of
Behavioral Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas, 2University of Texas

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Southwestern Medical Center, Psychiatry, 3University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey, Radiology — Research has revealed age-related
slowing on measures of cognitive processing speed and that processing
speed declines account for age-related variability on a variety of more
complex cognitive tasks. These findings have led to hypotheses that the
efficient use of limited sets of cognitive operations governs a variety of
age-related cognitive declines. fMRI was used in the present study to
examine the neural basis for age-related differences in processing speed,
particularly targeting prefrontal cortex (PFC). During scanning, groups of
older and younger participants completed an fMRI-adapted version of a
cognitive processing speed task. On each trial, participants determined
whether a symbol-number pair also appeared in a simultaneously presented array of nine symbol-number pairs. Estimates of task-related
BOLD signal-change were obtained for each participant. These estimates
were then correlated with the participants’ performance on the task. For
younger participants, BOLD signal-change within PFC decreased with
better performance, but for older participants, BOLD signal-change
within PFC increased with better performance. The results suggest that
differential efficiency in the use of PFC neural resources mediates agerelated changes in processing speed, in particular, and cognitive performance, more generally.
B64
FUNCTIONAL DYNAMICS OF ANTERIOR INTRAPARIETAL
SULCUS WITHIN THE ACTION OBSERVATION NETWORK
DURING UNDERSTANDING OTHER PEOPLE’S INTENTIONS:
EVIDENCE FROM COMBINED FMRI AND EEG REPETITION
SUPPRESSION Stephanie
Ortigue1,
James
Thompson2,
Raja
Parasuraman2, Scott Grafton1; 14D Brain Electrodynamics Lab, UCSB Brain
Imaging Center, Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies, 2George Mason
University — Inferring intentions of other people based on the observation of their behavior recruits brain regions within the inferior frontoparietal network (including the mirror neuron system) extending to the
superior temporal sulcus (STS). However, the functional dynamics
between these brain areas remains unclear. To assess this question, we
tested repetition suppression (RS) effects in 24 healthy men who performed an intention inference task while their brain activity was recorded
with high-spatial fMRI and high-temporal EEG recordings. During this
task, participants were instructed to attend to video-clips displaying
hand-on-object actions, and to try to decode ’why’ actions were being
performed (e.g., to use a gun or to transport it). Functional MRI results
confirmed the specific role of the inferior frontal lobe, anterior intraparietal sulcus (aIPS) and STS in intention understanding. High-density EEG
neuroimaging combining brain microstate analysis with LAURA distributed linear source estimations expanded these results by revealing the
temporal dynamics within this brain network. Suppressed responses for
intention decoding were observed in STS in the early stage of processing
(~100ms after hand-on-object interaction). Then, a specific recruitment of
aIPS was observed around 200ms. Finally, a combined STS and aIPS
recruitment was observed around 330ms. Within this cascade of events,
the recruitment of aIPS was more specifically observed for action goals
than objects per se. Together, these results show the temporal dynamics
of intention understanding within the human action observation network
that are different than those used to decode lower level visual features
related to the object per se.
B65
AGING EFFECTS ON RULE-BASED AND INFORMATIONINTEGRATION CATEGORY LEARNING Bo Zhu1, Jennifer Pacheco1,
Maia Langford1, David M. Schnyer1, W. Todd Maddox1; 1University of Texas
at Austin — Rule-based (RB) and information-integration (II) category
learning was investigated in healthy older participant (60 - 81 years old).
Participants were asked to categorize single line stimuli that varied in
length and orientation into one of four categories. In the RB condition,
correct classification required that each line be classified as short or long
and steep or shallow, and these decisions integrated using a conjunctive

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

75

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

rule. In the II condition, the optimal strategy had no verbal analog, but
instead involved a pre-decisional integration of length and orientation.
The RB and II categories were structurally equivalent in the sense that
within- and between-category variance was constant. All other procedures were fixed across conditions (e.g., optimal accuracy, nature of the
feedback, response requirements, etc). Each subject completed 6-100 trial
blocks in each condition. Accuracy- and model-based analyses were performed. The results suggested that (a) elderly participants were less accurate than controls in the RB condition, (b) elderly participants were less
accurate than controls in the II condition early in learning, but showed no
II performance impairment during the last half of the session, and (c) the
locus of the accuracy deficits (when they emerged) were due to a deficit
in categorization rule learning, and not to increased variability in the
application of the rule. These results replicate previous studies that show
RB deficits in normal aging and extend them to conjunctive rule learning.
The early learning II deficit converges with previous results, but the lack
of impairment late does not.
B66
A NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ALTERNATIVE FOR THE
TREATMENT OF INSOMNIA - INSTRUMENTAL CONDITIONING
OF BRAIN OSCILLATIONS Kerstin Hoedlmoser1, Thanh Dang-Vu2,
Martin Desseilles2, Pierre Maquet2, Manuel Schabus1,2; 1University of
Salzburg, Austria, Division Physiological Psychology, 2University of Liege,
Belgium, Cyclotron Research Centre — Electroencephalographic recordings
over the sensorimotor cortex show a very distinctive oscillatory pattern
in a frequency range between 12-15Hz termed sensorimotor rhythm
(SMR). SMR appears to be dominant during quiet but alert wakefulness,
and synchronizes by the inhibition of motor behaviour. This frequency
range is also known to be abundant during light non-rapid eye movement sleep, and is overlapping with the sleep spindle band. Given earlier
findings we aimed at changing sleep quality and cognitive performance
in humans by using instrumental conditioning (IC) of that SMR frequency band. Twenty-seven subjects were randomly assigned to either a
SMR-conditioning protocol or to a randomized-frequency-conditioning
protocol. Whereas the experimental group was trained to enhance the
amplitude of their SMR-frequency range during 10 IC sessions over the
course of 2 weeks, the control group participated in a placebo conditioning protocol. Before and after these IC blocks subjects had to attend the
sleep laboratory to take a 90min nap and additionally had to perform a
declarative memory task. Results confirmed the increase of 12-15Hz
activity over the course of the ten training sessions in the experimental
group. Interestingly, the increased SMR activity (i) was also expressed
during subsequent sleep by eliciting positive changes in various sleep
parameters like sleep spindle number or sleep onset latency and (ii) was
associated with the enhancement of declarative memory performance. In
addition, preliminary data from our own laboratory indicate that people
suffering from insomnia could also benefit from SMR-conditioning as
indicated by improved measures of subjective and objective sleep quality.

Linguistic processes: Semantics
B67
NEURAL PROCESSING OF ICONIC AND METAPHORIC COVERBAL GESTURES: WHAT MEMORY TELLS US ABOUT
UNDERLYING PROCESSES Benjamin Straube1,2, Antonia Green1,
Anjan Chatterjee2, Tilo Kircher1; 1RWTH Aachen University, Aachen,
Germany, 2Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, The University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA — Iconic and metaphoric gestures illustrate verbal utterances with shape, space or action information. However, these gesture
types differ in reference to the abstractness of the sentence content. The
question arises how the different information of speech and gesture is
processed and stored on the neural level. This study tested the hypothesis

76

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

that iconic and metaphoric gestures contribute to memory for spoken
sentences and that they have different neural instantiations. During
fMRI-data acquisition participants were presented with videos showing
an actor performing iconic (IG), metaphoric (MG) or no gestures (NG) to
corresponding concrete or abstract sentences, respectively. After scanning, participants performed a recognition task for videos of the spoken
sentences without gestures of each condition. Behavioral results indicate
that co-verbal gestures lead to better memory performances for spoken
sentences than when the sentences were spoken without gestures. We
found for the IG condition, bilateral temporo-occipital and parietal activation accompanied by predominantly right lateral hippocampal activation was associated with better subsequent discrimination. By contrast,
for the MG condition fronto-temporal and predominantly left lateral hippocampal activation was related to better recognition. These results suggest differences in encoding processes for both gesture types. The right
hippocampus is probably more involved in concrete visuo-spatial integration processes of speech and gesture. By contrast, the left hippocampus and a fronto-temporal network are more involved in semantic
integration of abstract information of speech and metaphoric gestures.
B68
NEURAL SUBSTRATE FOR INTEGRATING SEMANTIC AND
PHONOLOGICAL PROCESSING IN CHINESE CHILDREN ShuHui Lee1, Tai-Li Chou1, Li-Ying Fan1, Mei-En Hsieh1; 1National Taiwan
University — Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to
examine the neural correlates of auditory semantic judgments to Chinese
characters in a group of 10-15 year old Chinese children. The participants
had to judge if two Chinese characters were related in meaning. The first
character was visually presented and the second character was auditorily
presented. Different from English, Chinese has plenty of homophones in
which each pronunciation corresponds to many characters. This task
required the participants to select a semantically appropriate answer
among homophones, given that the first and the second characters were
related in meaning. The participants showed activation in left middle
temporal gyrus (BA 21, 22) and left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG, BA 45, 47)
for semantic processing. Consistent with previous visual semantic findings, characters with stronger semantic association elicited greater activation in left inferior parietal lobule (BA 40). Different from previous visual
semantic findings, characters with weaker semantic association elicited
activation in left IFG (BA 45), suggesting greater engagement of selection
among homophones for Chinese characters. We also examined whether
age explained variance in the patterns of activation. Increasing age was
correlated with greater activation in IFG (BA 45) for related pairs and in
IFG (BA47) for unrelated pairs. The developmental results indicate
greater integration of semantic and phonological processes to select the
correct answer among homophones for related pairs, and demanding
retrieval processes to judge unrelated pairs for older children. Our findings imply different roles for subparts of IFG, BA 45 and BA 47 during
semantic judgments.
B69
MOOD AFFECTS SEMANTIC PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM
N400 Dorothee J. Chwilla1, Constance, Th. W. M. Vissers2, Daniele
Virgillito3, Dan Fitzgerald4, Anne, E. M. Speckens2, Indira Tendolkar2;
1
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, 2Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Psychiatry, 3Scuola Superiore di Catania,
Catania, Italy, 4Behavioral Science Institute — N400 amplitude systematically varies with the degree at which a word is expected based on context.
This N400 effect of cloze probability with larger amplitudes for less
expected words is taken to reflect the ease with which a word is integrated into context. In this study we explored the interaction of language,
in particular of semantics, with emotion. This was accomplished by
investigating the effects of emotional state on N400. EEG was recorded
while female participants (N=31) read high-cloze sentences (’In that
library the pupils borrow books...’) and low-cloze sentences (’The pillows
are stuffed with books...’). Mood was manipulated between participants

Poster Session B

by presenting short film clips that displayed fragments from a happy
movie or a sad movie. These film clips have been shown to effectively
induce the intended mood. The main results were as follows: Participants
scored significantly higher on a 9 point-mood scale after watching the
happy film clips than after the sad film clips (p <.01). For N400 (300 to 500
ms epoch), an interaction of cloze probability and mood was found for
the midline and the lateral sites (ps < .05). For the midline sites an N400
effect was present in the happy mood but absent in the sad mood condition. For the lateral sites the interaction indicated that the N400 effect in
the happy mood condition was more broadly distributed across the scalp
than in the sad mood condition. The N400 data show that mood in
healthy subjects affects semantic processing, in particular meaning integration.
B70
COMPREHENSION OF ACTION AND NON-ACTION VERBS IS
PRESERVED IN PARKINSON'S DISEASE David Kemmerer1,2,3, Luke
Miller2, Megan MacPherson1, Jessica Huber1; 1Purdue University, Speech,
Language, and Hearing Sciences, 2Purdue University, Psychological Sciences,
3
University of Iowa, Neurology — The Embodied Cognition Framework
(ECF) maintains that action concepts depend in part on the primary
motor and/or premotor cortices. This predicts that disturbances to those
regions should impair comprehension of action verbs (e.g., throw) but
not non-action verbs (e.g., think). A recent study reported reduced repetition priming for verbs but not nouns in non-demented patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD), a movement disorder that indirectly affects the
motor cortices due to abnormal input from the basal ganglia and the
mesocortical dopaminergic pathway (Boulenger et al., 2008). However, in
that study all the verbs encoded actions and all the nouns encoded
objects, leading to a conflation of grammatical and semantic categories. In
the current study we compared the performance of 10 non-demented PD
patients with 10 healthy control subjects on a task assessing comprehension of action and non-action verbs. All participants received the Semantic Similarity Judgment Task, which requires determining which of two
verbs is more similar to a third (Kemmerer et al., 2008). There were 144
itemsó24 for each of 6 classes of verbs, 4 classes involving actions (running, speaking, hitting, and cutting) and 2 classes not involving actions
(changes of state, and psychological processes). The PD patients were
tested both ’on’ and ’off’ their anti-parkinsonian medication. Relative to
healthy controls, PD patients did not have significantly lower accuracies
for any of the verb classes, regardless of medication status. Thus, PD
patients appear to have intact comprehension of action and non-action
verbs, raising important questions about the scope of the ECF.
B71
REVEALING THE ROLE OF THE ATL IN SEMANTIC COGNITION:
EVIDENCE FROM DISTORTION-CORRECTED FUNCTIONAL
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING Richard
Binney1,
Elizabeth
Jefferies2, Matthew A. Lambon Ralph1; 1Neuroscience and Aphasia Research
Unit, University of Manchester, UK, 2University of York, UK — The association between bilateral anterior temporal lobe (ATL) atrophy and a generalised semantic impairment in semantic dementia (SD) has led to the
supposition that this region could be a core component of the cortical
semantic network. However, despite the remarkable consistency of this
association in SD, this hypothesis is still controversial. One reason for this
is that fMRI studies of healthy individuals have thus far failed to provide
consistent evidence for the involvement of the ATL in semantic tasks.
This is at least partially explained by the fact that conventional gradientecho echo-planar fMRI is vulnerable to geometric distortions and signal
dropout in areas that are near to bone or air-filled cavities. One of the
most severely affected areas is the ATL. However, it has recently been
shown that it is possible to correct these distortions by using a combination of spin-echo echo planar imaging and a novel correction algorithm.
We report the analysis of corrected images that revealed significantly
greater ATL activation when healthy participants performed a semantic
judgement task as contrasted with an equally-demanding control task.

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

This is consistent with previous studies that used this same task and
demonstrated that SD patients perform significantly more poorly than a
healthy control group, and that semantic decision times of healthy participants are significantly slowed by inducing a ’virtual lesion’ in the left or
right temporal pole using low-frequency repetitive TMS. These findings
add substantial weight to a growing body of evidence for the role of the
ATL in semantic representation.
B72
ELUCIDATING THE NATURE OF DEREGULATED SEMANTIC
COGNITION IN SEMANTIC APHASIA: EVIDENCE FOR THE
ROLES
OF
PREFRONTAL
AND
TEMPOROPARIETAL
CORTICES Krist A. Noonan1, Elizabeth Jefferies2, Matthew A. Lambon
Ralph1; 1Neuroscience and Aphasia Research Unit (NARU), University of
Manchester, UK, 2University of York, Psychology, UK — Semantic cognition
- semantically-driven verbal and nonverbal behaviour - is composed of at
least two interactive principal components: conceptual representations
and executive control processes that regulate and shape activation within
the semantic system. Previous studies indicate that semantic dementia
follows from a progressive yet specific degradation of conceptual knowledge. In contrast, multimodal semantic impairment in aphasic patients
(semantic aphasia) reflects damage to the control component of semantic
cognition (Jefferies & Lambon Ralph, 2006). The purpose of the present
study was to examine the nature of the semantic control deficits in
semantic aphasia (SA) in detail for the first time. Seven patients with SA
were tested on four comprehension and naming tasks which directly
manipulated the requirement for executive control in different ways. In
line with many theories of cognitive control, the SA patients demonstrated three core features of impaired control: they exhibited (i) poor
online manipulation and exploration of semantic knowledge; (ii) poor
inhibition of strongly associated distractors; and (iii) reduced ability to
focus upon or augment less dominant aspects of semantic information,
even though the knowledge itself remained and could be successfully
cued by external constraints provided by the examiner. Our findings are
consistent with the notion that the anterior temporal lobes are crucial for
conceptual knowledge whilst the left prefrontal and temporoparietal cortices, damaged in patients with SA, play a critical role in regulating
semantic activation in a task-appropriate fashion.
B73
THE DYNAMICS OF SENSE-MAKING: ERP EVIDENCE OF WORDS
WITHIN WORDS Petra van Alphen1, Jos van Berkum1,2; 1Max Planck
Institute for Psycholinguistics, 2Donders Institute, Centre for Cognitive
Neuroimaging — In two ERP experiments, we examined whether listeners, when making sense of spoken language, take into account the meaning of spurious words that are embedded in longer words, either at their
onsets (e.g., pie in pirate) or at their offsets (e.g., pain in champagne). Listeners heard sentences in which the critical multisyllabic words contained either an initial or final embedding. The semantic fit of the carrier
words and embedded words in the context was manipulated in such a
way that semantic involvement of the embedded words should result in a
modulation of the N400 components. The results of the first experiment
showed that when the context supports the meaning of the embedding
but not that of the carrier word, listeners briefly relate the meaning of
both initial and final embeddings to the context. Crucially, the second
experiment showed that when the carrier word but not the embedded
word is supported by the context, final (but not initial) embeddings are
still taken into account. This indicates that even when the comprehension
system is already pursuing a sensible interpretation, it can still start a second sense-making stream for the following (stressed) syllable of the
word, in parallel to the first one. The absence of an effect for the initial
embeddings, however, could be taken to suggest that the system is not
able to start two such processes at exactly the same time. These results
give us new insights into the dynamics of the sense-making process and
its link to lexical activation.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

77

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

B74
CONFLICTS BETWEEN SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS: AN ERPSTUDY Miriam Kos1, Theo Vosse1,2, Peter Hagoort1,3; 1Radboud University
Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Centre for
Cognitive Neuroimaging, 2University of Leiden, 3Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen — Research has shown that conflicts between
constraints for grammatical role assignment and thematic role biases
elicit P600 effects (Kuperberg, 2007). This P600 has no apparent syntaxspecific characteristic, and thus seems to be at variance with the dominant view that P600 effects are modulated by syntactic violations, ambiguities or complexities. To explain these findings it has been postulated
that conflicts between syntax and semantics trigger a prolonged combinatorial or a monitoring process. We, however, favor a different interpretation: due to the strong semantic bias, the conflict between syntax and
semantics was ’perceived’ at the syntactic level. There can only be one
winner and, in the ERP effect, ’the loser takes it all’. We investigated the
nature of these conflicts further in a Dutch ERP study. First, participants
read relative clause sentences, structurally ambiguous in Dutch, with
strong semantic constraints (the dentist who(m) the client treats, the client who(m) the dentist treats). The conflict between syntax and semantics
elicited an N400 effect. This is possibly due to subject-first strategies overriding the semantic-thematic bias. Second, we presented sentences containing a conflict between syntax and semantics at a point in the sentence
at which the syntactic constraints were very strong (baseline condition:
Father eats a sandwich / Father eats in a restaurant; thematic role violations: Father eats in a sandwich / Father eats a restaurant). The combinatorial and monitoring explanations predict a P600. However, in this case
an N400 effect was observed, supporting our ’loser takes it all’ account.
B75
ANAPHORIC REFERENCE TO QUANTIFIED STATEMENTS: AN
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Ruth Filik1, Linda Moxey1,
Anthony Sanford1, Hartmut Leuthold1; 1Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging,
University of Glasgow, UK — We report two event-related potential (ERP)
experiments examining how readers process sentences containing anaphoric reference to quantified statements. Previous studies (Moxey &
Sanford, 1987; Paterson, Sanford, Moxey, & Dawydiak, 1998; Sanford,
Moxey, & Paterson, 1996) have shown that positive (e.g. ’many’) and negative (e.g. ’not many’) quantifiers cause readers to focus on different sets
of discourse entities. For example in ’Many of the fans attended the
game’, focus is on the fans who attended (the reference set), and subsequent pronominal reference to this set, as in, ’They cheered very loudly’,
is facilitated. In contrast, if ’many’ is replaced by ’not many’, focus shifts
to the fans who did not attend (the complement set), and pronominal reference to this set, as in ’They stayed home instead’, is preferred. In the
current studies, the electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded while participants read positive or negative quantified statements followed by anaphoric reference to the reference set or complement set. Results suggest
that positive quantifiers make the reference set available on encountering
the quantified statement, with reference to the complement set being perceived as anomalous. Specifically, following a positive quantifier, there
was an N400 effect for complement set reference relative to reference set
reference (Experiment 1). In contrast, for negative quantifiers, anaphoric
reference to the reference set did not produce an N400 effect. Results
instead suggest that the complement set is added to the discourse model
on reading the anaphoric sentence (Experiment 2). Findings are discussed
in relation to theoretical accounts of reference resolution.
B76
AGING MODULATES TOP-DOWN BUT NOT AUTOMATIC
PROCESSES DURING LEXICAL AMBIGUITY RESOLUTION: AN
ERP STUDY Chia-lin Lee1, Kara D. Federmeier1; 1The Beckman Institute for
Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois — The
current
experiment investigated how older adults process noun/verb (NV)
homographs (e.g., park) given prior syntactic and semantic contextual
information. We compared ERP responses to NV-homographs and

78

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

matched unambiguous words that completed sentences with either both
semantic and syntactic contextual information (congruent sentences) or
syntactic information only (syntactic prose sentences). Our earlier work
with young adults demonstrated that, relative to unambiguous words,
NV-homographs elicit (1) larger N400 responses in congruent sentences,
suggesting a semantic mismatch between the context and the automatic
activation of the contextually-inappropriate sense, and (2) a sustained
frontal negativity in syntactic prose, suggesting the recruitment of topdown mechanisms mediated by frontal brain areas to aid semantic selection when semantic constraints are less available. In older adults as a
group, there were similar (although smaller) N400 effects for congruent
sentences, whereas the frontal negativity previously observed in the syntactic prose condition in the young was absent. Analyses of individual
differences revealed a positive correlation between the size of the frontal
negativity effect and verbal fluency scores, showing that more fluent
older adults maintained a young-like effect pattern. These findings support the hypothesis that lexical ambiguity resolution engages multiple
neural mechanisms. With age, more automatic semantic processing
mechanisms seem to be relatively well-maintained, whereas top-down
executive mechanisms may be less available or efficient.
B78
SYNTACTIC POSITION OUTRANKS SYNTACTIC FUNCTION:
REFERENTIAL PROMINENCE REVISITED Petra
Schumacher1,
Dietmar Roehm2,3; 1Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Germany,
2
University of Salzburg, Austria, 3Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — Accessing an antecedent expression during referential processing is guided by a variety of ’prominence
features’, such as discourse prominence (e.g. topic, non-topic), syntactic
prominence (e.g. subject, object), form features (e.g. definite, indefinite,
pronominal),... ERP research has reported enhanced N400-effects as indication of referential processing cost, e.g. when definite noun-phrases
(contra pronouns) refer to highly prominent antecedents. Previously, we
showed that a definite noun-phrase prefers i) an indefinite antecedent
over a definite antecedent and ii) an object antecedent over a subject antecedent (evidenced by an enhanced N400 for the dispreferred entities).
These findings indicate that a definite noun-phrase ideally refers to a less
prominent entity in discourse. In the present investigation, we wanted to
find out whether the latter prominence effect was driven by syntactic
function alone (subject vs. object) or by the syntactic position (because we
had only used subject-before-object order). Since German has a flexible
word order, we were able to tease apart these two prominence features.
We examined referential processing in a two-sentence reading study,
where the first sentence manipulated the antecedent’s syntactic function
(subject, object) and its position (subject-before-object, object-before-subject), while the second sentence contained the referring noun-phrase.
ERPs measured to the onset of the referring noun-phrase replicated our
previous results (more pronounced N400 for subject over object antecedents in subject-before-object order) and also revealed an enhanced N400
for object over subject antecedents in object-before-subject order. This
indicates that syntactic position - which encodes prominence features - is
a stronger predictor for prominence than syntactic function is.

Linguistic Processes: Semantics
B79
BRAIN
POTENTIALS
AND
THE
PROCESSING
OF
(IN)DEFINITENESS IN LATE LEARNERS OF ENGLISH John
E.
Drury1,4, Erin J. White2,4, Lydia White3,4, Karsten Steinhauer1,4; 1McGill
University, School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, 2McGill
University, Psychology, 3McGill University, Linguistics, 4McGill University,
Centre for Research on Language, Mind, and Brain — Much research has
examined the extent to which late second language (L2-)learners may
attain native-like proficiency, including a recent surge of studies using

Poster Session B

event related brain potentials (ERPs). However, ERP research in this
domain has so far ignored L2-acquisition/processing of semantic/pragmatic distinctions such as (in)definiteness. The present ERP study tested
adult native English speakers alongside two groups of late-learners of
English (native French/Chinese speakers) in a sentence reading/judgment study examining two different types of violation paradigms: (i) syntactic category violations [e.g., The man hoped to *meal the enjoy with
friends vs. The man hoped to enjoy the meal with friends], and (ii) violations of the definiteness restriction [DR-violations] in existential constructions [e.g., There was *the/a man in the room; note * marks deviance/
unacceptability]. DR-violations have been shown elsewhere to yield late
P600-type effects and concurrent late left anterior negativities [L-LANs]
in English natives. We have previously shown that syntactic/type-(i) violations elicit LAN/P600 responses in English native-speakers and in
(both French/Chinese) high-proficiency late-L2 learners, whereas corresponding low-proficiency (French/Chinese) L2-learners do not elicit a
LAN. Here, in the same group of subjects, we demonstrate a complete
absence of any ERP effects for DR-violations in both French and Chinese
low-proficiency groups. In contrast, high-proficiency French/Chinese
groups appear to approximate native-like ERP-patterns [both show late
P600-like effects], but the two groups differed from each other both
behaviourally and in the timing of ERP-effects. The full array of findings
suggest that L1-background may differentially effect distinct linguistic
sub-domains in late second language learning.

Linguistic processes: Semantics
B80
SEMANTIC PROCESSING IN WERNICKE'S APHASIA AND
SEMANTIC DEMENTIA Juliana Baldo1, Jennifer Ogar1,4, Nina
Dronkers1,2,3, Maria Luisa Gorno Tempini4; 1VA Northern California Health
Care System, 2University of California, Davis, 3University of California, San
Diego, 4University of California, San Francisco — Anterior temporal cortex
has been associated with semantic processing, as evidenced by both
lesion and imaging studies. More posterior portions of temporal cortex,
especially in the left hemisphere, have been implicated in lexico-semantic
processing aspects of language. In the current study, we examined the
role of these areas by comparing behavioral and anatomical changes in
patients with semantic dementia (SD) and Wernicke’s aphasia (WA). Ten
patients with WA and ten SD patients were tested on measures of speech,
language, and semantic association abilities. Performance of SD patients
was evaluated at two different intervalsóinitial testing and 1-2 year follow-up. Both SD and WA patients exhibited significant language deficits
that declined further over time in SD. Despite significant anomia in both
groups, SD patients tended to have richer, more intelligible speech, relative to Wernicke’s patients, but both groups exhibited significant lexicosemantic impairments in comprehension. One striking area of contrast
was the impaired semantic processing evidenced by SD patients on a triadic comparison task, which was relatively intact in WA. Voxel-based
morphometry in the SD patients revealed left anterior temporal atrophy,
with some gray matter loss extending to medial portions of the left temporal lobe. In contrast, the WA patients had temporal lesions that overlapped to the greatest extent in the left posterior middle temporal gyrus.
The differences between WA and SD in behavioral performance as well
as anatomical involvement further support the critical role of left anterior
temporal cortex in semantics and more posterior left temporal regions in
core language processes.
B81
COVARIANCE STRUCTURES IN NARRATIVES STUDIED WITH
FMRI - PROOF OF CONCEPT Mikkel Wallentin1,2, Peter Vuust1,3, Kim
Mouridsen1, Andreas Roepstorff1,4, Torben Ellegaard Lund1; 1Center of
Functionally Integrative Neuroscience, Aarhus University Hospital, 2Center for

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Semiotics, University of Aarhus, 3The Royal Academy of Music, Aarhus,
of Aarhus, Social Anthropology — Narratives are difficult to
study scientifically. Changes in use of frequent words, however, must be
followed by changes in meaning and thus be salient for a cognitive system involved in comprehension, e.g. if a story that has previously used
only third person (’she’) starts using first person (’I’) then this signals a
change in meaning (e.g. a shift to dialogue). Such changes can be
observed as covariance between the most frequent words. This study
investigated hemodynamic changes in language regions evoked by these
changes. Covariance components were made by taking onsets for the 10
most frequent verbs, 9 pronouns and 10 prepositions from a recording of
’The Ugly Duckling’ by Hans Christian Andersen. Onsets for each word
was convolved with the HRF in SPM and these 29 regressors were then
analysed with principal component analysis (PCA). To test the effects of
these components with minimal variance we scanned the same subject 8
times while he listened to the recording. Scannings: on a 3T system (580
volumes/session, 34 slices, 3x3x3 mm, TR: 2200 ms). Data were analysed
in SPM. 1st level: 10 primary covariance components were used as regressors in one GLM/session. 2nd level: The first six components entered into
a factorial model treating sessions as random effects. Main result (P<0.05,
FWE-corrected): A striking left lateralized pattern with two foci: Inferior
frontal and posterior temporal cortex. This serves as proof of concept that
monitoring linguistic covariance is an important part of language and
that this may be studied using fMRI.
4University

B82
HOW FAST CAN WE TELL DUCK FROM MUD: AN ERP
INVESTIGATION OF CATEGORY DECISION Xin Zheng1, Sidney
Segalowitz1; 1Brock University — In a previous ERP study (Segalowitz &
Zheng, 2008), we found evidence in the N1 component suggesting early
lexical access at 160 ms, P1 enhancement in semantic priming, and that
individual differences in task performance correlated with the P1 sensitivity to semantic task manipulation. In the current study using a different paradigm, these effects were further tested. Participants (n=12)
performed a living/nonliving category decision, in which words were
visually presented, and participants pressed corresponding buttons. Half
of the stimuli in both categories were ’new’, as they were not previously
seen in the study. In contrast, the other half of the stimuli were ’old’ and
had been used earlier in another task (a semantic priming task with
words presented in pairs). Furthermore, these repeated stimuli could
have been previously used either as a ’prime’ or as a ’target’. Between 400
- 550 ms, there was a main effect for category in the N400: words of nonliving categories (e.g., mud) had a larger N400 than words of living categories (e.g., duck). The N400 was also affected by ’repetition’. It was
smaller for words used as ’targets’ than for words that were either ’new’
or used as ’primes’, while the N400 between the latter two were not different. In addition, the earliest category differentiation appeared as early
as 160 ms in N1 component (trend, p = .08): nonliving items had larger
N1 than living items. For P1, no main effects or interaction were found.
B83
ERP EVIDENCE FOR MODAL SUBORDINATION IN SPOKEN
SENTENCES Veena D. Dwivedi1, Natalie A. Phillips2, Shari Baum3, John
E. Drury3, Karsten Steinhauer3; 1Brock University, 2Concordia University,
3
McGill University — We used event-related brain potentials (ERPs) in an
auditory study to examine the nature of anaphoric resolution in 2-sentence discourses. The first Context sentence was either Hypothetical (S1)
or Factual (Control condition S1'). The subsequent continuation sentence
either included (S2a) or excluded (S2b) a modal auxiliary (e.g.,
must,should) and contained a pronoun. Thus, either it was a Modal or a
Non-modal sentence. S1: John is considering writing a novel. S1': John is
reading a novel. S2a: It might end quite abruptly. S2b: It ends quite
abruptly. The Modal sentence (S2a) is a natural continuation of the Hypothetical context (S1), but is also compatible with Control context S1'. In
contrast, the Non-modal sentence (S2b) does not follow naturally from
S1, since a novel does not exist yet, rendering the discourse anomalous.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

79

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

No such anomaly results when combining the factual context S1' with the
non-modal continuation sentence S2b. In terms of ERP patterns, we predicted that there would be no empirical difference between Modal continuation sentences that followed Hypothetical vs. Control contexts. In
contrast, continuation sentences that were Non-modal should differ,
depending on the previous context, where the Control context is felicitous but the Hypothetical context results in anomaly. Results showed that
waveforms for Non-modal sentences in anomalous Hypothetical contexts
elicited a positive-going deflection that reliably differed from Control
contexts, whereas no such context-dependent difference emerged for
Modal sentences. The P600-like effect replicated and extended our previous findings from a reading study -- lending ecological validity to our
previous claims.
B84
HOW INPUT MODALITY AND ACTION PROPERTIES AFFECT
SEMANTIC PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FOR GRADED SEMANTIC
AND SOMATOTOPIC REPRESENTATIONS Carrie
Esopenko1,
Cummine Jacqueline1, Sarty Gord1, Borowsky Ron1; 1University of
Saskatchewan — We examined the semantic processing of objects presented in picture and word format, in order to evaluate three models of
semantic representation: an amodal semantic system (Caramazza et al.,
1990), multiple semantic systems (Shallice, 1988), and a hybrid graded
semantics model (Plaut, 2002). Previous neuroimaging research has supported the notion of a hybrid graded semantics model by showing both
unique and shared regions of activation during the semantic processing
of picture and word stimuli (Borowsky et al., 2005; Vandenberghe, Price,
Wise, Josephs, & Frackowiak, 1996). Other neuroimaging research has
shown a somatotopic-semantic organization in the premotor cortex during the processing of action-related language (Esopenko, et al., 2008;
Hauk, et al., 2004; Tettamanti et al., 2005). We used an event-related fMRI
paradigm to examine both the effect of input modality and action-properties within-participants using both a naming task and a semantic categorization task (SCT; i.e., is the object used by arm or leg?). Both tasks
showed shared and unique areas of activation as a function of input
modality and action-properties. Moreover, the premotor cortex was
found to be organized somatotopically independent of input modality.
This all-within participant’s experiment further supports the graded
semantics model and the somatotopic-semantic organization of the premotor cortex.
B85
REDUNDANCY EVALUATION VS. SEMANTIC COMPETITION:
AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF PRONOUN-DROP IN TURKISH
Sukru B. Demiral1, Matthias Schlesewsky2, Ina Bornkessel-Schlesewsky1;
1
Independent Junior Research Group Neurotypology, Max Planck Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2English and
Linguistics, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany — Many languages allow for sentence participants to be omitted from an utterance. In
Turkish, for example, subjects are omitted in approximately 70% of transitive sentences. Subject-drop is particularly pervasive with 1st- and 2ndperson-subjects, since these are also marked on the verb. How does the
human language comprehension system deal with this ’covert’ information? Is the avoidance of redundancy most important, hence favoring
pronoun-drop? Alternatively, does the overt realization of subject pronouns reduce processing complexity as induced by the construction of
the null-subject? These hypotheses were contrasted in an ERP study,
which compared 1st-person-Pronoun-Object-Verb (POV) to Object-Verb
(OV) sentences in Turkish. Objects were marked with accusative case and
were either animate or inanimate. Animacy was manipulated in order to
examine the semantic competition for subjecthood; animate arguments
are highly prominent and may compete for the subject position, especially when the subject is constructed on the verb. This may induce
semantic processing cost reflecting as N400. ERP measures at the verb
revealed an N400 for all conditions in comparison to the inanimate OV
condition. Furthermore, the inanimate POV condition engendered a P600

80

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

in comparison to all other conditions. These findings suggest that the
N400 effect appears to reflect both competition and the existence of the
redundant pronoun. By contrast, the evaluation of the redundancy of the
pronoun depended on the degree of competition: A P600 effect was
engendered only when semantic competition was low. Redundancy evaluation was blocked when the overt-pronoun served to prevent competition, leading to an attenuated P600.
B86
NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF CONCRETE AND ABSTRACT
CONCEPTS Jing Wang1, Julie A. Conder1, Svetlana V. Shinkareva1;
1University of South Carolina — Many studies have attempted to identify
the brain regions that can be associated with representation of abstract
concepts. However, diversity among brain regions previously identified
as involved in this process has resulted in controversy. This is perhaps
due in part to the wide variety of tasks used to assess abstract concept
representation. In the current study, we used event-related functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and a similarity judgment task to
identify brain regions associated with representation of abstract and concrete concepts. While being scanned, participants were required to view
word triplets consisting of three highly-related concepts. Stimulus words
were selected from abstract and concrete categories. The abstract condition included words related to emotion or cognition, whereas the words
in the concrete condition were related to tools or dwellings. In the similarity judgment task, participants were required to decide which word of
two was most similar to a third word, thus eliciting semantic meaning for
the concept represented by the word triplet. Results indicated that representation of abstract concepts is associated with increased activation in
several right hemisphere regions including superior frontal gyrus, middle temporal gyrus, and cerebellum. These results do not support recent
findings suggesting that left frontal and temporal regions play a larger
role in abstract concept representation.
B87
CROSS-LANGUAGE PRIMING EFFECTS: EVIDENCE FROM RTS
AND ERPS Sofie Schoonbaert1, Phillip J. Holcomb2, Robert J. Hartsuiker1;
1
Ghent University, Belgium, 2Tufts University, MA — Our main goal was to
further explore lexico-semantic organisation in a second language, using
a translation priming paradigm. In the present study English-French
bilinguals performed a lexical decision task while reaction times (RTs)
and event related potentials (ERPs) were measured to L2 targets, preceded by non-cognate L1 translation primes versus L1 unrelated primes
(Experiment 1a), and vice versa (Experiment 1b). Significant masked
translation priming was observed, indicated by faster RTs and a
decreased N400 for translation pairs as opposed to unrelated pairs, both
from L1 to L2 (1a) and from L2 to L1 (1b), the latter effect being weaker
(RTs) and less longer lasting (RTs, ERPs). The obtained N400-priming
effects are taken as an indication of semantic involvement during priming in both directions, and therefore suggest strong lexico-semantic connections for L2 (as well as for L1). This can be interpreted as evidence
against the Revised Hierarchical model (Kroll & Stewart, 1994), assuming
only weak links from L2 to concepts. We provided evidence for the temporal delay assumption of the BIA+ model (Dijkstra & Van Heuven,
2002) by showing that effects to L2-targets occured later compared to L1target effects. --- References: Kroll, J. F., & Stewart, E. (1994). Journal of
Memory and Language, 33, 149-174. Dijkstra, T., & Van Heuven, W.
(2002). Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 5, 175-197.
B88
N400-LIKE EFFECTS EVOKED BY SINGLE PAIRS OF WORDS
Louis Renoult1,3, J. Bruno Debruille1,2; 1Douglas Mental Health University
Institute, Montréal, Québec, Canada, 2McGill University, Montréal,
Psychiatry, Québec, Canada, 3McGill University, Montréal, Neurology and
Neurosurgery, Québec, Canada — The N400 event-related potential (ERP)
is an electrophysiological index of semantic processing. A number of
studies have shown that N400 effects could be markedly reduced or suppressed by the inclusion of one or several stimulus repetitions. Neverthe-

Poster Session B

less, we have recently shown that significant N400-like effects of semantic
matching and category could be obtained with massively repeated target
words in a prime-target semantic categorization task (Debruille &
Renoult, in press). The present study aimed at extending these findings to
the study of single pairs of words. A similar primed semantic categorization task was used. The prime could be one of two category words and
the target one of two exemplar words. To control for physical matching,
letter case was manipulated so that both the meaning (semantic matching) and case (physical matching) of target words could be compared to
that of prime words. The effect of task instruction was also evaluated by
contrasting a bloc of trials where subjects had to focus on meaning
(semantic instruction) and one where they had to focus on case (physical
instruction). Results showed that the N400-like ERP was modulated by
semantic matching and semantic category, but not by physical matching.
The effect of semantic matching was observed only with the semantic
instruction, while the effect of category was not modulated by task
instruction. These results show that massive repetition could allow, at
least in explicit semantic tasks, a drastic simplification of N400 protocols
and permit the study of specific categories or individual differences
B89
INFLUENCE OF ANIMACY AND THEMATIC ROLE TYPE ON
INTERPRETATION OF DIRECT OBJECT ARGUMENTS IN ACTIVE
ENGLISH SENTENCES Martin Paczynski1, Gina Kuperberg1,2, Evan
Ruppell1; 1Tufts University, 2Massachusetts General Hospital — In
two
experiments we explored the neural processing associated with the processing of Direct Objects, using Event Related Potentials (ERPs). In experiment one we compared Direct Object noun phrases (NPs) that were
strongly prototypical Patients (inanimate) with weakly prototypical
Patients (animate). The NPs were presented within a sentence context following verbs selecting for animate (e.g. frisk) or inanimate (e.g. reopen)
Direct Object. In normal sentences, a small, transient N400 effect was
found for weakly prototypical animate NPs relative to inanimates. In sentences with animacy violations (e.g. frisked the *gate/reopened the *passenger), anomalous NPs evoked a biphasic N400-P600 effect relative to
their normal counterparts, that was larger for anomalous inanimate NPs
at frontal sites. In experiment two, animacy selecting Agent-Patient verbs
(e.g. frisk) were compared with Causer-Experiencer (e.g. please) verbs,
thus contrasting a prototypical Direct Object role (Patient) with an atypical role (Experiencer). In normal sentences, Experiencer NPs evoked a
large, early, frontal N400 effect compared to Patient NPs, indicating that
atypical roles rapidly incur greater integration processing costs. Animacy
violations (e.g. frisked the *gate/pleased the *gate) evoked a biphasic
N400-P600 which was not modulated by Thematic Role type. Taken
together, the two experiments suggest that how prototypical an NP is relative to its Thematic Role has modest influence on semantic integration
costs, while the level of prototypicality of a Thematic Role markedly
impacts early semantic processing. Additionally, these experiments show
that the semantic P600 is not modulated by animacy per se nor Thematic
Role type.
B90
THE TIES THAT BIND THE LEXICON: LEXICAL ASSOCIATIVE
PROCESSES IN THE CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES Padmapriya
Kandhadai1, Kara Federmeier1,2; 1University of Illinois, 2Beckman Institute for
Advanced Science and Technology — This study investigated lexical associative processes in the cerebral hemispheres using the visual half-field
technique in conjunction with event-related potentials (ERPs). Participants read pairs of words for comprehension and were told to try to
remember the pairs for a later cued recall task. Word pairs were asymmetrically associated (e.g., butcher-meat), allowing a manipulation of
associative strength while keeping semantic content relatively constant.
In the forward direction (forward pairs), there was a strong association
from prime to target and the target was the primary associate of the
prime. However, when these pairs were presented in the backward direction (backward pairs), there was a weak association from prime to target.

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

For both hemispheres, ERPs to lateralized targets revealed that N400
amplitudes were graded, smallest to forward pairs and largest to unrelated pairs. This suggests that both hemispheres are sensitive to lexical
associative strength. However, there was a P2 enhancement for forward
pairs limited to the left hemisphere (LH), indicating that only the LH uses
context information to predict upcoming words when there is a strong
association from prime to target. Further, enhancement of the late positive complex to the backward targets in the LH suggests that the LH
additionally employed controlled processes to reshape and amplify the
weak association from prime to target. These results suggest that even
though both hemispheres are sensitive to lexical association, they engage
in complementary processes to appreciate such associative relationships.
B91
NOMINAL AND PREDICATE METAPHOR PROCESSING IN
PARTICIPANTS WITH LEFT AND RIGHT HEMISPHERE
LESIONS Gwen L. Schmidt1, Eileen Cardillo1, Alexander Kranjec1, Anjan
Chatterjee1; 1University of Pennsylvania — The traditional view that people with right hemisphere (RH) lesions have difficulty understanding figurative language such as metaphors is currently under fire. Recent
imaging work has provided conflicting results which may be due to various factors including poor stimulus control. Furthermore, metaphor theory and research typically only consider nominal metaphors (’My job is a
jail’). However, verbs are frequently used metaphorically in predicate
metaphors (’He swept the woman off her feet’). To address these potentially critical factors, we developed a closely-matched set of nominal metaphors, predicate metaphors, and literal sentences with accompanying
comprehension questions for testing with participants with strokes
(n=32). While participants with LH lesions showed similar performance
across conditions, participants with RH lesions were less accurate on
metaphors than literal sentences, an effect driven by performance in the
predicate metaphors. The residuals from a regression of predicate metaphors on matched literal sentences did not differ between the two
groups, while the residuals from a regression of literal sentences on predicate metaphors were significantly different between the groups. Thus it
was the differences in literal sentence processing between the groups that
drove the effect, and participants with LH lesions had higher scores for
metaphors than literal sentences. One possible explanation is that they
derive a benefit from an intact right hemisphere which facilitates their
processing of metaphors more than literal sentences.
B92
BRAIN MECHANISM OF CHINESE IDIOM COMPREHENSION:
EVIDENCE FROM A FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE
IMAGING STUDY Jie Yang1, Hua Shu1; 1State Key Laboratory of
Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing,
China — Idiom processing has evoked interesting empirical researches
and led to theoretical debates regarding the role of the left versus the
right hemisphere in the processing of idioms. The current study investigated the brain mechanism of Chinese idiom to identify the neural substrates of idiom processing. During the experiment, participants judged
whether there was an italic character in each opaque idiom, transparent
idiom, or regular phrase. Group analysis and conjunction analysis
showed idioms activated bilateral brain regions, while phrases only activated left regions. ROI analysis showed in the left inferior frontal gyrus
the sum signal intensity of opaque idioms was significantly greater than
that of transparent idioms and regular phrases, but there was no significant difference between the later two conditions. In the right inferior
frontal gyrus, there was clearly a graded effect of the sum signal intensity
across opaque idioms, transparent idioms, and phrases, suggesting that
this region may be particularly involved in idiom processing. Besides, in
left middle temporal gyrus phrases showed significant greater signal
intensity than idioms. In sum, the results showed bilateral neural substrates are involved in idiom processing. The left regions might be
responsible for general lexical retrieval and semantic integration, while
the right regions may play the more important role. This role might be

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

81

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

due to the involvement of the right inferior frontal gyrus in the retrieval
of long-term, episodic memory, given that the Chinese opaque idioms
require special efforts in organizing and completing a knowledge-based
story comprehension.
B93
SEMANTIC INTERFERENCE IN THE POSTCUE NAMING
PARADIGM IS A POSTLEXICAL EFFECT: EVIDENCE FROM
FMRI Julia Hocking1, Katie McMahon1, Greig` de Zubicaray1; 1fMRI Lab,
Centre for Magnetic Resonance, University of Queensland — In the postcue
naming paradigm, participants are shown pictures of two objects and are
cued to name one (the target) following their presentation. When the two
objects are categorically related, naming latencies are slower compared to
unrelated objects. Three different mechanisms have been proposed to
account for this effect occurring at pre-lexical, lexical and post-lexical levels of processing. We tested these accounts using event-related functional
magnetic resonance imaging with a sparse design at 4 Tesla. Over 50 trials, participants were required to view two superimposed line drawings
of real objects (one red, one green). A subsequently presented selection
cue - the postcue (a red or green dot) - then indicated which item was to
be named. Half the superimposed pairs were categorically related. Following standardized data preprocessing stages in SPM5, we computed
the effect of naming in related compared to unrelated trials. At the second, random effects level, naming in the context of related compared to
unrelated distractors increased activation in two regions of frontal cortex.
The first was in the left pars triangularis of the inferior frontal gyrus - a
region thought to be involved in mediating selection among competing
alternatives in picture naming tasks. A second cluster was observed in a
medial superior frontal gyrus region associated with task switching and
response selection. Together, these results indicate that semantic interference during naming in the postcue paradigm occurs at a late stage in the
object naming system, subsequent to lexical selection.
B94
AUDITORY CONTEXT EFFECTS IN PICTURE NAMING
INVESTIGATED WITH EVENT RELATED FMRI Greig de Zubicaray1,
Katie McMahon1; 1fMRI Lab, Centre for Magnetic Resonance, University of
Queensland — Naming an object entails a number of processing stages,
including retrieval of a target lexical concept and encoding of its phonological word form. We investigated these stages using the picture-word
interference task in a sparse design event-related fMRI experiment. Participants named target pictures in the presence of auditorily presented
semantically, phonologically or unrelated distractor words, or in isolation. As expected, auditory context effects resulted in BOLD signal
changes in left hemisphere regions associated with lexical conceptual and
phonological processing, including the mid to posterior lateral temporal
cortex. However, contrary to predictions, these BOLD responses manifested as signal reductions for all distractor conditions compared to naming alone. Compared to unrelated words, phonologically related
distractors showed further signal reductions in these regions, while only
the pars orbitalis of the left inferior frontal cortex showed a selective
reduction in response in the semantic condition. We interpret these findings as indicating the word forms of lexical competitors are phonologically encoded, and that competition during lexical selection is reduced by
phonologically related distractors due to initial word form features overlapping with those of the target. As the extended nature of auditory presentation requires a large portion of a word to be presented before its
meaning is accessed, we attribute the BOLD signal changes observed for
semantically related words to mechanisms engaged after target name
selection has occurred. In addition, we argue that the signal decreases
observed could only be accommodated by production models incorporating lateral inhibition to suppress the activity of competitors.
B95
A PARAMETRIC FMRI STUDY OF QUANTIFIER TYPES: MANY,
MOST, AND MORE-THAN-HALF Yosef Grodzinsky1, Stefan Heim2,3,4,
Sarah Hautvast5, Simon B. Eickhoff2,3,4, Katrin Amunts2,3,4; 1McGill

82

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

University, Linguistics, 2INB3-Medicine, Research Centre Jülich, 3Aachen
University, Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical Faculty, JARA, RWTH,
4Aachen University, Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical Faculty, RWTH, 5
Aachen University, Neurolinguistics, Medical Faculty, RWTH — Quantifiers
are relational terms whose role in semantic composition is critical. They
are classified into first-order (some, many) or higher-order quantifiers
(most, more-than-half). These types recruit different computational
resources: the former require one calculation of set relations (Some As are
Bs=A is a subset of B); the latter require additional calculations (Most As
are Bs= the intersection between A and B is greater than A-B). First- and
higher-order quantifiers recruit distinct brain regions (Troiani et al. 2008;
McMillan et al. 2005). We used a novel fMRI design with two objectives
in mind: (1) to explore this distinction via a parametric design varying the
processing demands within each quantifier condition; (2) to investigate
finer distinctions within higher-order quantifiers (most vs. more-thanhalf) that are treated equally in Generalized Quantifier Theory, although
they might be computed differently (Hackl 2008). Participants heard sentences like most circles are blue or more-than-half of the circles are yellow
and then saw scenes in which task difficulty was systematically manipulated by varying the proportion of blue and yellow circles. They decided
whether the scene matched the sentence. RTs and BOLD response measures were regressed upon the parametric modulation of the proportion
of blue/yellow circles. We found RT and BOLD differences for these
regressors for first- vs. higher-order quantifiers, and, most importantly,
for most vs. more-than-half. Thus, we may have hints for a semantic
brain map. This novel paradigm may be useful to elucidate deficits in
patients with either linguistic (e.g. primary-progressive aphasia) or formal thought disorders (e.g. schizophrenia).
B96
COMMUNICATIVE STYLE OF A SPEAKER AFFECTS LANGUAGE
COMPREHENSION: AN ERP STUDY Thomas Gunter1, Stefanie Regel1,
Seana Coulson2; 1Max-Planck-Institute for Human and Cognitive Brain
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2University of California, San Diego — Contextual and pragmatic knowledge has been shown to influence the interpretation of sentences within discourses. Specifically, this information gains
importance when sentences have a figurative, e.g. ironic meaning which
has to be derived by means of contextual knowledge. The knowledge
about speakers, for example, indirectly adds extra-linguistic information
that probably facilitates the interpretation of sentences having a non-literal meaning. In an ERP experiment with two sessions, we investigated
when and how such pragmatic knowledge can affect the construction of
sentence meanings. In the first session the pragmatic knowledge of two
particular speakers was established. One speaker was characterized as
being highly ironic and making very frequently ironic statements,
whereas the other appeared to be low ironic saying mainly literal sentences. In session 2, the influence of this knowledge was explored when
the use of irony was balanced for both speakers. Participants were presented with discourses ending in an ironic or literal sentence expressed
either by the high or low ironic speaker. ERPs in session 2 showed a clear
interaction of irony and speaker on the P2. Whenever the communicative
style of a speaker was congruent with a particular statement, P2 was
larger compared to when it was not. Interestingly enough, only for the
high ironic speaker a LPC was elicited by ironic statements. These results
suggest that pragmatic knowledge about speakers is taken into account
when comprehending (ironic) sentences.
B97
THE MODULATION OF SEMANTIC PRIMING BY DISCOURSE
AND
SENTENCE
CONTEXTS
DURING
SPEECH
COMPREHENSION: AN ERP STUDY Megan Boudewyn1, Christine
Camblin2, Jon Venezia3, Lara Polse1, Peter Gordon4, Tamara Swaab1; 1 UC
Davis, Psychology and Center for Mind and Brain, 2CSU, Division of Social,
Behavioral and Global Studies, Monterey Bay, 3UC Irvine, Cognitive Sciences,
4UNC, Psychology, Chapel Hill — This study examined the effects of
semantic priming in discourse and sentence level contexts in both the

Poster Session B

visual and auditory modalities. Specifically, highly associated words (e.g.
tables and chairs) and unassociated words were embedded within auditory three-sentence passages (Experiment 1) and in auditory, visual, and
compressed, flat-prosody single-sentence contexts (Experiments 2, 3 & 4).
In Experiment 1, the discourse was either congruent or incongruent with
the final word in the third sentence (which was either associated or unassociated). ERP results for Experiment 1 show early main effects of discourse congruence and delayed traces of lexical association effects. The
same pattern of results was found in auditory sentential contexts (Experiment 2), yet classic N400 effects of lexical priming were intact when the
same stimuli were presented as text (Experiment 3). In order to establish
whether properties unique to spoken language were leading to speech
having a ’context-advantage’ over text, we removed prosodic cues as well
as compressed the naturally spoken stimuli from Experiment 2 (Experiment 4). However, as in Experiment 2, this yielded a null N400 effect of
semantic priming. The pattern of results across all four experiments
shows strong N400 evidence for the robust modulation of semantic priming in spoken (more than written) three-sentence discourse contexts and
in single sentences. This indicates that although the greater effect of context on semantic priming in speech cannot be attributed to prosodic cues
alone, the presence of auditory discourse and even sentential context may
still be enough to modulate word-level effects like priming.
B98
FMRI-ADAPTATION EVIDENCE OF OVERLAPPING NEURAL
REPRESENTATIONS FOR OBJECTS RELATED IN FUNCTION OR
MANIPULATION Eiling Yee1, Daniel Drucker1, Sharon L. ThompsonSchill1; 1University of Pennsylvania — According to sensorimotor-based
theories of semantic memory, different aspects of an object's meaning are
stored in physically distal networks, according to the modality in which
the information was acquired. We used fMRI adaptation to test this
hypothesis, measuring brain activation as participants read pairs of
words, on which they later made a semantic judgment. Pairs shared:
shape (marble - grape), function (flashlight - lantern), both (pencil - pen),
neither (saucer - needle), or were identical (drill - drill). We observed
adaptation for pairs similar in both function and shape in left precentral
cortex (premotor cortex). Further, we found that (across all pairs) degree
of manipulation similarity was correlated with the degree of adaptation
in left premotor cortex and in left intraparietal sulcus (involved in guiding actions). This suggests that manipulation information about concepts
is encoded in brain regions involved in performing or guiding actions.
There were also three regions in which function (but not manipulation)
similarity was correlated with degree of adaptation: two in the left temporal lobe (left medial temporal lobe, left middle temporal gyrus) which
has been hypothesized to play a role in mutimodal integration, and the
left superior frontal gyrus. Unexpectedly, we also found that objects similar in shape showed increased activation (rather than adaptation) in left
premotor cortex and left intraparietal sulcus. Overall, we found evidence
(in the form of adaptation) that objects that share semantic features have
overlapping representations, as well as support (due to the particular
regions of overlap) for both sensorimotor and amodal representations.
B99
AN
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATION
OF
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THE USE OF SENTENTIAL
CONTEXT Edward W. Wlotko1, Kara D. Federmeier1,2,3, Marta Kutas4,5;
1
University of Illinois, Psychology, 2University of Illinois, Neuroscience
Program, 3Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology,
4University of California, Cognitive Science, San Diego, 5University of
California, Neurosciences, San Diego — Comprehenders differ on a number of dimensions relating to the processes involved in constructing message-level meaning for spoken or written discourse in realtime. In several
experiments using similar materials, we investigated how some aspects
of verbal ability and/or verbal memory may affect the ease or efficiency
of message-level processing. We focused on the sentence level by examining event-related brain potential (ERP) responses to words that com-

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

pleted sentence frames varying in level of constraint. Consistent with
prior research, we found that reading span predicted the size of the basic
sentence-level expectancy effect on the N400 component of the ERP. We
also found that scores on the Magazine Recognition Questionnaire, a
measure of exposure to print, predicted the size of a recently-observed
late frontal positivity that is larger for unexpected endings in strongly
constraining sentence contexts compared to unexpected endings in
weakly constraining contexts. We previously linked this positivity to a
semantic revision process, needed when a plausible but unexpected word
must be integrated into a constraining sentential context that strongly
suggests a different word. These results suggest that reading experience
may impact the use of predictive contexts in online language comprehension, particularly during reading.
B100
CALLOSAL QUALITY MEDIATES THE BILATERAL PROCESSING
ADVANTAGE Simon Davis1,2, Jamaur Bronner2, Norbou Buchler1,2,
Roberto Cabeza1,2; 1Duke University, Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, 2Duke
University, Psychology and Neuroscience — A number of studies have
shown the benefit of interhemispheric processing when tasks become
increasingly difficult. This bilateral processing advantage (BPA) occurs in
older adults at lower levels of matching demands than in younger adults;
this result is consistent with the functional compensation account because
it suggests that older adults show the benefits of bilateral processing at
levels of task difficulty for which a single hemisphere is largely sufficient
in younger adults. Our study sought to use functional MRI and diffusion
tensor imaging (DTI) to link age effects on cross-hemispheric matching to
the quality of the bilateral processing network in older adults. In the perceptual condition participants matched faces that differed in perceptual
similarity, whereas in the semantic condition they matched word pairs
that differed in semantic relatedness. Consistent with the functional compensation view, BPA in the semantic and perceptual conditions increased
with task difficulty; this pattern was even more pronounced in older
adults. A parametric analysis of fMRI data weighted by task difficulty
indicated that lateral temporal and fusiform activity tracked task difficulty in semantic and perceptual conditions, respectively, while anterior
frontal regions tracked task difficulty in both tasks. Consistent with these
fMRI results, DTI data indicated that the quality of callosal fibers connecting these anterior frontal regions showed positive relationship with
the BPA. Taken together, these results support the view that the hemispheres cooperate during difficult bilateral tasks and that this effect generalizes to complex semantic and perceptual tasks not previously
investigated with this paradigm.
B101
THE EFFECT OF LEXICAL AMBIGUITY ON SPOKEN WORD
RECOGNITION USING HOMOGRAPHIC AND HETEROGRAPHIC
HOMOPHONES Jack Rogers1, William Marslen-Wilson, Matthew Davis;
1
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK — Faster visual
lexical decisions for semantically ambiguous words versus unambiguous
controls have been interpreted as evidence for facilitatory feedback from
multiple semantic representations (Rubenstein et al., 1970). Yet, more
recent experiments have suggested two opposite effects of lexical ambiguity: polysemous words (twist) with multiple related senses show an
ambiguity advantage whereas homographic homophones with multiple
unrelated meanings (bark) delay word recognition due to semantic competition (Rodd et al., 2002). However, the homophony/polysemy distinction is subjective and further data is valuable. Assessing responses to
spoken words allows us to use homographic (bark) as well as heterographic (knight/night) homophones for which two separate representations exist. In both an auditory lexical decision task and semantic
categorisation task using 72 matched homographic homophones, heterographic homophones and single-meaning controls subjects show significantly slowed response times for both groups of ambiguous words
versus controls. No significant difference between the homographic and
heterographic homophones suggests that the ambiguity disadvantage is

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

83

Sunday, March 22, 8:00 - 10:00 am

largely due to semantic not orthographic competition. This ambiguity
disadvantage is consistent with neural network accounts of word recognition (Rodd et al., 2004); ambiguous spoken words activate multiple
semantic representations, which compete during identification. Similarly,
neural responses to sentences containing multiple ambiguous words produces increased signal in frontal and temporal regions implicated in comprehending and selecting contextually appropriate word meanings
(Rodd et al., 2005). We propose that the neural mechanisms that enable
the selection of appropriate semantic attributes of ambiguous words
within a sentence also allow semantic information to be selected and integrated for single ambiguous words.
B102
WHAT CONSTITUTES A RELEVANT CONTEXT FOR
PROCESSING NEGATION? AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL
STUDY Lea Hald1, Julie-Ann Marshall1, Alan Garnham2; 1Canterbury
Christ Church University, United Kingdom, 2University of Sussex, United
Kingdom — Several event-related potential (ERP) studies have found
when a sentence includes negation (’A robin is not a TREE/BIRD’) the
amplitude of the N400 is greater for true sentences (’tree’) than for false
sentences (’bird’), (Fischler et al., 1983). However, Nieuwland and Kuperberg (in press) have shown that in a context appropriate for negation,
false words rather than true words elicit a larger N400. This suggests that
the context allows readers to relate the incoming words to the negation
information immediately. The current study explores what aspects of
context are relevant. Our hypothesis is that at least three factors contribute to the immediate processing of negation. First, whether the negated
word is in focus. Secondly, whether the negated word is related to ’the
implied set of likely worlds’ and thirdly, whether the use of negation
adds new information. When all three of these factors are present, a
negated word will not elicit a large N400. However, when none of these
factors are present, a negated word will elicit a large N400. In an ERP
study we have tested this prediction by using a five-sentence discourse
context followed by one of five continuations that tease apart the independent but correlated influence of focus, the implied set of likely worlds
and new information. Our preliminary results support our hypothesis,
when all three of these factors are included in a context, the amplitude of
the N400 is smallest compared to when some or all of these factors are
missing from the discourse.
B103
‘BREAKING’ LANGUAGE: A PARADIGM THAT DISSOCIATES
SEMANTIC AND PHONOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS IN LEFT
POSTERIOR TEMPORAL AND PARIETAL BRAIN REGIONS
Miranka Wirth1, Ayse At1, Melanie Fisler1, Andrea Federspiel1, Helge Horn1,
Thomas Dierks1; 1University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland — Previous
functional Magnet-Resonance-Imaging (fMRI) findings suggest a dissociation
of language (i.e., phonologic and semantic) functions in posterior temporal and parietal brain areas. However, this assumption is mostly derived
from analyses that compare activations patterns across different stimuli
and subjects groups. In this study we test a simple block-design paradigm that aims to localise language functions connected to posterior
brain areas in group and single subject analyses by demanding semantic
and phonological judgements to the same word-stimuli. The subjects
judged words according to semantic (living?, yes/no) and phonological
(2 syllables, yes/no) features via button press. Preliminary data will be
presented.
B104
FINDING AN OPTIMAL TASK FOR TESTING LANGUAGE
DEFICITS IN ATTENTION-DEFICIT/HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER
CHILDREN Jennifer Edens1, Fan-pei Gloria Yang1, Daniel Krawczyk1, 2;
1Center for Brain Health, University of Texas at Dallas, 2University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Psychiatry, Dallas, Texas — Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) has been studied in areas of language abilities in general. Clear lines have not been drawn on whether
ADHD language deficits have to do with vocabulary competence, seman-

84

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

tic knowledge or inference ability. It is beneficial to design a language
task that can assess performance on different types of linguistic stimuli to
identify which cognitive factors are of most concern. The goal of our proposed study was to investigate correlations between vocabulary competence/inference ability and figurative language comprehension using
computerized presentation of novel and conventional metaphors and literal sentences. Conventionalized sentences (metaphor and literal) only
test semantic knowledge whereas novel metaphors test inference ability.
In this study the participants were instructed to rate whether the displayed sentence held a positive or negative meaning by pressing the corresponding key. A written task asked for their interpretation of the
sentences. Our results indicated that these children performed significantly better in both the conventional metaphors and the literal sentences
relative to the novel metaphor condition. Overall they scored equally
well on comprehension of conventional and literal sentences. Compared
with normal controls they performed significantly worse in all categories.
This study can provide insights for research on ADHD children’s higher
cognitive functions such as reasoning and language processing. This can
help to assess whether conventional neuropsychological measures are
appropriate for evaluation and diagnosis. These measures have limitations that our computerized tasks could supplement by allowing better
control over familiarity of stimuli and identification of specific cognitive
deficits in relation to language comprehension.
B105
REAL WORD PICTURE SET NORMED FOR NAME AND STEM
COMPLETION Aaron T. Karst1, Eric S. Clapham1, C. Mark Wessinger1,2,3;
1University of Nevada, Reno, 2Charteroak State College, 3Northcentral
University — Experimental investigations utilizing picture stimuli many
times suffer from a lack of validity because the picture set being
employed was never normed. To avoid this problem many individuals
either norm pictures themselves or will use a normed picture set available to the public. Stimuli for one such normed set available for public
use consists of pictures of black and white line drawings of objects and
animals. These pictures are standardized for name and image agreement,
which increases the validity of the stimuli and thus any experiment using
the stimuli. Though this picture set provides for a great deal of validity
for experimental use, the pictures do not contain many real world characteristics such as color, depth or texture. This confound raises the question
of whether these pictures are processed in the same manner as one would
process the real world, or as efficiently. Attempting to correct for this
confound our lab has standardized a variety of real world, full color pictures for name and image agreement. Consequently, this picture set is
being standardized in other areas. Among the various subgroups (e.g.
furniture) represented within this picture set, it also contains an equal
animate/inanimate grouping. Furthermore, all picture names with five
or more letters have been normed for completion percentage. This
involved adding additional letters to each root forming the first word
that came to mind. Such information will prove useful in many experimental studies investigating object and semantic processing.

Poster Session C
Attentional processes: Visual
C1
EARLY ATTENTIONAL PROCESSES AS PREDICTORS OF
RESPONSE CONFLICT AND ERROR COMMISSION John R. Fedota1,
Craig G. McDonald1, Raja Parasuraman1; 1George Mason University — Are
modulations in early attentional ERP components predictive of modulations in later decision related components and the commission of errors?
In the present study we evaluate the relationship between early and late
stimulus-related ERP components. Recent evidence suggests that the N2
component indexes response conflict in go/no-go tasks. The ERN, an
index of error commission, is also is elicited in go/no-go tasks. If early
attentional processes inform later conflict and error processes, changes in
N1 amplitude should be reflected in changes in N2 and ERN following
response conflict and error commission respectively. Subjects completed a
visual go/no go task with a difficult discrimination between targets and
non-targets. Blocked task conditions were 80% target-20% non-target (go/
no go) or 20% target-80% non-target (oddball). 64 channel EEG was
recorded. Behavioral data show subjects had difficulty making the target/
non-target discrimination in both the 20/80 and 80/20 target/non-target
conditions. Thus, there were adequate numbers of error trials to enable
meaningful comparison of correct and error trial ERP waveforms. ERP
results showed that reduced N1 amplitude was predictive of error commission in both tasks and with the ERN associated with the go/no go task.
Conversely, greater N1 amplitude was associated with correct performance in both tasks and greater pre-response N2 amplitude for the go/no
go task. While previous studies have examined conflict and error processing in relation to N2 and response-ERN, our results tie the manipulation of
these components directly to the attentional modulation of the earlier N1
component.
C2
INTEGRATING FEATURES ACROSS AND WITHIN CORTICAL
STREAMS IN VISUAL SEARCH: DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF
AGING AND ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE William C. Heindel1, Elena K.
Festa1, Samantha Set1, Lindsay A. Miller2, Jennifer D. Davis3, Brian R. Ott2;
1Brown University, Psychology, 2Brown University, Clinical Neurosciences,
3Brown University, Psychiatry and Human Behavior — The selective disruption of corticortical connections in Alzheimer's disease (AD) should lead to
a specific deficit in effectively integrating stimulus features processed
within distinct cortical areas. To examine this issue, two visual search tasks
identical in their selective attention demands but differing in the demands
placed on cross-cortical interactions were developed: Subjects were
required to integrate a target’s motion with either its luminance contrast
(black or white) or its isoluminant color (red or green). Given that luminance and motion information are both processed within the same dorsal
cortical stream whereas color identity information is processed within the
ventral cortical stream, the motion/color integration task places greater
demands on cross-cortical interactions than does the motion/luminance
integration task. As expected, healthy elderly participants performed comparably on the two integration tasks, and displayed proportionately larger
search times with increasing distractor set size compared to healthy young
participants; taken together, these results indicate that aging is associated
with a deficit in selective attention but not sensory integration. AD
patients, in contrast, not only displayed an additional increase in slope relative to the healthy elderly in both tasks (suggesting a further decline in
selective attention), but also showed an additional impairment in the more
demanding cross-cortical binding motion/color task that was independent

of set size. These findings not only provide further confirmation of a specific sensory binding deficit associated with neocortical disconnectivity in
AD, but also provide empirical support for a fundamental distinction
between binding and attentional components of feature integration within
visual search.
C3
OBJECT-BASED ATTENTION IN PATIENTS WITH LEFT AND
RIGHT HEMISPHERE LESIONS Alexandra List1,2, Ayelet Landau1,
Joseph Brooks1, Anastasia Flevaris1, Francesca Fortenbaugh1, Michael Esterman1,
Thomas VanVleet3, Alice Albrecht1, Bryan Alvarez1, Lynn Robertson1,3;
1University of California, Berkeley, 2School of Psychology and Wolfson Centre for
Cognitive Neuroscience, Bangor University, UK, 3Medical Research Service,
Veterans Affairs, Martinez — Since Egly, Driver and Rafal’s (1994) pioneering study of object-based attention, their two-object cueing design has
been widely used to study space- and object-based attentional orienting.
Here, twenty-nine patients with unilateral brain injury (sixteen with RH
injury) performed target detection in a modified version of the two-object
cueing task. By obliquely orienting the two rectangular objects ±45?, we
were able to measure cueing performance separately at midline, in the
contralesional field, and in the ipsilesional field. Cues were 64% predictive
and always appeared in an upper or lower midline location. For targets
appearing at midline locations, RTs were faster at the cued than uncued
locations, as expected. When targets appeared laterally to the right or left
of fixation, performance was modulated by the configuration of the objects
in the display, but in opposite ways on the contralesional and ipsilesional
sides. Reaction times (RTs) on the ipsilesional side were in the predicted
direction: faster for targets in cued objects than uncued objects. Conversely, RTs to contralesional targets were slower in cued objects than
uncued objects. The left and right hemisphere groups did not differ from
each other in this respect. In sum, both patient groups revealed contralesional object-based neglect while demonstrating the opposite, but
expected, object-based facilitation effect in their ipsilesional field. The current findings will be related to previous studies of lateralized attentional
orienting, patients’ performance on bedside tests of space- and objectbased orienting, and to theories of hemispheric asymmetries in attentional
orienting.
C4
ATTENTIONAL CAPTURE BY SIZE DEPENDS ON FEATURESPECIFIC TOP-DOWN TASK SETS: EVIDENCE FROM THE N2PC
COMPONENT Monika Kiss1, Martin Eimer1; 1Birkbeck College London,
UK — The question whether attentional capture by salient but task-irrelevant visual stimuli is determined by top-down task set is still a matter of
debate. A recent study (Eimer & Kiss, 2008, J Cogn Neurosci) used the
N2pc component of the event-related potential to show that spatially uninformative colour singleton cues capture attention only when targets are
defined by their colour but not when they were defined in another dimension (onset or size). Here, we used the N2pc as a marker of attentional capture to investigate the role of feature-specific top-down task sets for the
attentional capture by size singletons. In separate blocks, participants
searched for a pre-defined size target (a small or large bar among mediumsized bars). Circular search displays were preceded by spatially non-predictive circular cue displays that contained either a small or a large item
among medium-sized items. N2pc components and behavioural cueing
effects were observed only when the relative size of singleton cues and targets matched (e.g., for small cues when participants searched for small targets), demonstrating that attentional capture is not triggered by any size
discontinuity, but is determined by feature-specific top-down task sets that

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

85

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

represent relative size. Interestingly, the absence of an item in the cue display triggered behavioural cueing effects and an N2pc both when participants searched for small and for large targets, suggesting that bottom-up
factors can affect attentional capture in such extreme cases of feature discontinuity.
C5
ATTENTIONAL CAPTURE AND AWARENESS Edmund Wascher1,
Christian Beste1; 1Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and
Human Factors — Visual attention might be driven either by intention or
by salient events in the visual field. Models like the "biased competition
model" assume that these two mechanisms interact with each other,
thereby providing the basis for aware representations. Within this framework, a competition of information is assumed to take place in perceptual
and higher prefrontal areas. This process brings incoming information in
relation to each other and selects those (strongest) elements of relevance
that will subsequently propagate to higher cognitive functions. Attentional control is assumed to modulate this process as a kind of processing
filter. Thus, also for intention based selection, the competition mechanism
might serve as the main substructure. Therefore, manipulating the
saliency of irrelevant elements in a display may essentially modulate the
processing of attended information. We run two experiments in which
participants had to press a button to a luminance change. In some trials, a
motion transient of varying strength (implemented by a 90&deg; rotation
of a bar with differing aspect ratios) was presented simultaneously with
the 40cd-lumimance change. Behavioral data showed that the strength of
the task-irrelevant transient modulated the ability of the observer to perceive the luminance transient awarely. Up to 30% errors were committed
with the strongest irrelevant stimulus. EEG-recordings support the
notion that despite the instruction to attend the luminance transient only,
the motion signal captured attention at a first processing step. Intention
based attention obviously has to overcome this initial tendency when
searching for desired information.
C6
THE
NEURAL
CONTROL
MECHANISMS
UNDERLYING
MEMORY-GUIDED ATTENTION Ian C. Gould1, Mark G. Stokes1,
Kathryn Atherton1, Anna Christina Nobre1; 1University of Oxford — The
control mechanisms that guide selective attention are typically examined
in response to explicit attentional cues. In everyday life, however, the
focus of attention is more typically guided according to past experiences
than direct instruction. We therefore developed a novel behavioural paradigm to examine the neural substrate of memory-guided attentional orienting. Participants first learn the location of target stimuli hidden within
naturalistic scenes. After the target locations have been learned, participants then perform an attention-orienting task. Each experimental trial
begins with a cue stimulus, consisting of the memory scene presented
without the target stimulus. A test scene is then presented, with a 50%
probability of a target stimulus being present at the remembered location.
Participants are instructed to use their memories to guide the focus of
attention. In a previous fMRI study (Summerfield et al., 2006, Neuron),
trials involving memory-guided attention were shown to engage activity
in the same dorsal frontoparietal network that is typically associated with
explicitly cued shifts of spatial attention, and in the hippocampus. However, it was not possible to isolate target-related processes from cuerelated processes. In the present study, we tested and verified the roles of
dorsal frontoparietal cortex and hippocampus activity in the neural control of memory-guided attention, by dissociating mnemonic cue-related
activity from target-related activity. These results provide additional
insights into the functional neural architecture of memory-guided attention, broadening the neuroscientific foundations for a more generalised
account of attentional control during real-world behaviour.

86

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

C7
VISUAL REALISM AND EMOTION MODULATE ATTENTIONAL
PROCESSING: EVIDENCE AT THE P3 EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL Bernadette Sibuma1, Karen Froud2,3, John Black2,3; 1State
University of New York at Oswego, 2Columbia University, 3Teachers
College — Emotional content and task relevance have been found to modulate the amplitude of the P3 event-related potential (ERP), however little
is known about the effects of the visual realism of images on attentional
processes. In this study, we examined the P3 amplitude as elicited by cartoon, computer agents, and photographs of faces with and without emotion (fear, neutral). The experiment was conducted using dense array
electroencephalography with twenty-five adult participants. A repeated
measures design using two perceptual decision-making tasks examined
the effects of visual designs on ERPs. Consistent with previous studies
(Kiss & Eimer, 2008), the results showed a significant effect of emotion on
the P3 amplitude, with fearful faces increasing P3 positivity. Researchers
suggest that fear images, in particular, enhance attention due to a hard
wired response to threatening stimuli. Secondly, a significant effect of
design was found, with photographs eliciting higher P3 amplitudes in
comparison to agents or cartoons. The results suggest increased attentional processing to photographs that could be due to activation of higher
cognitive processes, such as discrimination of face identity, which are not
active when cartoon or computer agents are perceived. The findings are
relevant for the selection and equivalency of stimuli across various neurocognitive experiments, in particular those which occur in simulated
environments.
C8
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SUSTAINED ATTENTION Caroline
Hilti1, Kay Jann1, Dörthe Heinemann2, Andrea Federspiel1, Erich Seifritz1,
Katja Cattapan-Ludewig1; 1University Hospital of Psychiatry, University of
Bern, Berne, 2University Hospital of Neurology, Inselspital Bern, Berne — All
versions of the Rapid Visual Information Processing task (RVIP) - RVIP0,
RVIP000 and RVIP3tarseq - require the participant to sustain attention
over 16 min. Whereas the RVIP3tarseq is a high demanding task,
RVIP000 and RVIP0 are simple tasks especially designed to measure
purer forms of sustained attention. We apply a rapid event related paradigm in fMRI to investigate brain regions recruited by these tasks and the
correlation between brain activity and behavioural data. 20 right-handed
participants responded to specific target numbers in each task. Reaction
times (RT) and the number of hits were recorded. Nullevents were interspersed randomly. Random effects GLM analyses were performed, contrasting targets vs. nullevents. RVIP0 shows the most extended and
highest activations followed by RVIP000 and RVIP3tarseq. They all activated the visual areas bilaterally and the medial frontal/cingulate area.
RVIP0 is the only task that activates the right dlPFC. The inferior parietal
lobules bilaterally are activated in RVIP000 and RVIP3tarseq. Furthermore, RVIP3tarseq shows the most extended deactivations in the default
mode network, whereas the same areas are only partly/not deactivated
in RVIP000/RVIP0. The three tasks differ in the behavioural data and in
the magnitude and extent of the (de)activated brain regions. The activation in the medial frontal gyrus might reflect planning and execution of
movement. The RVIP0 could be the purest form of a sustained attention
task, as it is the only task where the right dlPFC is activated. The default
network might only become visible when highly demanding tasks
(RVIP3tarseq) are performed.
C9
FEATURE PRIMING IN CHRONIC METHAMPHETAMINE
ABUSERS: EVIDENCE FOR SPATIAL DEFICITS Ruth Salo1,2, Susan
Ravizza3, Thomas Nordahl1,2, Lynn Robertson4,5; 1UC Davis Imaging Research
Center, 2UC Davis Medical Center, 3Michigan State University, 4University of
California, Berkeley , 5Department of Veteran Affairs, Martinez CA — Longterm methamphetamine (MA) abusers report problems in focusing attention. These attentional problems may be the result of a deficiency in filtering out irrelevant information. The aim of the current study was to assess

Poster Session C

whether MA abusers exhibit greater effects of changes to task irrelevant
features compared to healthy participants. 21 chronic MA abusers (mean
age = 38+ 7.3 yrs) who were currently drug abstinent (range 1 mos to 4
yrs) and eighteen controls (mean age = 34+ 8.8 yrs) were studied. Subjects
identified targets whose features could repeat or switch. The task-relevant feature of the target was letter identity whereas color and/or location were always task-irrelevant. Each trial consisted of a brief
presentation of a target and distractor letter. Participants pressed the
appropriate key associated with the target letter. Of primary interest in
this experiment were effects of switches in the irrelevant features (color
and location), when target identity remained constant. All participants
were slower when color and location switched, however, MA abusers
tended to show a bigger location switching effect than controls (p < .05).
In contrast, color switching effects did not differ between groups (F < 1).
These results suggest that chronic MA abusers do not exhibit global
impairments of feature processing. Instead, impairments appear to be
restricted to situations in which task-irrelevant location features vary.
These findings are consistent with other studies that have reported spatial processing deficits in patients with damage to dopaminergic systems.
Keywords: methamphetamine, feature processing, spatial attention
[K01DA16293-01 to RS].

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

have yet to be assessed. The purpose of this experiment was to investigate how brain activation to backward masked emotional stimuli is
related to individual differences in empathy and mindfulness. In the current study, event-related fMRI data was collected while participants
viewed backward masked emotional faces. During each trial subjects
viewed a fixation cross for 1000ms followed by a happy, fearful, or neutral face for 33ms, which was immediately masked with a neutral face for
100ms. Subjects completed the Interpersonal Reactivity Index as a measure of empathy and the Kentucky Inventory of Mindfulness Skills.
Scores from both questionnaires were found to covary with activation in
relation to fearful and happy faces. Activation to backward masked
happy faces was found to covary with empathy and mindfulness in facial
recognition, limbic, medial frontal, and cingulate regions. Fewer areas
were found to covary with fearful faces, primarily the thalamus and temporal pole. These results suggest that even backward masked emotional
faces activate brain regions involved in empathy. In addition, this activation was predicted by individual differences in empathy and mindfulness.

C10
REDUCED SPATIOTEMPORAL RESOLUTION IN CHILDREN
WITH
CHROMOSOME
22Q11.2
DELETION
SYNDROME
(22Q11.2DS) Elliott A. Beaton1,2, Margarita Cabaral1,2, Joel Johnson1,2,
Tony J. Simon1,2; 1Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 2The M.I.N.D. Institute,
University of California, Davis — Children with 22q11.2DS have cognitive
impairments on spatiotemporal attention, arithmetical and numerical
tasks. We suggest that early atypical neurodevelopment is deleterious to
forming representations and processes necessary for typical function in
the spatiotemporal domain. We hypothesize that this results in "spatiotemporal hypergranularity"; diminished attentional capacity,
increased crowding, and a decrease in the number of elements that can be
individuated. To examine spatiotemporal processing impairments and
attention capacity in children (7-14 years) with 22q11.2DS versus typically developing (TD) controls, we used a variant of the Multiple Object
Tracking (MOT) task in both the laboratory and during a functional magnetic resonance (fMRI) scan. In both versions, children viewed cartoon
animations of 0 to 3 aliens hiding behind corresponding target planets in
a field of 7 total identical planets. For 12 seconds, the 58 by 58 pixel planets moved at 60 or 120 pixels per second in non-overlapping or occluding
motion within a 770 square pixel field. The child reported, via touch
screen or button press, whether a planet concealed a target. In the nonscanner task, children with 22q11.2DS but not TD children showed significant decreases modeled capacity as number of targets and speed of
motion increased. In the fMRI task, neural activation in children with
22q11.2DS during active object tracking overlapped with but was dissimilar to the canonical frontoparietal network evident in TD controls.
Decreased tracking capacity with increased load and atypical functional
activation indicate anomalous development of cortical, subcortical, and
limbic temporal and spatiotemporal processing circuits in children with
22q11.2DS.

C12
COGNITIVE CONTROL OF ATTENTION: NEUROIMAGING
EVIDENCE SUPPORTING USE OF THE DISTRACTOR
CONDITION
SUSTAINED
ATTENTION
TASK
IN
TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH Elise Demeter1, Luis HernandezGarcia2, Sally K. Guthrie3, Rachel Engelmann4, Stephan F. Taylor5, Martin
Sarter4, Cindy Lustig4; 1University of Michigan, Neuroscience Program,
2University of Michigan, FMRI Laboratory, 3University of Michigan, College
of Pharmacy, 4University of Michigan, Psychology, 5University of Michigan,
Psychiatry — The dSAT (distractor condition sustained attention task)
was originally developed to investigate the neural bases of attention and
top-down control in rats. Recent neuropsychological studies validated its
use in healthy humans (Demeter et al., 2008). The Cognitive Neuroscience Treatment Research to Improve Cognition in Schizophrenia
(CNTRICS) initiative chose the dSAT as a candidate task to investigate
attentional control in schizophrenia (Nuechterlein et al., in press). As part
of continuing validation we report evidence on the neural correlates of
dSAT performance in healthy adults. For each task trial, the participant
indicates the presence or absence of a brief, centrally-presented signal.
The standard (SAT) condition uses a static grey background; the distraction (dSAT) condition increases attentional challenge by using a strobing
(10 Hz) background. Continuous arterial spin labeling (ASL) perfusion
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of this task in healthy
humans (n = 16) shows that SAT performance activates regions in bilateral middle frontal gyri, paracingulate and cingulate gyri, and motor and
somatosensory regions. The dSAT condition impairs performance and
results in extensive right frontal and right parietal activation. Comparison of the dSAT and SAT conditions while controlling for the visual stimulation produced by the dSAT reveals increased activation in right
middle frontal gyrus and right frontal pole. These results confirm the
general view that sustained attention performance and top-down control
of such performance is mediated via a right hemispheric frontal-parietal
network. Thus, this evidence supports the usefulness of the dSAT for
translational research.

C11
MODULATION OF BRAIN ACTIVATION TO BACKWARD
MASKED EMOTIONAL FACES BY TRAIT EMPATHY AND
MINDFULNESS Kit Elam1, Josh Carlson2; 1Southern Illinois University at
Carbondale, 2State University of New York at Stony Brook — Research
has
shown that individual differences in anxiety modulates brain activation
to subliminally presented threatening emotional stimuli in the amygdala.
In empathy research, overt emotional scenes activate limbic areas such as
the insula, inferior and medial frontal areas, and cingulate areas. Mindfulness, the purposeful attention to the self and surroundings, has been
associated with increased emotional processing. However, individual
differences in empathy, mindfulness, and subliminal emotion processing

C13
COVERT ORIENTING OF ATTENTION TO A SALIENT
DISTRACTOR CAN BE SUPPRESSED DURING VISUAL SEARCH
John McDonald1, Vincent Di Lollo1; 1Simon Fraser University — Recent electrophysiological studies of visual search in humans and monkeys have
fueled a long-standing debate about the ability of salient visual objects to
capture attention. Evidence from event-related potentials (ERPs) indicates that salient-but-irrelevant pop-out items (distractors) capture attention when humans search for less salient pop-out items (targets)(Hickey
et al., 2006), whereas evidence from cellular recordings indicates that
salient distractors can be ignored when monkeys search for less-salient
targets (Ipata et al., 2006). Although the experiments were similar, the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

87

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

color of the distractor varied randomly in the human ERP study but was
fixed in the monkey study. The purpose of the present study was to
determine whether advanced knowledge of the distractor helps to guide
visual search in humans. We hypothesized that observers can establish a
suppressive filter based on a single stimulus feature to reduce the interference from predictable visual distractors. To investigate this issue, we
recorded ERPs to search displays containing a target shape singleton and
a distracting color singleton whose color was fixed in each block. Crucially, the predictable distractor singleton elicited an ERP component
called the distractor positivity (PD), which has been associated with
attentional suppression (Hickey, Di Lollo, & McDonald, in press). This
finding differed markedly from the ERP results obtained in a related ERP
study (Hickey et al., 2006), wherein unpredictable distractor singletons
elicited an ERP component associated with attentional deployment
(N2pc; Luck & Hillyard, 1994). This demonstrates that while unpredictable distractors capture attention, observers can suppress attentional capture by predictable distractors.
C14
INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES
IN
VOLUNTARY
AND
INVOLUNTARY ATTENTION Ayelet Landau1, Deena Elwan1, Sarah
Holtz2, Han Duong3, Prinzmetal William1; 1UC Berkeley, CA, 2Head-Royce
School, 3Southern California College of Optometry — The present study
examined whether voluntary and involuntary attention manifest differently in people with differences in impulsivity (measured with the Barratts Impulsivity survey). We proposed that high and low impulsive
participants would display different amounts of voluntary and involuntary attention. We used the spatial-cueing paradigm to assess attention.
In each trial a peripheral cue (the thickening of a rectangle) was displayed, followed by a letter target. Participants were required to identify
the target (F or T). Targets could either appear in the cued location (valid
trials) or in the uncued location (invalid trials). We used two different
manipulations to probe voluntary and involuntary attention. The first
was the time elapsing between the cue onset and the target onset (SOA).
Targets were separated from cues by either 40 or 400 ms. This manipulation was motivated by the finding that involuntary attention is typically
transient while voluntary attention takes longer to build up. In addition,
the peripheral cues were either predictive of cue location (i.e., mostly
valid trials) or non predictive of cue location (i.e., equal probability for
valid and invalid trials). While predictive trials probe voluntary and
involuntary attention, non predictive trials summon only involuntary
attention, since target location is random with respect to cue location. The
different SOAs and predictability manipulations were performed in separate blocks within subjects. We found that participants with high impulsivity scores exhibited larger involuntary attention effects whereas
participants with low impulsivity scores, exhibited larger voluntary
attention effects.
C15
SELECTIVE ATTENTIONAL IMPAIRMENTS IN CHILDREN WITH
CHROMOSOME 22Q11.2 DELETION SYNDROME Heather
M.
Shapiro1, Yukari Takarae,2, Elliott A. Beaton1, Joel Johnson1, Tony J. Simon1;
1M.I.N.D. Institute, University of California, Davis, 2Center for Mind and
Brain, University of California, Davis — Children
with
chromosome
22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) demonstrate a variety of impairments on tasks involving spatial attention. These include poorer endogenous but less impaired exogenous orienting, delayed inhibition of return,
and more impaired space- versus object-based attention compared to
similarly aged typically developing (TD) children. To explore this further, we used an "Endogenous-Exogenous" cueing experiment to examine the differential effects of cue type, meridian crossing, and cue
presentation time in 34 children with 22q11.2DS and 25 TD children (all
aged 7-14 years). The task included both exogenous (luminance change in
a peripheral box with 50% valid/invalid probability for an upcoming target) and endogenous (a central arrow with 65/35% valid/invalid probability for an upcoming target) cues. The time lapse from cue to target, or

88

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA), was either 200 or 750 ms. Cues oriented attention to equidistant locations either above and below or to the
left and right of a central fixation. Overall, children with 22q11.2DS
showed larger invalidity costs on endogenously but not exogenously
cued trials compared to TD children. Effects were modulated by SOA
length and whether orienting required crossing the horizontal or vertical
meridians. Both groups produced inhibition of return, which was also
modulated by SOA length and which meridian was crossed. Integrated
with our other cognitive and neural findings, these results significantly
clarify the specific neurocognitive basis of attentional impairments in
children with 22q11.2DS.
C16
PERCEPTUAL
GROUPING
DURING
MULTIPLE
OBJECT
TRACKING Andrew McCollough1, Trafton Drew1, Edward Vogel1;
1University of Oregon — Previous research has suggested that perceptual
grouping may significantly aid performance in Multiple Object Tracking
(MOT) tasks. That is, observers may track multiple items by spontaneously grouping disparate items into a single virtual object. According to
this hypothesis a virtual polygon is initially created and then updated
during tracking, with the vertices of the polygon consisting of the tracked
elements.( Yantis 1992) Recently our lab has demonstrated an ERP component, the CDA, sensitive to the number of successfully tracked items in
a MOT task such that the amplitude of the component increases with
increasing set size up to the individual subject’s tracking capacity (Drew
& Vogel 2008 J. Neuroscience). Here, we investigated whether a real or
virtual polygon between targets in a tracking task would enhance behavioral performance and reduce tracking load (as indexed by a reduction in
amplitude of the CDA). We found that the the presence of actual grouping lines between three targets in a bilateral tracking task reduced tracking load when the lines were present as compared to when they were
absent. These result suggest that perceptual grouping does play a role in
tracking but this may be restricted to situations when there are strong
bottom-up cues for grouping.
C17
ATTENTIONAL
PRIORITIZATION:THE
INFLUENCE
OF
EXPERTISE ON HOW JOURNAL ARTICLES ARE READ Lisa
M.
Meschino1, Michael G. Reynolds2, Daniel Smilek1, Grayden Solman1;
1
University of Waterloo, 2Trent University — Critical to efficient and effective reading is the ability to prioritize what is of central and peripheral
importance from text-based sources. The modular format of journal articles is designed to favor this kind of prioritization by standardizing the
areas of central and peripheral interest and promoting selective reading.
Our study examined how expertise with the journal article format influences attentional prioritization. Participants viewed two 6-page articles
from the journal, Psychological Science. They were given only five minutes to read each article and each article was followed by a comprehension test. An eye monitor tracked eye movements and recorded the
location, frequency, and duration of each fixation. Participants were
divided into two groups based on their expertise with the text format: 1) a
novice group of undergraduate students and 2) an expert group of graduate students. Our results showed that experts had higher comprehension
scores than did novices and that there were substantial differences
between the two groups in the frequency and location of their fixations.
Experts and novices differed in how they attended to the abstract, introduction, methods, figures and discussion, with some variance across
journal articles. The findings suggest that novices are less able than
experts to identify and locate the important information in the article.
Therefore, expertise with text format includes knowledge of what content
is of central importance and where to look for it, and this knowledge
guides overt attention in a top-down fashion.

Poster Session C

C18
THE EFFECTS OF TMS OVER THE POSTERIOR PARIETAL OR
DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX ON THE ATTENTION
NETWORK TASK June Hung1, Vincent Walsh2, Jon Driver2; 1Chang
Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine,
Taiwan, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London,
UK — Arousal, spatial orienting, and conflict resolution represent varieties of attentional functions. These functions seems partially dissociated
and usually require separate tasks to measure each. The attention network task is a modified flanker task that consists of three possible flankers (neutral, congruent, and incongruent) preceded by four possible types
of cueing (no cue, central cue, double cue, or spatial cue), which allows
measurements of the cognitive processes involving conflict resolution,
along with those concerning alerting and spatial orienting. Here we
investigated the roles of the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) in these three dimensions of attentional
function. Seven healthy participants performed the attention network
task before and after 1-Hz repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
(rTMS) over the left/right PPC and DLPFC. The results showed that,
after 1-Hz rTMS over the left/right PPC or left DLPFC for 600 s, all postrTMS behavioral measures were not significantly different from the prerTMS baseline. After 1-Hz rTMS over the right DLPFC, however, accuracy in performing the flanker task was significantly decreased; this effect
was only apparent for incongruent-flanker trials that set the highest
demand for conflict resolution. Correspondingly, right DLPFC rTMS significantly increased a reaction-time derived parameter, conflict effect
(prolongation in reaction times for incongruent-flanker trials relative to
those for congruent-flanker ones), without affecting other parameters
reflecting alerting or orienting effect. Right DLPFC is thus important in
resolving conflict or competition between visual stimuli to achieve visual
selectivity.
C19
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN MULTIPLE MODES OF
VOLUNTARY VISUAL ATTENTION Marcia Grabowecky1, KatieAnn
Skogsberg1,2, Joshua Wilt1, William Revelle1, Satoru Suzuki1; 1Northwestern
University, 2Centre College — Extensive research has characterized what
can be prioritized by attention (e.g., a location, an object, a color, or a
motion), and how attention can act (e.g., focused, distributed, or sustained). Neuroscientific approaches have identified both distinct and
overlapping patterns of brain activity associated with different modes of
attention, suggesting inter-relationships among attention mechanisms.
To understand how the many hypothesized attention mechanisms work
together to support behavioral goals, it is essential to understand these
inter-relationships. To this end, we examined inter-correlations among
representative voluntary attention skills by administering an attention
battery consisting of 10 common voluntary attention tasks to over 250
participants. Eight of these tasks (except for two Eriksen-flanker-type
tests) had sufficient reliability, so we examined their relational structure
by performing cluster (using the ICLUST algorithm; Revelle, 1979) and
multidimensional scaling (MDS) analyses on their correlation matrix.
Results suggested that these tasks formed four distinct clusters of attention skills, (1) rapidly deploying attention, (2) persistently maintaining
attention (vigilance), (3) spatially shifting attention or tracking with attention, and (4) attending to global patterns and objects or grouping with
attention. In the MDS, the first two clusters defined an axis interpretable
as a transient-sustained axis, and the latter two clusters defined an axis
interpretable as a spatiotempral-discrete-global axis. Prior investigations
of the neural substrates of some of the attention battery tasks appear consistent with this clustering. Finally, we will demonstrate the utility of the
attention battery for investigating group differences in attention abilities
using sex differences as a test case.

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

C20
DO
VISUAL
SPATIAL
ATTENTION-VISUOMOTOR
INTERACTIONS EXTEND TO LOCOMOTIVE MOVEMENTS? AN
ERP STUDY OF SENIOR FALLERS VS. NON-FALLERS Lindsay
Nagamatsu1,3, Patrick Carolan1, Teresa Liu-Ambrose2,3, Todd Handy1,3; 1The
University of British Columbia, Psychology, 2The University of British
Columbia, Physical Therapy, 3The Centre for Hip Health — Visual-spatial
attention has been found to have a central function in visuomotor planning associated with reach and grasp type movements. Our main question was whether this link between motor abilites and visual-spatial
attention extends to other types of movement, such as walking, and how
it may apply to successful movement through the environment. Because
of methodological problems associated with recording event-related
potentials (ERP’s) during movement, we used a population with deficits
in locomotion in order to answer this question. Using a between-groups
design, we recorded event-related potentials in a canonical spatial cuing
task performed by two groups of senior (aged 65+ years old) participants:
those with a recent history of falls (> 2 falls in the past 12 months), and
those with no such history (0 falls in the past 12 months). In terms of
attentional control systems in cortex, we found no significant differences
in function between groups. However, in terms of attentional factilitation of cortical processing, we found that fallers manifest specific abnormalities in the sensory/perceptual processing of targets in the left visual
field. Our findings thus suggest that fallers have specific deficits in
visuocortical systems associated with attentional enhancement of events
on the left side of visual space. These findings are consistent with the
hypothesis that visual-spatial attention and visuomotor abilities are critical for successful locomotion through the environment.
C21
SPATIAL TOPOGRAPHY OF HUMAN PREFRONTAL AND
PARIETAL CORTICES Trenton Jerde1, Adam Riggall1, Clayton Curtis1,2;
1NYU, Psychology, 2Center for Neural Science, NYU — We used fMRI to
map the spatial topography of the frontal and parietal cortices in humans.
To define topographical maps in these higher order association areas, we
used modified versions of standard retinotopic methods that tax spatial
attention processes. We induced traveling waves of neural activity across
cortex in topographical areas with working memory (WM) and motion
discrimination (MD) tasks. In the WM task, subjects maintained fixation
while faces were presented one at a time circling the visual periphery and
indicated when the same face was presented consecutively (one-back). In
the MD task, subjects maintained fixation while attending to circular
apertures containing varying levels of coherently moving dots. Dot apertures were presented one at a time and circled the visual periphery; subjects indicated the direction of coherent dot motion by pressing a button.
By adjusting the percentage of dots moving in the same direction, a staircase procedure kept subject performance at 75% accuracy. Fixation during both tasks was quantified by eye tracking. For both tasks, data were
analyzed with standard phase-encoded retinotopic mapping methods.
When using WM and MD tasks, similar topographical maps of contralateral space were found in dorsal and ventral prefrontal cortex and in posterior parietal cortex, as well as in early visual areas. Moreover, these
topographic areas showed evidence of contralateralized persistent activity during the maintenance of covert spatial attention. Therefore, discrete
areas of association cortex are spatially topographic and can be defined
by systematic shifts in the locus spatial attention.
C22
THE ALLOCATION OF EARLY VISUAL ATTENTION DURING
SMOOTH PURSUIT EYE MOVEMENT Javier Lopez-Calderon1, Kathya
Torquati2, Johanna Kreither3, Francisco Aboitiz1; 1Departmento de Psiquiatria,
Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e
Bioimmagini and ITAB, Istituto di Tecnologie Avanzate Biomediche, Università
“G. D’Annunzio”, Chieti - Italy, 3Escuela de Psicología, Universidad San
Sebastián, Chile — Recent studies suggest that the control of voluntary eye
movements relies on specific target selection and decision making pro-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

89

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

cesses. In particular, the accuracy of smooth pursuit eye movements
(SPEMs), which maintain the image of a moving target on the fovea,
depends strongly on attentional mechanisms. Nonetheless, the specific
nature of the link between visual attention and SPEMs remains to be elucidated. Previous studies have elegantly demonstrated a biased allocation of attention to an area just in front of a constant-speed pursued
target. This has been accomplished by measuring the latency and accuracy of saccadic eye movements, or manual reaction times, to stimuli
appearing near the location of the moving target. As a further step in this
line, we explored the spatial allocation of attention during horizontal
sinusoidal SPEMs, using pattern reversal visual evoked potentials
(prVEPs), elicited by retinotopically selected bilateral patches in the
periphery of a pursued target. Our findings show a higher V1/V2 global
response for the pursued right-going compared to left-going movement.
Additionally, we found a higher contralateral V1/V2 response for the
right-going movement, suggesting an ahead-biased allocation of attention. We discuss a direction-of-reading effect hypothesis.
C23
EARLY AND LATE PRE-STIMULUS ENHANCEMENTS FOR
EXPECTATION OF FEARFUL AND NEUTRAL FACES IN
FUSIFORM FACE AREA Tracy Jill Doty1,2, Shruti Japee1, Martin
Ingvar2, Leslie Ungerleider1; 1NIMH/Laboratory of Brain and Cognition,
2Karolinska Institutet, Clinical Neuroscience — The expectation of a behaviorally relevant stimulus can lead to faster and more accurate behavioral
responses. Neuroimaging studies have shown that the anticipation of an
upcoming visual stimulus enhances activity in visual processing areas
even before that stimulus appears. However, few studies have investigated the effect of emotion on this anticipatory activity, and none has
studied the expectation of emotional faces. In this event-related fMRI
study, we manipulated valence expectation by presenting face images,
within 50-trial runs containing different proportions of fearful:neutral
faces: 80:20, 50:50, and 20:80. Before each run, subjects were explicitly told
the ratio of fearful to neutral faces, and subjects were instructed to categorize each face as fearful or neutral on each trial. A red fixation cue preceded each face by 4 seconds. Behavioral data demonstrated that subjects
were significantly faster to categorize the expected face type. A robust
early (2-4 seconds post-cue) increase in BOLD activity was found in bilateral fusiform face area (FFA) prior to the presentation of an infrequent
fearful face (compared to other trials). While this early activation in
response to the cue did not confer a reaction time advantage (subjects
were as slow to categorize infrequent fearful as infrequent neutral faces),
it may represent a preparatory bias for infrequent emotional images. In
contrast, consistent with behavioral data, a late (6-8 seconds post-cue)
enhancement was seen in bilateral FFA during certain expectation trials
(80:20 and 20:80) as compared to uncertain expectation trials (50:50). This
late pre-stimulus enhancement may represent preparatory top-down signals.
C24
SLOW-WAVE
AND
OSCILLATORY
MARKERS
OF
ANTICIPATORY BRAIN ACTIVITY DURING VISUAL SPATIAL
ATTENTION AND THE PERCEPTUAL BIASING OF SENSORY
CORTEX Tineke Grent-t-Jong1,2, Marty G. Woldorff1; 1Center for Cognitive
Neuroscience, Duke University, 2Utrecht University, Psychopharmacology,
Netherlands — Two scalp-recorded electrophysiological markers of
visual-location-specific anticipatory brain activity -- the slow-wave ERPcomponent termed the Biasing-Related-Negativity (BRN) and the eventrelated power decreases (ERDs) in alpha-band oscillatory activity -- have
been reported in the literature as reflecting a state of increased excitability
of sensory cortical areas (baseline-shift or biasing hypothesis) that results
in improved perceptual sensitivity. However, the possibility that they
might reflect different frequency components of the same underlying
brain mechanism has never been directly tested. The current study
attempts to fill this gap by using three variants of a visual spatial-cueing
paradigm to test (a) whether the contralateral BRN and alpha-ERDs

90

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

respond similarly to different task manipulations, (b) whether their activity levels correlate across the delay period, and (c) whether they similarly
affect perceptual processing of the expected stimulus. The results indicated that none of these criteria for accepting the hypothesis of corresponding functional significance were met. The behavior of the
contralateral BRN activity was the most consistent with the biasing
hypothesis, in that this component was sensitive to the manipulation of
expected perceptual difficulty of the target and its activity level correlated with the amplitude of the target N1 sensory component. In contrast,
the contralateral alpha-ERDs responded more to motor-preparation
instructions and motivational aspects of the task and affected later target
processing stages (P3 amplitude). Generally, alpha oscillatory changes
appeared to be more indicative of the strength of spatial attention at a
particular point in time, rather than reflecting expectancy-driven biasing
activity for future processing.
C25
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR THE TOP-DOWN
MODULATION OF ATTENTIONAL ORIENTING ELICITED BY
CENTRAL NUMBER CUES Jelena Ristic1, Barry Giesbrecht1; 1University
of California Santa Barbara — It has been reported that central numbers
elicit an automatic shift of attention to the location corresponding to their
relative spatial position on a left-to-right mental number line (Fischer et
al 2003). Behaviorally, this effect is revealed as facilitated responses for
left targets precued by a small number (e.g., 1) and right targets precued
by a large number (e.g., 9). However, because the effect emerges late,
about 700ms post-cue, it has been argued that instead of reflecting automatic orienting, it may reflect orienting that is controlled in top-down
manner. Here we examined attentional effects of central number cues on
visual cortical processing as indexed by the P1 event-related potential
(ERP) component. Participants completed a cuing task in which centrally
presented digits (3 or 9) served as attentional cues. The numbers were
either uninformative or informative of the target location. Analysis of target-evoked ERPs revealed that when the number was uninformative, P1
magnitude was modulated in a manner that is consistent with the mental
number line. However, this pattern reversed in the informative condition
where the spatial location cued by the number contradicted the left-right
number line, such that the P1 was largest for left targets cued by a large
digit (9) and right targets cued by a small digit (3). These data indicate
that the perception of digits may initially bias visual processing according to the mental number line. However, dovetailing with past data, the
resulting attentional effect appears to depend on the spatial mental set
adopted by observers.

Emotion
C26
VARIATIONS
IN
TREK1
GENOTYPE
LINKED
TO
ANTIDEPRESSANT RESPONSE ARE ASSOCIATED WITH
POTENTIATED NEURAL RESPONSE TO REWARDS IN
HUMANS Daniel Dillon1, Ryan Bogdan1, Jesen Fagerness3, Avram
Holmes1, Roy Perlis2,3, Diego Pizzagalli1; 1Harvard University, Psychology,
2
Depression Clinical & Research Program, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, 3Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit,
Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital — The
TREK1 gene has been linked to a depression-resistant phenotype in
rodents and antidepressant response in humans. However, the mechanisms underlying these links are unclear. Because TREK1 is expressed in
reward-related basal ganglia regions, it has been hypothesized that
TREK1 genetic variation may be associated with anhedonic symptoms of
depression. To test whether TREK1 genetic variation influences reward
processing, we genotyped healthy individuals (n = 32) who completed a
monetary incentive delay task during functional magnetic resonance
imaging. Three of four TREK1 genotypes previously linked to positive

Poster Session C

antidepressant response were associated with potentiated basal ganglia
responses to gains, but did not influence activity elicited by penalties or
no change feedback. Furthermore, the total number of "protective"
TREK1 alleles possessed by individuals was positively correlated with
responses to gains in several other regions of the mesocortical reward
network, including the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, and mesial prefrontal cortex. These results indicate that variation in
TREK1 genotype is associated with individual differences in neural
responses to rewards, and suggest that variation in reward processing
could mediate the association between TREK1 and antidepressant
response in humans.
C27
THE EFFECTS OF ACUTE STRESS ON ATTENTIONAL CAPTURE
BY ALCOHOL-RELATED CUES IN SOCIAL DRINKERS Ryan
Giuliano1, Natalie Ceballos2, Nicole Wicha1,3, Reiko Graham2; 1University of
Texas, San Antonio, 2Texas State University, 3University of Texas Health
Sciences Center, San Antonio — Alcohol is often consumed to ameliorate
the stress of everyday life. The purpose of this study was to examine the
neurophysiological correlates of alcohol-related attentional processes
among social drinkers before and after exposure to stress using a 3-stimulus oddball paradigm. Participants (N = 34) were randomly assigned to
either an alcohol target (respond to alcohol pictures, ignore other objects
or nonsense shapes) or an object target condition (respond to object pictures) while event-related potentials (ERPs) were measured before and
after stress induction. Behavioral results indicated that overall, responses
to both alcohol and object targets were faster after stress induction. These
results were mirrored by changes in the peak latency of the P300, which
peaked earlier as a result of stress, irrespective of target type. Amplitude
analyses were also conducted after taking latency differences across conditions into account. Regardless of stress, P300 amplitudes were largest
for targets, but this was mediated by a target by condition interaction.
Amplitudes were larger for targets in the alcohol condition, whereas
there was no significant difference between targets and non-targets (alcohol images) in the object condition, suggesting that alcohol images captured attention, regardless of stress or target status. Interestingly, there
was a stress by condition by hemisphere effect: the P300 for alcohol targets was bilateral before stress but right-lateralized after stress, supporting the role of right parietal regions in emotion-related arousal (Heller,
1993). Overall, results suggest that stress appears to affect both controlled
and automatic processing of alcohol related images.
C28
GOAL INDUCEMENT AND EMOTION CONTROL: THE EFFECTS
OF CONSCIOUS AND NONCONSCIOUS GOAL REGULATION
ON THE RESPONSE TO EMOTIONAL STIMULATION Sanda
Dolcos1,2, Keen Sung1,2, Ekaterina Denkova1,2, Florin Dolcos2,3; 1University of
Alberta, Psychology, Canada, 2University of Alberta, Psychiatry, Canada,
3
Centre for Neuroscience, University of Alberta, Canada — The ability to regulate emotions is an important coping mechanism in the face of emotionally stressful situations. While previous emotion regulation (ER) studies
have focused mainly on conscious/deliberate regulation, recent evidence
suggests that non-conscious/automatic regulation could prove as effective while being less costly (Bargh & Williams, 2007). However, it is not
clear whether both types of ER are equally effective in controlling varying intensities of emotional challenge. The present study used an experimental design that manipulated both the goal to regulate emotion
(conscious vs. nonconscious) and the intensity of emotional challenge
(high vs. low). Different groups of participants were either explicitly
instructed or non-consciously primed to suppress their response to pictures with varying degrees of emotional content selected from the International Affective Picture System. Participants rated the emotional
content of negative and neutral pictures, while skin conductance (SC)
responses to viewing the pictures were also recorded. Analyses of behavioural data suggest that both deliberate and automatic ER decreased the
subjective response to low-intensity emotional pictures. However, only

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

deliberate ER was effective in suppressing the response to high-intensity
emotional pictures. Preliminary analyses of the SC data are consistent
with the subjective rating findings. This study suggests that while automatic ER might be less effortful and less costly, it might also be less effective in the face of highly challenging negative situations. The findings are
relevant for understanding mood and anxiety disorders, in which emotion dysregulation is often among the core debilitating features.
C29
SEX-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN EMOTION REGULATION
STRATEGIES IN COPING WITH SOCIAL ANXIETY: A
COMBINED
PERSONALITY
AND
BRAIN
IMAGING
INVESTIGATION Florin Dolcos1,2, Sanda Dolcos1,2,3, Ekaterina Denkova1,
Gloria Wong1,2; 1University of Alberta, Psychiatry, Canada, 2University of
Alberta, Canada, Centre for Neuroscience, 3University of Alberta, Psychology,
Canada — The study investigated the role of individual variation in emotion regulation (ER) strategies in response to trait and state social anxiety
(SA). The relationship between the habitual use of two ER strategies (i.e.,
reappraisal and suppression) and trait SA was first investigated using the
Emotional Regulation Questionnaire (ERQ) and the Liebowitz SA scale
(LSAS). Correlation analyses on data from 86 participants (49 females)
identified a negative relationship of LSAS scores with ERQ-Reappraisal
(ERQ-R), but a positive relationship with ERQ-Suppression (ERQ-S).
Interestingly, while the former relationship was driven by women, the
latter was driven by men. These findings suggest that reappraisal is overall a more effective strategy in coping with SA, and that habitual suppression tends to be inefficiently engaged by men. These findings were next
confirmed on a smaller sample (N=18, 10 females) in which SA was transiently induced by viewing angry faces presented as task-irrelevant distracters during a working memory (WM) task. This investigation also
revealed that ERQ-R predicts enhanced WM performance in the presence
of transiently induced SA in men but not in women. Functional MRI data
were also recorded while participants performed the WM task, and preliminary analyses suggest that these sex-related differences in the
engagement of ER strategies are linked to dissociable involvement of cognitive control brain regions (e.g., anterior cingulate) in response to transient anxiety-inducing distraction in men and women. Collectively, these
findings suggest that women and men engage different ER strategies and
brain mechanisms in coping with trait and state SA.
C30
EMOTIONAL DISTRACTION MODULATES THE IMPACT OF
TASK DIFFICULTY ON PERFORMANCE IN A PERCEPTUAL
TASK Andrea Shafer1, Dmitriy Matveychuk1, Todd Penny1, Roberto
Cabeza2, Florin Dolcos1; 1University of Alberta, 2Duke University — An
important open question in the emotion literature concerns the impact of
task-irrelevant emotional distraction on perceptual processing. According to Lavie (2005), task-irrelevant distracters have a differential impact
on task-relevant processing depending on the "processing load" of the
main task - i.e., low-perceptual load is susceptible to distraction whereas
high-perceptual load eliminates distracter processing. It is unclear, however, whether these effects are also found when the distracters are emotionally-charged. Possibly because of their relevance for survival,
emotional stimuli can "capture" attention and reallocate processing
resources from processing goal-relevant information to processing irrelevant emotional information. Thus, it is possible that processing of distraction is not eliminated by high perceptual load if the distracters are
emotional. This idea was investigated using a shape detection (SD) task
in which participants made decisions on the orientation of vertical and
horizontal pictures with varying degrees of emotional content. Task difficulty was manipulated by varying the ratio of the horizontal vs. vertical
sides, which thus influenced the difficulty in deciding whether the pictures were clearly rectangles (with vertical/horizontal orientation) or
closer to squares (with uncertain vertical/horizontal orientation). Preliminary analyses showed that the response speed in the SD task was modulated by both task difficulty and emotional content. Specifically, the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

91

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

longest reaction times were recorded when the orientation was difficult
to identify and the content of the pictures was emotional. These findings
shed light on the impact of task-irrelevant emotional distracters on perceptual processing, and have relevance for understanding clinical conditions associated with exacerbated susceptibility to emotional distraction.
C31
ALMOST HUMAN: NEURAL ACTIVATION TO AVATAR AND
HUMAN EMOTIONAL FACIAL EXPRESSIONS Matthias
Wieser1,
1
1
1
2
Antje Gerdes , Paul Pauli , Peter Weyers , Felix Breuer , Andreas
Mühlberger1; 1University of Würzburg, 2Magnetic Resonance Bavaria
(MRB) — Facial expressions of emotions are important in nonverbal communication. While previous studies have mostly relied on facial images
of humans, the effects of computer-generated (avatar) emotional faces
compared to natural emotional faces on brain activation were investigated in the present study. Twenty-two healthy subjects (ten females)
viewed blocks of facial expressions (anger, fear, happinnes and neutral)
and scrambled faces in a blocked design, while their brain activation was
measured by means of 1.5 T BOLD fMRI. Activations in emotional networks including amygdala, insula, ACC were apparent in response to
both avatar and human emotional faces, but the response was significantly stronger especially to human faces of anger in the amygdala.
Behavioral data indicate that avatars are rated as less arousing compared
to human faces, which might be an explanation of the weaker brain
responses. However, as there was an emotional modulation of brain
activity present, we suggest that avatars could be a useful tool in neuroimaging studies of facial expression processing because they elicit comparable activations in emotional areas similarly to human faces, yet have
the advantage of being highly manipulable and fully controllable. This
allows for creating innovative research designs with dynamic facial
expressions. However, further investigations are needed to clarify the
differences between natural and artificial stimuli and the influence of
trait variables like social anxiety.
C32
OPPOSING PATTERNS OF BRAIN ACTIVITY IN PERCEPTUAL
AND EXECUTIVE BRAIN REGIONS LINKED TO INDIVIDUAL
VARIATION IN SOCIAL ANXIETY: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION
Ekaterina Ninova1, Gloria Wong2, Kristen Sabourin3, Keen Sung1, Sanda
Dolcos4,1, Florin Dolcos1,2; 1University of Alberta, Psychiatry, Canada,
2University of Alberta, Center for Neuroscience, Canada, 3University of Alberta,
Biomedical Engineering, Canada, 4University of Alberta, Psychology,
Canada — Mood and anxiety disorders are often characterized by
increased susceptibility to emotional distraction. However, the underlying neural circuitry associated with individual differences predicting the
response to emotional challenge remains unclear. Here, we investigated
the relationship between brain activity in response to anxiety-inducing
task-irrelevant distraction (i.e., angry faces) and individual variation in
indices of social anxiety (SA). Event related fMRI data were recorded
while 18 healthy subjects performed a working memory (WM) task with
angry face distracters presented during the delay between the memoranda and probes. Trait SA was also measured with the Liebowitz Social
Anxiety Scale (LSAS). Analysis of fMRI data revealed dissociable patterns of brain activity in perceptual (fusiform face area-FFA) and executive (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex-dlPFC) brain regions linked to the
nature of distraction and individual variation in SA. Specifically, anxietyinducing distraction enhanced activity in the FFA while disrupting activity in the dlPFC. Moreover, activity in these regions also showed opposing patterns of co-variation with the trait SA, reflected in positive (FFA)
vs. negative (dlPFC) correlations with the LSAS scores. Collectively, these
findings provide support for the idea that enhanced activity in perceptual
brain regions in response to task-irrelevant emotional distraction may
lead to disrupted activity in executive brain regions, and that these effects
are mediated by individual variation in the sensitivity to anxiety-inducing stimulation. These findings have implications for understanding
alterations in the neural circuitry underlying emotion-cognition interac-

92

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

tions in clinical SA, in which exacerbated response to anxiety-inducing
social contexts leads to debilitating effects on social behavior.
C33
TRAIT ANXIETY AND IMPOVERISHED PREFRONTAL CONTROL
OF ATTENTION Sonia Bishop1; 1University of California, Berkeley —
Many neurocognitive models of anxiety emphasize a hyper-responsive
threat-detection system centered on the amygdala, with recent accounts
incorporating a role for prefrontal mechanisms in regulating attention to
threat. The current study investigated whether trait anxiety is associated
with a much broader dysregulation of attentional control. Volunteers
performed a response conflict task under conditions posing high or low
demands on attention. High trait anxious individuals showed reduced
prefrontal activity and slower target identification in response to processing competition when the task did not fully occupy attentional resources.
The relationship between trait anxiety and prefrontal recruitment
remained after controlling for state anxiety. These findings indicate that
trait anxiety is linked to impoverished recruitment of prefrontal attentional control mechanisms to inhibit distractor processing even when
threat-related stimuli are absent. Critically, this deficit is observed when
ongoing task-related demands on attention are low, potentially explaining the day-to-day difficulties in concentration associated with clinical
anxiety.
C34
THE IMPACT OF METHYLPHENIDATE ON EARLY EMOTIONAL
PROCESSES IN ADULT PATIENTS WITH ATTENTION DEFICIT
HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER (ADHD) Eva
Woidich1,
Annette
Conzelmann1, Ron F. Mucha1, Peter Weyers1, Christian P. Jacob1, Paul Pauli1;
1University of Würzburg — Background: Emotional- motivational dysfunctions are very likely important in the pathophysiology of attentiondeficit/ hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Although symptoms like hyperactivity and impulsivity seem to be closely related to emotional- motivational functions, few studies about this topic can be found. Even fewer
studies examined the influence of methylphenidate on emotional processes, though methylphenidate is the first class medical treatment in
ADHD since 1937. Methods: 13 adult ADHD- patients took part twice.
During both investigations, objective (affect- modulated startle response)
and subjective (valence and arousal ratings) reactions to positive, neutral
and negative visual stimuli were affiliated. Every subject had to cope
with the same task twice- once without and once after the intake of their
own methylphenidate supplement. Results: During the exposure of high
arousing visual stimuli and after the intake of methylphenidate, all 13
patients showed improved affective startle- modulation in response to
positive and negative pictures. Affective valence and arousal ratings did
not differ between both examinations. Conclusion: These findings indicate some positive impact of methylphenidate on early emotional processes in adult ADHD- patients. Results suggest that this improvement is
independent of subjective parameters.
C35
INVESTIGATING
SEROTONIN’S
ROLE
IN
LINKING
BEHAVIOURAL INHIBITION TO PUNISHMENT Molly Crockett1,
Luke Clark1, Trevor Robbins1; 1Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute,
Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge — Serotonin (5-HT) has
been implicated in a wealth of psychiatric disorders, including depression, anxiety, and obsessive-compulsive disorder, but its functions in regulating both normal and abnormal behaviour remain poorly understood.
Two hypotheses dominate the literature: one suggests that 5-HT signals
punishments, and the other proposes that 5-HT facilitates response inhibition. It has recently been suggested that 5-HT is responsible for linking
inhibition to punishment, potentiating behavioural suppression in anticipation of negative outcomes. However, existing data cannot rule out
either the punishment or the inhibition hypothesis. In this study, we temporarily lowered brain 5-HT levels in healthy human volunteers using
the acute tryptophan depletion (ATD) procedure. We employed a novel
version of the Go/No-Go task that independently tested the ability to

Poster Session C

inhibit responses and the ability to adjust behaviour in response to
rewards and punishments. Twenty-two healthy volunteers completed
the task, once following ATD and once following placebo. On placebo,
volunteers adjusted their response speed in line with feedback valence,
speeding up in response to rewards and slowing down in response to
punishments. ATD abolished punishment-induced slowing in a contextsensitive manner, while preserving basic response inhibition and the ability to track changes in reward and punishment contingencies. Additional
analyses indicate that ATD removed a bias that was present at the start of
the placebo session, but was then attenuated, presumably by learning.
These data support the hypothesis that 5-HT promotes a bias to inhibit
behaviour in the face of potential punishments, rather than simply signalling punishment or facilitating general inhibition.
C36
A ROLE FOR THE VENTROLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX
AND VENTRAL BASAL FOREBRAIN IN TRACKING PROXIMITY
TO THREAT AND ANXIETY Leah Somerville1, Paul Whalen1, William
Kelley1; 1Dartmouth College — Previous research identifying the neural
substrates of emotion processing has typically treated threat as a categorical stimulus, either present or absent from the environment. An associated question that has received less scientific attention is whether an
individual’s relative level of threat or safety in a given context is represented continuously in the brain. During fMRI scanning, 50 participants
viewed a threat line fluctuating in height, with the height of the line representing risk for earning subsequent electrical shocks. The line trajectory
was set to vary such that equal amounts of time were spent at different
proximities to the threat (categorized as low, medium, and high), as well
as times when the threat (e.g., earning the shock) was earned. Randomeffects group analyses identified brain regions with increasing responses
as the proximity to the shock threshold increased. Regions demonstrating
this pattern include the left and right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
extending into the anterior insula, and the left and right ventral basal
forebrain. When examining individual differences, we observed that
these regions showed an exaggerated response profile in individuals
with greater dispositional anxiety. The present findings suggest that
these regions may continuously monitor changes in arousal state, and
may subserve hyperarousability in potentially threatening situations
commonly experienced by anxious individuals.
C37
INTEROCEPTION FOR MENTALIZING: HEARTBEAT-EVOKED
BRAIN POTENTIAL SHOWS AMPLITUDE MODULATION IN AN
’EYES TASK’ Hirokata Fukushima1,2, Satoshi Umeda1; 1Keio University,
2Japan Society for the Promotion of Science — Interoception is a visceral perception or a sensation of the physiological condition of the inner organ
(Craig, 2002). Here we investigated whether interoceptive processing in
the central nervous system is employed to understanding others’ mental
states, and it is increased in the individual who was engaged in a mentalizing task. As a neural index of this processing, we examined a pattern on
the surface electroencephalogram (EEG), termed heartbeat-evoked
potential (HEP). This is a deflection on the brain potential contingent to
the most prominent peak of the electrocardiogram (ECG), and which is
thought to reflect cortical processing of cardiac afferent input (Schandry
et al., 1986). Being measured EEG and ECG, twenty-one healthy adults
participated the experiment where they attended to either the mental or
physical features of a series of images showing the eyes of other people.
Results showed increased HEP amplitude in mentalizing trials compared
to non-mentalizing trials. This pattern was observed on the left and
medial frontal electrodes around 250-300 ms latency after the R-peak of
the ECG. Furthermore, the mean amplitude in this period was found to
be associated with a subscore of empathy questionnaire (Interpersonal
Reactivity Index; Davis, 1983). The present study suggests the possibility
that the external social cognition involves the internal self-monitoring of
the bodily states.

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

C38
RATING AND SEARCHING FOR OCD-CONCERN RELATED
IMAGES: ABNORMAL AND NORMAL PROCESSING IN OCD
PATIENTS Sharon Morein-Zamir1, Martina Butt1, Naomi Fineberg2,3,
Trevor Robbins1, Barbara Sahakian1; 1University of Cambridge, 2Queen
Elizabeth II Hospital, 3University of Hertfordshire — Whether
Obsessive
Compulsive Disorder (OCD) is associated with an increased attentional
bias to emotive stimuli remains controversial. Additionally, though
depression is the main comorbidity of OCD, it is unclear whether it modulates abnormal emotional processing. To examine whether attentional
bias may be restricted to individualized concern-related information we
employed a visual search task with OCD-relevant images. Following
individual ratings of 100 images, the idiosyncratic most positive and negative scenes were selected for each individual. Participants then searched
for their positive images amongst their negative distracters, and their
negative images amongst their positive distracters. The search task was
administered to nondepressed OCD patients, depressed OCD patients
and healthy controls (n=18 per group). Whilst the rating values were similar, both OCD groups were slower than controls to rate the images in
terms of pleasantness. Visual search performance did not differ between
the groups, although the OCD depressed group exhibited a general slowing. All groups demonstrated an attentional bias whereby negative targets were detected faster amongst positive distracters as compared to
positive targets amongst negative distracters. A second experiment using
pre-selected negative and positive images replicated the visual search
results, with no group differences in attentional bias. OCD rating performance following the search now indicated both slower and more negative scoring values. Results indicate that OCD patients, regardless of their
depression state, process OCD-relevant scenes differently from controls
depending on task demands and previous exposure. The results have
implications for the development of emotional responses to concernrelated materials in OCD.
C39
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF THE DORSOLATERAL
PREFRONTAL CORTEX DURING A FACIAL EXPRESSION VS.
IDENTITY N-BACK TASK Maital Neta1, Erika Ruberry1, Paul Whalen1;
1
Dartmouth College, Psychological & Brain Sciences — Facial expressions of
emotion are a critical aspect of our social interactions as human beings.
Just as important is the identity of the individuals, as this creates the context in which these expressions will be interpreted. Therefore, it is crucial
that we monitor both identity as well as expression information and
maintain this information in memory. Participants performed an N-back
task in which they either tracked the expression or the identity of the
same set of face stimuli. During both the expression and identity tasks,
we found a significant increase in activity in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), an area that has been shown to be critical for working memory. Functional connectivity analyses revealed that activity within this
region of the DLPFC was coupled with the amygdala during the facial
expression N-back, but coupled with the fusiform gyrus during the face
identity N-back. Finally, the connectivity of these regions in each task
was significantly correlated with accuracy on those trials. Based on these
findings, there is evidence for two separate neural circuitries, both
involving the DLPFC, supporting working memory for two distinct
aspects of face processing/memory.
C40
AMYGDALA VOLUME CORRELATES POSITIVELY WITH
FEARFULNESS IN NORMAL HEALTHY GIRLS: AMYGDALA
VOLUME AS AN ENDOPHENOTYPE FOR INTERNALIZING
DISORDERS? Ellen A.A. van der Plas1, Aaron D. Boes1, John Wemmie1,
Peg Nopoulos1; 1University of Iowa, Psychiatry — Research into the neural
underpinnings of fear and fear-related pathology highlight the role of the
amygdala. For instance, bilateral damage to the amygdaloid complex is
associated with decreased appreciation of danger and recognition of fear
in humans and non-human primates, whereas enlarged amygdala vol-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

93

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

ume is associated with syndromes such as anxiety disorders and depression. It is unknown whether amygdala volume and fearfulness are
directly related in the absence of pathology. To address this issue, we
examined the correlation between normal fearfulness and amygdala morphology in 116 healthy children and adolescents (60 boys, 56 girls, age 717). Based on the structure-behavior relationship suggested by lesionand pathological fear studies, we predicted to find a positive correlation
between fearfulness and amygdala volume. Fearfulness was measured
using the parent ratings on the Pediatric Behavior Scale (Lindgren et al.,
1987) and amygdala volumes were determined by manual tracing. Partial
correlation analyses indicated a significant positive correlation between
right amygdala volume in girls (r = .29, p < .05). This relationship was
more robust and significant for both the left and right amygdala when
analyses were limited to girls with a positive nuclear family history of
depression (r = .63 and r = .58 respectively, both ps < .05). In boys there
was no significant relationship, which may suggest that biological mechanisms and their interactions with the environment differ between sexes.
Given the role of the enlarged amygdala volume in pathology, these findings may indicate that variation in amygdala morphology marks susceptibility to internalizing disorders.
C42
UNDERSTANDING
THE
EFFECTS
OF
UNPLEASANT
DISTRACTERS DURING A FACIAL WORKING MEMORY TASK
Anne Richards1, Virginia Hon1, Sammy Aung1, Richard Hernandez1, Parveen
Hussain1, Sam London1, Richard Maddock1; 1University of California,
Davis — This study investigated the effects of emotion on working memory (WM) and how these effects are related to individual differences,
physiological arousal, emotion regulation, and brain activation. We used
a facial memory task with unpleasant and neutral distracters. Block
instructions alternated between "Regulate Emotions" and "Respond Naturally". We recorded memory accuracy, skin conductance and several
individual difference questionnaires from 109 undergraduates. Regulation instructions did not affect working memory performance, so we
combined both block types for all analyses. A paired t-test shows
improved WM accuracy on trials with unpleasant distracters (n=109,
t=6.581, p<.0001, two-tailed). This facilitation of WM is significantly
related to low state anxiety (n=109, r=.326, Z=3.486, p=.0005). A Wilcoxon
Signed Rank test shows that higher arousal measured by skin conductance response to unpleasant distracters predicts better memory accuracy
following unpleasant distracters (n=80, Z=1.962, p<.05, two-tailed). A
separate group of 20 subjects participated in an fMRI study using a version of the same task. In a contrast between unpleasant and neutral distracters, we found that fMRI activity in the left mid-VLPFC (BA 45)
correlated with WM facilitation by unpleasant distracters (cluster-level
p<.05). In summary, unpleasant distracters unexpectedly improved facial
WM accuracy. This effect correlated with low state anxiety and with fMRI
activity in the left mid-VLPFC, an area associated with cognitive control
in memory. WM accuracy following unpleasant distracters was positively correlated with skin conductance responses to the unpleasant distracters. Thus, emotional distracters can lead to improved working
memory via a mechanism influenced by arousal, anxiety, and cognitive
control.
C43
MODULATORY EFFECT OF VOICE ON CONSCIOUS AND
NONCONSCIOUS PROCESSING OF EMOTIONAL BODY
LANGUAGE Bernard M.C. Stienen1, Akihiro Tanaka1, Beatrice de
Gelder1,2; 1Cognitive and Affective Neurosciences Laboratory, Tilburg, The
Netherlands , 2Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts — Previous studies have shown that affective processing of faces is still possible
in absence of visual awareness. Recent results of our group have shown
that emotional body language is also processed even if a target body is
masked after a short SOA and not consciously visible. As emotional
events have multiple correlates and are simultaneously perceived by sev-

94

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

eral sensory systems in naturalistic settings, emotional information conveyed by other modalities (e.g. voice) can affect the processing of
conscious and nonconscious processing of emotional body language. In
the present study, we investigated the effect of emotional voice on conscious and nonconscious processing of emotional body language. A target body (happy or anger) and a mask were presented at 12 different
SOAs varying from -50 to +133 milliseconds. Emotional voice (happy or
anger) was presented with the onset of the target body. Participants were
instructed to ignore the voices and to do two tasks successively. The first
task was to categorize the expression of the target body and the second
task was to indicate whether they had seen the body or not. Results
revealed that emotional voice facilitated categorization of the target body
when the emotional valence was congruent between body and voice,
whereas it interfered with categorization when the emotional valence
was incongruent. Voice did not affect the responses when the body was
not presented, while it did affect when the body was presented. These
results have implications for multisensory and nonconscious processing
of emotion.
C44
THE
PROCESSING
OF
EMOTIONAL
PROSODY
IN
ALEXITHYMIA Katharina Goerlich1, Sander Martens1, André Aleman1;
1
BCN Neuroimaging Center Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, The Netherlands — In the present study, we used
event-related potentials (ERP's) to test the hypothesis of aberrant automatic processing of emotional speech in Alexithymia, a personality trait
associated with difficulty to interpret emotions. High-scorers on
Alexithymia were compared to low-scorers on this personality trait and
to a control group with middle scores on Alexithymia. Volunteers
watched a silent video while nonsense syllables spoken in neutral emotion (standard) and four different emotional intonations (deviants) were
presented in an oddball paradigm. High-scorers on alexithymia were
found to show diminished amplitudes of ERP components indicating
pre-attentive, automatic detection of changes in emotional prosody. The
results of this study suggest that people with Alexithymia show differences in processing emotion conveyed by speech already at very early,
automatic processing stages, reflecting a dimished sensitivity to emotional prosody in this personality trait.
C45
HOW THE BRAIN RESPONDS TO SEEING FEARFUL BEHAVIOR
IN THE REAL WORLD Jan Van den Stock1,2, Beatrice de Gelder1,3;
1
Laboratory for Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, Tilburg University, the
Netherlands, 2Old Age Psychiatry, University Hospitals Leuven, Belgium,
3Martinos NMR-MGH Center, Harvard Medical School — Recent
studies
have examined the role of surrounding contextual information on the
processing and recognition of objects, as well as the respective neural
mechanisms. There are only a few studies focussing on the mechanisms
involved in contextual influence on perception of social stimuli.
Although the processing of faces seems to have a ’privileged’ status,
recent data reports that the early components of the neural processing of
faces are influenced by the emotional content of the contextual information. An object category that displays several behavioral and neurofunctional similarities with faces, comprises whole bodies. We used
functional Magnet Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to investigate the neural
correlates of perceiving emotional whole body expressions in either emotionally congruent or incongruent contexts. We presented fearful and
neutral whole body expressions in a fearful, neutral or scrambled context,
creating realistically compound stimuli. The stimuli were presented in a
blocked design while blood oxygenation level depended brain scans
were acquired (3 Tesla). Participants were required to perform an oddball
detection task on the presentation of an inverted stimulus. The experiment consisted of four runs with each 31 blocks. In one block, eight stimuli were presented for 800ms with an interval of 350ms. In 10% of the
blocks, an oddball stimulus was presented. Finally, a functional localiser
for the perception of faces, bodies, houses and tools was performed. The

Poster Session C

results show that activity in brain areas that are associated with perception of bodies or perception of scenes, are influenced by the emotional
information conveyed by the respective stimuli.
C46
NEURAL
CIRCUITRY
UNDERLYING
EMOTIONAL
VS.
COGNITIVE CONFLICT AND CONTROL: FACIAL EXPRESSIONS
AS A MODEL BEHAVIOUR Kimberly S. Chiew1, Bethany G. Edwards1,
Todd S. Braver1; 1Washington University in St. Louis — Recently, the neural basis of emotional control has become a topic of empirical interest;
however, overlaps and differences in the neural circuitry underlying
emotional and cognitive control have yet to be systematically established.
We have identified emotional facial expressions as actions modulated by
both emotional and cognitive influences: thus, their use as performance
measures in emotional control tasks may provide greater ecological
validity than previous tasks, using arbitrary behavioural responses, have
permitted. In this study, we examined brain activity during emotional
and cognitive versions of the AX-Continuous Performance Task (AXCPT), a cue-probe task used to examine controlled processing and conflict. Participants responded via facial expressions (smiling or frowning)
to emotional probes (IAPS images) or unemotional probes (letters, numbers and symbols). In both tasks, trial frequency and contextual cues
introduced a bias towards the target cue-probe combination that leads to
two forms of conflict in non-target trials: top-down (i.e., cue-driven) vs.
bottom-up (i.e., probe-driven). However, in the emotional condition, the
conflict was further amplified by the incongruency between the required
facial expression and the emotional valence of the picture. A mixed
block/event fMRI design enabled separation of sustained and eventrelated neural correlates of task activity. The results address the question
of whether affective brain regions (e.g., ventral striatum, orbitofrontal
cortex, amygdala) are selectively engaged in the emotional conditions,
and further whether conflict in this condition engages regions associated
with cognitive control (e.g., anterior cingulate cortex and lateral PFC) but
in anatomic locations distinct from those activated in the cognitive condition.
C47
ANXIETY AFFECTS LUMINANCE DISCRIMINATION IN THE
RIGHT HEMISPHERE Caroline Crump1, Eran Zaidel1; 1University of
California, Los Angeles — Key features of anxiety include an attention bias
toward negative, emotional stimuli and heightened autonomic response
to threat. Both negative emotions and autonomic responses are selectively associated with the normal right hemisphere. Consequently, we
predicted that the right hemisphere of anxious participants will have a
distinct information processing profile, different from the left hemisphere
of an anxious participant and from the right hemisphere of a nonanxious
participant. We compared the perceptual differences between college students who rated high and low on the Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety
Inventory. Participants received identical copies of a color square (the target) and an emotional word in each visual hemifield. Following a brief
delay, they received two probes: one identical to the target, the other
equally often of a lighter or darker luminance. Participants were required
to indicate with a keypress which probe test matched the target. We predicted that anxious participants would more often choose the probe with
the lower luminance and that this effect should be selective to left hemifield probes. Both predictions were correct. The results implicate the right
hemisphere in anxiety and show a perceptual bias toward the darker
(more negative) stimuli. It remains to be determined whether the bias
toward darker stimuli occurs in the perceptual stage, reflects short-term
memory, or is due to a late-stage response programming bias. The results
suggest new, nonverbal measures of anxiety. They also suggest that the
right hemisphere is the proper target for both measuring and controlling
anxiety.

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

C48
FURTHER EVIDENCE FOR AN EPISTASIS BETWEEN 5-HTT AND
BDNF FROM SELF REPORTED ANXIETY RELATED TRAITS Tina
B. Lonsdorf1,2, Armita Golkar1,2, Martin Schalling1, Arne Öhman1,2;
1Karolinska Institutet, 2Stockholm Brain Institute — Anxiety related traits
have been associated with several genetic polymorphisms. The s-allele of
an insertion/deletion (5-HTTLPR) in the serotonin transporter (5-HTT)
promoter is associated with higher neuroticism, amygdala reactivity and
morphological alterations. The met-allele of a polymorphism
(BDNFval66met) in the Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) prodomain has been associated with lower scores on anxiety related traits. A
study by Pezawas et al. (2008) demonstrated a biological epistasis
between BDNFval66met and 5-HTTLPR. The morphological phenotype
of 5-HTTLPR s-allele carriers, reduced gray matter volume of the subgenual anterior cingulate, could be compensated by the presence of a BDNF
met-allele. We tested this epistasis at the level of self reported traits. 349
healthy individuals, genotyped for 5-HTTLPR and BDNFval66met, filled
in the Swedish University Scales of Personality (SSP). Both 5-HTTLPR
and BDNFval66met genotype had a main effect on the subscale Stress
Susceptibility (SS): 5-HTTLPR s-carriers and BDNF val-carriers reported
higher SS than individuals homozygous for the 5-HTTLR l- allele, p=0.04,
and the BDNF met-allele, p=0.032. Furthermore there was evidence for an
epistasis effect: 5-HTTLPR s-carriers that also were homozygous for the
BDNF met-allele reported significantly less SS than 5-HTTLPR s-carriers
that also carried a BDNF val-allele, p=0.011. Our data indicate that the
BDNF met/met genotype seems to protect against the adverse effect of
the 5-HTTLPR s-allele also on the level of self reported traits.
C49
GENETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY TO DEPRESSION AND SELECTIVE
ATTENTION FOR NEGATIVE AND POSITIVE INFORMATION:
PRELIMINARY FINDINGS Iris van Oostrom1, Barbara Franke2, Maaike
Verhagen1, Annemarie Van der Meij1, Jan Buitelaar1, Constance Vissers1,
Armand van Oosterwijck1, Joost Janzing1; 1Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Psychiatry, The Netherlands, 2Radboud University
Nijmegen Medical Centre, Antropogenetics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands —
According to the cognitive theory of depression, individuals susceptible
to depression attend selectively to negative information and filter out
positive information. Goal of the study was to examine the relationship
between candidate genetic susceptibility factors for major depressive disorder (MDD) and selective attention for negative or positive information
in formerly depressed patients, their unaffected relatives and unaffected
controls. Formerly depressed female patients having at least one firstdegree relative with a history of MDD (n=23), unaffected female relatives
(n=20) and female healthy controls screened for lifetime MDD (n=10)
were administered the emotional Stroop task using negative, positive and
neutral words. Attentional biases were calculated using the difference in
reaction times (RT’s) between neutral and negative or positive words.
The CIDI was used to assess current and lifetime diagnosis of MDD. All
participants were genotyped for polymorphisms in the 5-HTT/SLC6A4
gene (5-HTTLPR), BDNF (Val66Met) and COMT (Val158Met). Patients
and family members demonstrated non-significantly (p=0,09) longer RT’s
for negative compared to neutral words (m=5,67;sd=26,78), while controls demonstrated shorter RT’s for negative compared to neutral words
(m=-13,39; sd=46,04). Groups did not demonstrate differences with
regard to positive bias. At the genetic level, no significant differences
were observed in attentional biases between groups based on genetic
polymorphisms. Findings suggest that formerly depressed patients and
their unaffected family members tend to focus more on negative information than controls. Our non-significant findings may be due to small sample sizes and/or the restricted contribution of single polymorphisms. We
suggest to use larger sample sizes in future studies.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

95

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

C50
ATTENTIONAL REDEPLOYMENT AS AN EFFECTIVE EMOTION
REGULATION STRATEGY Martin Herrmann1,2, Andreas Mühlberger2,
Alexandra Rebhan2, Maike Georgs2, Paul Pauli2, Andreas Fallgatter1;
1University of Würzburg, Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy,
2
University of Würzburg, Psychology — Recent studies have shown that
cognitive reappraisal can be used as an effective emotion regulation strategy, leading to decreased amygdala activity and to a reduction of the late
positive potential (LPP) in the EEG. Van Reekum and colleagues (2007)
tested the possibility that people use attentional redeployment rather
than, or in addition to, reappraisal as a strategy to regulate emotion.
Indeed they found that subject show a reduced viewing of the emotioneliciting stimulus when they were instructed to decrease the emotional
response. Another study (Dunning and Hajcak, in press) showed that
cues leading the visual attention to a non emotional focus within unpleasant images can also reduce the LPP. Both studies suggest that attentional
redeployment might be an effective emotional regulation strategy, which
should be tested in our study. Therefore we instructed our subjects
(n=20) to lead their attention to a non emotional or emotional focus
within the displayed images and recorded the event-related EEG potentials with 21 scalp electrodes. As hypothesized we found a reduction of
the LPP over Pz while focusing to a non emotional part of the pictures,
leading to the suggestion that simply to instruct the subjects not to look at
the emotional part of a picture is a useful emotion regulation strategy for
healthy subjects.
C51
MOOD AFFECTS SYNTACTIC PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM
P600 Constance Vissers1, Daniele Virgillito2, Dan Fitzgerald1, Anne
Speckens1, Indira Tendolkar1, Iris Van Oostrom1, Dorothee Chwilla3; 1Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Psychiatry, 2Scuola Superiore di
Catania, Catania, Italy, 3Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour — A P600 effect has been reliably reported after syntactic violations (Osterhout et al., 1992) and more recently also to several kinds of
semantic anomalies (Kuperberg, 2007). To our view the P600 effect
reflects a more general process of reanalysis, triggered by a strong conflict between a highly expected and an unexpected linguistic element
(Vissers et al. 2008). In this study we explored the interaction between
syntax and emotion. To this aim, we investigated the effects of emotional
state on P600. EEG was recorded while female participants (31) read sentences half of which contained subject-verb agreement errors (’The crook
who shot[plural] at the cops...’) and correct sentences (’The cops who
shot[plural] at the crook...’). Mood was manipulated between participants by presenting short film clips that either displayed fragments from
a happy movie or a sad movie. The main results were as follows: After
watching the happy film clips participants scored significantly higher on
a 9 point-mood scale than after watching the sad film clips (p <.01). The
clips thus effectively induced the intended mood. For P600, measured
between 600 to 800 ms, an interaction of syntax with mood was present
for both the midline and for the lateral sites (ps < .02). ). The interaction
revealed a broad bilaterally distributed P600 effect for the happy mood
condition, and a strong reduction of a P600 effect for the sad mood condition. Hence, syntactic processing is affected by mood in healthy subjects.
This modulation of syntax by mood challenges modular views of language processing.
C52
DISPOSITIONAL MINDFULNESS AND NEURAL SYSTEMS
UNDERLYING REAPPRAISAL OF NEGATIVE EMOTION Gemma
Modinos1, Johan Ormel2, André Aleman1; 1BCN Neuroimaging Center,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 2Interdisciplinary
Center of Psychiatric Epidemiology, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands — Research with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has played a crucial role in seeking to determine
the neural substrates of the cognitive regulation of negative emotional
responses. However, little is known about how activity in these regions is

96

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

modulated by individual differences in the tendency to respond emotionally or to regulate emotion. Mindfulness, an enhanced attention to and
awareness of current experience, is at the core of meditation practices,
and is known to reduce negative affect and promote well-being. The
influence of dispositional mindfulness skills, thought of as a form of selfregulation, on the neural systems supporting the cognitive control of
emotion remains unknown. To examine the relationship between mindfulness and reappraisal-related neural structures, we imaged 18 healthy
subjects (mean age = 20.56; 7 females) while performing a reappraisal
task in a 3T MRI scanner. Subjects viewed neutral and negative emotional
pictures under three conditions - attend-neutral, attend-negative, reappraise-negative - and provided in-scan emotion experience ratings. Dispositional mindfulness skills were assessed prior to scanning through
self-report. When individual mindfulness scores were incorporated in the
analysis of brain activity associated with reappraising compared to
attending to negative pictures, we observed that mindfulness significantly predicted increased activity in the amygdalae, insula, and dorsal
prefrontal cortex. These results suggest a direct link between mindfulness
and the neural substrates of emotion processing and its cognitive control,
and provide novel neuroscientific support to the potential usefulness of
mental training in the effective regulation of negative affect.
C53
MOTOR SYSTEM CONTRIBUTIONS TO SOCIAL INTERACTION
SKILLS: EVIDENCE FROM EEG ACTIVITY IN THE MU
FREQUENCY RANGE Anat Perry1, Shlomo Bentin1,2, Nikolaus F. Troje3;
1Hebrew University, Psychology, Jerusalem, Israel, 2The Interdisciplinary
Center of Neural Computation, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel, 3School of
Computing, and Centre for Neuroscience Studies, Psychology, Queen's
University, Kingston, Canada — Motor actions suppress the EEG activity
over the sensory-motor cortex, in a frequency range between 8-13 Hz, a
range labeled Mu rhythms. Mu-suppression is induced not only by actual
movements but also while the participant observes actions executed by
someone else. This characteristic of Mu rhythms putatively associates
them with the Mirror-Neurons System, which has been implicated in
humans with social skills abilities and ToM. Further evidence for association between mu rhythms and social skills comes both from studies of
individuals with Autistic Spectrum Disorders, and from a few studies
with typical participants. These studies showed different mu rhythms
modulations depending on the degree of social content of an observed
human action. We further explored the basic relation between mu
rhythms and social interaction. Specifically, using point-light biological
motion, we manipulated the observer's task while keeping the stimuli
identical across tasks. In separate blocks EEG was recorded while observers were instructed to process either the gender or the emotion or the
intention of a moving pattern revealing the same biological motion of
humans. The participants also completed two questionnaires - The Interpersonal Reactivity Index, and The Empathy Quotient. Mu suppression
was found in all conditions relative to a baseline consisting of a moving
circle. The suppression was modulated by task, strengthening the proposed association between mu rhythms and social interaction skills. Significant correlations between mu suppression and the scores on the
personality scales unveiled theory-based individual variability in the
activation of the mu-suppression mechanism.
C54
SITUATED CONCEPTUALIZATION OF EMOTION AND
ABSTRACT CONCEPTS Christine Wilson1, Lisa Feldman Barrett2,3, W.
Kyle Simmons4, Lawrence Barsalou1; 1Emory University, Psychology, 2Boston
College, Psychology, 3Harvard Medical School, Psychiatric Neuroimaging
Research Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, 4National Institutes of
Mental Health, Laboratory of Brain and Cognition — Evidence increasingly
suggests that the human conceptual system is situated and dynamic.
From this perspective, situational content, such as setting, event, and thematic information, shapes concepts dynamically, including emotion concepts like fear and anger. This approach to emotion concepts motivates

Poster Session C

different questions than traditional views that focus instead on trying to
identify a diagnostic biological pattern in the body and brain for each
emotion category. To investigate whether situational context shapes emotion concepts dynamically, we developed an fMRI paradigm in which a
mental state concept is processed in physical situations (where participants imagined being in physical danger brought on by their own poor
judgment) and in social situations (where participants imagined being
socially evaluated in an unfair manner by another individual). Two emotion concepts (fear, anger), and two abstract concepts (plan, observe),
were assessed in each situation type. On a given trial, participants listened to the description of a situation, heard one of the four mental state
words, and rated how easy it was to experience the mental state in the situation. We predicted that different activation patterns would occur for
the same mental state concept in the two situation types. Results support
these predictions, indicating that conceptualizing an emotion or abstract
concept is a context-sensitive, dynamic process.
C55
DIFFERENTIAL NEURAL RESPONSES TO EMOTIONAL STIMULI
ASSOCIATED WITH MOOD CONGRUENT VS MOOD
INCONGRUENT DELUSIONS Ayana Gibbs1, Paul Fletcher2, Anthony
David1; 1Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, 2University of
Cambridge — Delusions in psychosis have been divided into those that
arise from underlying mood disturbance (mood congruent - MC) and
those arising in the absence of mood abnormalities (mood incongruent MI). Abnormal responses to emotional stimuli may play a role in the formation of delusional beliefs. However this role may differ for MC compared to MI delusions. To investigate this, fMRI data were collected
while participants (8 MC, 9 MI and 15 controls) viewed 46 aversivearousing pictures and 46 neutral pictures. In the AVERSIVE > NEUTRAL
contrast MC patients demonstrated a similar pattern to controls with activation in visual cortical areas and limbic areas, while the MI group demonstrated activity in ventral striatal regions. In the alternate NEUTRAL >
AVERSIVE contrast there was a pattern of ventral striatal activation in
the MC group, mirrored to a lesser extent in the controls, suggesting relative suppression of striatal responses to aversive pictures. Between group
comparisons of the AVERSIVE > NEUTRAL contrast revealed increased
activation of the ventral striatum in MI relative to MC patients. Taken
with the within group findings, this suggests that the MI group may be
less effective at suppressing activity in this reward-associated region in
the presence of a non-rewarding or aversive stimulus. There was also
increased activation of the precuneus in MC relative to MI patients. These
findings suggest that abnormal patterns of brain activation to emotional
stimuli may play a role in the formation of mood congruent and mood
incongruent delusions however the neural mechanisms may differ.
C56
EARLY AND LATE EFFECTS OF EMOTIONAL WORDS AND
FACES IN THE EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIAL
Annekathrin Schacht1, Julian Rellecke1, Werner Sommer1; 1HumboldtUniversity at Berlin, Psychology — Several studies have shown emotional
stimuli to involuntarily draw attentional resources, resulting in a preferential and sustained processing. The underlying neural mechanisms are
suggested to be reflected in two different components of event-related
brain potentials (ERPs): the early posterior negativity (EPN) and the late
positive potential (LPC). However, as yet it remains mostly unclear,
under which boundary conditions emotional processing depends on the
availability of central attentional resources and specific stimulus characteristics. In a series of experiments, we investigated the time course of
emotion effects in word and face processing by using ERPs. In line with
studies on affective picture processing, both EPN and LPC components distinguishable in their scalp topographies and latencies - were elicited
by emotional words and facial expressions, although their emotional
meaning was irrelevant for the tasks. Importantly, EPN effects appeared
later to words than faces, but showed comparable scalp distributions in
both domains, and were independent of the level of processing. More-

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

over, the EPN to angry faces appears to benefit from the withdrawal of
central resources by an additional task. In contrast, LPC effects were
modulated by a variety of different factors and dependent on specific
task demands. Furthermore, these late emotion effects appeared at comparable latencies but with different scalp distributions to words and
faces, indicating contributions of domain-specific brain systems. These
results indicate both ERP components to reflect different mechanisms of
emotional processing at early and late stages.
C57
RECOGNIZING EMOTIONS FROM OUR OWN FACES: HOW
GOOD ARE WE? Bhismadev Chakrabarti1, Jorrit de Kieviet1,2, Zanna
Szlachta`1,3, Simon Baron-Cohen1; 1Autism Research Centre, University of
Cambridge, 2Vrije University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3MRC Cognition
and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK — Background: Our own face has
special status as an instrument for interacting with the external social
world, using expressions of emotion that we rarely see. Humans, from
birth, perceive expressions of emotion in the faces of others but have limited visual experience of their own emotion expressions (via mirrors and
film). In two experiments we tested emotion recognition from one's own
face compared to those from others' faces. Sample and Method: 34 volunteers were photographed making expressions of five basic emotions, and
tested one week later using their own face and those of unknown others
(taken from a standardized stimuli set), in an emotion recognition task.
Results: In Experiment 1, people were quicker to correctly recognize all
emotions from their own face, compared to others' faces. In Experiment 2
replicated these results, using a set of morphed faces between self and
others, and showed that the degree of self-similarity in a faces is positively correlated with speed of accurate emotion recognition. Conclusions: This is the first demonstration of a self-effect in relation to basic
emotion recognition from faces. The results are consistent with an
account based on simulation theory and have possible clinical implications for conditions marked by difficulties in self and emotion processing,
such as autism spectrum conditions.
C58
CUE-DEPENDENT NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF VOCAL
AFFECT PERCEPTION David Leitman1, Tim Campellone1, Daniel
Ragland,2, Daniel Wolf1, James Loughead1, Jeffery Valdez1, Cameron Carter,2,
Bruce Turetsky1, Daniel Javitt,3,4, Ruben Gur1; 1Brain Behavior Laboratory,
Neuropsychiatry Section, 2Imaging Research Center, UC DAVIS, 3Nathan S
Kline insititute for Psychiatric Research, 4New York University, Psychiatry —
Affective communication through vocal tone (prosody) is a core channel
of interpersonal interaction, which, like its facial analogue, relies on gestural changes. Such vocal changes involve modulation of specific aspects
of the speech signal including perceived pitch, voice intensity, and spectral energy. The stage in the information processing cascade where perception and integration of these cues occur in the brain is the topic of
intensive debate. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we show
that right primary and secondary auditory cortices are already sensitive
to valence-related vocal features. These auditory regions in conjunction
with limbic regions show a reciprocal pattern of activation with inferior
frontal gyrus. The balance of activation is determined by the degree of
cue salience in an emotion-specific manner.
C59
EARLY EXPERIENCE AND CHANGES IN BRAIN STRUCTURE
AND FUNCTIONS FOR MATERNAL LOVE Pilyoung Kim1,2, James
Leckman2, Linda Mayes2, Michal-Ann Newman3, Ruth Feldman4, James
Swain2; 1Human Development, Cornell University, 2Child Study Center, Yale
University, 3Howard University, 4The Leslie and Susan Gonda Brain Science
Center, Bar-Ilan University, Israel — Early experience such as maternal
care can influence development of stress reactivity and the ability to bond
with others. Animal studies suggest that early maternal care is related to
heightened stress reactivity in the hippocampus. Maternal care may also
have long-term effects on brain areas related to social competence and
attachment. To examine whether early experience may affect neurologi-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

97

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

cal correlates of maternal love, we studied effects of perceived quality of
maternal care in childhood on brain structure and functional responses to
salient infant stimuli among human mothers in the first postpartum
month. Higher maternal care in childhood was linked to larger gray matter volumes in the superior and middle frontal gyri, orbital gryrus, superior temporal gyrus and fusiform gyrus. These areas have been found to
be important for social information processing. Furthermore, in response
to infant cries, mothers with higher maternal care in childhood showed
increased activations in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, middle frontal
gyrus, superior temporal gyrus, and fusiform gyrus; whereas mothers
with lower maternal care showed increased hippocampal activations.
The areas with greater brain activations were considerably overlapping
with the areas with larger gray matter volumes among the high maternal
care group. These findings suggest an association between maternal care
in childhood and neurobiological substrates of stress reactivity, social
attachment, further maternal love in human mothers.
C60
NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF FEAR EXTINCTION DUE TO
EXPOSURE THERAPY Katherina Hauner1, Susan Mineka1, William
Revelle1, Ken Paller1; 1Northwestern University, Psychology — Specific phobias, characterized by excessive and unreasonable fear of an object or situation, are the third most prevalent of all mental disorders. Exposure
therapy for specific phobias can lead to fear extinction, usually within
two hours of treatment. The neural mechanisms by which this remarkable clinical outcome is accomplished are not currently understood. The
chief goal of the present study was to identify the functional neuroanatomical substrates of fear extinction following exposure therapy in a
group of participants meeting diagnostic criteria for spider phobia. An
additional goal was to determine the extent to which extinction and
habituation (a non-associative decrease in fear due to repeated stimulus
presentation) are neuroanatomically distinct. Before treatment, neural
correlates of phobic fear were obtained as differential fMRI responses to
alternating sequences of phobic images (spiders) versus neutral images
(moths), particularly in the amygdala. A detection task performed during
all scanning required subjects to maintain attention to all stimuli. Neural
correlates of habituation were obtained using repeated phobic images.
Participants then completed a 2-hour exposure therapy session (or 2-hour
sham therapy session), followed by a subsequent fMRI session during
which they viewed a novel set of phobic and neutral images. Results
yielded pre- versus post-treatment changes in the processing of phobic
versus neutral stimuli. These findings are relevant for hypotheses regarding neurocognitive mechanisms for fear extinction, which appears to
involve both changes in the perception of fear and in the strategic use of
fear inhibition. Ramifications for neurobiological models of fear extinction will be discussed.

Higher level cognition: Executive
functions
C61
SEPARATE SYSTEMS IN ATTENTIONAL SWITCHING AND
SELECTION: EVIDENCE FROM FMRI Benjamin O. Turner1, F.
Gregory Ashby1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara — In the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST), subjects learn to sort cards using a series of
simple one-dimensional rules. Perseverative responding on this test is a
classic symptom of frontal dysfunction. Even so, perseverative errors on
the WCST could be due to a failure to select the appropriate dimension
that needs attending, or to a failure to switch attention from the current
dimension to the newly selected dimension. The present study used a
modified version of the WCST in which errors of selection and switching
had separate observable effects. Healthy normal college students performed this modified WCST in a rapid event-related fMRI experiment,
experiencing approximately 100 rule changes over the course of the scan-

98

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

ning session. The results strongly supported the hypothesis that selection
and switching are separate neural and cognitive processes. For example,
relative to rule switching, rule selection was associated with increased
activation in anterior cingulate cortex and in the striatum. Further, these
areas were shown to be components in partially-overlapping networks
that mediated the selection and switching operations. Overall, the results
were generally consistent with the COVIS model of category learning,
which proposes that selection is mediated by a network that includes the
anterior cingulate and the prefrontal cortex and that switching is mediated by a reduction in the prefrontal activation of the striatum.
C62
NEURAL
NETWORKS
THAT
MONITOR
RESPONSE
UNCERTAINTY Erick J. Paul1, David Smith2, F. Gregory Ashby1;
1University of California, Santa Barbara, 2University at Buffalo, State
University of New York — Humans and some animals (but not all) display
the ability to monitor uncertainty about the environment, and to cope
with such uncertainty by escaping or by seeking more information. In
most categorization and discrimination experiments, participants are
forced to make a decision on each trial regardless of their uncertainty.
Some paradigms, however, have been designed specifically to elucidate
the nature of uncertainty monitoring during such tasks. Researchers have
successfully observed strategic use of uncertainty (or escape) responses
from humans and some animals, but the neural substrates of uncertainty
monitoring are not entirely known. Using fMRI, the present study sought
to detect active brain regions related to uncertainty in a categorization
task. Human subjects were asked to categorize visual patterns according
to whether the pixel density was sparse or dense; they were also allowed
to use an uncertain response on every trial. Correct responses were
rewarded, incorrect responses were punished, and uncertainty responses
allowed participants to escape to the next trial. On trials when uncertain
responses were given, we identified activity unique to uncertainty
responses and unrelated to task difficulty. This network included areas of
bilateral frontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and right posterior insular cortex, which have been implicated in state monitoring, self-awareness and attention. These results help to describe the neural components
of uncertainty and metacognition and may clarify what distinguishes
humans and animals that can consistently use uncertainty responses
from those that cannot.
C63
INFLUENCE OF CONFLICT SIZE AND ERROR TYPES ON POSTERROR SLOWING Carolin Dudschig1,2, Ines Jentzsch1; 1University of St
Andrews, 2Universität Tübingen — In order to achieve optimal performance, people are able to adjust their response threshold on a trial-totrial basis, becoming increasingly faster until committing an error and
slowing down immediately after the error. Such adjustments are usually
explained by shifts along the speed-accuracy trade-off function, triggered
by conflict in previous trials (Botvinick et al., 2001). Some researchers
assume that conflict is particularly large in error trials, especially when
the erroneous and correct responses are similar (e.g. left foot instead of
left hand, see Gehring & Fensick, 2001). However, the influence of conflict strength on post-error slowing, and the link between the errorrelated negativity (ERN) and post-error slowing, is still unclear. In two
experiments conflict size and its influence on post-error slowing and on
the ERN were investigated. If conflict strength determines post-error
slowing, slowing should increase the more response features are shared
by the erroneous and correct response. We found the ERN and post-error
slowing to increase with increasing conflict, but only when different
effectors (hand, foot) were involved. When only hand responses were
required (hand, finger), the data did not follow the predictions of the conflict strength hypothesis. We conclude that the conflict account as well as
the relationship between ERN amplitude and post-error slowing is limited to specific task settings.

Poster Session C

C64
INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY IN WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY
PREDICTS SUCCESS IN ATTENTION-RELATED PROCESSING OF
VISUAL STIMULI Jesse J. Bengson1,2,3, George R. Mangun1,2,3,4; 1Center
for Mind and Brain, University of California, Davis, 2University of California,
Davis, 3University of California, Davis, Psychology, 4University of California,
Davis, Neurology — We investigated the hypothesis that working memory
capacity (WMC) supports a subject’s ability to generate expectancies for
the characteristics of upcoming stimuli. In a cuing paradigm (Handy et
al., 2001) participants were cued to expect both the location and orientation of a square-wave grating stimulus. Performance in the cuing task
was measured as the difference in reaction time (RT) and accuracy
between validly cued orientations and invalidly cued orientations at validly versus invalidly cued spatial locations. The Operation Span
(OSPAN) task (Turner & Engle, 1989) indexed variations in subjects’
WMC. The design included two between-subjects conditions: a response
cued condition, in which the grating orientation cue also cued the hand of
response, and a feature cued condition, in which the orientation cue did
not predict the hand of response. A total of 111 subjects were tested. In
the response-cued condition, independent of WMC, we found that RTs
were faster for validly cued orientations, at both validly, (t(54) = 10.599, p
< .000), and invalidly cued spatial locations, (t(54) = 5.501, p < .000). In
contrast, in the feature-cued condition, the benefits of cueing were
observed at validly cued spatial locations only for those subjects in the
top third of WMC, (t(17) = 4.134, p = .001). In conclusion, these findings
show that the ability to develop expectancies for complex stimuli is critically dependent on individuals’ WMC. As a result, individuals with
higher WMC are better able to utilize selection mechanisms to enhance
performance under demanding perceptual conditions.
C65
EFFECTIVE AND STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY OF THE
EXECUTIVE AND MOTIVATIONAL CORTICOSTRIATAL LOOPS
UNDERLYING FEEDBACK PROCESSING Dan
Lopez-Paniagua1,
Carol Seger1; 1Colorado State University — Previous research indicates that
feedback is crucial for successful category learning. The head of the caudate and ventral striatum have been shown to be sensitive to feedback
across different types of learning, including category learning. Several
cortical areas work collectively with these striatal regions; the head of the
caudate connects with prefrontal and posterior parietal cortex to form the
’executive’ corticostriatal loop, while the ventral striatum connects with
orbitofrontal and mediofrontal cortex to form the ’motivational’ corticostriatal loop. In this study, both effective and structural connectivity of the
executive and motivational loops were examined. First, BOLD responses
associated with feedback processing were measured during trial and
error learning in a categorization task. Diffusion tensor mapping (DTM)
identified frontostriatal pathways between regions implicated in feedback processing. Effective connectivity between striatal and cortical
regions sensitive to feedback was then assessed using Granger Causality
Mapping (GCM). Directed influence was observed from ventral striatum
to mediofrontal cortex, from mediofrontal cortex to the head of the caudate, which in turn exerted directed influence on lateral prefrontal, posterior parietal cortex, and posterior regions of the caudate. The effective
and structural connectivity results of the present study provide further
insight as to how the striatum and cortex interact to subserve feedback
processing. In particular, GCM results demonstrate that information
from one corticostriatal loop can be relayed to another loop in a "feed-forward" fashion, and are consistent with animal models showing that interactions between loops occur in a ventroanterior to laterosuperior
direction beginning in the ventral striatum.
C66
DISSOCIABLE COMPONENTS OF COGNITIVE CONTROL: AN
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATION
OF
RULESWITCHING Matthew Waxer1, J Bruce Morton1; 1The University of
Western Ontario, Psychology — Rule-switching is thought to involve distinct preparatory and response-related processes. The current study

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

investigated these potentially dissociable aspects of cognitive control by
mean of high-density event-related potentials (ERP’s). Adult (n=20) participants performed a deductive rule-switching task with distinct preparatory and response-related trial periods. To investigate differences in
preparatory processes underlying rule-switching, we compared ERP’s in
the preparatory period of switch trials and repeat trials. To investigate
differences in response-related processes underlying rule-switching, we
compared ERP’s in the response period of conflict trials and non-conflict
trials. Participants were slower and more error-prone on switch trials and
conflict trials than on repeat trials and non-conflict trials. There was no
interaction between switching and conflict. Analysis of ERP’s timelocked to the preparatory period revealed a late negativity over frontal
sensors whose amplitude was greater on switch than repeat trials. Source
localizations of these ERP data with Low Resolution Electromagnetic
Tomography (LORETA) revealed increased current density activations of
the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC), and left parietal cortex for switch trials relative to repeat trials.
Analysis of ERP’s time-locked to the response-period revealed a frontocentral N2 whose amplitude was greater on conflict than on non-conflict
trials. Distributed cortical source localizations of these data with
LORETA revealed increased current density activations of the ACC for
conflict relative to non-conflict trials. These findings provide further
insight into differences in dissociable processes involved in rule-switching.
C67
WHO TO MARRY OR TO CHOOSE AS A FRIEND?: EFFECT OF
SOURCE INFORMATION AND SOCIAL CONTEXT ON THE
BRAIN MECHANISMS OF PERSON-PREFERENCE JUDGMENT
Motoaki Sugiura1,2, Risa Funayama2, Yuko Sassa1,3, Hyeonjeong Jeong1,4,
Keisuke Wakusawa1,5, Kaoru Horie6,7, Shigeru Sato6,7, Ryuta Kawashima1,3;
1IDAC, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan, 2Faculty of Education, Miyagi
University of Education, Sendai, Japan, 3RISTEX, JST, Kawaguchi, Japan,
4Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Tokyo, Japan, 5Graduate School of
Medicine, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan, 6Graduate School of Intercultural
Studies, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan, 7LBC Research Center, Tohoku
University, Sendai, Japan — Person preference is critical to the dynamics of
our society. In making judgments, the face and behavior are two important sources of information, and choice of spouse and of friends are different decisions. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to
identify brain areas involved in person-preference judgment, based on
paired information in two contexts. Normal subjects were shown pictures
of two different faces of the opposite sex (Fa), or shown one actor performing two different routine behaviors (Bh). Each subject selected the
person they would prefer to marry (Mr) or to be a friend with (Fr). As a
control task, brightness of the picture was judged. All the preferencejudgment conditions activated the anterior cingulate and caudate nucleus
more than the control task. The Bh condition activated the bilateral temporoparietal junction and anterior temporal sulcus more than the Fa condition. Activation in the right ventral striatum and left amygdala was
conspicuous in the FaMr condition. Activation in the right dorsolateral
and medial prefrontal cortices was prominent in the BhMr condition. Our
results showed that, in addition to the common decision-making mechanism, person-preference judgments recruit different brain areas, depending on the type of source information and social context. Behavior-based
judgment involves the neocortical networks for social perception. Choice
of a spouse, which is of critical evolutionary importance, recruits the limbic networks in face-based judgment and the neocortical cognitive integration and inhibition networks in behavior-based judgment,
presumably reflecting different evolutionary stages, when the two types
of source information were relevant to the judgment.
C68
INDEPENDENT MODULATORS OF REGIONAL EEG ALPHA SUBBAND POWER DURING A WORKING MEMORY TASK Julie
Onton1, Scott Makeig1; 1University of California, San Diego — Previous
studies have suggested that upper and lower alpha-band power are sepa-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

99

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

rately regulated during certain cognitive processes. A shortcoming of
those studies was that alpha power was summed across several scalp
channels. Here we show that alpha sub-bands are, indeed, separately regulated and occur within single EEG independent component or source
domains. EEG data from a "two-back" working memory task was first
decomposed by extended-infomax independent component analysis
(ICA) to isolate temporally independent EEG activities from the signal
mixtures recorded at the scalp channels. Activation time series of braingenerated independent component (IC) processes were transformed into
log spectrograms using 4-cycle (at 4 Hz) to 42-cycle (at 125 Hz) wavelets
moved at 50-ms intervals through each stimulus-response trial. The mean
log power spectrum over all time windows was removed for each IC,
leaving spectral fluctuations from the mean log spectrum in each window. Spectral data from all ICs were reduced by principal component
analysis (PCA), and then again decomposed by ICA to separate the spectral data into a log mixture of independent modulator processes (IMs)
with maximally distinct spectral profiles across ICs and frequencies.
Some of the resulting IM templates accounted for activity in distinct
alpha sub-bands. Because each IM template was associated with IM time
weights for each trial and latency, we could test whether these alpha subband modulators had different mean time courses relative to task events
and whether the patterns of alpha power modulation were brain-region
specific.
C69
THE EFFECTS OF EXPECTED VALUE AND RISK LEVEL ON
BEHAVIORAL AND ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES IN A
MODIFIED IGT Nai-Shing Yen1,2, Chang-Hao Kao1, I-Chen Chou1, HuiKuan Chung1; 1Psychology, National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan,
2
Research Center for Mind, Brain, and Learning, National Chengchi University,
Taipei, Taiwan — The somatic maker hypothesis (SMH) proposed that
decision making is a process that depends on emotion and deficits in
emotional signaling will lead to poor decision making (Damasio, 1994).
An Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) was used to support SMH. In the IGT,
somatic maker (i.e. anticipatory SCR) is interpreted as correlates with the
bad decks, and it operates as an alarm to make subjects withdraw from
bad decks. Compared with normal controls, patients with VMPFC damage showed less anticipatory SCR and chose more cards from bad decks.
However, the bad decks in IGT are also more risky decks. Thus, another
factor which may influence the performance on the IGT is risk level
(Dunn et al., 2006). In order to further clarify the SMH, the expected values and risk levels were manipulated in a modified IGT. In good decks,
the immediate gain and delayed loss are smaller, which leads to positive
expected values. In bad decks, the immediate gain and delayed loss are
larger, which leads to negative expected values. The risk level was
manipulated by the magnitude of coefficient of variation. Behavioral
data, SCR and alpha activity in the EEG were collected. In our modified
IGT, a significant interaction between decks and risk levels was found.
Participants chose more cards from bad decks in high risk condition and
chose more cards from good decks in low risk condition. Furthermore,
the anterior alpha activity showed the same pattern as the behavioral
data. But the anticipatory SCRs were not. Therefore, the SMH is not supported.
C70
A FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING STUDY OF
LIST-WIDE VS. ITEM-SPECIFIC CONTROL IN THE STROOP
TASK Julie Bugg1, Bethany Edwards1, Todd Braver1; 1Washington
University in St. Louis — The magnitude of Stroop interference is smaller
when attentional conflict occurs frequently, as in a mostly incongruent
condition. In a previous study using a state-item fMRI design, we found
that decreases in list-wide proportion congruence (the percentage of congruent trials within a list) were selectively associated with increased
state-related activation of right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex. We interpreted this sustained pattern as reflecting increased utilization of proactive control: expectancy-driven attentional adjustments that biased

100

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

attention away from word reading even prior to stimulus onset. While
recent behavioral evidence suggests a single control mechanism may
underlie both the list-wide and item-specific proportion congruence
effect (i.e. smaller interference for mostly incongruent items in a 50% congruent list), this idea has not been tested using fMRI. In the current study,
we used a state-item fMRI design to examine the degree to which similar
or dissociable neural activation patterns characterize list-wide and itemspecific proportion congruence effects. Participants (N = 20) were
scanned while performing Stroop trials in blocks for which proportion
congruence was manipulated in a list-wide manner (mostly congruent,
mostly incongruent, mostly neutral, and equal ratio) as well as in an itemspecific manner (list = equal ratio). Both types of proportion congruence
manipulations influenced behavioral interference effects. The imaging
results address whether these manipulations differentially affect activity
in control regions, including the anterior cingulate cortex and lateral prefrontal cortex response to conflict. We consider several explanations for
our findings including the role of stimulus repetition.
C71
MOTIVATIONAL INFLUENCES ON INHIBITION-RELATED
BRAIN ACTIVITY Lauren Leotti1, Tor Wager1; 1Columbia University,
Psychology — The stop-signal paradigm provides a sensitive measure of
response inhibition (SSRT) that is assumed to be independent of strategic
and motivational biases. However, our recent work has shown that SSRT
varies systematically when adopting different strategic tradeoffs between
speed and accuracy. The present study examines stop-signal performance in 14 participants in a mixed-block/event-related design, which
allowed us to separate responses on stop and go trials (phasic changes)
with sustained strategy-related activity (tonic changes). Consistent with
previous studies, successful inhibition of responses to the stop-signal was
associated with increased activity in inferior frontal cortex (IFC) and striatum. Controlling for activity due to phasic responses, we observed tonic
increases in response inhibition-related regions (right IFC) when subjects
adopted an accuracy bias and tonic increases in motor preparation
regions (basal ganglia, substantia nigra, motor cortex) when subjects
adopted a speed bias. Furthermore, strategy-induced differences in tonic
activity predicted differences in phasic response on successful inhibition
trials. Greater tonic activation of right IFC (accuracy > speed) predicted
greater phasic activation of the globus pallidus on successful stop trials.
Greater tonic increases in the substantia nigra (speed > accuracy) predicted less phasic activity in control regions in the lateral PFC. Collectively, the results suggest that strategic shifts alter the recruitment of
regions involved in response inhibition and response selection. Separating the influences of motivation from inhibitory processes is important
for understanding the neural bases of inhibitory control in normal cognition and in populations with presumed inhibitory deficits.
C72
REGULATORY FOCUS AND EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS Brian D.
Glass1, J. Vince Filoteo2, Arthur B. Markman1, W. Todd Maddox1; 1The
University of Texas at Austin, 2VA San Diego Healthcare System & University
of California, San Diego — Executive functions (EF) encompass cognitive
processes that allow flexible and adaptive behavior in the face of novel or
changing situations. The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and head of the
caudate nucleus have been proposed as critical brain regions in rule
based tasks involving set shifting (Maddox & Ashby, 2004; Monchi et al.,
2006). The Wisconsin Card Sorting Task is the gold standard measure of
EF in cognitive assessment and has been used extensively in experimental settings. We test the hypothesis that EF is affected by the interaction of
global incentive structure and the local task reward structure in a group
of normal participants. This prediction is based on the possibility that the
ACC is differentially activated by the interaction between global incentive structure and local task components (Cunningham et al., 2005). Global incentive structure was manipulated by requiring participants to earn
a raffle entry (promotion focus) or keep a raffle entry from being revoked
(prevention focus). Reward structure was framed as maximizing point

Poster Session C

accrual (gains structure) or minimizing point reduction (losses structure).
A regulatory mismatch (promotion-losses, prevention-gains) is predicted
to impair cognitive flexibility relative to regulatory fit (promotion-gains,
prevention-losses). As predicted, participants in a regulatory mismatch
showed worse EF than participants in a regulatory fit. These findings
suggest that accurate assessment of EF must consider motivational and
task reward factors that could be influenced by various neural systems,
and have important implications for the relationship between executive
function and regulatory focus.
C73
NEUROCOGNITIVE CORRELATES OF ERROR INDUCED
POSITIVITIES REVEALED BY MEG Päivi
Helenius1,
Marja
2,3
2
4
Laasonen , Laura Hokkanen , Ritva Paetau , Markku Niemivirta5; 1Brain
Research Unit, Helsinki University of Technology, Finland, 2Helsinki
University, Psychology, 3Helsinki University Central Hospital, Phoniatrics,
4
Helsinki University Central Hospital, Pediatric Neurology, 5Education,
Helsinki University — The cognitive and physiological processes related
to successful Go/NoGo task performance and error detection were investigated using magnetoencephalography (MEG) and event-related potentials (ERPs at Fz, Cz, Pz). Our stimuli were visual arrays composed of 5
items (apples and animals). The relative position of items was randomized between successive stimuli presented once every 2 seconds. The 12
participants were instructed to make a rapid manual response to a target
stimulus (wolf facing a pig) and avoid responding to a non-target stimulus (17%) (wolf facing an apple). Erroneous responses elicited an ERP
component peaking 60 ms after button press and an enhanced positivity
peaking around 230 ms (error positivity, Pe). The infrequent non-target
stimuli evoked a more negative going deflection 390 ms after stimulus
onset and a more positive going deflection at 530 ms (late positive component, LPC) compared to the target stimuli. The Pe and LPC components were coupled with functionally and temporally equivalent
activation in the MEG channels. This activation was localized bilaterally
in the posterior temporal cortex. In the response-locked averages, the
temporal activity was enhanced if errors were committed. In the stimulus-locked averages, the activation was also enhanced after infrequent
non-target stimuli and delayed for the initially miscategorized non-targets accompanied with erroneous response. Thus, the results suggest that
the cortical correlates of LPC and Pe are not specifically related to commission of an error, but these components, and bilateral temporal cortices, are more generally involved in conflict resolution and memory
updating triggered by the incoming stimuli.
C74
ASSOCIATING EVENT-RELATED BRAIN DYNAMICS WITH
EVENT CONTEXT Scott Makeig1, Julie Onton1; 1University of California
San Diego — Active human agents both create and respond to events in
’real’ time without the luxury of delay. Ongoing EEG source signals and
their event-related perturbations index processes that maintain or adjust
the distribution of attention between sensory, mnemonic, and imaginative processes in response to the perceived significance of events --which may be heavily influenced by the context in which they occur. To
determine from the data themselves which event contexts are linked to
which brain dynamics changes, we decomposed event-related log spectrograms from maximally independent EEG components (IC) processes
time locked to delivery of auditory feedback signals in a ’Two-back with
feedback’ visual working memory paradigm. Before decomposition of
the (frequencies * latencies by trials) matrix for each IC, we appended a
matrix of ’answers’ to 19 questions about the trial context, in the form of a
(questions by trials) matrix of (’yes|no’) 1s and -1s. Maximally independent components of the joint data matrix gave independent factors (IFs)
comprising a log spectral time/frequency modulation template, a loading on each of the questions, plus a weight specifying the relative effect of
the template in each trial. Sorting the individual trial context vectors by
their IF trial weights revealed significant across-trials trends, even for IFs
predominantly linked to relatively simple event contrasts. Context ICA

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

decomposition appears likely to allow new insights in the connection
between events in context and the complex spatiotemporal patterns of
local cortical field synchrony that produce the ongoing EEG.
C75
THE ROLE OF OVERALL VALENCE IN EVALUATIVE DECISION
MAKING Andries Van der Leij1, Steven Scholte2, Ap Dijksterhuis1;
1
Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 2University of
Amsterdam, Psychology — Evaluative decision making, for instance deciding which of two political opinions to prefer, involves forming a relation
between the alternatives and one’s internal values and goals, a comparison between the alternatives, and a choice. The characteristics of these
goal-directed decisions change when both alternatives are judged as positive or negative, the former leading to a decision in terms of anticipated
benefits and the latter to a decision in terms of costs (’Which alternative
will benefit/harm me the most?’). It has been shown that the evaluative
judgment of a stimulus (e.g. self-referential processing) involves activation of the anterior frontomedian cortex. However, the neuronal underpinnings of decision making between multiple evaluative stimuli are still
largely unknown. We hypothesized that the potential harmfulness of
choosing the wrong alternative between two negative options would be
associated with additional prefrontal activity. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to investigate the neuronal processes underlying
these types of decisions. While scanned, participants made dichotomous
choices between political statements. In a behavioral session the participants rated each statement on a negative to positive visual analogue
scale, which allowed for estimation of the overall valence of the choices.
When contrasted with choices between two positive statements, choices
between two negative statements led to the activation of the frontopolar
cortex. These data support the notion that the differences in overall
valence of evaluative decisions are associated with differences in brain
activation patterns and suggest a special role of the most frontal regions
in choosing between undesirable alternatives.
C76
IS YOUR ERROR MY CONCERN? AN EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL STUDY ON OWN AND OBSERVED ERROR
DETECTION IN COOPERATION AND COMPETITION Ellen
de
Bruijn1, Daniel von Rhein1, Harold Bekkering1; 1Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands —
For successful goal-directed behavior it is essential for humans to continuously monitor one’s actions and detect errors as fast as possible. EEG
studies have identified an error-related ERP component known as the
error-related negativity or ERN. Theories on error monitoring propose a
direct relation to reward processing. Whenever an error is made, the outcome of an action turns out to be worse than expected, resulting in a loss
of reward and hence eliciting the ERN. However, as own errors are
always associated with a loss of reward, disentangling whether the ERN
is error- or reward-dependent has proven to be an extremely difficult
endeavor. Recently, an ERN has also been demonstrated following the
observation of other’s errors. An important difference with own errors is
that other people’s errors can be associated with loss or gain depending
on the cooperative or competitive context in which they are made. We
conducted an ERP study to disentangle whether the ERN is error- or
reward-dependent. Eleven pairs (N=22) of participants performed and
observed a speeded-choice reaction task in two contexts. Own errors
were always associated with a loss of reward. Observed errors in the
cooperative context also yielded a loss of reward, but observed errors in
the competitive context resulted in a gain. The results showed that the
ERN was present following all types of errors independent of who made
the error and the outcome of the action. Consequently, the current study
demonstrates that the ERN is error-specific and not dependent on
reward.
C77
FUNCTIONAL
PREFRONTAL

CONNECTIVITY OF THE
CORTEX IN CHILDREN

DORSOLATERAL
WITH AUTISM

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

101

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

SPECTRUM DISORDERS: A FUNCTIONAL MRI STUDY OF
WORKING MEMORY Benjamin E. Yerys1, Alicja U. Kreczko1, Kathryn F.
Jankowksi1, Philip S. Lee2, Peter Daniolos1, John VanMeter3, Lauren
Kenworthy1, Chandan J. Vaidya1,2, William D. Gaillard1,3; 1Children's
National Medical Center, Washington, DC, 2Georgetown University,
Washington, DC, 3Georgetown University Medical Campus, Washington,
DC — Functional connectivity studies of working memory in adults with
ASD have yielded reduced neural synchrony between neural regions
expected to support task performance. No studies to date have examined
functional connectivity of working memory networks in children with
ASD. The current study included 24 children (12 with ASD and 12 age,
IQ, and gender matched controls) who completed an N-back working
memory task (2-back and 1-back blocks) at 3T using echo planar imaging.
The left and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA 9/46; DLPFC) served
as seeds, given their importance in working memory. The time series of
seed locations were extracted via MarsBar and entered as a covariate of
interest in a whole-brain voxel-wise regression in SPM5. Within the control group, the expected fronto-striatal loop was observed with both
DLPFC seeds. In contrast, the ASD group exhibited atypical increased
prefrontal connectivity. Taken together, these findings extend atypical
functional connectivity to include working memory networks in childhood samples of ASD.
C78
NEURAL CORRELATES OF REWARD-BIASED PERCEPTUAL
DECISION-MAKING Kartik Kesavabhotla1, Shruti Japee1, Aurora Ramos1,
Leslie Ungerleider1; 1Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, NIMH, NIH — Studies suggest that higher-level cortical areas may compute perceptual decisions by comparing outputs of different pools of selectively tuned lowerlevel sensory neurons. A factor that may influence this decision-making
process is the reward value associated with making a particular response
choice. To study the effect of incentive on the decision-making process,
we conducted an fMRI study, in which 19 subjects performed a facehouse categorization task involving noise-degraded stimuli and multiple
levels of monetary reward. Two noise levels: 46% and 58% were used for
degradation of images. To study the effect of incentive, four reward levels were used: No Reward, Equal Reward, High Face Reward (higher
reward for correct face than house), and High House Reward (higher
reward for correct house than face). Behavioral data showed that subjects
shifted their decision criterion towards the more profitable response
choice, especially at the higher noise level. Preliminary fMRI data
showed that frontal regions, such as BA9/44, were generally more
engaged when subjects processed noisy stimuli and when their decisions
were influenced by reward. Specifically, these regions showed greater
activity during high house compared to equal reward trials. Furthermore,
when subjects incorrectly identified a face as a house (i.e., decision
aligned with reward-induced bias toward houses), differential activity
(high house relative to equal reward) in this region was negatively correlated with the magnitude of decision-criterion shift (for high house relative to equal reward trials). These results indicate that frontal regions
may combine reward-induced response bias with sensory evidence when
computing perceptual decisions.
C79
SEARCHING
FOR
THE
MAJORITY:
ALGORITHMS
OF
VOLUNTARY CONTROL Jin Fan1,2, Kevin G. Guise2, Xun Liu2,
Hongbin Wang3; 1Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Psychiatry, 2Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, Neuroscience, 3University of Texas Health Science Center at
Houston, School of Health Information Sciences — Voluntary
control
of
information processing is crucial to allocate resources and prioritize the
processes that are most important under a given situation; the algorithms
underlying such control, however, are often not clear. We investigated
possible algorithms of control for the performance of the majority function, in which participants searched for and identified one of two alternative categories (left or right pointing arrows) as composing the majority
in each stimulus set. We manipulated the amount (set size of 1, 3, and 5)

102

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

and content (ratio of left and right pointing arrows within a set) of the
inputs to test competing hypotheses regarding mental operations for
information processing. Using a novel measure based on computational
load, we found that reaction time was best predicted by a grouping
search algorithm as compared to alternative algorithms (i.e., exhaustive
or self-terminating search). The grouping search algorithm involves sampling and resampling of the inputs before a decision is reached. These
findings highlight the importance of investigating the implications of voluntary control via algorithms of mental operations.
C80
ERROR SWITCH COST AS GOAL NEGLECT: FAILURE OF
VOLUNTARY TOP-DOWN CONTROL AND ITS RELATION TO
FLUID INTELLIGENCE Koki Ikeda1, Ryo Tamura2, Toshikazu Hasegawa1;
1University of Tokyo, 2Saitama Gakuen University — Altmann proposed the
randomized-runs task switching paradigm, where a run consists of several trials, and a task cue is presented only in the first trial of a run but not
in the following trials (Altmann & Gray, 2008). Subjects are required to
execute the same task throughout a run. When the task assigned in a run
differs from the previous one, it is defined as a "switch" run. In this paradigm, "latency" switch cost (or "switch cost" as commonly termed) is
observed only in the first trial of a run, whereas "error" switch cost occurs
all through a run and only after switching. Apparently, there are two distinct mechanisms that underlie these two types of switching cost, but
only few attempts have been made to understand the nature of error
switch cost. In this study, we explored several aspects of this phenomenon. First, we showed that error switch cost was eliminated either by
explicit error feedback or voluntary effort to reduce error. Secondly, individual differences in error switch cost were correlated with the psychometric scores of fluid intelligence. These results suggested that error
switch cost closely resembles a phenomenon called "goal neglect," which
was found in frontal damaged patients (Duncan et al., 1996). Possible
mechanisms underlying this phenomenon are discussed.
C81
FRONTAL EEG POSITIVITIES DURING A SIMPLE STERNBERG
TASK PREDICT TASK ERROR RATE IN OLDER ADULTS William
Tays1, Jane Dywan1, Lesley Capuana1, Sidney Segalowitz1; 1Brock
University — There is evidence that enhanced frontal activation in older
adults during cognitive tasks may serve a compensatory role in sustaining high level performance. We have recently shown that a Sternberg
short-term memory task with familiarity-based interference manipulations produced a unique frontal positivity in the ERP waveforms of older
adults rather than the interference-based negativities typically observed
in the young. However, in contrast to the compensation account, these
positivities were related to higher error rates on the task. We hypothesized that these interference-related positivities in older adults may represent a strong response to familiarity that does not easily resolve itself,
thus making older adults more susceptible to familiarity-based interference. In the present study, we recorded EEG responses of younger and
older adults in a simple Sternberg task without interference manipulations such that familiarity would be beneficial to performance. We
hypothesized that frontal positivities in older adults in this circumstance
would be predictive of enhanced performance. In contrast to expectations, unique frontal positive activations in older adults appeared to once
again predict poor Sternberg memory accuracy thus replicating previous
work. These data suggest that deviations from the medial prefrontal negativities that emerge in younger adults during the Sternberg task may
represent a less efficient form of information processing which is inconsistent with the compensatory frontal activation reported in imaging
data.

Poster Session C

C82
CONTROLLING
MENTAL
IMAGERY:
BRAIN
ACTIVITY
UNDERLYING
MENTAL
IMAGE
GENERATION
AND
INHIBITION Courtney Clark1,2, Adam Safron1, Ken Paller1; 1Northwestern
University, 2St. Andrews University — A pink elephant! Upon reading this,
does a Dumbo-like image pop into your mind’s eye? Through sheer will
power, could you prevent that elephant from entering your visual consciousness? To explore the extent to which people can avoid visual imagery on command, we studied two conditions. In the IMAGE condition,
subjects were asked to form vivid visual images for the referents of 96
concrete, highly imageable spoken nouns. In the REFRAIN condition,
subjects were asked to focus attention on the sound of each of 96 similar
words and not to think of anything visual at all. EEG data were collected
so that we could analyze a specific brain potential associated with visual
imagery in prior experiments (e.g., Gonsalves & Paller, 2000ab). EEG
results suggested that subjects were successful at inhibiting imagery, in
that occipital potentials were larger in the IMAGE than in the REFRAIN
condition, with maximal amplitude differences about 800 ms after spoken-word-onset. Given that different views of imagery control were provided by EEG measures and self-assessments (subjective ratings,
attention-control questionnaire, and visual imagery ability), it is unclear
which method provides the best account of whether the mind’s eye is full
or empty, and of the ability to achieve control of mental imagery. More
work will be needed to cohesively relate subjective measures to EEG
measures, but these EEG methods nonetheless provide a new way to
investigate the degree of control people have over this sort of visual
imagery that normally comes to mind so swiftly and naturally.
C83
A COMMON ROLE FOR LEFT INFERIOR FRONTAL GYRUS
(BA45) IN PROACTIVE AND SEMANTIC INTERFERENCE IN A
WORKING MEMORY TASK? Alexandra S. Atkins1, Patricia A. ReuterLorenz1, John Jonides1, Marc G. Berman1; 1University of Michigan,
Psychology — — Proactive interference (PI) in short-term item recognition tasks causes participants to be slower to correctly reject familiar negative probes that were members of the memory set on a recent trial (see
Jonides & Nee, 2006). Numerous brain imaging studies of this recentprobes task have shown increased activations in left inferior frontal
gyrus, BA45, associated with this form of familiarity-based PI (Jonides et
al., 1998; Nelson et al., 2003). Using a short-term variant of the Deese,
Rodeiger and McDermott false memory paradigm, we recently demonstrated within-trial semantic interference and false recognition in
response to lure probes using semantically themed memoranda (Atkins
& Reuter-Lorenz, 2008). In this task, subjects are slower to correctly reject
lure probes that are semantically related to items in the memory set compared to non-related negative probes. Given the importance of left BA45
in mediating interference related to familiarity, we predicted this region
might also mediate the processing of semantically related lures. Here we
present results from an event-related fMRI investigation which show
increased activation in left BA45 associated with the correct rejection of
lure vs. unrelated negative probes presented 3 seconds following study of
4-item semantically themed memory set. ROI analyses indicate a positive
relationship between the magnitude of semantic interference and BA45
activity. Findings suggest left BA45 may serve a common role in both
familiarity-based PI and semantic interference in working memory tasks.
C84
THE INFLUENCE OF PROPORTION CONGRUENCY ON STROOP
INTERFERENCE IN THE PRESENCE AND ABSENCE OF
AWARENESS Chris Blais1, Eddie H. Nahabet1, Silvia A. Bunge;
1University of California, Berkeley, Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute — The
magnitude of the Stroop effect increases as the proportion of congruent
trials in a block increases. The most common interpretation of this finding
is that participants detect and use the contingency between the color and
the word to optimize performance. Accordingly, many accounts assume
that participants are aware of the proportion of congruent trials. The

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

present investigation directly assesses the role of awareness of the proportion of congruent trials on the magnitude of the Stroop effect, using
principles from psychophysics. Participants performed 228 blocks, each
containing 100 Stroop trials. The number of congruent trials in each block
varied from 5 to 95, in increments of 5. Following completion of each of
these 2-3 minute blocks, participants were asked (1) were there more congruent trials than incongruent trials, (2) are you sure, and (3) out of the
100 trials, how many were congruent. The results reveal a strong linear
relationship between (a) the size of the Stroop effect and the proportion
of congruent trials and (b) the estimated number of congruent trials and
the actual number of congruent trials. Assuming that the confidence ratings are an accurate measure of awareness, these results indicate that an
entirely "unaware" mechanism can drive the proportion congruency
effect, given the fact that participants were only confident of the proportion at the extremes (i.e., >85 and <20).
C85
RESPONSE INHIBITION MEDIATED BY PREFRONTAL CORTEX
DISTINGUISHES HEAVY SMOKERS FROM ’CHIPPERS’ V.
Viswanath Venugopalan1, Marco Leyton1,2, Lesley K. Fellows1; 1Montreal
Neurological Institute, McGill University, 2McGill University — Addiction
to tobacco is the largest preventable cause of death in the world. Not
everyone who smokes, though, becomes addicted. A subset of smokers
retain better control over their cigarette use, typically smoking no more
than 4 or 5 cigarettes per smoking day and not necessarily smoking
everyday. We hypothesized that these cigarette ’chippers’ would be less
impulsive, or exert better inhibitory control (or both), compared to heavy
smokers. These possibilities were tested in 27 addicted smokers (12.4±2.1
cigarettes/day) and 27 chippers (3.3±1.3 cigarettes/day) matched for age,
gender and education. Group assignment was based on the combined
score on two self-report measures of the degree to which individuals can
control their smoking behavior. Prefrontally-mediated inhibitory control
was measured with the stop-signal task, and in terms of commission
errors in a working memory task. Two aspects of impulsivity, temporal
discounting and risk-taking, were tapped with a standard delay-discounting task for money, and the Balloon Analog Risk Task (BART),
respectively. Participants were tested twice, once while smoking at their
usual rate, and once after an 18 h withdrawal period. The groups differed
significantly on both measures of inhibitory control: chippers had faster
stop-signal reaction times, and made fewer errors of commission on the
working memory task. The groups performed similarly on the two measures of impulsivity. Abstinence did not substantially affect performance
on any of the tasks. These findings suggest that individual differences in
prefrontally-mediated response inhibition may be an important protective factor in retaining control over cigarette use.
C86
TO GRIP OR NOT: ACTION VALUATION BASED ON PHYSICAL
EFFORT AND MONETARY GAIN Irma Triasih Kurniawan1, Deborah
Talmi2, Wako Yoshida2, Ben Seymour2, Nick Chater1, Raymond J. Dolan2;
1
University College London, Cognitive, Perceptual, and Brain Sciences Research
2
University College London, Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging —
Contemporary decision making focus on incentives that determine the
value of an action, but little is known how values are discounted by physical effort. Animal and recent human studies suggest that effort costs
influence action choices and that the Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC) is
crucial in integrating effort and reward. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we investigated how our brain calculates the physical
effort involved in gripping against the monetary benefit attained by that
grip action. We employed a choice task wherein eighteen healthy participants (Mean age 23; SD = 3.4) chose to do nothing or to exert effort by
gripping for a sum of money. Choices were followed by the execution of
the selected actions. We manipulated effort (low and high) and reward
(low and high) levels, and tested if participants’ willingness to grip is
influenced by effort, reward, and the integration of effort and reward. We
assessed BOLD responses in regions implicated in action valuation,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

103

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

namely the ACC and the striatum. Behaviourally, we found main effects
of effort and reward; as expected, participants were more willing to grip
when the gain is higher and when the effort is less. The neural results of
this paper extend animal findings about calculating action costs and benefits and provide insights about the role of effort costs in amotivation
symptoms such as apathy.
C87
EFFECTS OF CONVERSATION COMPLEXITY OF CELL PHONE
CONVERSATIONS ON DRIVING: ERP LAB AND ON-ROAD
DRIVING STUDIES Sean Seaman3,2,1, Li Hsieh2,1, Richard Young2,4;
1Wayne State University, Communication Sciences and Disorders, 2Wayne
State University, Institute of Cognitive and Applied Neuroscience, 3Wayne
State University, Psychology, 4Wayne State University, School of Medicine,
Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences — How does the complexity of a
conversation affect driving performance? Previous work (Hsieh et al.,
2008; Bowyer et al., 2008) has revealed that small, reliable effects of conversation on driving performance can be observed using simulators, but
data concerning the kind of conversation - and the specific effects on
driving performance it may have - has been lacking. We addressed this
research gap in a series of studies designed to measure driving performance while engaged in a secondary conversation task. In the first study,
we looked at simulator responses to visual events during a live conversation task. The cognitive complexity of the conversation was manipulated
to reflect two naturalistic levels of speech complexity. In addition to measuring behavioral measures of driving performance, such as reaction
times to visual stimuli and lane maintenance, we also measured ERPs
and subjective workload estimates. In the second study, we took the task
on-road to evaluate the effects of live speech, and its varying levels of
complexity, in a real-world driving task. Here, we also measured driving
performance (in terms of visual event reaction times and lane maintenance), ERPs, and subjective workload estimates. These studies reveal a
pattern of the subtle ways in which different conversation demands can
interact with the network of cognitive processes that underlie proficient
driving performance.
C88
PAYING ATTENTION WHEN IT COUNTS: THE EFFECT OF
MOTIVATION ON FMRI ACTIVITY DURING ATTENTIONAL
CONTROL Tracy L. Luks1, Ashley Kopec2, Corby L. Dale1, Gregory V.
Simpson1, Anthony Kaveh3; 1University of California, San Francisco, 2Carroll
University, 3University of California, Berkeley — Attentional control is the
goal-driven allocation of attention to task-appropriate stimuli and
responses, and away from distractions. Motivation is the ability to anticipate and appreciate the consequences of behavior, such as rewards or
punishments. We examined interactions between neurobiological systems underlying motivation and attentional control using a Rewarded
Counting Stoop task during an fMRI scan. Subjects made a button press
response indicating the number of lines of text presented. The content of
the text could be neutral, number words congruent with the number of
lines of text, or number words incongruent with the number of lines of
text. Subjects were notified at each block start that performance would
(Reward Condition) or would not (No Reward Condition) be rewarded
(25 cents per correct response within 500msec, indicated at the end of
each Reward block). Relative to the No Reward condition, Stroop task
performance in the Reward condition was associated with greater activation of striatum, thalamus, insula, orbitofrontal cortex, right dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex and the intraparietal sulcus area. During Incongruent
trials, greater activity occurred in anterior cingulate cortex and orbitofrontal cortex in the Reward than the No Reward condition. During Congruent trials, there was greater activity in the pre-supplementary motor
area in the Reward than the No Reward condition. These results suggest
that motivation modulates attentional control via increased activity in
orbitofrontal and anterior cingulate cortex, as well as increasing arousal
and sustained attention by increasing activity in thalamus and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.

104

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

C89
EFFECTS OF EMOTIONAL SPEECH TONE OF CELL PHONE
CONVERSATIONS ON DRIVING: ERP LAB AND ON-ROAD
DRIVING STUDIES Li Hsieh1,2, Sean Seaman1,2,3, Richard A. Young1,4;
1Wayne State University, Institute of Cognitive and Applied Neuroscience,
2
Wayne State University, Communication Sciences and Disorders, 3Wayne
State University, Psychology, 4Wayne State University, School of Medicine,
Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences — We present an investigation
into multitasking, using an ecologically valid task: a simulation of driving while conversing on a hands-free cellular phone. Specifically, we look
at what factors influence multitasking performance; in this case, we
investigated emotional prosody. Recent investigations into the visual
processing of emotional stimuli are suggestive of overall enhanced processing of visual information in emotionally-salient contexts. Because the
majority of investigations into the effects of phone conversation on driving performance have used emotionally neutral conversation contexts,
they may be lacking ecologically validity and wrongly assessing the
impact of speech on performance. We used behavioral, ERP and other
measures to assess performance and physiological differences between
two types of multitasking situations. We employed a validated eventdetection paradigm with lane-tracking to measure driving performance.
Participants viewed a video recording of a driving scene while using a
foot pedal to respond to visual events occurring in the periphery of the
display. Lane-tracking was employed to ensure participants were
engaged with the video recording. RTs to visual events were recorded,
and ERPs were averaged on these events. Behavioral analyses showed
the expected pattern of events occurring during simulated conversations
being associated with slightly longer RTs. However, this effect was moderated by the emotional tone of the conversation; events occurring during
angry conversations were responded to significantly faster than events
occurring during neutral conversations, and were only marginally slower
than events occurring in absence of conversation. ERP analysis confirms
this distinction between events occurring during angry and neutral
events.
C91
RESPONSE INHIBITION AND THE INFERIOR FRONTAL GYRUS:
ARE THERE TASK DIFFERENCES IN LATERALIZATION? Diane
Swick1,2, Victoria Ashley1, And Turken1; 1VA Northern California Health Care
System, 2University of California, Davis — An influential theory holds that
motor response inhibition is strongly lateralized to the right prefrontal
cortex (PFC), based on evidence from neuroimaging and neuropsychology (Aron et al., 2004). The human lesion evidence is based entirely on
results from the Stop-Signal RT task, where patients with lesions in right
IFG, but not left IFG, were impaired in SSRT. However, we recently
reported that 12 patients with focal damage in left IFG and insula showed
response inhibition deficits in the Go/NoGo task, particularly when
responses were more prepotent (90% vs. 50% Go probability; Swick et al.,
2008). This raises the possibility that the two tasks might be tapping different elements of response inhibition. Here, we present new data from
patients with R PFC lesions in GNG. Three of the four had increased
numbers of missed Go trials, suggesting a deficit in sustained attention
rather than response inhibition. This pattern was exaggerated in the
patient with the most extensive RIFG damage. This patient also had
increased NoGo errors in the 50/50 condition but not the 90/10 condition, which does not suggest impairment in response inhibition alone. We
also conducted separate meta-analyses of neuroimaging results from
GNG (620 foci) and SSRT (130 foci) using the Activation Likelihood Estimation method (Laird et al., 2005). Activations in SSRT were actually
more bilaterally represented in PFC and insula than in GNG. Combined,
these results demonstrate the importance of obtaining behavioral data
from both GNG and SSRT in the same groups of patients and the same
fMRI experiments.

Poster Session C

C92
LOAD EFFECTS ON ENCODING, MAINTENANCE, AND
RETRIEVAL PROCESSES IN YOUNGER AND OLDER ADULTS
Brian Gordon1,2, Carrie Brumback3, Gabriele Gratton1,2, Monica Fabiani1,2;
1University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2Beckman Institute, 3University of
California Irvine — Neuroimaging research indicates that tasks utilizing
working memory (WM) draw upon a complex cortical network including
sensory areas and several regions of frontal and parietal cortex. These
regions are involved in different elements of task performance including
information encoding, maintenance, and retrieval. Most neuroimaging
methods are limited to attaining either high spatial resolution or high
temporal resolution. Here we use a brain imaging method with high spatial and temporal resolution, the event-related optical signal (EROS), to
measure brain activation during each of these phases in a highly-practiced, fast-paced memory search task. Experimental manipulations
included load (2-6 items) and age (young: 18-30; old: 65-85). By incorporating both spatial and temporal information, it was possible to locate
areas in prefrontal cortex that show sustained activity during the maintenance interval dissociated from areas in anterior parietal, occipital and
prefrontal cortex that show responses during encoding then again during
retrieval. The activity was graded both in both latency and amplitude
during encoding, and amplitude alone during maintenance and retrieval
phases. The older adults showed a more widespread and bilateral pattern
of activity than younger adults. The data support the idea that a network
of dorsal fronto-parietal structures is involved in maintaining information in WM (Corbetta & Shulman, 2002).
C93
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN TOP-DOWN COGNITIVE CONTROL
AND BOTTOM-UP MNEMONIC EVIDENCE IN PRIMING AND
DECISION-MAKING Elizabeth Race1, Gwen Lawson2, Anthony
Wagner1,2; 1Stanford University, Neurosciences Program, 2Stanford
University, Psychology — Multiple levels of learning from past experience
can have dissociable neural and behavioral consequences during subsequent decision-making. Specifically, recent fMRI data (Race et al., 2008)
indicate that stimulus processing is facilitated by learning at three distinct representational levels, with dissociable patterns of BOLD repetition
suppression obtained for conceptual learning, stimulus-decision associative learning, and stimulus-response associative learning. While these
data demonstrate that different levels of learning yield neural ’benefits’
during subsequent decision-making, mnemonic information may also
produce behavioral and neural ’costs’ when goals change. Indeed, Race et
al. reported that neural processing demands increased when a previously
learned response was no longer goal-appropriate. However, this neural
’cost’ was not accompanied by behavioral (RT) evidence for responseswitch costs, raising the possibility that response-switch costs may be offset by stimulus-level facilitation. To investigate this possibility, the current study manipulated top-down preparatory control (cue-to-stimulus
interval, CSI), providing a means of temporally separating the influences
of learning at distinct levels of representation. Behavioral priming (RT
facilitation) due to stimulus-decision learning was observed at both short
(300ms) and long (1100ms) CSIs, as was priming due to stimulusresponse learning when current responses were congruent with the previously learned response. By contrast, incongruent responses produced
an RT cost after short CSI, whereas there was no evidence for stimuluslevel facilitation nor response conflict after long CSI. Collectively, these
results suggest that retrieval of learned stimulus-response associations
occurs rapidly, but that increased top-down preparatory control can
reduce the influence of stimulus-response mnemonic conflict to enable
faster, task-appropriate responding.

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

C94
INVESTIGATING THE UNDERLYING COGNITIVE PROCESSES
OF THE N-BACK TASK: A REGRESSION STUDY Martin
Buschkuehl1, Susanne Jaeggi1, Marc Berman1, Kirti Thummala1, Courtney
Behnke1, John Jonides1; 1University of Michigan, Psychology — Recently, we
were able to show that a 4-week long training intervention with a dual nback task leads to improvements in fluid intelligence. Although the nback task is widely used, especially in studies involving functional brain
imaging, surprisingly little is known about the cognitive processes that
are involved in this task. Although many researchers have hypothesized
the processes required to successfully perform an n-back task, there are
few studies that have examined these hypotheses operationally. Furthermore, there are no published studies that have investigated the processes
engaged by the dual n-back task that we used to show training effects on
fluid intelligence. Consequently, we have little knowledge about the processes underlying dual n-back training which eventually promote transfer to fluid intelligence. In this study, we used multiple hierarchical
regression analyses to account for n-back performance with tasks representing different constructs such as working memory capacity, interference resolution, task switching, processing speed, and fluid intelligence.
Our results show that dual n-back task performance is best predicted by
fluid intelligence and processing speed providing further evidence for
the close relationship between fluid intelligence and n-back performance.
Our data shed light on the nature of the observed transfer effects that we
obtained previously.
C95
GLUTAMATE AND GLUTAMINE, NOT WHITE MATTER
INTEGRITY, UNDERLIE THE ANTERIOR CINGULATE’S ROLE IN
EXECUTIVE FUNCTION David Ruhl1,2,3, Charles Gasparovic1,4, Arvind
Caprihan1, Mollie Monnig3, Paul Mullins1,5, Jessica Pommy3, David
Hampton3, Per Lysne3, Robert Thoma1,2; 1Mind Research Network, 2University
of New Mexico, Psychiatry, 3University of New Mexico, Psychology,
4University of New Mexico, Neurology, 5University of Bangor, School of
Psychology — Functional neuroimaging studies have implicated the anterior cingulate (AC) in executive functioning, but the mechanisms by
which this is supposed to occur remain unclear. To investigate this issue,
several measures of AC structure and function were assessed with
respect to neuropsychological test scores. Neuropsychological measures,
high-resolution structural, diffusion-tensor imaging, and single-voxel
MR spectroscopy (MRS) data of the anterior cingulate were collected in
thirteen healthy individuals. Gray matter thickness (GM) and fractional
anisotropy (FA; a measure of white matter integrity) in bilateral cingulate
gyri tracts were computed. GM and FA values for the area within the
spectroscopy voxel (GMv & FAv) were also derived to facilitate intermodal comparisons. Glx, a composite measure of glutamate and
glutamine, was quantified from MRS data. Linear regression revealed a
significant negative relationship between Glx and an executive function
score derived from the Trail Making Test (TMT A-B), such that higher
Glx levels were associated with better executive performance (adj Rsquare = .63). Neither age, nor Full Scale IQ moderated this relationship.
FAv and GMv were also entered into the regression, but did not account
for significant additional variance in TMT B-A. No other MRS-derived
metabolite concentrations were predictive of executive function. Collectively, these results suggest that it is specifically glutamate and glutamine
content, and not gray or white matter structure that mediate the cingulate's contribution to executive functioning.
C96
THE
NEURO-ECONOMICS
OF
AGING
IN
POLITICAL
PREDICTION Kanchna Ramchandran1, Dhananjay Nayakankuppam,2,
Joyce Berg,2, Eric Axelson,3, Daniel Tranel1, Antoine Bechara,4, Natalie
Denburg1; 1University of Iowa, Neurology, 2Tippie College of Business,
University of Iowa, 3University of Iowa, Psychiatry, 4University of Southern
California, Psychology — As America ages, its elderly have a strong voice
in political prediction polls and in political outcomes. Deficits in predic-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

105

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

tion among older adults would affect how they engage and influence politics. Older adults (90% male; M=74.0 years, SD=5.6) were asked to
predict the winners of the Presidential primary elections in a repeated
measures (Jan, Feb, March, and April 2008) experiment involving the
Iowa Electronics Market (IEM). Participants traded shares (amongst
themselves) of candidates in the primaries race as if they were market
stocks. During the nominee race, their task was to weigh candidates’ ability to win the nomination and assign share price. Their performance was
compared against the simultaneous, primary election market administered by the IEM, involving approximately 1000 younger, experienced
traders (90% male; M=45.8 years, SD=14.4.) Of the older adult sample,
approximately 50% had been characterized as poor and 50% as strong
decision-makers. Brain MRI volumetric data was available on a subset of
the older adult sample. Data revealed that the older adult, strong, decision-makers were comparable to the younger traders in accurately predicting the winning nominees and their share prices. Both samples
outperformed the older adult poor decision-makers. Prediction accuracy
and rate of updating information were predicted by caudate (p = .02) and
putamen (p = .0002) volumes respectively, in older adults. We conclude
that a subset of older adults may suffer from prediction deficits that correlate with striatal volume. These findings imply deficits in how older
adults may pick political candidates and invest in stock markets.
C97
EXAMINING
THE
NEURAL
EFFECTS
OF
CONFLICT
ADAPTATION DURING WORKING MEMORY Amishi Jha1, Pauline
Baniqued1, Ling Wong1, Kartik Sreenivasan; 1Center for Cognitive
Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania — Distracting information can
cause conflict at many levels along the information processing stream.
Increases in cognitive control following conflict typically lead to
decreases in the subsequent behavioral costs of conflict. This "conflict
adaptation" effect is thought to be subserved by anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) activity on high conflict trials which signals the need for increased
cognitive control. Conflict adaptation has been investigated in paradigms
(e.g., Stroop and flanker) in which the need for cognitive control is punctate. In the current study, we investigated if conflict adaptation would
occur when conflict occurred at the representational level and the need
for cognitive control was sustained. Participants (n = 26) performed a
working memory delayed-recognition task during fMRI recording. Representational conflict was manipulated by presenting distracting items
during the delay that shared many or few perceptual features with the
memory items (high conflict [HC] and low conflict [LC] trials, respectively). Accuracy increased following HC relative to LC trials. Randomeffects fMRI analysis revealed a compatible pattern in the ACC; activity
was greater following HC trials than following LC trials. Additionally,
we investigated the magnitude of the conflict effect (LC accuracy - HC
accuracy) and found reduced conflict effects following HC trials. This
corresponded to larger neural control effects following HC trials in the
inferior frontal gyrus, previously shown to be preferentially activated by
HC trials. Our results demonstrate relatively long-lasting conflict adaptation effects in the context of working memory, and suggest a common
neural profile for the sequential recruitment of control across tasks.
C98
DISSOCIATING CONTROL OVER TASK SET VERSUS CONTROL
OVER
SPEED-ACCURACY
EMPHASIS
IN
PREFRONTAL
CORTEX Vincent Van Veen1, Sheila Loharuka1, Mark DEsposito1;
1
University of California, Berkeley — People are able to control whether
they place emphasis on speed during task performance, or accuracy.
Modulation of this speed-accuracy tradeoff (SAT) is thought to be
obtained by the modulation of baseline activity in decision-related brain
regions; speed emphasis is associated with an increase in baseline activity, such that less neural "evidence" is needed to reach the decision
threshold during speed emphasis. In this study, we compared the control
of SAT to the control over task set. In a 4T MRI scanner, participants performed a Simon task, in which a red or green square was presented to the

106

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

left or right of fixation. Prior to each Simon stimulus, a cue was presented
instructing the participants to emphasize speed or accuracy, and whether
to respond to the color or location of each Simon stimulus with a left or
right hand button press. Preparing to make a response based on location
is more automatic than making a response based on color; therefore,
making a response based on color requires more task control. Thus, task
set and SAT were independently modulated. We replicated our previous
results concerning SAT (e.g., Van Veen et al., 2008); speed emphasis, compared to accuracy emphasis, was associated with increased baseline
activity and reduced transient response-related activation, in SMA, premotor and parietal cortices, while SAT control was associated with left
prefrontal activation. In contrast, control over task set was associated
with right prefrontal activation. Thus, different prefrontal regions are
required for these different types of control.
C99
INTERNAL PERFORMANCE MONITORING INTERACTS WITH
EXTERNAL SITUATION Shun Itagaki1, Kazuo Hiraki1; 1The University
of Tokyo — External information provides us clues in understanding
social and emotional situations, as exemplified by when we understand
others’ emotion by their facial expressions. Additionally, internal processing such as performance-monitoring is essential for one to adapt to
the environment. It has been unknown how they interact with each other,
independently of incentive effects. To investigate this issue, we evaluated
event-related potential (ERP) components called error-related negativity
(ERN), which is elicited by error responses in choice response task such
as the flanker task and thought to reflect performance-monitoring that
derives from the anterior cingulate cortex activities. Participants (N=13)
performed face flanker task constructed by central target and flanker distracters. Stimuli were either Angry and Neutral faces (AN condition) or
Smile and Neutral faces (SN condition). The results of ERPs time-locked
to choice responses showed a clear ERN for error responses, regardless of
stimulus congruency. We found that the ERN was more sensitive to the
error responses in the presence of relatively positive emotional stimuli
than negative ones. In AN condition, a larger ERN was elicited when the
central target was neutral expressions than angry ones. On the other
hand, positive expressions elicited a larger ERN than neutral ones in SN
condition. These results suggest that the ERN reflects multiple monitoring functions, which are associated not only with the mismatch-detection
between the goal and the actual performance, but also with the evaluation of external emotional valence. We conclude that the performancemonitoring function reflected by the ERN interacts with the external situation.
C100
EXAMINING THE LIFESPAN EFFECTS OF REPRESENTATIONAL
CONFLICT DURING WORKING MEMORY Anastasia
Kiyonaga1,
Ling M. Wong2, Amishi P. Jha1; 1University of Pennsylvania, Center for
Cognitive Neuroscience, 2University of California, Davis — It is well-established that behavioral performance following task conditions of high conflict is better than task performance following low conflict, in healthy
young adults. This ’conflict adaptation’ effect is subserved by anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) signaling the need for increased cognitive control
to be implemented by lateral prefrontal cortex (Egner, 2007). In the current study we investigated: 1) If conflict adaptation is observed during
working memory tasks when the need for cognitive control is sustained
over longer intervals; 2) If the influence of conflict on subsequent cognitive control differs over the lifespan. Three groups of volunteers (adolescents (N=86), young adults (N=46), and older adults (N=44)) were
recruited to perform a working memory delayed-recognition task in
which conflict was manipulated. Distracting items were presented during the delay which either shared many or few perceptual features with
the memory items (high conflict [HC] and low conflict [LC] trials, respectively). Consistent with previous results, overall task accuracy was highest in young adults, followed by adolescents, and lowest within older
adults. Importantly, young adults demonstrated reliable conflict adapta-

Poster Session C

Sunday, March 22, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

tion effects, such that current trial accuracy was greater on trials preceded
by HC vs. LC trials. In contrast, accuracy was worse on trials following
HC vs. LC trials in adolescents and older adults. These results suggest
that recruitment of cognitive control in response to conflict has a developmental trajectory that may follow the integrity of the prefrontal cortex
during normal lifespan development.

Higher level cognition: Other
C101
UNDERSTANDING AND EMPATHIZING WITH DISSIMILAR
OTHERS: A CASE STUDY OF A CONGENITAL AMPUTEE Lisa
Aziz-Zadeh1, Tong Sheng1, Lei Liew1, Henryk Bukowski1, Hanna Damasio1,
Antonio Damasio1; 1University of Southern California — How do individuals born without limbs understand actions performed by others with
limbs they themselves have never had? In such individuals, which neural
processes correlate with empathy for pain when observing pain in limbs
that the congenital amputees are missing? Using fMRI we studied an
individual born without arms and legs (DD), in two conditions: action
observation and observation of physical pain. In the action observation
condition, DD saw videos of normal individuals performing simple
actions using their foot, hand, and mouth. Some actions were possible for
DD, albeit with the mouth rather than the hand or foot; other actions
were impossible for DD. We found that, like normal controls, DD showed
activity in premotor and parietal regions for action observation of the
hand, foot and mouth. However, when DD observes actions impossible
for her, she additionally activates the bilateral superior frontal and bilateral cingulate regions. This may indicate that for impossible actions,
regions involved in reasoning and conflict processing are also recruited.
In the pain empathy condition, DD observed others receiving an injection
in the mouth, upper arm and hand. In normal individuals, these stimuli
usually activate components of the "pain matrix" (insula, ACC, and SI/
SII). DD displays a similar pattern but with no activity in SI/SII for the
hand condition, and increased activity in SI/SII for the mouth condition.
This finding indicates that sensory experience is essential for activating
SI/SII during pain observation. Broader implications for how we process
actions and empathize with physically dissimilar others are discussed.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

107

Poster Session D
Higher level cognition: Problem solving
D1
ROSTROLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX INTEGRATES BOTH
SEMANTIC AND VISUOSPATIAL RELATIONS Carter Wendelken1,
David Chun1, Silvia A. Bunge1,2; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, UCBerkeley, 2, UC-Berkeley, Psychology — The ability to reason with complex
relational structure is a central feature of higher-level human intelligence.
Recent fMRI studies have implicated rostrolateral prefrontal cortex
(RLPFC) is in a key component of this capacity: the ability to perform second-order relational processing, or relational integration (Christoff et. al.
2003, Bunge et. al 2005, Wendelken et. al. 2008). These studies, involving
different tasks and different kinds of stimuli, have variously shown activation in left or right RLPFC, dorsally in some cases and more ventrally in
others. We have speculated that differences in the specific locus of activation within RLPFC may be due to privileged access of some areas to information from a particular stimulus domain (Wendelken et. al. 2008).
However, in its strongest form, the theory that RLPFC supports processing
at the highest levels of complexity suggests that this region should be
domain-neutral. We set out to test for domain generality or specificity of
RLPFC activation by collecting fMRI data from subjects as they performed
two versions of a relational matching task, one involving semantic relational judgments and another involving visuospatial relational judgments.
Preliminary evidence (N=12) indicates that both semantic and visuospatial
tasks strongly engage the same region of left RLPFC. In addition, right
RLPFC is strongly activated by the integration of visuospatial relations,
but only weakly activated by the integration of semantic relations. These
findings support the hypothesis that RLPFC implements processing at the
highest level of abstraction, far removed from the input domain.
D2
INTUITION AND INSIGHT PROBLEM SOLVING Azurii
Collier1,
Mark Jung-Beeman1; 1Northwestern University — Often when failing to solve
insight problems, people report some idea of the solution or that the problem is solvable, but cannot explicitly access the idea. We investigated
whether intuition would relate to overnight incubation effects and solvers'
ability to make coherence judgments when working on Compound
Remote Associate (CRA) problems, where they view three words and
must think of another word that forms a compound word with each of the
trial words (crab, sauce, pine; solution- apple). When investigating incubation, on Day 1, participants (n=48) attempted to solve 96 CRAs. For
problems that were unsolved, participants reported whether they had a tip
of the tongue (TOT). On Day 2, participants were given each of the problems they did not solve on Day 1, and 48 new problems. Participants were
more likely to solve a new problem compared to an unsolved Day 1 problem. Interestingly, on Day 2, participants were more likely to solve old
problems if they reported a TOT for those problems on Day 1. We investigated whether intuition would relate to solvers’ ability to judge whether a
CRA was coherent or incoherent. Participants (n=43) had 5 seconds to
judge the coherence of a problem and afterwards were asked for the solution. There was a significant association between participants' judgments
and the coherence of the problem. Of the unsolved problems, participants
had a significantly greater percentage of hits and correct rejections than
false alarms. This suggests solvers' intuition showed some sensitivity to
discriminate between coherent and incoherent problems.

108

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

D3
COMPARING
EVIDENCE
FOR
MULTIPLE
HYPOTHESES
RECRUITS THE LEFT MIDDLE TEMPORAL GYRUS AND THE LEFT
INFERIOR FRONTAL GYRUS Jennifer Whitman1, Todd Woodward2;
1University of British Columbia, 2Provincial Health Services Authority — To
determine the cause of an event, one must consider multiple hypotheses
and evaluate the strength of the evidence supporting each. Next, one must
compare this information to determine the hypothesis most strongly supported by the available evidence. We investigated the brain regions
involved in this comparison using fMRI in a probabilistic reasoning task.
Each trial of this task showed one visibly empty lake and two upstream
lakes filled with black fish and white fish. On each trial either a black or a
white fish jumped from the otherwise empty downstream lake. This fish
could have come from either the lefthand or the righthand upstream lake.
On evidence evaluation trials, participants rated the strength of evidence
for just one of the hypotheses (e.g. the likelihood of a black fish coming
from the lefthand upstream lake). On evidence comparison trials, participants rated the likelihood of one of the potential explanations being correct
rather than the alternate explanation (e.g. the likelihood that the jumping
black fish came from the lefthand rather than the righthand upstream
lake). Regions more active in the evidence comparison condition than in
the evidence evaluation condition included the left middle temporal
gyrus, which has been shown to play a role in making comparisons in
word problems (i.e. taller / shorter, better / worse). We also found clusters
in primary visual cortex, which may reflect elaborative visual processing
of the two lakes, and the left inferior frontal gyrus, thought to be involved
in selecting among competing representations.
D4
INVESTIGATION OF FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN A VISUOSPATIAL REASONING TASK USING GRANGER CAUSALITY
Ehsan Shokri Kojori1, Michelle McClelland1, Michael Motes1, Bart Rypma1, Daniel
Krawczyk1; 1Center for BrainHealth, University of Texas at Dallas — We studied the role of cortical regions in visuo-spatial reasoning by assessing the
connectivity of cortical influences using multiple measures including connection density and directionality. Participants performed a visuo-spatial
reasoning task that included three complexity levels during fMRI scanning. In each trial, multiple shapes with different changing patterns were
shown simultaneously to subjects. Then they were asked to judge whether
or not the changes occurred in accordance with predefined rules. The complexity level was manipulated by increasing or decreasing the number of
shapes that changed together. Response time and accuracy were used as
discriminators between subjects. The fMRI data analysis demonstrated
strong activation peaks in right anterior prefrontal cortex, motor cortex,
and left and right parietal cortices. Since the exact location of peaks differs
across subjects, ROI analyses were performed for each individual subject.
Using average response times, subjects were grouped into fast and slow
performers. The time series associated with peaks of activations were
extracted for further connectivity investigations. Granger causality analysis (Roebroeck et al., 2005 & Seth, 2005) was used to identify the connectivity pattern for the defined ROI sets. Results indicated that faster
performers showed greater prefrontal connectivity to posterior cortical
regions compared to slow performers. These findings will be contrasted to
other studies (Rypma, 2006) that have found greater PFC connectivity to
posterior cortical regions in slower performers.

Poster Session D

D5
WHITE MATTER CONTRIBUTIONS TO BROAD COGNITIVE
DYSFUNCTION IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Rex
Jung1,2,3,4,
Robert
1
1
1
1
Chavez , Arvind Caprihan , Jeremy Bockholt ; Mind Research Network,
2University of New Mexico, Neurosurgery, 3University of New Mexico,
Psychology, 4University of New Mexico, Neurology — Schizophrenia (Sz) is
a heterogeneous brain disorder characterized by broad cognitive decline.
While numerous studies have established white matter abnormalities in
Sz (Kubicki et al., 2005), none have specifically linked broad cognitive
decline to specific white matter pathology. Based upon our previous
work linking intellectual functioning to integrity of the parieto-frontal
network (Jung & Haier, 2007), we hypothesized that white matter connections underlying this network would predict broad cognitive functioning
in schizophrenia. The sample consisted of twenty-four first episode and
chronic Sz patients scanned at 1.5 Tesla. Patients underwent a broad neuropsychological battery from which the first unrotated principal component g was obtained (Jensen, 1998). Diffusion Tensor Imaging data was
processed using Tract-Based Spatial Statistics (Smith, et al. 2006) from
which each subject's FA image was registered to a group skeletonized FA
image. Major white matter tracts measured included bilateral uncinate,
superior longitudinal, cingulum, inferior longitudinal, anterior thalamic
radiation, forceps major/minor, corticospinal, and inferior fronto-occipital. Applying a white matter atlas to obtain regions of interest, FA values
were average across each voxel within each subject's particular fiber tract
to calculate the mean FA of that tract. When we regressed all tracts
against g, we found that higher average FA in the right superior longitudinal fasciculus, linking the parietal and frontal lobes, was associated
with higher g across patients diagnosed with schizophrenia [F = 9.45, p =
.006; r2 = .31]. To our knowledge, this is the first report linking white matter integrity to broad cognitive functioning in schizophrenia.

Higher level cognition: Other
D6
SELF-CONTROL INVOLVES TOP-DOWN MODULATION OF THE
BRAIN'S COMMON VALUE SYSTEM Todd Hare1, Colin Camerer1,
Antonio Rangel1; 1California Institute of Technology — Self-control
problems in value-based decision-making are at the core of a large number of
social and public policy problems, and play an important role in diseases
and public health concerns such as addiction and obesity. Despite
decades of research, we still lack answers to many basic questions regarding self-control and decision-making. To address these questions, we
used fMRI to examine the neural correlates of self-control during a ’real
life’ decision-making task. We recruited individuals who were dieting to
lose weight and non-dieting controls and had them decide whether or not
to eat healthy and unhealthy food items. We show that ventral medial
prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) activity correlated with value computations
during decision-making. Furthermore, in dieting subjects who exercised
self-control, vmPFC activity also correlated with the separate taste and
health aspects of a food item consistent with the idea of a common valuation system in goal-directed choice. When subjects used self-control,
activity in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) increased and this
increased activity correlated with changes in vmPFC activity. An analysis
of psychophysiological interactions suggested that DLPFC might modulate activity in vmPFC and influence value computations during the exertion of self-control in decision-making.
D7
SEX DIFFERENCES IN REAL-LIFE SPATIAL COGNITION Claudia
Wolf1,2, Sebastian Ocklenburg1, Beyza Oeren1, Andrea Hofstaetter3, Christa
Boes3, Markus Popken4, Truls Thorstensen3, Onur Guentuerkuen1; 1Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, Biopsychology, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany,
2Faculty of Life Sciences, Neurobiology and Biology of Cognition, University of

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

Vienna, Austria, 3EFS Unternehmensberatung GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 4Audi
AG, Ingolstadt, Germany — Sex differences in cognitive abilities have been
investigated in numerous psychological studies. Whereas women outperform men in certain verbal tasks, men tend to be superior in some tests
for spatial cognition. Most stable differences in favour of men are found
in the Mental Rotations Test, a paper-and-pencil test requiring the comparison of highly abstract 3-dimensional figures. However, the ecological
validity of results obtained in such artificial and controlled experimental
procedures has been questioned. To obtain a more ecologically valid
measure of spatial cognition, we investigated parking, a complex real-life
situation. Participants parking speed and accuracy were recorded during
three different parking manoeuvres: forward and backward bay as well
as parallel parking. In addition, participants were tested in the Mental
Rotations Test and asked to self-assess their parking skills. We found that
men outperform women in parking accuracy by about 2.1%. Sex differences in parking speed were much more marked: On average, men
parked about 35% faster than women. This difference, however, is not
necessarily an indicator for women’s inferior parking skills. It may also
reflect greater cautiousness while parking. Performance is related to mental rotation skills in driving beginners and self-assessment in more experienced drivers. We assume that this shift in related variables is due to
training and feedback effects. Taken together, our findings show that the
Mental Rotations Test possesses some ecological validity. However, reallife spatial cognition is a much more complex process that is also influenced by other factors.
D8
DURATION MATTERS: DISSOCIATING NEURAL CORRELATES
OF DETECTION AND EVALUATION OF SOCIAL GAZE Bojana
Kuzmanovic1, Alexandra Georgescu1, Simon Eickhoff2,3, Nadim Shah2,4, Gary
Bente5, Gereon Fink2,4,6, Kai Vogeley1,4; 1University Hospital Cologne,
Psychiatry/Psychotherapy, 2Institute of Neurosciences Medicine (INB3),
Research Center Juelich, 3University Hospital Aachen, Psychiatry,
Psychotherapy, 4Brain Imaging Center West, Research Center Juelich,
5University of Cologne, Psychology, 6University Hospital, Neurology,
Cologne — As a salient nonverbal signal for social interest and the intention to communicate, direct gaze indicate mental states of significant others. Despite of this assumed relation to higher-order cognitive processes,
no consistent evidence as indexed by the recruitment of medial prefrontal
neural regions is existent so far. The present functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study tries to clear up this discrepancy by considering additionally to the direction also the duration of gaze behavior.
Direct gaze displayed by virtual characters was, firstly, compared with
averted gaze and, secondly, systematically varied with respect to gaze
duration (i.e., 1, 2.5 or 4 seconds). Consistent with prior findings, behavioural data showed that likeability was higher for direct than for averted
gaze and correlated positively with gaze duration. On the neural level,
distinct brain regions were associated with the processing of gaze direction and gaze duration: (i) the comparison between direct and averted
gaze revealed activations in bilateral occipito-temporal regions including
the posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS), (ii) whereas increasing
direct gaze duration evoked differential neural responses in the medial
prefrontal cortex (MPFC) including orbitofrontal and paracingulate
regions. The results suggest two complementary cognitive processes
related to different gaze parameters. On the one hand, the recruitment of
multimodal sensory regions in the pSTS indicates detection of gaze direction via complex visual analysis. On the other hand, the involvement of
the MPFC associated with outcome monitoring and mentalizing indicates
higher-order social cognitive processes related to evaluation of the ongoing communicational input conveyed by direct gaze duration.
D9
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS OF EMOTIONAL PICTURES
Alana Campbell1, Deana Davalos1; 1Colorado State University — The negativity bias is a robust response in which people value negative components of information more than positive. The negativity bias appears in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

109

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

both behavioral and electrophysiological research and affects a number
of cognitive processes including decision making and value judgments.
The current study uses event-related potential (ERP) to investigate if this
bias can be manipulated and diminished using framing in younger
adults. Participants’ brainwaves are recorded in response to positive,
neutral and negative images. Participants are split into two conditions;
the positive condition must respond if the image viewed is positive or not
while the negative are asked if the image is negative are not. Comparisons between the groups are made based on changes in amplitude and
latency of the late positive potential wave for the three types of images.
Preliminary results suggest that framing may significantly alter the
amplitude of ERPs.
D10
MODULATION OF MOTOR AREA ACTIVITY DURING
OBSERVATION OF COMPETITIVE GAMES Sotaro
Shimada1,
Ryosuke Abe1; 1Meiji University — Observing competitive games, such as
sports, is a pervasive entertainment for humans. It is reasonable to consider that this inclination to watch others play is based on our social cognitive ability to understand the internal states of others. The mirror
neuron system, which is activated when a subject observes the actions of
others, as well as when they perform the same action themselves, seems
to play a crucial role in this process. However, how the mirror system
responds during the observation of competitive games has not yet been
fully investigated. In the present study, we measured the activity of
motor areas using near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) when a subject
watched short movie clips in which two models played a simple competitive game with physical gestures (rock-paper-scissors game). Motor
areas were significantly activated when the subject observed the movie,
as well as when they performed the same action. Interestingly, the activity in the motor areas was significantly greater when the player concordant with the subject’s viewpoint won against the opponent, compared
with when the player lost (P<0.01) or the game ended in a draw (P<0.05).
This result indicates that mirror system activity is modulated by the outcome of the game, a higher-level evaluation of an action. We suggest that
the observer is likely to share the winner’s internal motor representation,
but not that of the loser.
D11
THE ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX CODES A NEGATIVE
REWARD PREDICTION ERROR IN ACTIVE BUT NOT
OBSERVATIONAL FEEDBACK-BASED LEARNING Christian
Bellebaum1, Stefan Thiele1, Irene Daum1; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany — Performance feedback in learning
tasks is accompanied by a negative event-related potentials component,
the so-called feedback-related negativity (FRN), which is generated in the
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). According to a recent theory, the FRN
codes a prediction error, providing a learning signal to guide action selection and optimize future behaviour. The present study aimed to determine, if the neural processing of monetary feedback stimuli for active
learning differs from monetary feedback processing in observational
learning. Two groups of 15 subjects matched for age and IQ participated
in this study. Subjects of the first group performed an active feedback
learning task in which a rule could be learned to maximize reward. Each
participant of the second group observed the performance of one active
subject. Observers were first required to learn the reward-determining
rule based on the observed reactions and feedback stimuli to later implement it in blocks of test trials. As expected, FRN amplitude appeared to
reflect a negative prediction error in active learners, being significantly
enhanced in response to unexpected negative compared to positive feedback. In observers, no significant difference between the valence conditions was found. As revealed by their choice behaviour in active learning
and test trials, respectively, the groups did not differ with respect to the
level of insight into reward contingencies. These findings suggest that
active and observational feedback learning are based on dissociable neu-

110

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

ral mechanisms, with the ACC receiving a feedback-locked learning signal from the basal ganglia for active choice behaviour only.
D12
THE ROLE OF THE NORADRENERGIC SYSTEM IN THE TRADEOFF
BETWEEN
EXPLOITATION
AND
EXPLORATION:
EVIDENCE FROM PUPILLOMETRY Marieke
Jepma1,2,
Sander
Nieuwenhuis1,2; 1Leiden University Institute for Psychological Research,
2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition — Recent studies have suggested
an important role for the locus coeruleus-norepinephrine (LC-NE) system
in regulating the trade-off between exploitative and exploratory behavioral strategies. The evidence for this theoretical progress is largely based
on cell recordings in nonhuman primates. In order to further develop theories about LC-NE function, it is important to investigate the role of the
LC-NE system in human cognition. It has recently been shown that pupil
diameter is a reliable marker of LC activity in humans, reflecting both its
tonic and phasic character. We measured participants’ pupil diameter
while they performed a gambling task with a gradually changing pay-off
structure (Daw et al., 2006). Each choice in this task can be classified as
exploitative or exploratory, by means of a computational model of reinforcement learning. Recent theories of the role of the noradrenergic system in the regulation of behavioral strategy would predict that
exploratory choices are preceded by a larger baseline pupil diameter than
exploitative choices. Our results are consistent with this prediction. Interestingly, part of the baseline pupil effect already developed during the
preceding trial, which suggests that changes in the tendency to explore or
exploit develop gradually. Together, our findings provide evidence for
the idea that the LC-NE system mediates behavioral strategy (exploitation versus exploration), and reinforce the notion that pupillometry is a
promising method for investigating the role of the noradrenergic system
in human cognition.
D13
HUMAN BRAIN CODES THE PROBABILITY OF ACTIONS Roger
D. Newman-Norlund1, Kim Bruggink1, Raymond H. Cuijpers2, Harold
Bekkering1; 1Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, 2Eindhoven
University of Technology — The capacity to make informed decisions in
ambiguous situations is critical to human survival. Computational neuroscientists often use probabilistic equations (Empirical Bayes) to model
and predict human behavior in such situations. The questions of how,
where, and even if such probabilities are represented in the human brain
remain largely unexplored. Two possible candidates for the neural implementation of probability coding are the human mirror neuron system
(MNS), hypothesized to play a key role in action understanding, and the
theory of mind (ToM) network, which is believed to be involved in the
understanding of intentions. Here, we manipulated the probability of a
simple bottle pouring action along two dimensions, the relative fullness
of two wine glasses (here we assumed that pouring into a relatively less
full glass would be most probable) and the relative distance between the
bottle and the glasses (here we assumed that the combination of spatially
proximate objects would be more probable than the combination of spatially distant objects). Participants underwent whole-brain fMRI while
viewing pouring actions of varying probability. Observation of improbable actions elicited relative increases in BOLD signal at core sites in the
theory of mind (ToM) network including the mSTS and MFC. Observation of probable actions was associated with relative increases at sites in
the left SMG, the precuneus and the visual cortex. These data are consistent with claims that the human brain distinguishes between high and
low probability actions and provide novel support for computational
models which assume this capability.
D14
NO EVIDENCE OF MIRRORING IN THE HUMAN ’MIRROR
SYSTEM’ Eunji Huh1, Susan Jones1, Karin James1; 1Indiana University,
Psychological and Brain Sciences, Bloomington — This study examines the
response properties of the putative ’mirror system’ in human adults in 2
conditions comparable to those in which mirror neurons were originally

Poster Session D

identified in the cortex of the rhesus macaque. We hypothesized that if
the human mirror system was actually the homologue of the mirror neurons found in the macaque, then one should observe similar activation
patterns in the same 2 conditions: 1) performing specific actions; and 2)
watching another individual performing the same actions. Previous
studies have found activation of 5 brain regions both when subjects imitate and when they are imitated, but no previous studies have looked for
mirroring properties in the absence of imitation. To this end, we compared neural activation, using fMRI, during performance and observation of the same actions. We also recorded activation while subjects were
imitating and being imitated, to confirm that our task recruited the cortical areas previously identified as the mirror system. During both imitation conditions ,the classic human mirror system was active. However,
during performance and observation of the same action, neural activation
overlapped in only one (superior temporal sulcus) of the five brain
regions of the ’mirror system’. These results demonstrate that the human
mirror system does not display the same mirroring properties in the same
tasks as monkey mirror neurons. The findings suggest that imitation,
which does activate the human mirror system, is therefore not produced
by a population of mirror neurons like those identified in the cortex of the
rhesus macaque.
D15
A NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL MODEL OF AUTOMATICITY IN
RULE-GUIDED BEHAVIOR Sebastien Helie1, F. Gregory Ashby1;
1
University of California, Laboratory for Computational Cognitive
Neuroscience, Psychology, Santa Barbara — Rule-guided behavior is essential in quickly adapting to one’s ever-changing environment. In particular, learned rules can quickly be used in new contexts or applied to new
stimuli (which confers an advantage over restricting behavior to associations). Here, we propose a new neurocomputational model of automaticity in rule-guided behavior. The proposed model assumes two parallel
neural pathways corresponding to naïve and automatic rule use. In the
longer pathway, stimuli activate object representations in the inferotemporal cortex, which in turn activates categorical object representations in
the prefrontal cortex (PFC). PFC object representations then activate
response units in the premotor cortex (PMC), while PFC rule units inhibit
inappropriate PMC response units. In a second shorter pathway, visual
areas of parietal cortex project directly to the PMC response units. Plasticity at parietal-PMC synapses is mediated by Hebbian learning. During
training, the longer pathway through the PFC is used to strengthen the
appropriate parietal-PMC synapses. The development of automaticity is
characterized by a transfer of control of rule-guided behavior from the
PFC mediated pathway to the direct parietal-PMC pathway. The model
includes differential equations that describe voltage changes in the relevant brain areas and difference equations that describe the Hebbian
learning. A variety of simulations are described, showing that the model
accounts for some critical single-cell recording data from several key
brain areas as well as some important behavioral results.
D16
DAMAGE TO THE HUMAN HOMOLOGUE OF V6A IMPAIRS
POINTING IN PERIPERSONAL BUT NOT PERSONAL SPACE
Lana Goldberg1, Carol Broderick1, James Danckert; 1University of Waterloo — We
examined pointing movement in near space in a patient with optic ataxia
resulting from right superior parietal damage encompassing the human
homologue of macaque area V6A. In an earlier study, the patient demonstrated deficits in pointing along the sagittal plane. More specifically,
higher deceleration times and longer ’dwell times’ (i.e., a period of time
in which the hand rests on a target before commencing the next movement in a sequence) were found for movements made with either hand
back toward the body. Here we examined movements made back toward
the body to a variety of targets in either peripersonal space (near the
patient’s body midline) or personal space (three targets on the patient’s
body; chest, lips and nose). Participants first made a pointing movement
to a target away from the body and then pointed to one of the four possi-

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

ble target locations (i.e., three proprioceptive and one visual target).
Examination of dwell time for movements made to the first target (i.e.,
prior to initiating the movement back towards peripersonal or personal
space) provided an index of movement difficulty. The patient demonstrated longer dwell times for the visually specified target when contrasted with the proprioceptively specified targets suggesting more time
spent planning movements to be made in peripersonal space. In addition,
dwell time decreased as the degree of specificity for the proprioceptive
targets increased. These results suggest that damage to the human homologue of V6A impairs visually guided movements more so than movements made towards a proprioceptively specified target.
D17
CONSCIOUS OF CONFLICT BUT NOT OF THE ELICITING
STIMULUS: IMPLICATIONS FOR THE NEUROSCIENCE OF
COGNITIVE CONTROL Taylor Rigby1, Tim Gerrits1, Travis Riddle1,
Christopher Berger1, Ezequiel Morsella1,2; 1San Francisco State University,
Psychology, 2University of California San Francisco, Neurology — Recent
developments in neuroscience (e.g., Pessiglione et al. 2008, Neuron, 2008)
suggest that one can be aware of urges and other metacognitions while
being unaware of the stimuli provoking these states (cf., Morsella 2005,
Psychological Review). Yet, it has never been demonstrated that one can
experience conscious conflict from a subliminal stimulus. To investigate
this, we used a version of the subliminal Stroop color-naming task (Tzelgov et al. 1997, AJP) and found that, replicating previous studies, the
Stroop response-time effect fails to occur for masked stimuli (17 msec
word exposure, pre-mask). However, building on prior research on neural processing of subliminal stimuli, we found that when participants (n =
33) were faced with subliminal stimuli, they were still able to report conflict-related urges as a function of Stroop condition, F (3, 96) = 3.538, p =
.0176: Stronger urges to err were reported for incongruent stimuli than
for any other kind of stimuli (congruent, neutral, and control), ps < .05. In
addition, for supraliminal Stroop stimuli, we examined whether the presence of intra-psychic conflict influences the sense of agency (e.g., when
urges conflicting with the current goal of color-naming are perceived as
foreign to the self), and whether the strength of the stimulus-evoked urge
is inversely related to the overall number of action plans associated with
that stimulusóa 'fan effect' of sorts. Together, these findings complement
recent psychophysiological findings and constrain theories regarding the
neuroscience of cognitive control, addiction, and the cognitive construction of the self.
D18
DOES POST-DECISION WAGERING REFLECT AN ONSET OF
CONSCIOUS AWARENESS OR RISK AVERSION? Shuo
Wang1,
Naotsugu Tsuchiya2, Ian Krajbich2, Ralph Adolphs2; 1Faculty of Science,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, 2Division of the Humanities and
Social Sciences, Caltech — In the Iowa Gambling Task, subjects start
employing an optimal decision-making strategy before they can explicitly verbalize their strategy. To probe when subjects consciously notice
their strategy, Persaud et al (2007) proposed a technique, called ’postdecision wagering’, where subjects bet high or low depending on the confidence they have in their decision. Persaud et al showed that subjects
start betting optimally many trials after they start to consistently select
from the good decks, implying a period of unconscious optimal deck
selection. To characterize the nature of post-decision wagering, we
implemented it in several gambling tasks and compared the results with
behaviorally derived measures of risk-aversion. Our goal was to determine whether subjects select cards optimally before they bet optimally 1)
because they are unaware of the card-reward contingency or 2) because
they are risk averse. First, we tried to replicate the Persaud et al finding.
For our subject population, we could not replicate their findings. Second,
we applied post-decision wagering to a different gambling task, where
the card-reward contingency switches after subjects select the best card
several times in a row. In this task, subjects did start betting optimally
after several trials of optimal card selection. Interestingly, some subjects

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

111

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

continued to bet low even after they selected from the good decks 5-7 trials in a row. However, our behavioral results are unlikely to be
explained by risk aversion; we found no correlation between the individual risk-aversion measures and differences in betting strategy.
D19
WHEN VISUAL KNOWLEDGE CAN MODULATE THE MOTOR
CORTEX Mirta Fiorio1, Maria Carla Bresciani1, Paola Cesari1, Giampaolo
Rodi1, Mattia Gambarin1, Antonio Fiaschi1, Michele Tinazzi1,2; 1Neurological
and Vision Sciences, University of Verona, Italy, 2Neurology Unit Borgo Trento
Hospital Verona, Italy — We aimed at unveiling any modulation of the
motor system associated to the onlooker’s visual, but not motor, expertise
of observed actions. Two groups of subjects were recruited, with different
visual expertise on a particular kind of action, i.e. a dystonic movement.
Group 1 (Naïf): 8 subjects without expertise in neurological diseases and
without previous exposure to the view of dystonic movements. Group 2
(Neurologists): 8 qualified neurologists working in the movement disorder divisions and dealing with dystonic patients. Single-pulse TMS was
applied over the left M1 and motor evoked potentials (MEPs) were
recorded from the FDI, AMD and FCR muscles, while subjects observed
the following stimuli: 1) static hand; 2) healthy writing; 3) dystonic writing; 4) grasping, presented with a blocked design and with random order
across subjects. Each condition consisted of 12 trials. Analysis (ANOVA)
showed that naïf subjects had higher MEP amplitudes than neurologists
only during observation of the dystonic writing (p = 0.0007). Higher activation in the FDI and FCR muscles were found in naïf subjects during
observation of the dystonic compared to the healthy writing (p < 0.0002).
Neurologists did not show different activation between the two writing
conditions. Visual expertise can modulate motor cortex excitability during action observation. A future step of this study is to unveil the influence of action observation on the motor system of dystonic patients.
D20
NEURAL CORRELATES OF TAILORED MESSAGE PROCESSING: A
SMOKE CESSATION CASE STUDY Emre Demiralp1, Hannah Faye
Chua2, Vic Strecher2; 1University of Michigan, Psychology, 2University of
Michigan, School of Public Health — Research has shown that individually
tailored health programs are more successful than generic one-size-fitsall programs. That is, people are more likely to quit smoking or eat more
vegetables when the message of the program is highly tailored to them.
Moreover we have shown in the past that highly individually tailored
messages engage rostral medial prefrontal cortex (rMPFC) and precuneus/posterior cingulate compared to low-tailored or generic smoking
cessation statements. In the current study we investigate whether this differential activation for highly tailored smoking cessation messages can be
operationalized in terms of self-related processing. Specifically the
medial prefrontal cortex and precuneus/posterior cingulate has been
implicated in processing information about the self, as well as performance of complex cognitive functions such as inferring other’s mental
and emotional states. In the current study, during one of the experiments
smokers who are interested to quit smoking received messages with personalized feedback (’You are a 45 year old smoker’), targeted messages
(’Looking better is a common reason for quitting.’), and neutral messages
(’About 90 percent of people on Earth live north of the equator.’). Participants also completed a self-appraisal task. Participants judged whether
an adjective describes them or not, or whether the adjective is of positive
or negative valence. Our preliminary analysis of 20 subjects indicate significant overlap between tailored message processing and self related
processing in rostral medial prefrontal cortex and precuneus. Further
analysis will involve data from more subjects as well as connectivity,
ROI, and further overlap analyses.

112

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

Higher level cognition: Numerical
processing
D21
COUNT ME IN! ON THE AUTOMATICITY OF ENUMERATION
PROCESSES Sharon Naparstek1, Avishai Henik1; 1Psychology and the
Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, BeerSheva, Israel — Enumeration processes are a basic component of mathematical abilities and are the subject of numerous studies. We have
recently developed a task that gives rise to an enumeration congruity
effect, enabling examination of both explicit and implicit processes of
enumeration. Participants were presented with displays containing a
variable number of digits and were asked to pay attention to the number
of digits or to their identity in separate blocks. In two experiments we
employed numerical comparison or parity judgment tasks. In the comparison task, participants were asked to report whether the number or
the identity of the presented digits was larger or smaller than 5. In the
parity judgment task, participants were asked to report whether the
number or the identity of the presented digits was even or odd. When the
number of items was relevant and identity irrelevant, there was a congruity effect regardless of task (comparison or parity judgment). In contrast,
when identity was relevant and the number of items irrelevant, the congruity effect was present solely in the comparison task. These results provide further information on the representation and processing of
numerosities, as well as expand our knowledge regarding the mental
processes underlying enumeration.
D22
HEARING 9 ATTENDING RIGHT - INSIGHTS FROM NUMBERFORM SYNESTHESIA Limor Gertner1, Avishai Henik1; 1Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Psychology and Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience,
Israel — In number-form synesthesia, numbers are experienced in spatially-defined configurations. A similar association between numbers and
space appears also in the non-synesthete population in the form of a spatial mental number line. Recent researches have suggested that attending
numbers may trigger shifts of spatial attention according to number magnitude. We examined this issue in 2 number-form synesthetes and a
matched control group. In separate tasks, participants were presented
with an auditory or a visual digit (cue) followed by an asterisk (target).
Participants were asked to ignore the digit and press a key as soon as the
target appeared. In both tasks, the synesthetes exhibited a validity
effectóa shorter reaction time when the number-cue was valid (e.g., 8 followed by a right side asterisk) than when it was invalid (e.g., 2 followed
by a right side asterisk). Validity was defined according to the synesthete's number-form (left-to-right or bottom-to-top). In contrast, no such
effect was found for the controls. Our results reveal that: 1) number-form
synesthesia can orient attention according to the specific spatial configuration without attending to the number-cue; 2) number-form synesthesia
is a conscious yet involuntary condition that might restrain the flexibility
of number representation; and 3) the presence of automaticity is contingent upon the existence of a strong relationship between stimulus featuresóin the current case, between numbers and space.
D23
AN MEG STUDY OF SYMBOLIC NUMBER COMPARISON Silke
M. Göbel1, Johan D. Carlin2, Isabella Paul3; 1Psychology & York Neuroimaging
Centre (YNIC), University of York, UK, 2Medical Research Council Cognition
and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, 3Clinical Psychology and
Neuropsychology, University of Konstanz, Germany — Neuroimaging studies of number comparison (NC) have consistently found activation in the
parietal lobes, often related to numerical distance. Numerical effects have
been observed at frontal and parietal electrode sides within the first 200
ms post-stimulus. The current study investigated the time-course and
location of parietal brain activity related to NC with Magnetoencephalography (MEG). During the NC condition, subjects (n = 18) had to indicate

Poster Session D

whether visually presented digits (1, 4, 6, 9) were greater or smaller than
a reference (5). In two control conditions they were asked to perform a
perceptual task (vertical line present/absent) either on numerical or nonnumerical stimuli. MEG signals were recorded using a 248-channel
Magnes 3600 whole-head MEG device (4D Neuroimaging Inc., San
Diego). Prior to recording, individual scalp landmarks were spatially coregistered using a Polhemus Fastrak system. These landmarks were
matched with the subjects' anatomical magnetic resonance scans and spatially normalized into standard space. Time-locked event-related fields
were derived by averaging over epochs for each condition after artifact
rejection. MEG source analysis was performed using a minimum variance beamformer (Van Veen et al., 1997). Nonparametric Permutation
Tests were employed for statistical comparisons. Significant differences
in activation between NC and control conditions were found in right
(from 135 ms onwards) and left (from 125 ms onwards) parieto-occipital
cortex. Numerical distance had a significant effect on left parieto-occipital
cortex from 172 ms onwards. Our results shed further light on the timing
of parietal activity related to symbolic number processing.
D24
THE ODD EFFECT: REVIEW AND SUGGESTED MODEL Terence
Hines1; 1Pace University, Pleasantville, NY — The odd effect refers to the
fact that under certain conditions it takes longer to make judgments
about odd than even digits. The effect is found when subjects make
explicit same/different judgments of digits or digit names based on parity and when explicit odd/even judgments are made. Children learn
even / even addition and subtraction problems faster than they learn
problems using two odd digits. This does not occur for multiplication
problems. These latter are learned and performed using rote memory, not
always the case for addition and subtraction problems. The internal
code(s) responsible for the odd effect are not activated when retreiving
solutions to multiplication problems. The odd effect is not due to a strategy in which subjects first test whether a stimulus is even and only then
test for oddness. A model is presented in which the internal representations of the even digits are more closely linked than the representations of
odd digits. Priming studies suport this model. An even digit prime
speeds responses to even digits significantly more than an odd prime
speeds responses to odd digits. The model makes predictions about
observed hemispheric differences in the odd effect depending on the type
of stimuli (digits, words or dot patterns) being judged.
D25
THE INFLUENCE OF NUMERICAL MAGNITUDE ON TIME
PERCEPTION AND REPRODUCTION Acer Y.-C. Chang1,2, Ovid J.-L.
Tzeng1,2,3,4, Daisy L. Hung1,2,3, Denise H. Wu3; 1Laboratories for Cognitive
Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Institute of
Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University, Jhongli, Taiwan,
4
Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan — Access to magnitude information in different quantity dimensions, such as numbers
and time, has been assumed to rely on generalized magnitude representations underlying these dimensions. Recent research also demonstrated
that task-irrelevant numerical information influenced temporal perception in a duration comparison task. However, empirical findings have
suggested that the functions of time perception and reproduction have
distinct characteristics and neural substrates. Therefore, whether numerical information modulates the abilities to perceive and reproduce time is
still an open question. In the current study, perception and reproduction
of the duration of different numbers were examined. In Experiment 1, we
found that the duration of a large number was judged to be longer than
the same duration of a small number. Similarly, in Experiment 2 we
found that reproduction of the duration of a large number was longer
than that of the same duration of a small number. In Experiment 3,
numerical information only appeared as a result of the key-press action
to reproduce a fixed duration. It was also found that magnitude of the
number indicative of the reproduced duration modulated the reproduc-

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

tion of the same duration. These results clearly demonstrate the influence
from magnitude information of numbers on time perception and reproduction, and are consistent with the proposal of generalized magnitude
representations subserving numerical and time processing. Further neurophysiological experiments are carried out to examine the number-duration congruency effect and to determine whether ERP components
related to temporal processing (e.g., frontal negative potential) is modulated by numerical magnitude.
D26
THE
DEVELOPMENT
OF
AUTOMATED
SYMBOLIC
NUMEROSITY PROCESSING IN CHILDREN, AN ERP STUDY
Titia Gebuis1, Leon Kenemans1,2, Edward de Haan3, Maarten van der Smagt1;
1
University of Utrecht, Experimental Psychology, 2University of Utrecht,
Psychopharmacology, 3University of Amsterdam, Faculty of Social and
Behavioural Sciences — Infants can visually detect changes in numerosity,
which suggests that a (non-symbolic) numerosity system is already
present early in life. Children acquire knowledge about symbolic Arabic
numerals around the age of five, and this knowledge gradually becomes
automated. The resulting automatic link between the number symbols
and their meaning is necessary for the acquisition of arithmetic skills. It is
often suggested that before the Arabic numerals are fully automated,
additional frontal processes are recruited when children process Arabic
numerals. In the current study we investigated the development of automated symbolic number processing in children from second (age 5-6) and
fourth grade (age 7-8) using a symbolic and non-symbolic size congruity
task and event related potentials (ERP) as a measure. The comparison
between symbolic and non-symbolic size congruity effects (SCE) allowed
us to disentangle processes necessary to perform the task from processes
specific to symbolic number processing. In contrast to previous studies,
second grade children already revealed both a symbolic and non-symbolic SCE similar to that of adults. The concurrently measured ERP data
revealed that the two magnitudes interfered at an early stimulus level in
all age groups. In addition, we found no evidence for the additional
recruitment of frontal processes in the early stages of symbolic number
automatization. Apparently, already at the age of five automatic symbolic number processing mirrors that of adults.
D27
SPATIAL
ORGANIZATION
OF
MAGNITUDE
IN
THE
REPRESENTATION OF ABSTRACT DOMAINS Kevin J. Holmes1,
Stella F. Lourenco1; 1Emory University — There is converging behavioral
and neural evidence that numerical representations are spatially organized from left-to-right, the so-called mental number line. When judging
parity (odd/even), for example, smaller and larger numbers produce
faster left- and right-side responses, respectively (’SNARC’ effect). Three
experiments revealed that this left-to-right organization of magnitude
extends to the representation of emotional valence. In Experiment 1, participants made parity judgments to numbers (0 to 9) and gender judgments (male/female) to human faces whose expressions ranged from
neutral to happy. Results replicated the canonical SNARC effect for number. In the face task, there was a similar, albeit weaker, pattern of spatial
organization, with right-side responses becoming increasingly faster as
happiness increased. In Experiment 2, emotion ranged from angry to
happy (and included neutral). Faster right-side responses were observed
as the magnitude of either emotion, relative to neutral, increased (i.e.,
more happy or angry), suggesting that magnitude, even when instantiated as emotional expression, is spatially organized. In Experiment 3,
participants made explicit emotion judgments (i.e., happy/not happy or
angry/not angry). For happiness judgments, faster right-side responses
were observed with increasing happiness, and for angriness judgments,
faster right-side responses with increasing angriness, demonstrating that
the left-to-right organization is flexible and depends on the magnituderelated representation of emotion. Together, our findings suggest that
people automatically extract magnitude information in the mental organization of abstract domains, and that number is but one example of a

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

113

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

more general representational system linking space and other magnitude
dimensions, perhaps with neural correlates in posterior parietal cortex.
D28
DIFFUSIVITY IN LEFT ANTERIOR SUPERIOR LONGITUDINAL
FASCICULUS PREDICTS ARITHMETIC ABILITY IN CHILDREN
Jessica Tsang1, Robert Dougherty2, Gayle Deutsch3, Brian Wandell2, Michal
Ben-Shachar4,5; 1School of Education, Stanford University, 2Stanford
University, Psychology, 3Stanford University Medical Center, Neurology and
Neurological Sciences, 4BAR-ILAN University, English,5BAR-ILAN
University, Gonda Brain Research Center — Studies of mental arithmetic
consistently report fMRI activation in the inferior parietal, inferior frontal, and precentral cortex (Dehaene et al., 2004). To determine whether
white matter pathways connecting these regions are related to mental
arithmetic ability, we tested 28 children (10-15 years, 14 girls) on mental
exact addition, approximate addition, and simple math facts. Using diffusion tensor imaging, we measured the anterior superior longitudinal fasciculus (antSLF), which connects inferior parietal with inferior frontal
and precentral cortex. These regions are thought to support quantitative,
linguistic, and working memory aspects of mental arithmetic. We used
deterministic tractography and manual path labeling to identify the left
and right antSLF in each child, and then extracted diffusion properties
from a portion extending between two coronal planes defined by the central sulcus and a plane 7mm posterior. We found that approximation
abilities positively correlate with fractional anisotropy in left antSLF
(r=0.47, p=0.016). Right antSLF showed a similar, but non-significant,
trend (r=0.31, p=0.11). Exact addition showed a similar, but non-significant, relationship with left antSLF (r=0.33, p=0.10), but no relationship
with right antSLF (r=0.01). A diffusion simulation on the observed pattern of diffusion tensor eigenvalues suggests that children with higher
arithmetic scores had fewer crossing fibers and higher fiber density in
antSLF. Our findings indicate that connections between parietal and frontal areas are important in mental arithmetic ability. Funding: NIH
EY015000; Stanford Interdisciplinary Graduate Fellowship to J.T.
D29
SITUATIONAL SOCIAL POWER AND THE NEUROCOGNITIVE
MECHANISMS OF MATH PERFORMANCE Donna J. Bridge1,2, Joan
Y. Chiao1,2; 1Northwestern Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program,
2
Northwestern University, Psychology — Heightening one’s sense of social
power has been shown to facilitate certain cognitive processes, including
executive functions, cognitive flexibility, and abstract processing. Here
we examined the influence of priming social power on the neurocognitive bases for two kinds of mathematical computations: exact and
approximate calculation. Convergent evidence from electrophysiology
and neuroimaging studies demonstrates that exact calculation (e.g. 3+4 =
7 or 6?) relies on language-dependent neural substrates, such as the left
inferior frontal gyrus, whereas approximation (e.g. 3+4 = 6 or 9?) relies on
language-independent neural circuitry within bilateral inferior parietal
lobules. Based on prior evidence that priming high power enhances
abstract processing, we hypothesized that priming high social power
would enhance math performance, particularly for approximate calculations. Twenty-two participants were randomly primed with either high
power (HP) or low power (LP) and then completed a series of small and
large exact and approximate equations. Accuracy results revealed a marginally significant three-way interaction of power by type by size F(1,20)
= 3.91, p =.06. HPs accurately computed more small approximate problems (M=.98, SE=.03) than LPs (M=.90, SE=.03), while LPs correctly
answered more small exact problems (M=.98, SE=.03) relative to HPs
(M=.93, SE=.03). For large equations there was a slight trend for HPs to
have higher levels of accuracy for exact (M=.89, SE=.03) and approximate
(M=.86, SE=.04) equations, relative to LPs (M=.85, SE= .03; and M=.85,
SE=.04, exact and approximate respectively). Implications of these findings for the role of situational social power on neurocognitive routes to
mathematical performance will be discussed.

114

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

D30
ANATOMICAL AND STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY DEFICITS
IN YOUNG CHILDREN WITH MATH DISABILITY Elena
Rykhlevskaia1,2, Lucina Uddin1, Leeza Kondos1, Vinod Menon1; 1Stanford
University, Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 2Stanford University,
Psychology, CA — Do math disabilities (MD) in young children have an
anatomical correlate? Previous neuroimaging studies have indicated the
involvement of a distributed network of parietal, prefrontal and inferior
temporal cortices in numerical and mathematical information processing.
We hypothesized that anatomical and brain connectivity impairments
within this network may underlie MD. We acquired T1-weighted structural and diffusion-weighted images from well-characterized 7-9 year old
children with MD (N = 23) and age-, IQ-, gender- and reading abilitymatched typically developing (TD) children (N = 24). Optimized voxelbased morphometry (VBM) analyses revealed reduced grey and white
matter volume in MD compared to TD. Children with MD group
showed reduced gray matter volumes in the right occipito-temporal cortex, fusiform, parahippocampal and lingual gyri, and bilaterally in the
cerebellum. They also showed reduced white matter volumes in the splenium of corpus callosum, and within a continuous cluster in the right
hemisphere including portions of the retroventicular part of internal capsule, saggital stratum, posterior corona radiata and superior longitudinal
fasciculus. Analysis of diffusion tensor imaging data revealed significantly reduced fractional anisotropy in children with MD in a right hemisphere region of interest obtained from the VBM analysis of white matter.
No such differences were observed in a homologous region of the left
hemisphere. These results, together with visualization of fiber tracts,
suggest significant deficits in inferior-temporal and parietal connectivity
in children with MD and provide compelling evidence that structural
deficits in anatomy and brain connectivity may contribute to math disability in young children.
D31
FUNCTIONAL OPTICAL SIGNAL ANALYSIS OF CALCULATION
AND LANGUAGE LATERALITY Teresa Iuculano1, Peck Hui Koh2,
Clare Elizabeth Elwell2, Brian Butterworth1; 1Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, UCL, London, UK, 2Medical Physics and Bioengineering, UCL,
London, UK — Neuropsychological studies have shown selective number
processing deficits following unilateral cerebral lesions suggesting that
calculation may be a lateralized process similar to language. Cerebral
dominance is often related to handedness, however, how this lateralization is genetically determined and its link to language and calculation is
currently unknown. We aimed to investigate the influence of genes and
handedness on the lateralization of calculation and language in Monozygotic and Dizygotic twins who were either concordant or discordant for
handedness. During functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy recordings
we tested twin pairs on addition, semantic word classification and letter
classification tasks. Second level analyses comparing task effects in relation to zigosity and handedness revealed that monozygotic twins with
discordant handedness showed the same pattern of lateralization for
both the addition and the word tasks, while opposite patterns of lateralization where found in Dizygotic twins regardless of handedness. Our
results suggest that calculation abilities may share the same pattern of lateralization as language processes and that zigosity has a more profound
effect on the neural organization of these networks than handedness.
D32
THE
ARITHMETIC
INCONGRUENCY
EFFECT:
SAME
PROCESSING
FOR
DIFFERENT
SYMBOLIC
REPRESENTATIONS Kristie Fisher1, Miriam Bassok1, Lee Osterhout1;
1University of Washington, Psychology — The incongruency effect is wellestablished by language research using the event-related potential (ERP)
methodology (N400 component; e.g., Kutas & Hillyard, 1998). The N400
effect occurs when a word is incongruent with the words that precede it,
and it is assumed to indicate the degree of integration of a word with its
semantic context. Investigations of this effect have been extended to

Poster Session D

measure conceptual integration in arithmetic. It has been found that
incorrect answers to arithmetic problems elicit a similar incongruency
effect, and that the patterns of latency and amplitude reflect the organization of arithmetic facts in memory (e.g., Niedeggen & Rosler, 1999; Szucs
& Csepe, 2005; Zhou et al., 2006). Most studies have shown that this
effect occurs slightly earlier in arithmetic (N300). This difference raises
the question of whether the incongruency effect in arithmetic is truly
analogous to that in language. We examined whether this difference is
due to the format of the respective symbols in these two domains - digits
vs. words. Participants in this study verified the correctness of arithmetic
problems presented as digits (e.g., 12 + 3 = 15) and as words (e.g., Twelve
plus three equals fifteen). In both conditions, we compared ERP
responses to correct answers (e.g., 15) with numerically close and far
incorrect answers (e.g., 14 and 4). We found that the processing of mathematical information presented in two different symbolic formats is
remarkably similar, indicating that conceptual integration does not
depend on the symbolic form used to represent the relevant concepts.
D33
THE IMPORTANCE OF LOLA: BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR INDICES
OF THE ORGANIZATION OF ARITHMETIC FACTS IN
BILINGUALS Elena Salillas1, Nicole Wicha1,2; 1University of Texas at San
Antonio, 2University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio — How
arithmetic is related to language is a question of intense debate. According to Campbell and Epp (2004) arithmetic facts are represented in the
bilingual brain as three modular codes (L1, L2 and Digits). Our findings
indicate that the proposed memory networks supporting arithmetic are
more strongly and accurately represented in both the Digits format and
the Language of Learning Arithmetic - LoLA, which may or may not
coincide with L1, than in the other language (toL). In a series of 8 behavioral and ERP experiments using the error-priming method (Niedeggen,
et al 1999) we explored the organization of the three arithmetic codes in
balanced bilinguals and, through code switching, the connections
between the representations. Specifically, judging the correctness of a
solution lead to a congruency effect with faster times for correct (3x2=6)
than incorrect (3x2=7) solutions, but only for the Digit and LoLA formats.
Convergent ERP data showed larger N400 congruency effects for Digit
and LoLA formats. Moreover, a relatedness effect modulated the N400
only in the LoLA and Digit formats, with a larger N400 congruency effect
for related (3x2=8, where 8 is a factor of 2) than unrelated (3x2=7) incorrect solutions. Switching across codes (3x2=six) elicited a late positive
component, as did using the toL, indicating that translation across codes
may be necessary when processing in a language other than LoLA. Based
on these findings, we propose modifications to the Encoding Complex
Model for bilinguals and address the general format dependencies for
arithmetic (e.g., Dehaene, 1997).

Linguistic processes: Lexicon
D34
DE COLORES: AN ERP STUDY OF CROSS-LANGUAGE
INTERFERENCE USING A BILINGUAL COLOR-STROOP TASK
Nicole Wicha1,2, Lavelda Bradley1; 1University of Texas at San Antonio,
2
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio — Bilinguals can
experience cross-language interference from an inhibited language, and
exhibit changes in brain activity related to this inhibitory process. We
tested the timing of lexical interference in the first and second languages
of fluent bilinguals using a modified Stroop task - an event-related potentials (ERP) extension of previous behavioral findings (Stanley, Kothmann
and Wicha, 2007, JCN Supplement). Spanish-English balanced bilinguals
named the ink color of color words that either matched in color or not.
The color words were presented in English or Spanish, and naming was
performed either in the same language as the text or not, across alternating blocks. In keeping with the bilingual Stroop literature, both between-

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

and within-language interference was found. Additionally, ERPs showed
that both color incongruent and language incongruent trials elicited an
increased negativity between 250 to 450 ms, with language interference
effects occurring earlier than Stroop interference effects. The negativity
was largest in amplitude when naming incongruent ink colors in one language while reading in the other language, reflecting dual interference
from both color and language. However, the negativity was more frontally localized for color interference and more broadly distributed for language interference. These findings suggest partially overlapping neural
substrates for cross-language inhibition and Stroop-related inhibition for
balanced bilinguals, with joint inhibitory effects at frontal sites. Additionally, a late positive component reflected differences across conditions.
Results will be discussed in light of models of bilingual lexical activation
and inhibitory control.

Linguistic processes: Other
D35
THE TALE OF THE PERRO AND THE BONE: READING CODESWITCHED NOUNS AND VERBS IN DISCOURSE Christian
Gonzalez1, Nicole Wicha1, 2; 1University of Texas at San Antonio, 2University
of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio — Switching between two
languages while comprehending a single sentence elicits a Late Positive
Component (LPC), with larger amplitude for the switched than the nonswitched word (Moreno, et. al, 2002). However, the majority of code
switching studies have used target nouns, even though the literature
indicates that nouns and verbs are processed differently (Federmeier,2000; Pulvermuller, 1999). The goal of the current study is to look
at code-switching in a discourse context, and to compare the brain’s
response to code-switched nouns and verbs. Spanish-English bilinguals
read short Aesop’s tales in English with occasional switches into Spanish.
The target words were both nouns and verbs and were presented either
early or late in the story. Preliminary data from six participants show a
LPC effect for both nouns and verbs, possibly reflecting a processing cost
when interpreting a switch. The LPC code-switch effect was larger for
nouns than verbs over central and parietal recording sites; verbs also elicited increased N400 amplitude. An effect of discourse was also observed,
with a larger LPC code-switching effect for words that were switched
later in context than earlier. In contrast, only earlier code-switches elicited
increased N400 amplitude. These data support the hypothesis that the
brain treats nouns and verbs differently even when code-switching. In
addition, whereas the N400 effect shows that more context helps process
the meaning of the switched word, the increase in the LPC effect with
additional context potentially reflects a difference in activation between
the story language and the language of the code-switched word.

Linguistic processes: Semantics
D36
BOOSTING THE N400: SYNTACTIC GENDER MODULATION AS
A FUNCTION OF CONTEXTUAL CONSTRAINT Lourdes
Guajardo1, Nicole Wicha1, 2; 1University of Texas at San Antonio, 2University
of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio — A central issue in psycholinguistics is how we process semantic and grammatical information and
how these processes interact during online comprehension. Previous
studies have yielded inconclusive results on how and when this interaction occurs; it is unclear whether these processes are continuously interacting or if they only interact at a later stage. The purpose of this study
was to examine this interaction using the N400 and P600 as indices of
semantic and grammatical processing, respectively. Native speakers of
Spanish were presented with Spanish sentences containing a target adjective that was either semantically and grammatically correct or disagreed
in meaning, grammatical gender, or both with the preceding noun. The

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

115

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

advantage of using gender-marked adjectives in Spanish is that they
allow us to compare both types of processes at a single word. The adjectives were embedded in a range of weakly to strongly constraining sentences in order to compare the interaction effect as a function of
contextual constraint. Semantic violations elicited a robust N400 effect
followed by a late positivity, while grammatical gender violations elicited
a P600 effect. Combined violations elicited a larger N400 and a reduced
P600 compared to the individual violations. Crucially, this boosting effect
on the N400 was significant for high, but not low cloze sentences. The
findings support fully interactive models whereby semantic and grammatical processes are continuously interacting as they unfold in time.
However, the interaction may be modulated by the amount of contextual
information available, as both processors are combining efforts to predict
upcoming words.

Linguistic processes: Lexicon
D37
NEURAL CORRELATES OF MEANING IN THE ACQUISITION OF
NOVEL WORDS M. Gareth Gaskell1, Shane Lindsay1, Jakke Tamminen1,
Yuanyuan Chen1,2, Ruowen Li1, Jennifer Wolfson1, Matthew H. Davis2;
1
University of York, Psychology, UK, 2Medical Research Council Cognition and
Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK — Recent behavioral and neuroimaging data suggest that acquiring novel words (without meanings) involves
two components of learning: immediate acquisition of phonological representations, followed by sleep-associated integration of novel words
with lexical neighbors (Dumay & Gaskell, 2007; Davis, Di Betta, Macdonald & Gaskell, in press). The current study examined the meaning
side of vocabulary acquisition using event-related fMRI. Adult participants learned different sets of visually presented novel words and associated meanings on two consecutive days. On the second day, BOLD
responses to both sets of stimuli, plus untrained novel and existing
words, were measured during a one-back meaning comparison task.
Retrieval of the meanings of novel words learned that day engaged a
broad brain network including bilateral inferior temporal regions, and
left inferior and middle frontal gyrus. The pattern for novel words
learned the previous day was similar, suggesting that sleep had not led to
major restructuring of the representations. Behavioral post-test data supported this conclusion. However, both sets of novel words also exhibited
substantially different patterns of activity from the pre-existing words in
bilateral occipital and superior temporal regions. The results suggest that
learning novel word meanings, like learning their forms, involves fast
and slow aspects of learning. However, unlike learning of form, the representation of novel meanings does not change substantially after a single
night’s sleep, with further consolidation presumably taking place over
subsequent weeks or months. We interpret the similarities and differences between form and meaning acquisition with respect to the systematicity of the mappings to be learned.
D38
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF MORPHOLOGICAL PRIMING
DURING OVERT LANGUAGE PRODUCTION Dirk Koester1,2, Niels
O. Schiller1; 1Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, Leiden, The
Netherlands, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands — Findings about the neuroanatomical correlates of morphological processing in language are sparse and partially inconsistent
(e.g. Devlin et al., 2004; Joanisse et al., 2005; Bozic et al., 2007) and the contributions of production processes have not been strictly dissociated from
comprehension processes. Moreover, it has been suggested that morphological effects emerge from an interaction of semantic and phonological
factors (e.g. Gonnerman et al., 2007). To investigate the neural correlates
of morphological priming during overt production of Dutch, we used a
long-lag word-picture priming paradigm. With this paradigm it has been
shown that the production of morphologically complex words (primes)

116

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

facilitates the subsequent production of picture names (targets) that were
part of the complex word prime (e.g. Koester & Schiller, 2008). A morphological priming effect is expected in the left middle temporal gyrus if
morphological priming relies on lexically stored information. However, if
such priming involves combinatorial lexical operations, a priming effect
is expected in the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). Native speakers of
Dutch named line drawings that were primed by semantically transparent or opaque compounds, or by monomorphemic nouns that fully contained the target picture name. Significantly increased brain activity was
observed in the left IFG (BA 47) for the transparent and opaque priming
conditions, but not for pure form overlap. These results suggest that morphological priming involves combinatorial operations that are supported
by the left IFG. On the basis of the present data, we therefore propose that
morphological information about words has a neurocognitive correlate.
D39
A
COMPUTATIONAL
CASE-SERIES
APPROACH
TO
FREQUENCY EFFECTS IN APHASIC WORD PRODUCTION
Nazbanou Nozari1, Audrey Kittredge1, Gary Dell1; 1Beckman Institute,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — How do we retrieve words
when speaking? Comparing retrieval during picture naming and auditory word repetition can answer this question. In the 2-step model of lexical access, both the word retrieval and phonological retrieval steps are
involved in naming, but the former has no role in repetition. We computationally implemented four accounts of word repetition, using the interactive 2-step model of Foygel and Dell (2000). Assuming accurate
recognition of the to-be-repeated word, repetition could consist of
retrieving the word’s output phonemes from the lexicon (pure lexical
route model), or words could be repeated via a direct route from input
phonology to output phonology (pure non-lexical route model). Alternatively, both routes might be used, either by summing their activation
(summation dual route model) or choosing one route on any given repetition trial (independent dual route model). We empirically tested these
four models by comparing the size of the word frequency effect (an index
of lexical retrieval) in aphasic naming and repetition. Using multinomial
hierarchical logistic multiple regression, we analyzed the naming and
repetition errors from 59 patients, and from simulations of the four repetition models. A comparison of the patient and simulation data supported the pure lexical and summation dual route models: the effect of
frequency in repetition was at least as strong as in naming, demonstrating that the lexical-to-phonological mapping, required for naming, is
equally influential in repetition. We further claim that cognitive neuropsychological questions can be addressed by doing comparable analyses
on patient data and output of computational models.
D40
NEURAL
MECHANISM
UNDERLYING
ORTHOGRAPHIC
INFLUENCE ON SPEECH PROCESSING: A COMBINED
TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION AND BEHAVIORAL
STUDY Chotiga Pattamadilok1,2,3, Iris, N. Knierim1,4, Keith, J. Duncan1,
Joseph, T. Devlin1; 1University College London, UK, 2Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Belgium, 3Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique-FNRS, Belgium,
4Université Pierre et Marie Curie, and Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris,
France — Several behavioral studies have demonstrated that learning to
read and write affects the way spoken language is processed. The present
study investigates the neural mechanism underlying the emergence of
such orthographic effects during speech processing. rTMS was used to
tease apart two competing hypotheses considering the orthographic
influence either as a consequence of online co-activation of the phonological and orthographic representations during speech processing or as a
consequence of a profound modification of the very nature of the phonological representations during literacy acquisition. Precisely, rTMS was
applied to disrupt the function of the brain regions involved either in
phonological (left supramarginal gyrus-SMG) or orthographic processing
(left ventral occipito-temporal cortex-vOTC) during the auditory lexical
decision task in which the orthographic consistency of spoken words was

Poster Session D

manipulated. If the orthographic effect results from the co-activation of
the auditory and visual systems during speech processing, interrupting
the function of left vOTC would reduce the orthographic consistency
effect. On the contrary, if the orthographic effect reflects a modification of
the very nature of the phonological representations via the contact with
written code, interrupting the function of left SMG would reduce the
effect. By demonstrating a disruptive effect of rTMS on the magnitude of
the orthographic influence only when the stimulation was delivered over
SMG, we provided first direct evidence for a profound modification of
the nature of the phonological representations as a consequence of literacy acquisition and argues against the widely accepted idea that written
code simply co-exists with spoken code of language.
D41
AN ERP STUDY OF CASE AND LOCATION INVARIANCE IN
ORTHOGRAPHIC PROCESSING Janelle
LaMarche1,
Phillip
J.
Holcomb1, Jonathan Grainger2; 1Tufts University, Medford, MA, 2LPC-CNRS,
University of Provence, Marseilles, FR — In an experiment combining
masked repetition priming and the recording of event-related potentials,
the visual similarity of prime target pairs as well as prime location were
manipulated. Single-word items were composed of letters that were
either similar (c-C) or dissimilar (a-A) in lower- and uppercase formats
(i.e. cook-COOK, area-AREA). The location of prime stimuli relative to
centrally located target words was also manipulated so that prime words
could appear at the same target location, or shifted to the right or left by
20 pixels. Repetition priming effects were found in a series of early visual
ERP components - the N/P150, the N250, and the N400. Critically,
results indicate an interaction between repetition and similarity, where
items with similar features show priming patterns in all three windows
similar to previous findings, while items with dissimilar features show
repetition priming effects that emerge later. Results provide further evidence for shape and location invariant orthographic representations, and
elucidate the nature of the processes that underlie the mapping of retinotopic visual features onto higher-level location invariant representations
during visual word recognition.
D42
THE INTERPLAY OF FREQUENCY, PREDICTABILITY, AND SOA
IN WORD RECOGNITION: EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS AND EYE MOVEMENTS Michael Dambacher1,2, Mario
Braun2, Sarah Risse1, Olaf Dimigen1,3, Kristin Göllner, Arthur Jacobs2,
Reinhold Kliegl1; 1Universität Potsdam, Psychology, Germany, 2Freie
Universität Berlin, Germany, Experimental and Neurocognitive Psychology,
3Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Biological Psychology, Germany — In
linguistic research, word frequency is commonly regarded as major bottomup determinant for the speed of lexical access. However, the temporal
role of top-down processes is debated: There is uncertainty whether context-based predictions about incoming words affect lexical or solely postlexical phases. Here, we used event-related potentials (ERPs) to delineate
the interplay of bottom-up and top-down processes during sentence
reading. In 144 sentences, frequency (low/high) and predictability (low/
high) were experimentally manipulated on target words; sentence frames
were kept constant. Compatible with most ERP reading studies, sentences were displayed word-by-word with an SOA of 700 ms. However,
normal reading speed with a faster rate of four to five words per second
challenges the generalizability of such data. The influence of input rate
was examined with the same stimuli in a second experiment approximating normal reading speed with an SOA of 280 ms. ERPs revealed interactions of frequency and predictability within 200 ms post-stimulus in both
experiments. Furthermore, presentation rate affected the timeline: At
SOA700, frequency effects emerged with a shorter latency for high (90140 ms) than for low predictability words (240-290 ms). SOA280 yielded
frequency effects for both predictability conditions in an intermediate
epoch (140-190 ms). The results indicate that early lexical processes are
directed by bottom-up as well as top-down information. This interplay is
modulated by the time available for word processing and prediction. We

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

present an approach that reconciles the findings and discuss their link to
eye movement data from left-to-right reading.
D43
TIME AND MONEY VERSUS MONEY AND TIME: AN ERP STUDY
OF BINOMIAL EXPRESSIONS IN ENGLISH Anna Siyanova1, Kathy
Conklin1, Walter J. B. van Heuven2; 1School of English Studies, University of
Nottingham, 2School of Psychology, University of Nottingham — It is generally accepted that we store representations of words in our mental lexicon. However, what exactly is stored remains an open question. Previous
research has looked at whether multi-word units (e.g., idioms, phrasal
verbs, and compounds) are stored holistically or computed on-line. In
previous behavioural and eye-tracking studies, we have investigated the
processing of binomials, which are recurrent expressions formed by two
words from the same lexical class connected by a conjunction (e.g., time
and money). In such expressions, a particular word order is more frequent and considered more acceptable (e.g., time and money vs. money
and time). Results showed a processing advantage for binomials over
their reversed forms. The current investigation looks at the processing of
binomials in sentence context using ERP. Of greatest interest is the N400
component, which has been shown to be sensitive to the processing of
lexical-semantic information and frequency, as well as real-world knowledge (e.g., Hagoort et al., 2004). Our results revealed larger N400 amplitudes for reversed binomials (e.g., money and time) and binomials with
semantic violations (e.g., time and party) relative to high frequency binomials (e.g., time and money). These findings support a view in which lexical storage is maximised, while on-line computation is minimised.
However, a more computational view of the mental lexicon cannot be
ruled out, where the processing advantage for time and money is the
result of a very quick, almost simultaneous activation of money upon
reading time. On this account, binomials are strongly linked but computed on-line.
D44
AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY ON WORD AND
PICTURE PROCESSING IN MANDARIN CHINESE SPEAKERS
Yen Na Yum1, Katherine Midgley1,2, Jonathan Grainger2, Phillip Holcomb1;
1Tufts University, Medford, MA, 2LPC-CNRS University of Provence,
Marsailles, France — A number of previous studies have looked at similarities and differences between word and picture processing, but not
many of them have made direct comparisons between the two. These differences are particularly interesting in languages with non-alphabetic
scripts like Chinese because of the arguably more pictographic nature of
the words. This study investigated how pictures and Chinese characters
are processed by native Mandarin Chinese speakers and native English
speakers using the Event-Related Potential (ERP) technique. Both groups
of participants performed a semantic categorization task with the same
set of stimuli, which consisted of pictures of objects and concrete one and
two character Chinese words, pseudo-randomly mixed to minimize
priming and expectation effects. Pictures and words were presented for
400 ms, and participants were instructed to respond whenever the stimulus was a human body part (~15% of trials). Results on the non-body part
critical words showed large ERP effects in the 300-600 ms time range. For
native Chinese speakers, large N400-like negativities were found for both
words and pictures, with the effects greater for words than for pictures
especially late in the N400 epoch. For monolingual English speakers there
were clear negativities for pictures, but as expected, there was no evidence of N400 activity for Chinese words. This pattern of effects is consistent with the possibility that Chinese speakers have a system for word
processing that is similar to that of picture processing. The results will be
discussed with respect to their implications for models of visual word
and picture processing.
D45
CORPUS CALLOSUM MORPHOLOGY AND LATERALIZATION
IN WILLIAMS SYNDROME Tiffany Nash1, Katherine Roe1, Shane
Kippenhan1, Christopher Coutlee1, Carolyn Mervis2, Colleen Morris3, Philip

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

117

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

Kohn1, Andreas Meyer-Lindenberg1, 4, Karen Berman1; 1Section on Integrative
Neuroimaging, CBDB, NIMH IRP, NIH, DHHS, Bethesda, MD,
2Neurodevelopmental Sciences Laboratory, Psychological and Brain Sciences,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, 3University of Nevada School of
Medicine, Pediatrics, Las Vegas, NV, 4Central Institute of Mental Health,
Mannheim, Germany — Williams syndrome (WS) is a rare genetic condition caused by a micro deletion of ~1.6 megabases on chromosome
7q11.23. Although language is relatively preserved in WS, language
acquisition is delayed, and previous research suggests reduced hemispheric specialization and interhemispheric cooperativity during lexical
processing. The corpus callosum (CC), critical for mediating cross-talk
between the two hemispheres, is known to be atypical in volume and
shape in WS. The current study investigated the relation between CC volume and hemispheric specialization during a lexical processing task in
WS. We used oxygen-15 water PET to measure regional cerebral blood
flow (rCBF) in 14 normal-IQ participants with WS (mean age 27.7, seven
female) performing a verbal fluency task. For each participant, six highresolution, 1.5T structural images were averaged, and corpus callosum
volumes (as segmented by FreeSurfer) were divided into five equallength segments along the rostral-caudal axis. These sub-volumes,
adjusted for total intracranial volume, were entered into a correlation
analysis with laterality indices and functional connectivity maps derived
from the verbal fluency rCBF data. Reduced functional lateralization of
rCBF in the left frontal and parietal lobes was associated with decreased
anterior CC (genu) volume (p<.001, uncorrected). Moreover, functional
connectivity between Broca’s area and right inferior parietal regions, previously found to be reduced in this population, was correlated with the
volume of anterior corpus callosum (p<.001, uncorrected). These findings suggest a strong relation between compromised white matter tract
integrity in the CC and aberrant functional lateralization during language
processing in WS.
D46
SHEDDING NEW LIGHT ON READING IN BILINGUAL AND
MONOLINGUAL CHILDREN Melody S. Berens1, Ioulia Kovelman2,
Matthew Dubins1, Mark Shalinsky1, Laura-Ann Petitto1; 1University of
Toronto, 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology — Little is known about the
neural basis of reading and language development in typical bilingual
and monolingual children. We ask whether and how early systematic
exposure to two languages modifies brain tissue underlying reading and
language capacities, and across important time periods of neural reading
and language development. English-Spanish bilingual children in the
Second and Third grades (ages 7-9; n=7) and English monolingual children (n=11) read aloud words during English and Spanish reading tasks
while undergoing functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS, Hitachi
ETG-4000) brain-imaging. All children read aloud Regular words (high
sound to letter correspondence), Irregular words (low sound to letter correspondence), and Non-words in English. Bilinguals read aloud Spanish
Regular and Non-words. fNIRS measures changes in the brain’s oxygen
level density (BOLD), and also its building blocks, deoxygenated and
oxygenated hemoglobin, with 10-Hz temporal resolution. fNIRS’ spatial
resolution is excellent for cortical studies of language (~3-4 cm depth),
child-friendly, quiet, portable, and tolerates movement. Results Behavioral. Bilingual and monolingual children performed similarly on the
English reading tasks (p > .05). Imaging. Consistent with our published
discoveries comparing bilingual and monolingual adult brains, we predict differences between bilingual and monolingual children’s recruitment of left inferior frontal tissue and bilateral posterior superior
temporal gyrus. Significance. Using innovative fNIRS allows first-time
examination of the neural underpinnings of reading in bilingual and
monolingual children providing important information both for neuroscientists about the extent and variability of reading/language in the
developing bilingual brain and for educators. Funding Petitto (P.I.):
NIHR01HD04582203, NIHR21HD05055802.

118

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

D47
THE SPATIOTEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF BILINGUAL LEXICOSEMANTIC REPRESENTATIONS Matthew Leonard1,4, Tim Brown3,4,
Katie Travis3,4, Lusineh Gharapetian4, Matt Erhart4, Eric Halgren2,4, Jeff
Elman1; 1University of California, San Diego, Cognitive Science, 2University of
California, San Diego, Radiology, 3University of California, San Diego,
Neurosciences, 4University of California, San Diego, Multimodal Imaging
Laboratory — More than two-thirds of the global population is proficient
in more than one language, yet we do not understand how the brain
organizes and processes multiple lexicons. It has been shown behaviorally that the first (L1) and second (L2) languages can both facilitate and
interfere with each other, however the existing neuroimaging literature
on bilingual lexico-semantic representations is inconclusive and contradictory with regard to shared versus separate neural substrates (Simos et
al., 2005; Indefrey, 2006). We used a multimodal imaging method that
combines the millisecond temporal resolution of magnetoencephalography (MEG) with the spatial resolution of structural magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) to examine these cortical representations in a group of
Spanish-English bilingual adults. Participants viewed single concrete
nouns presented visually in both languages, and made size judgments to
the words. Using a distributed source anatomically-constrained MEG
analysis (Dale et al., 2000), we found that while the L1 and the L2 share
neural representations in classical left hemisphere frontal regions, the L2
additionally recruits right hemisphere and posterior areas. These results
suggest that there are both separate and shared representations for lexico-semantic information between the two languages in relatively high
proficiency adult bilinguals. The nature of the additional bilateral posterior activity for the L2 relative to the native language also suggests that
the second language, prior to achieving native-like proficiency, may be
represented in a manner similar to a school-age child’s developing L1
(Brown et al., 2005). These findings pose potentially important questions
concerning L2 instruction, acquisition, and bilingual language disorders.
D48
EVIDENCE OF MOTOR ENCODING DURING SIGN LANGUAGE
PERCEPTION Nicole Spotswood1, David Corina1; 1Center for Mind and
Brain, University of California, Davis — Of fundamental concern in the
cognitive neuroscience of language is how speakers understand words.
There has been a renewed interest in theories which ground language
understanding in biological substrates of bodily senses. According to one
such theory, the motor theory of speech perception, words are encoded,
in part, in reference to one’s internal motor representations utilized in
speech production. Our interests were to examine whether this link
between perception and production could be found in sign language processing. We collected data from 20 fluent signers as they performed a lexical decision task. Right- and left-handed signers were asked to perform
lexical decisions to right- and left-handed tokens of well formed American Sign Language (ASL) words and non-lexical, yet phonologically possible ’non-signs.’ To the extent that there is a mapping between one’s
internal production of sign forms and the perception of another’s signing,
we asked whether handedness would affect this task. Each subject saw
video clips showing either an ASL sign or non-sign - half of the videos
displayed a left-handed signer signing, the other half showed a righthanded signer. Reaction times (RTs) were recorded while subjects made
lexical decisions to these stimuli. RTs for signs were significantly faster
than for non-signs. RTs for left- versus right-handed signs did not differ
significantly; however, we did find highly significant differences between
RTs for right-handed and left-handed non-signs. These results suggest
that motoric properties of language form may be brought to bear as discriminations become more difficult, as in the case of non-signs.

Poster Session D

D49
FROM NUMBERS TO LETTERS: FEEDBACK REGULARIZATION
IN VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION Nicola Molinaro1, Jon Andoni
Duñabeitia1, Alejandro Marìn-Gutièrrez1, Manuel Carreiras1,2; 1Instituto de
Tecnologías Biomédicas, Universidad de La Laguna, Spain, 2BCBL - Basque
Research Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, Spain — Alphabetic
word reading involves letter identification based on elementary visual
features, independently of the format of the written letters. This process
is sensitive to the word context, leading to the regularization of the input
even when numbers that resemble letters are inserted among letters (e.g.,
A=4, E=3, S=5, I=1; Perea et al., 2008). Here we investigate the electrophysiological correlates of number-to-letter regularization by means of
the masked priming paradigm: target words were preceded by alphabetic primes (e.g., MATERIAL-MATERIAL), primes with letter-like numbers (e.g., M4T3R14L-MATERIAL), or primes with unrelated numbers
(e.g., M7T6R28L-MATERIAL). The ERP patterns (N=26) were different in
three consecutive time windows. The P150 component was more positive
for the unrelated numbers condition compared to the two other conditions in occipital areas. Then, target words preceded by primes with
numbers elicited a more negative N200 compared to the fully alphabetic
condition, showing that the ERP effects are not due to visual overlap
between prime and target. Finally, a positive component peaking around
260 ms was more positive for targets preceded by alphabetic primes and
primes with letter-like numbers, compared to the condition with unrelated numbers. We explain these results as reflecting top-down feedback
activation from word units, which strongly influences the activation of
the letter units at a format-independent abstract level. Moreover, we propose an extension of the Local Combination Detectors model (Dehaene et
al., 2005).
D50
THE PROCESSING OF CONSONANTS AND VOWELS DURING
LETTER IDENTITY AND LETTER POSITION ASSIGNMENT IN
VISUAL-WORD RECOGNITION Manuel Carreiras1,2, Marta Vergara3,
Alejandro Marín2, Manuel Perea4; 1Basque Research Center on Cognition,
Brain and Language, Spain, 2Instituto de Tecnologías Biomédicas, Universidad
de La Laguna. Spain, 3Center for Brain and Mind, UC Davis, 4University of
Valencia, Spain — Recent research suggests that there is a processing distinction between consonants and vowels in visual-word recognition. To
further investigate the neural bases of consonant and vowel processing,
Event Related Potentials (ERPs) were recorded while participants read
words and pseudowords in a lexical decision task. To assess the time
course of vowels and consonants in letter identity/position assignment,
the stimuli were displayed in six different conditions in a masked priming paradigm with a 50-ms SOA: i) identity condition; ii) vowels-delayed
condition (e.g., choc?l?te-CHOCOLATE), iii) consonants-delayed condition (cho?o?ate-CHOCOLATE); iv) transposed-consonant condition
(cholocate-CHOCOLATE); v) transposed-vowel condition (chocaloteCHOCOLATE), and vi) unrelated (baseline) condition. Results showed
that the consonant- and vowel-delayed conditions differed in early ERPs
windows (over frontal areas), while consonant- and vowel-transposed
conditions differed in a later window (over right frontal areas). Furthermore, the comparison between delayed and transposition conditions
showed a larger negativity for transpositions starting at around 300 ms
over central areas. In addition, the identity and unrelated conditions differed from the consonant and vowel manipulation conditions in the N250
and the N400 components, respectively. The time course and scalp distribution of these effects seem to reflect different stages on the process of
letter coding during lexical access. Finally, RTs were longer in the conditions involving consonants than vowels and in the delayed-letter conditions than the transposed-letter conditions. The RTs in these four
delayed/transposed-letter conditions differed from the identity and the
unrelated conditions. We examine the implications of these findings for
computational models of visual-word recognition and reading.

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

D51
LANGUAGE USE AFFECTS LONG-TERM SEMANTIC PRIMING IN
CHILD BILINGUALS: EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL Arturo
Hernandez1,
Manfred
Gugler2,
Isabell
Wartenburger2,3; 1University of Houston, Psychology, 2Berlin NeuroImaging
Center, Charite Berlin, 3University of Potsdam, Linguistics — The
present
study investigated and examined the effects of language use on neurophysiological activity during auditory word recognition. Participants
were early German-English bilingual children, ages 6 to 7, who learned
both languages from birth and were currently living in Germany. Participants were asked to listen passively to auditorily presented words in
English and German while EEG activity was being monitored. Each word
was presented twice with varying lags between repetitions. Results
revealed an N400 for all words presented. However, a reduction in the
N400 was only observed upon the second instance of a repeated German
word when it had been preceded earlier in the experiment by its English
translation. No other modulation of the N400 was observed for repetition in any of the other conditions. Hence, repetition priming was
observed in only one direction and only when items were repeated first
in English and then in German. These results suggest that immersion in a
language may modulate the magnitude of semantic processing. The findings are consistent with the view that lexical-semantic processing in bilingual children, even those who exhibit high proficiency in two
simultaneously learned languages, are sensitive to factors such as language use.
D52
EFFECTS OF MORPHOLOGICAL COMPLEXITY ON LEXICAL
PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM MEG Caroline M. Whiting1, Yury
Shtyrov1, William D. Marslen-Wilson1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences
Unit, Cambridge UK — The role of morphological structure and semantic
transparency during visual word processing was investigated in a magnetoencephalography (MEG) study. Recent evidence has suggested that
morpho-orthographic cues - the presence of a potential stem and affix can be sufficient to trigger morphological segmentation, regardless of the
semantic relationship between the stem and whole form (Longtin et al,
2003). In this study we aimed to examine the spatiotemporal pattern of
lexical processing, in particular the point at which stems and affixes can
cue the presence of morphological complexity. Furthermore, we investigated how the semantic transparency of complex forms could influence
attempts at segmentation. Stimuli co-varied on the presence and absence
of a potential stem and affix in English. Source analysis using L2 minimum norm estimates (MNE) revealed a left-lateralised fronto-temporal
network activated during word recognition. Using a region-of-interest
analysis, we found activity at the M170 associated with visual string processing within left fusiform gyrus, but no difference between complex
and non-complex forms. At approximately 250ms, anterior temporal
regions showed differential processing for forms containing both a stem
and affix (e.g. farmer) from those that could not be morphologically complex (e.g. scandal). A late transparency effect appeared in the 400ms timewindow, associated with the semantic relatedness between the stem and
whole form. Our results support recent behavioural and neuroimaging
results pointing to early processing based on the presence of orthographic cues to morphological structure.
D53
NATIVE LANGUAGE SEMANTIC ACTIVATION IN NON-NATIVE
SPEECH COMPREHENSION: EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS Ian FitzPatrick1,2, Peter Indefrey1,2; 1Max Planck Institute
for Psycholinguistics, 2Radboud Unversity Nijmegen, Donders Institute for
Brain Cognition and Behaviour — Converging evidence suggests that there
is language non-selective access to the bilingual lexicon in the domain of
written word comprehension. For auditory comprehension the situation
is less clear-cut. The current study further investigated the availability of
first language (L1) semantic features in second language (L2) speech processing. We recorded EEG from 30 Dutch-English bilinguals who listened

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

119

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

to spoken sentences in their L2 (English). Experiment 1 used sentences in
which the critical word was a: (a) semantially congruent L2 word, (b)
semantically incongruent L2 word, (c) congruent L1 word, or (d) an
incongruent L1 word . Incongruent L1 and L2 words elicited a canonical
N400 effect. Furthermore, the N400 to congruent L1 words had a substantially earlier offset than the N400 to inconruent L1and L2 words. Experiment 2 the critical word in the sentence was an L1-L2 interlingual
homophone. In separate conditions: (a) the L2 meaning, (b) the L1 meaning, or (c) neither meaning was congruent with the sentence context.
Whenever the L1 meaning was congruent with the sentence context we
observed an N400 with an earlier offest than the N400 to incongruent
homophones. When the L2 meaning of the homophone was congruent a
negativity emerged, but substantially later than the N400 to incongruent
homophones. Taken together these results firstly show that interlingual
homophones activate semantic features from L1 and L2, however L1
semantic features become available later. Secondly, while L1 words are
not initially available for semantic integration, congruent L1 words are
nevertheless eventually successfully integrated.
D54
FRACTIONATING THE N400 EFFECT WITH SIMULTANEOUS
MEG AND EEG Ellen Lau1, Diogo Almeida1, Nuria Abdulsabur2,1, Allen
Braun2, David Poeppel1,3; 1University of Maryland, College Park, 2National
Institutes of Health, NIDCD, 3NYU — Contextual modulation of the N400
evoked response to words has been demonstrated in sentential contexts
and word priming manipulations. Conditions lacking in contextual support (incongruent sentence completions and unrelated word pairs) elicit
higher N400 amplitudes than contextually supportive conditions (congruous sentence completions and related word pairs). The difference in
amplitude appears in the ERP as a single broad peak lasting 200-300 ms.
However, different localization techniques (intracranial recording, fMRI,
MEG) have implicated different sources in generating the N400. We
hypothesized that the N400 MEG response fractionates multiple processes that are temporally and spatially smeared in the ERP response. To
explore this, we simultaneously recorded participants’ brain activity
from 275 MEG channels and 34 EEG electrodes in response to (i) congruous or incongruous sentence endings and (ii) semantically related or
unrelated word pairs. Participants performed a probe detection task (single words in the sentence block, single letters in the word pair block).
The EEG data (n=12) replicate the typical N400 effect, a centro-parietal,
slightly rightward monophasic amplitude difference from 250-600ms.
The MEG data replicate previous work (Lau et al 2008) and reveal a
biphasic, left-lateralized response, involving two distinct stages: The first
(250-350ms) is left lateralized, whereas the second (350-550ms) has right
anterior hemispheric activity in addition to the left hemisphere pattern
observed in the first stage. These results suggest that the spatial dimension of MEG may be used to derive more detailed information about the
time course of contextual processing within the N400 effect observed in
ERP.
D55
BILINGUAL LEXICAL ACCESS: INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN
WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY AND LEVEL OF PROFICIENCY
Gicele Vieira Prebianca1, Mailce Borges Mota2, Thomas Redick3; 1Universidade
Federal de Santa Catarina, 2Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina;
Georgetown University, 3Georgia Institute of Technology — In order to produce speech, bilinguals need to manage two linguistic systems so as to
verbalize thoughts in just one intended language at a time. Although the
ability to avoid interference from the unintended language seems to be
crucial to this endeavor, it is not the only one a bilingual speaker must
develop. Bilinguals also need to deal with within-language competition
since a concept may be lexicalized in different ways in the intended language (De Bot & Schreuder, 1993). The set of experiments reported in this
study explores the role of working memory capacity (WMC) and second
language (L2) proficiency level in bilingual lexical competition. One-hundred L2 speakers of American English were submitted to three WM span

120

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

tests, two L2 proficiency tests and one L2 picture-naming task carried out
under the semantic competitor paradigm in a control and an experimental condition. WMC and L2 proficiency both significantly predicted bilingual lexical access. Higher spans retrieved lexical items faster than lowers
spans. In addition, more proficient bilinguals presented faster reaction
times during the retrieval of L2 lexical items than less proficient ones,
regardless of doing the control or the experimental condition first. These
data are compatible with the proposal that bilingual lexical access is
affected by the ability to control attention and by level of proficiency.
Findings are discussed in the context of the controlled-attention view of
working memory capacity (Kane, Bleckley, Conway & Engle, 2001) and
the Inhibitory Control Model (Green, 1998).
D56
THE NEUROBIOLOGY OF ADAPTIVE LEARNING IN READING
LOW-FREQUENCY CHINESE PHONOGRAMS: A CONTRAST
BETWEEN PHONOLOGICAL AND SEMANTIC TRAINING
CONDITIONS Jingjing Zhao1, Jay Rueckl1, Stephen Frost2, Xiaoyi Wang3,
Wan Sun3, Hua Shu3, Shin-Yi Fang1, W. Einar Mencl2, Kenneth Pugh2;
1
University of Connecticut & Haskins Laboratories, Psychology, 2Haskins
Laboratories, 3State Key Laboratory for Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning,
Beijing Normal University — fMRI used to investigate the influence of
phonological and semantic training on the cortical circuitry of Chinese
skilled readers recruited to read low-frequency Chinese regular phonograms. The experiment provide direct evidence of the neural basis of
reading in Chinese, and present indirect evidence about the similarities
and differences of division labor of phonological and semantic processing
between readers of different writing system (Chinese vs. English). The
experiment happened in two stages. During the training phase, subjects
made phonological or semantic judgments about 84 Chinese phonograms
(42 in each task, each phonogram 8 exposures). Subsequently, subjects
were scanned while naming the trained 84 phonograms and 84 additional
untrained phonograms (42 regular and 42 irregular). Behaviorally, subjects’ reaction time decreased and accuracy increased along 8 exposures
during both training conditions; phonological and semantic training both
resulted in transfer facilitation in naming. In addition, we found regularity effect for untrained phonograms: regular phonograms named faster
and better than irregular phonograms. Brain imaging data mirrored the
behavioral regularity effect: irregular phonograms showed higher activation in inferior frontal gyrus and occipitotemporal junction than regular
phonograms. Phonological training and semantic training of Chinese
phonograms yielded different functional activation patterns comparing
to English study (Sandak, et al., 2004). The findings indicate that even
though in some sense the neural circuits of reading Chinese may show
the same pattern to English (regularity effect), the division labor of the
neural circuits in reading Chinese still differ from reading English.
D57
ERP EFFECTS OF SUBLEXICAL PROCESSING IN VISUAL WORD
RECOGNITION: ARE SYLLABIC EFFECTS MODULATED BY
SYLLABIC STRUCTURE? Marta Vergara-Martínez1, Alejandro Marín2,
Manuel Carreiras2,3; 1University of California, Davis, 2Instituto de Tecnologías
Biomédicas, University of La Laguna, Spain, 3Basque Research Center on
Cognition, Brain and Language, Spain — The aim of this study was to
investigate electrophysiological correlates of sublexical processing in
visual word recognition in Spanish. Previous work using event-related
potentials (ERPs) to examine syllabic processing has shown very early
effects; however, only consonant-vowel (CV) syllabic structure was considered. We recorded ERPs while participants made lexical decisions to
words and pseudowords in two priming experiments. Target word pairs
were selected that shared the first 3 graphemes but differed in their syllabic structures (CV; ca.mi.no; or CVC: cam.po). They were preceded
either by unrelated syllabic primes (po/ren-ca.mi.no; ren/po-cam.po) or
by related primes. When primes were related, they were either syllabically congruent primes (ca-ca.mi.no; cam-cam.po) or syllabically incongruent primes (cam-ca.mi.no; ca-cam.po). This allowed us to disentangle

Poster Session D

syllabic from orthographic overlap priming effects. If syllables play a
role during lexical access, early ERP differences would be expected for
our syllabic manipulation. Experiment 1 had a 200 ms SOA, and replicated P350 effects for prime-target relatedness (P350: lexical access;
Friedrich et al., 2004). No effect of the syllabic manipulation emerged.
Early effects (P200) were observed for the type of prime (CV vs CVC).
Experiment 2 tried to overcome the problem of conscious priming by
masking the prime with a shorter SOA of 55 ms. Early effects of relatedness and prime type were present; however, syllabic congruency effects
were not observed. These results are discussed in terms of the primary
role that the consonant-vowel syllabic structure plays in the Spanish language.
D58
DIRECT ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE OF A NEURAL
SUBSTRATE FOR MORPHOLOGICAL RULE APPLICATION
Riadh Lebib1, Andrea Krott1; 1School of Psychology, University of Birmingham
- United Kingdom — A critical issue for understanding language processing in the brain is whether linguistic rule application is subserved by a
distinct neural substrate. One of the evidence supporting this hypothesis
comes from studies employing electroencephalographic measurements
during the processing of rule misapplication. This evidence is inconclusive because it might reflect processes caused by the violation such as
error handling rather than application of rules per se. Here we provide
first evidence that correct regular formations, i.e. German past participles, are associated with left frontal negative-going activity, i.e. a LAN,
providing direct encephalographic evidence for rule application in the
brain. Moreover, a LAN response is present regardless of the participles’
frequency, suggesting that independently from the mode of lexical access
(i.e. decomposition or full-form activation), the cerebral structures associated with rule-based mechanisms are activated. We will discuss how our
results shed further light on the functional cerebral mechanisms associated with the LAN response during the information processing stream.

Linguistic processes: Syntax
D59
ATTENTION MAKES THE DIFFERENCE - A SYNTAX ERP-STUDY
WITH 3-4-YEAR-OLD CHILDREN Franziska Suess1, Angela D.
Friederici1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences,
Leipzig, Germany — In a recent event-related potential (ERP) study we
showed that the syntactic sentence processing in 3-4-year-old children is
influenced by varying the proportions of syntactically incorrect sentences
(20% vs. 80%). In this passive listening task we found an early negativity
for the 20% condition but no effect for the 80% condition. In a prior study
with adults Hahne and Friederici (1999) had used the same manipulation
and found an ELAN for both conditions and a P600 only for the 20% condition. They interpreted this result to indicate automaticity of the first
pass parsing process reflected by the ELAN, and more controlled syntactic revision processes reflected by the P600. In their study, Hahne and
Friederici had used a grammaticality judgement task. In order to be able
to compare children with adults we tested 30 children at the age of 3-4
years in an ERP study with the same sentence material, now using a
grammaticality judgment task. Under this task children showed an ERP
pattern similar to that reported by Hahne and Friederici for adults. In a
nutshell these findings indicate that children at the age of 3-4 years similar to adults show an automatic first pass parsing process and a more
controlled syntactic revision process, depending on the amount of attention induced.

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

D60
AN INVESTIGATION OF THE NEURAL GENERATORS OF ERP
INDICES OF SYNTACTIC PROCESSING USING PROFICIENCYRELATED ERP MODULATIONS IN AN ERP-FMRI PARADIGM Eric
Pakulak1, Mark Dow1, Helen Neville1; 1University of Oregon — Eventrelated potential (ERP) studies of syntactic violations typically report a
biphasic response in which an earlier negativity, often maximal over left
anterior sites (LAN), is followed by a later positivity usually maximal
over posterior sites (P600). Evidence bearing on the neural generators of
these components is limited: evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), magnetoencephalography dipole modeling, and
ERP studies of patients with focalized brain lesions (e.g., Friederici et al.,
2000; Friederici et al., 2003; Friederici & Kotz, 2003; Kotz et al., 2003) has
implicated inferior frontal and anterior temporal regions as possible neural generators of the LAN and the basal ganglia and posterior temporal
regions as possible neural generators of the P600. Here we take a novel
approach to this question. Using an auditory syntactic violation paradigm, we gathered ERP and fMRI data from monolinguals who varied on
measures of English proficiency and used individual proficiency-related
modulations of the LAN and P600 as covariates in the analysis of fMRI
data from the same participants. Results suggest that multiple neural
generators may contribute to both effects. Implicated in the generation of
the anterior negativity were left inferior frontal gyrus and left temporal
pole, while several posterior temporal and temporoparietal areas were
implicated in the generation of the P600. These results illustrate the
potential for the use of individual modulations in ERP components in
conjunction with fMRI to provide valuable insight into the interplay
between ERP and fMRI data and the neural generators of ERP indices of
syntactic processing.
D61
TENSOR PRODUCT MODELS FOR LANGUAGE-RELATED BRAIN
POTENTIALS Sabrina Gerth1, Peter beim Graben2, Shravan Vasishth1;
1Institute for Linguistics, University of Potsdam, Germany, 2School of
Psychology and Clinical Language Sciences, University of Reading, UK — An
important online measure of language processing is event-related brain
potentials (ERPs) that are currently interpreted purely phenomenologically. We use tensor product representations (TPR) of symbolic structures
to model syntactic parsing as nonlinear dynamics in neural activation
space. In an ERP experiment on the processing of German subject-object
ambiguities, we observed a P600 ERP for object first sentences reflecting
an initial garden path interpretation. Starting with a Government and
Binding formulation of the sentences, we construct a locally ambiguous
context-free grammar from the phrase structure trees. This grammar is
decomposed into its unambiguous parts representing the two alternative
processing strategies, namely subject preference against object preference
in order to construct two appropriate deterministic pushdown recognizers. Using the TPR, the syntactic categories of the disambiguated grammars are mapped onto filler vectors, while positions in a labeled binary
tree are represented by three role vectors. In order to build a parallel processor the two parses for the subject-object sentence (regular vs. garden
path) and the other two for the object-subject sentence respectively were
linearly superimposed in activation space. Then, model ERPs are
obtained as the first principal component. Our model is able to describe,
at least qualitatively, the obtained ERP results by trajectories that explore
functionally and causally different regions in activation space while pursuing different language processing strategies. During its transient evolution, the trajectories of the model diverged exactly when the garden
path was encountered which shows remarkable resemblance with the
P600 effect in the ERP.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

121

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

D62
BIMODAL ASPECTS OF THE FUNCTIONAL ORGANISATION OF
LANGUAGES AS REVEALED BY GERMAN/GERMAN SIGN
LANGUAGE BILINGUALS: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL
STUDY Monique Kügow1,2, Nils Skotara1,2, Uta Salden1,2, Barbara HänelFaulhaber2,3, Brigitte Röder1,2; 1Biological Psychology and Neuropsychology,
University of Hamburg, 2Research Centre 538: Multilingualism, University of
Hamburg, 3Educational Sciences, Section II: Perception & Communication,
University of Hamburg — Brainimaging studies in early bilinguals have
provided evidence that two oral languages learned simultaneously from
birth activate overlapping brain systems. Thus, studying people who
grew up with an oral and a signed language provide the unique opportunity to investigate modality-specific aspects of the neural systems mediating language comprehension. German and German Sign Language
(DGS) sentences were presented to hearing adults, who were born to deaf
parents (CODAs) and who, thus, were exposed to both German Sign Language (DGS) and German from birth. The electroencephalogram was
recorded throughout the experiment. Task of the participants was to
decide whether or not the just seen sentence had been correct. Half of the
sentences were correct while either a semantic violation or a syntactic
violation was embedded in the other half of the sentences. The German
and the DGS ERP data of the CODAs were compared to those of hearing
native German speakers and a group of deaf native signers of DGS. At
the behavioural level the CODAs did not differ in either language. For
German, the typical ERP correlates of semantic and syntactic processing
were observed in both groups. For DGS both, the CODAs and the native
signers showed a P600 while only for the native signers a bilateral central
negativity prior to a P600 was observed after syntax. Thus, these results
suggest that language processing in CODAs and native signers recruits
partially similar (P600), and partially distinct brain systems. We discuss
in how far hearing status might contribute to the ERP differences.
D63
PHONOLOGY PLAYS A ROLE IN MORPHOSYNTACTIC
PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM ERPS Cheryl
Frenck-Mestre1,2,
Haydee Carrasco2; 1Centre National de Recherche Scientifique, 2Université de
Provence — Herein we show that when morphosyntactic agreement is
phonologically realized, native French readers process agreement more
systematically than when it is silent. We manipulated the presence versus
absence of phonological cues to morphosyntactic agreement in written
French for gender concord between a noun and immediately following
adjective in short sentential contexts. Both our behavioural and ERP
results show a clear role of phonological cues, which, furthermore, interacted with grammatical gender. Gender concord errors produced a
graded ERP response, with a larger P600 response elicited by phonologically realized errors (stylo(masc) verte*(fem)) than by silent errors
(stylo(masc) bleue*(fem)); however, the difference between silent and
orally realized gender concord errors was more marked for masculine
than feminine nouns (stylo(masc) verte*(fem)
vs.
table(fem)
vert*(masc), stylo(masc) bleue*(fem) vs. table(fem) bleu*(masc)), in line
with the hypothesis that default gender in French is masculine (Nelson,
2005). These results further the finding of a role of phonological cues in
processing verbal person agreement in written French (Frenck-Mestre et
al., 2008), and add to the existing evidence of the importance of phonological cues in reading.
D64
WHY THE METRIC NEGATIVITY IS NOT AN N400: AN ERP
STUDY ON METRIC AND SYNTACTIC PROCESSING USING
JABBERWOCKY SENTENCES Kathrin Rothermich1, Maren SchmidtKassow1, Sonja A. Kotz1; 1MPI CBS, Leipzig, Germany — Meter and syntax
are assumed to be principles governing the arrangement of discrete structural elements in sequences (Patel, 2003). Recent ERP data support these
principles and show that processes underlying these principles interact
during language processing (Schmidt-Kassow and Kotz, in press). Listening to metrically violated sentences leads to a biphasic pattern consisting

122

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

of an early negativity and a late positivity (Schmidt-Kassow and Kotz, in
press; Magne et al, 2007; Knaus et al., 2007). In particular, the function of
the early negativity is a matter of debate as it is unclear whether the negativity reflects an N400 as a result of misplaced stress in lexical access or
mirrors deviance detection of a rule-based principle comparable to the
LAN elicited by syntactic violations. The current experiment addressed
this conflict by using German jabberwocky sentences, thus omitting lexical information. These sentences were metrically, syntactically, or syntactically and metrically violated. If the initially reported metrical negativity
is an electrophysiological index of effortful lexical access (N400), no negativity should be elicited by metric violations in jabberwocky sentences.
Our results show that both metric and syntactic violations elicited an
anteriorly distributed negativity. This implies that the metric negativity is
not an N400 but rather a response to metric deviation comparable to the
LAN elicited by syntactic violations.
D65
ERP EVIDENCES IN WORD ORDER PROCESSING BY BASQUESPANISH BILINGUALS Kepa Erdozia1, Itziar Laka1; 1University of the
Basque Country — We present results from a series of behavioral and ERP
experiments investigating processing preferences in bilinguals of two
languages with opposite word orders (Basque-ObjectVerb/Spanish-VerbObject). We compare very fluent and proficient groups of bilinguals. In
one group, the first language (L1) of bilinguals is Basque, in the other
group L1 is Spanish. The L1Spanish population learnt Basque starting at
3 years. We compare processing of canonical (SOV) versus non-canonical
(OSV) sentences in Basque, a language never explored with this methodology. Experimental materials consist of (a) a set of transitive sentences
in Basque containing a Subject, an Object and a Verb: OSV sentences are
syntactically derived from canonical SOV. (b) Syntactically fully ambiguous sentences which can be disambiguated as OSV order resorting to
world-knowledge. Comparison of canonical (SOV) and derived (OSV)
sentences in L1Basque bilinguals shows a modulation of anterior negativities and P600 components in derived word order (OSV) suggesting the
load of increased syntactic complexity with respect to canonical (SOV)
word order. Results on ambiguity resolution show that ambiguous stimuli were processed as canonical SOV sentences; frontal negativity distinguished simple SOV and complex ambiguous OSV sequences. These
results show a sharp processing contrast between basic SOV and derived
OSV word order in L1Basque speakers. Results from the group of
L2Basque bilinguals who are native of Spanish will determine whether
their SVO native preferences modulate their word order processing in
Basque, and hence will shed light on how early language processing
mechanisms impact on nonnative language processing.
D66
PARAMETERS OF GRAMMAR AND MATURATIONAL EFFECTS:
AN ERP STUDY ON ERGATIVITY AND OBJECT VERB
AGREEMENT PROCESSING BY NATIVE VERSUS NONNATIVE
SPEAKERS OF BASQUE Adam Zawiszewski1,2, Itziar Laka2; 1MPI for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2University of the
Basque Country, Bilbao / Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain — The extent to which specific aspects of human grammars show maturational effects is still not
well known: some studies report Age of Acquisition (AoA) effects
(Weber-Fox and Neville, 1996; Hahne, 2001) whereas others do not find
them for very proficient nonnatives (Rossi et al., 2006; Kotz et al., 2008).
We study specific grammatical parameters (Chomsky 1981) absent in the
native language of very proficient nonnatives (ergativity and object-verb
agreement). We find a difference in processing between natives and nonnatives in one parameter (ergative case) but not in the other (OV agreement). This suggests that different parameters of grammar may have
different acquisition windows, and that AoA versus proficiency studies
must carefully control for language distance. We conducted an EventRelated Brain potentials (ERP) study on ergative case and OV agreement
processing in Basque, an isolate typologically very distant from Spanish,
to determine how natives and very proficient nonnatives (AoA = 3 years)

Poster Session D

process these grammatical parameters (Baker 2001). Spanish, native language of the nonnative group, has no ergative case or OV agreement, so
our study controls not only for AoA and proficiency but also for language distance. ERP data revealed no differences in processing of OV
agreement violations across groups. However, nonnatives did not show a
P600 component elicited by the native group for ergative case violations.
We thus report maturational effects for one parameter of the grammar
but not the other, which suggests that AoA can have an asymmetrical
impact, depending on the grammatical parameter at play, independent of
proficiency.
D67
GRAMMATICAL GENDER PROCESSING IN FRENCH AS A FIRST
AND SECOND LANGUAGE: AN ERP STUDY OF THE EFFECT OF
PHONOLOGICAL REALIZATION Haydee Carrasco1, Cheryl FrenckMestre1; 1Université de Provence — The present study further examined
how phonological cues may impact grammatical gender processing in
French as a first and second language. Recent ERP studies have shown
that native and non-native readers benefit from the presence of phonological cues during grammatical processing (Osterhout et al., 2006;
Frenck-Mestre et al., 2008). Herein, ERPs were recorded while French
natives (N=14) and Spanish-French learners (N=14) read sentences that
varied according to the presence versus absence of phonological cues to
gender agreement in the determiner phrase (e.g. la musique française/
français* vs. la musique espagnole/espagnol*). Grammatical gender was
held constant across languages. Results for both natives and learners
showed a P600 effect for gender concord errors, which was larger for
errors that involved phonological cues. However, differences between
groups were observed. Spanish-French learners showed a greater
reponse to orally realized than silent errors independent of noun gender.
For French native speakers phonology and grammatical gender interacted; the P600 effect was larger for phonologically realized errors that
violated masculine than feminine gender concord, whereas for silent
errors the P600 effect was of equal magnitude for both genders. These
results suggest that native readers are more sensitive to the statistical
probability of errors than are learners; gender concord errors on the
adjective are indeed least likely for masculine in the presence of phonological cues. Together, our results show that native and non-native readers alike benefit from the phonological realization of morphosyntax and
provide further evidence of the role of phonology in processing written
language (Harm & Seidenberg, 2005).
D68
SYNTACTIC PROCESSING IN PROGRESSIVE NON-FLUENT
APHASIA: THE FUNCTIONAL STATUS OF THE LEFT INFERIOR
FRONTAL GYRUS Stephen M. Wilson1, Jennifer M. Ogar1, Federica
Agosta1, Bruce L. Miller1, Nina F. Dronkers2, Maria Luisa Gorno-Tempini1;
1
Memory and Aging Center, Neurology, University of California, San Francisco,
CA, 2Center for Aphasia and Related Disorders, Veterans Administration
Northern California Health Care Service, Martinez, CA — Progressive
nonfluent aphasia (PNFA) is a clinical syndrome characterized by motor
speech impairments along with expressive and receptive agrammatism.
Patients show left-lateralized atrophy of inferior frontal, motor and
insula regions, typically resulting from taopathies. A recent voxel-based
morphometric study of syntactic comprehension in a mixed neurodegenerative cohort suggested that the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), pars triangularis, is crucial for comprehension of syntactically complex
sentences (Amici et al., 2007, J. Neurosci). We used fMRI to investigate
functional activity in this region in agrammatic PNFA patients during a
syntactic comprehension task. Six patients and eleven healthy agematched controls were scanned as they performed a sentence-picture
matching task with seven conditions varying in degree of syntactic complexity. Controls performed well on all but the hardest sentences; imaging results showed that they differentially recruited several perisylvian
regions as sentences became more difficult, including the left IFG. PNFA
patients failed on the harder conditions, but performed well on the easier

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

ones. Our central finding was that even while processing these easier sentences, patients exhibited much more extensive activity than controls in
the left IFG. This increased activity was likely not due to difficulty alone,
since it was observed even when contrasting (different) syntactic conditions on which patients and controls performed comparably. These data
suggest that in the earlier stages of PNFA, when tissue is atrophied but
not entirely lost, the left IFG is still involved in sentence processing and
actually demonstrates excessive BOLD activity, possibly as a consequence of its structurally compromised state.
D69
ADAPTING TO COMPLEXITY: FMRI ADAPTATION DISTINGUISHES SYNTACTIC SPECIFICITY IN SUBREGIONS OF
BROCA’S AREA Andrea Santi1, Yosef Grodzinsky1; 1McGill University —
We know Broca’s area demonstrates greater activation for noncanonical
(’The boy [who the tall girl is smiling at _ ] is Derek’) than canonical (’The
boy [who _ is smiling at the tall girl] is Derek’) sentences, but is this due
to a general complexity contrast or a more specific one? The current fMRI
adaptation study sought to distinguish between general and selective
syntactic accounts of Broca’s area by comparing two complexity factors:
canonicity (ie, subject vs object extraction) and relative clause position (ie,
right-branching vs center-embedding). According to global syntactic
accounts, Broca’s area is responsible for computing all syntactic representations, but is recruited more the greater the syntactic complexity (Caplan
et al., 2000; Just et al., 1996; Stromswold et al., 1996; Friederici, 2006).
General syntactic accounts of Broca’s area contrast with ones that stipulate it is sensitive to a selective dimension of syntactic complexity represented by the canonicity contrast (Bornkessel et al., 2005; Grewe et al.,
2005, 2006; Grodzinsky, 2000; Santi & Grodzinsky, 2007b). In this experiment we investigated adaptation to the two complexity factors - canonicity and relative clause position - in a fast-event related design. A
deconvolution analysis demonstrated that posterior Broca’s area (BA 44)
adapted to both canonicity and relative clause position, whereas anterior
Broca’s area (BA 45) adapted to canonicity only. Therefore, the results
suggest a parcellation of Broca’s area with it being general syntactically
posteriorly and selective syntactically anteriorly.
D70
OPTIONAL INFINITIVE: EVIDENCE OF HOW THE ADULT BRAIN
PROCESSES GRAMMATICAL ERRORS THAT ARE TYPICAL AND
ATYPICAL OF CHILDHOOD LANGUAGE ACQUISITION Ioulia
Kovelman1, Satrajit S. Ghosh2, Patricia K. OLoughlin1, Irina Ostrovskaya1,
Tyler K. Perrachione1, John Lymberis1, Elizabeth S. Norton1, Sonia Cosman1,
Kenneth Wexler1, John D. E. Gabrieli1; 1Brain & Cognitive Sciences,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Research Laboratory of Electronics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology — Child language acquisition in
many languages is marked by an Optional Infinitive (OI) stage (ages 2-4)
during which children use nonfinite (infinitival) verb-forms and finite
verb-forms interchangeably in grammatical contexts that require finite
forms. In English, children's errors include omissions of past-tense /-ed/
and 3rd singular /-s/. The OI stage phenomenon is well established, but
little is known about its neural basis or the impact it may have on adult
language use. We compared behavior and fMRI brain activation of grammaticality judgments for sentences with OI-developmental errors (He
tall) versus Non-developmental errors (He am tall), that do not occur in
typical child language acquisition. Previous imaging studies found that
left inferior frontal (LIFG) regions participate in grammaticality judgment, and we hypothesized that LIFG would participate in OI-error judgments. METHODS: In fMRI, fifteen adult English speakers completed a
grammaticality judgment task with OI-developmental errors, Non-developmental errors, and Correct sentences. RESULTS: Participants were significantly slower and less accurate on OI-developmental errors relative to
other sentences. Consistent with our predictions, OI-developmental
errors yielded greater activation in LIFG relative to Correct and Nondevelopmental error sentences. Sentences with Non-developmental
errors yielded greater activation in left inferior parietal cortex relative to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

123

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

Correct sentences. CONCLUSIONS: This study shows for the first time
that processing OI grammatical errors in adulthood results in increased
response time and LIFG activation relative to other grammatical errors
that are not made in childhood. These findings suggest that the OI stage
of child development influences grammatical mental and neural function
in adulthood.
D71
AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY OF VERBAL MEMORY
SPAN EFFECTS ON GAP FILLING Arild Hestvik1, Evan Bradley1,
Catherine Bradley1, Tyler Prescott1, Lauren Sparacino1, Megan Kaufmann1;
1University of Delaware — The goal of this study was to examine the relationship between verbal memory span and antecedent reactivation in
syntactic gap-filling. Whereas a working memory cost is known to be
incurred during the storage stage of this process, less is known about the
completion stage of the dependency resolution. (Roberts et al., 2007)
reported that only subjects with high verbal memory span exhibited antecedent priming at gap-positions in a cross-modal lexical decision task.
This suggests that low-span subjects require more time to integrate the
filler, and reactivate the antecedent later. We aimed to measure the time
course of gap-filling in different working memory groups by using a continuous event-related potentials measure of the completion stage process.
27 college aged subjects were divided into a low vs. high verbal memory
span group based on the Listening Span Test (Daneman & Carpenter,
1980). EEG was recorded from 128 channels while subjects heard sentences like (i) and (ii): (i) *The zebra that the hippo kissed the camel on the
nose... (ii) The weekend that the hippo kissed the camel on the nose... We
predicted that ’the camel’ in (i) should elicit an Early Left Anterior Negativity (ELAN), followed by a P600 (Friederici, 2002), when compared to
the grammatical ’the camel’ in (ii), and that low-span subjects should
show a latency delay. However, both groups exhibited a P600 to the
ungrammatical noun phrase, with no group interaction. This suggests
that differences in verbal memory span do not affect the completion stage
of gap-filling.
D72
TIME-FREQUENCY
ANALYSIS
OF
LATE
POSITIVE
COMPONENTS DURING LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION José
Corral1, Horacio Barber2,1, Maartje van der Meij2,3, Manuel Carreiras4,1;
1
Instituto de Tecnologías Biomédicas, Universidad de La Laguna, Spain,
2Psicología Cognitiva, Universidad de La Laguna, Spain, 3Neuropsicología,
Universidad de Oviedo, Spain, 4Basque Research Center for Cognition, Brain
and Language, Spain — Event-Related Potential (ERP) analysis is a robust
technique for investigating the temporal brain dynamics related to cognitive processes. In this study we combine this approach with time-frequency analyses of two similar language-related late positivities. Subjects
read sentences that involved code switching from L2 (English) to L1
(Spanish), which resulted in a Late Positive Component (LPC). They also
read L1 sentences that included a morphosyntactic violation, which again
produced a late positivity (P600 effect). Both effects occurred in the same
time window and had a similar topographical scalp distribution. We
extracted the power and phase of the frequency components active during the ERP effects, for possible differences that could be hidden when
comparing the averaged wave amplitudes. Event-Related Synchronization (ERS) in the delta frequency band and Event-Related Desynchronization (ERD) in the alpha frequency band reflect both positivities. Phase
information allowed us to compare the topography and strength of synchronization between electrodes in the two experimental tasks. Similarities and differences between both types of effects are discussed in relation
with the different interpretations of the late positivities associated to language comprehension.

124

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

D73
THE
NEUROCOGNITION
OF
MORPHO-SYNTACTIC
PROCESSING IN SECOND LANGUAGE:
AN ARTIFICIAL
LANGUAGE STUDY Kara Morgan-Short1, Karsten Steinhauer2, Cristina
Sanz3, Mandy Faretta1, Michael Ullman3; 1University of Illinois at Chicago,
2
McGill University, 3Georgetown University — Recent research has shown
that artificial language learning can provide a useful model of second language acquisition (e.g., Friederici, Steinhauer and Pfeifer, 2002). Here we
use an artificial language to examine the acquisition of morpho-syntax,
which is particularly problematic in second language learning (White,
2003). Adult native English speakers learned to speak and comprehend to
advanced levels of proficiency an artificial language with both nounadjective and noun-article gender agreement. Half the subjects learned
the artificial language under explicit (classroom-like) training conditions
and half learned under implicit (immersion-like) training conditions.
Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) were measured in response to auditorily-presented sentences with correct or incorrect agreement twice within
each subject, once at low proficiency and once at high proficiency. At low
proficiency both types of agreement violation (adjective, article) yielded
N400s, but only for the group with implicit training. At high proficiency
noun-adjective agreement violations elicited N400s for both the explicit
and implicit groups, whereas noun-article agreement violations elicited
P600s for both groups. The results suggest that various factors can influence the neurocognition of morpho-syntactic processing in second language acquisition, including training condition (classroom-like vs.
immersion-like), proficiency level (low vs. high), and type of morphosyntactic structure (e.g., article vs. adjective gender agreement). Implications for second language acquisition will be discussed.
D74
READING FLUENCY IN PHONOLOGICAL ALEXIA: FROM
SINGLE WORDS TO PHRASES Kathleen Baynes1, Eunike Jonathan2,
Christine H. Davis3; 1Center for Mind and Brain, University of California at
Davis, 2University of California at Davis, Psychology, 3University of California,
Speech Pathology and Audiology, Davis — Phonological
alexia
is
an
acquired reading disorder that results in an inability to read out loud
function words, verbs and grammatical morphemes whereas concrete
nouns and other words with greater semantic content are relatively
spared. In the second of a series of interventions, a 46-year-old male with
phonological alexia was trained for two weeks for about 1 hour per day.
The use of semantic cues at the single word level and intensive implicit
practice on sound recognition of function words, verbs, and grammatical
morphemes in short sentences were combined in this intervention. Data
from reading out loud 20 probe sentences demonstrated a trend toward
an increased number of correctly read sentences and a decrease in the
number of errors overall, However, some targeted items remained
impossible for our participant to read accurately in a sentence context.
Generalization of changes in fluency, comprehension and error types
were also tracked using the Gray Oral Reading Test pre and post training,
Reasons for the difficulty in making a useful improvement in reading
specific aspects of text will be discussed in terms of the psycholinguistic
source of the deficit and the intended target of the intervention.
D75
THE DYNAMIC ACTIVATION AND RESOLUTION OF
SYNTACTIC AND SEMANTIC AMBIGUITY IN SPOKEN
LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION: A MEG STUDY Guosheng
Ding2,1, Billi Randall1, Barry Devereux1, Anna Shestokova1, Lorraine K. Tyler1;
1
Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, 2State Key Laboratory of
Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Bejing Normal University — Ambiguity is an ubiquitous property of language. Here we investigate when and
how ambiguity is resolved during language processing using magnetoencephalography (MEG) to probe the moment-by-moment processing
of sentences containing semantic (greasy locks) or syntactic (playing
cards) ambiguities. Ambiguous phrases vary in the strength of preference
for one reading or another, therefore all sentences were presented twice

Poster Session D

with each ambiguous phrase being immediately followed by a disambiguating verb which was consistent with the subordinate (least preferred)
reading and therefore inconsistent with the dominant (most preferred)
reading. Participants passively listened to the sentences while we
recorded activity using MEG (306-channel Vectorview system). Eventrelated magnetic fields (ERF) were analyzed after MEG epochs were
aligned to key points in the speech stream. Neural generator sources
were localized using the MNE software. We analysed data from 2 VOIs
(LIFG, LpMTG) based on our previous fMRI study (Rodd et al, 2004).
Semantic and syntactic ambiguity showed different effects of dominance
and disambiguation. Semantic ambiguity produced increased activity for
the dominant meaning starting during the ambiguous phrase, which persisted even when the disambiguating word (consistent with the subordinate meaning) was heard. The subordinate meaning became more
strongly activated only 900 msec after the disambiguating word. Both
LMTG and to a lesser extent LIFG showed this pattern. In contrast, syntactic ambiguity produced minimal effects of preference strength in
LMTG, but LIFG showed early and stronger activity for the dominant
reading, with a rapid switch to the subordinate reading as soon as the
disambiguating word was heard.
D76
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES INDEX GRAMMATICAL
ACQUISITION IN SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNERS Darren
Tanner1, Lee Osterhout2, Julia Herschensohn1; 1University of Washington,
Linguistics, 2University of Washington, Psychology — Previous findings on
language processing using event-related potentials (ERPs) have shown a
neurocognitive dissociation between processing of lexical/semantic violations and morphosyntactic violations, which elicit N400 and P600 ERP
components, respectively (Osterhout & Nicol 1999). The current study
investigates processing of morphosyntactic (subject-verb agreement) violations in German native speakers (n=13) and low- and intermediate-proficiency second language (L2) learners of German (n=33). Findings show
that while morphosyntactic violations elicited the expected P600 component in natives and intermediate L2 learners, the lowest proficiency
group showed only an N400 effect. We interpret these results as indicating that L2 learners initially memorize morphologically complex,
inflected words as unanalyzed wholes and later decompose these forms
into stem+affix sequences, having induced a productive syntactic rule.
The low-proficiency learners showed sensitivity to the unexpected forms
in the agreement violation condition both behaviorally and electrophysiologically; however, the N400 response indicates difficulty integrating a
whole word form into a preceding context. The P600 response in intermediate learners is indicative of more native-like morphosyntactic processing and application morphological decomposition mechanisms in
parsing agreement. Moreover, learners’, but not native speakers’, individual P600 amplitudes showed a significant linear correlation with performance on a grammaticality judgment task. This contrasts with
previous ERP findings on L2 learning, which showed no relationship
between behavioral and electrophysiological responses (McLaughlin,
Osterhout & Kim 2004).
D77
WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO BE PROMINENT?
AN ERP
INVESTIGATION OF FOCUS Clinton L. Johns1,2, Peter C. Gordon3,
Debra L. Long1,2,4, Tamara Y. Swaab1,2; 1University of California, Davis,
2
Center for Mind and Brain, 3University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
4
University of Central Lancashire, Preston, England — Repeated name anaphors refer to previously mentioned discourse entities (antecedents).
When antecedents are in discourse focus (Debra taught the class because
Debra...), processing difficulty results (repeated name penalty, RNP).
Discourse focus, which in this case results from syntactic prominence, is a
linguistic property that is encoded relatively automatically during sentence comprehension. Non-linguistic devices may also be employed to
focus a comprehender’s attention on elements of a discourse. However,
little is known about the extent to which non-linguistic focus influences

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

the encoding of antecedent representations, or subsequent processing of
anaphoric references to them. To study this, we manipulated linguistic
and non-linguistic prominence in a series of ERP studies. Linguistic
prominence was a function of antecedents’ embedding in sentences’ syntactic trees (Debra vs Debra and Clint). Non-linguistic prominence was
established by transposing the first two letters of the antecedent (eDbra)
and asking subjects to generate the name. For the linguistic prominence
conditions an RNP effect was found; a reduced N400 effect to coreferential repeated names preceded by non-prominent, normal antecedents. In
contrast, when prominent antecedents were generated, increased priming for repeated names was found. Interestingly, memory performance
was enhanced for both linguistic and non-linguistic focus conditions. In
our last experiment we investigated whether previous results reflect the
match of encoding and retrieval processes. Critical names either were
read following normal antecedents, or were letter-reversed following
generated antecedents. Results reveal differences between the match
conditions (normal vs. generation) and strongly suggest that language
processing does not simply follow the principles of recognition memory.

Memory: Memory systems
D78
DLPFC DISRUPTION FACILITATES PROCEDURAL MEMORY
CONSOLIDATION
AND
IMPAIRS
DECLARATIVE
KNOWLEDGE Neil B. Albert1,2, Joseph M. Galea1,3, R. Chris Miall1;
1
University of Birmingham, Psychology, UK, 2University of Chicago,
Psychology, 3Johns Hopkins Medical Institution, Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation — In procedural learning tasks, an improvement in skill is
typically seen after sleep - leading to the recent literature on sleep-dependent motor consolidation. Procedural consolidation can also occur during
wakefulness if the declarative memory system’s competitive encoding of
the sequence is reduced through a secondary cognitive task. Here we
used continuous theta-burst transcranial magnetic stimulation (cTBS) to
disrupt the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) immediately after
learning a 12-item sequence. We hypothesize that disruption of the
DLPFC immediately after sequence learning would degrade declarative
memory systems and thus facilitate wakeful skill improvement. Inhibitory cTBS was applied to the left DLPFC (n=10), right DLPFC (n=10), or
to an occipital cortical control site (n=10) immediately after sequential
reaction time task (SRTT) training. All three groups were retested after 8
daytime hours without sleep. cTBS to the DLPFC degraded recall of the
sequence but led to a significant increase in skill. No within day improvement was observed in the control group. These results confirm that processes that interfere with declarative knowledge of recent events allow
procedural consolidation during wakefulness. Moreover, we show that
the DLPFC is directly involved. Accordingly, sleep-independent procedural consolidation may be driven by processes which thrive in the
absence of declarative memory systems.
D79
DELINEATING
PERCEPTUAL
AND
CONCEPTUAL
CONTRIBUTIONS TO REPETITION SUPPRESSION WITHIN
OCCIPITAL AND TEMPORAL CORTICES Aidan
Horner1,
Rik
Henson1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Science Unit — Prior exposure to a
stimulus can facilitate its subsequent identification and classification.
This behavioural facilitation is usually accompanied by a reduction in
neural response within distinct cortical regions (Repetition Suppression RS) (Grill-Spector, Henson, & Martin, 2006). Despite previous research
suggesting RS within Occipital/Temporal regions reflects repetition of
perceptual and/or conceptual processes (Henson et al., 2003; Horner &
Henson, 2008; Race, Shanker, & Wagner, in press) delineating these two
possible contributions has not yet been possible. Previous research has
suggested RS within left, as opposed to right, Fusiform cortex is less sensitive to changes in view-point (Vuilleumier, Henson, Driver, & Dolan,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

125

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

2002) and exemplar (Koutstaal et al., 2001). Although these data suggest
RS within the left Fusiform may reflect repetition of conceptual processes
to a greater degree than right Fusiform it is also possible that such effects
are attributable to the repetition of more high-level perceptual processes
(e.g., the extraction of three-dimensional object properties). To control
for such a possibility we visually presented the names of concrete objects
at Study whereas we presented object pictures at Test. Results from two
fMRI experiments demonstrate significant RS within left Fusiform and
left Lateral Occipital cortex. Furthermore, RS within the equivalent right
hemisphere regions do not demonstrate significant RS (indeed, a significant Region-by-RS interaction is present). These results suggest that RS
within left Fusiform and Lateral Occipital cortex can result from the repetition of conceptual processes, whereas RS within the equivalent right
hemisphere regions is primarily driven by the repetition of perceptual
processes.
D80
RESOLVING RETRIEVAL CONFLICT THROUGH INHIBITION
Justin Hulbert1, Michael Anderson1; 1University of St. Andrews, Scotland — The
very act of retrieving a particular memory can reduce the accessibility of
related items, a finding termed Retrieval-Induced Forgetting (RIF).
According to the inhibition account of RIF, a retrieval cue (e.g., FRUITO__) activates the target memory (ORANGE), as well as its competitors
(BANANA), creating conflict, which is detected by the ACC, and
resolved by inhibiting the interfering competitor through the intervention of the prefrontal cortex (Kuhl et al., 2007). Non-inhibitory accounts of
RIF have largely struggled to account for the finding that RIF generalizes
to novel test cues, such as MONKEY-B__. Recently, however, it has been
suggested that the cue-independent impairment reflects associative interference arising from the covert retrieval of study cues (FRUIT) while trying to access the competitor from the independent probe. If true,
strengthened competitors (ORANGE) might then impede retrieval. In the
current series of experiments, we demonstrate that strengthening a target
in the absence of retrieval fails to generate the predicted impairment,
indicating that associative blocking is insufficient as an account of cueindependent impairment. Moreover, the results support an inhibitory
account, in that RIF is found to be cue-independent, retrieval-specific,
and interference-dependent. Methods for further specifying the neural
underpinnings of cue-independent forgetting are discussed.
D81
BRAIN
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES
OF
RECOGNITION WITHOUT IDENTIFICATION Anne
Cleary1,
Anthony Ryals1, Carly Yadon1, Jason Nomi1, Faith Williams2, Madeline
Krawzoff1, Chris Boreson1, Joshua Rooney1; 1Colorado State University,
2
Capital University — Old-new recognition memory is typically characterized by two ERP signatures, an earlier FN400 old-new effect that is
thought to be related to familiarity, and a later parietal old-new effect that
is thought to be related to recollection. The present study demonstrates a
very early ERP old-new effect related to the recognition without identification (RWI) effect. RWI is the finding that people can discriminate
between old and new items on a recognition test when the items themselves cannot be identified. For example, when participants study a list
of words and are tested with word fragments, they can discriminate
between unidentified fragments of studied and of unstudied words. The
present study searched for ERP correlates to this effect. ERPs were
recorded at test using a 128-channel Hydrocel Geodesic sensor net. Our
primary interest was in ERPs for word fragments that went unidentified.
ERP old-new differentiation among unidentified items began to emerge
as early as 100-150 ms post-stimulus. This ERP old-new differentiation
was characterized by a polarity reversal across hemispheres such that
unidentified old items led to greater positivity than unidentified new
items in the left hemisphere and new items led to greater positivity than
old items in the right hemisphere. This old-new polarity reversal across
hemispheres was significantly greater over inferior sites than over superior sites and persisted across the entire 1000 ms recording window once

126

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

it emerged. These findings suggest that, among items that are not identified, the brain can differentiate old and new items very early on in processing.
D82
IMPAIRED CATEGORY FLUENCY IN MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE
AMNESIA: THE ROLE OF EPISODIC MEMORY Daniel Greenberg1,
Margaret Keane1,2, Lee Ryan3, Mieke Verfaellie1; 1VA Boston Healthcare
System, Boston University, Boston, MA, 2Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA,
3University of Arizona, Tuscon, AZ — Memory tasks are often classified as
semantic or episodic, but recent research shows that semantic and episodic memory are highly interactive. Category fluency, for example, is
generally considered to reflect retrieval from semantic memory, but
behavioral evidence suggests that episodic memory is also involved: Participants frequently draw on their autobiographical experiences while
generating exemplars for certain categories. Neuroimaging studies
accordingly have reported increased medial temporal lobe (MTL) activation during exemplar generation. Studies of MTL amnesics have yielded
mixed results, but these studies were not designed to examine potential
contributions of episodic memory. We addressed this issue by asking
MTL amnesics and controls to generate exemplars for three types of categories. One type tended to elicit autobiographical and spatial strategies
(AS). Another type elicited strategies that were autobiographical but
nonspatial (AN). The third type elicited neither autobiographical nor
spatial strategies (N). 9 patients and 10 controls generated exemplars for
8 categories of each type. Patients were impaired on all three category
types but showed greater impairment on AS and AN categories. After
covarying for verbal fluency (total FAS score), the N category impairment
was not significant, but the impairment on AS and AN categories
remained. The same results were seen when patients with damage
extending into lateral temporal regions were excluded. We conclude that
patients' episodic memory impairment hindered their performance on
this putatively semantic task. This interaction between episodic and
semantic memory might partially account for the fluency deficits seen in
aging, depression, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer's.
D83
AGE EFFECTS ON NEURAL CORRELATES OF CUED RECALL: AN
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Séverine Fay1, Lucie Angel1,
Badiâa Bouazzaoui1, Laurence Taconnat1, Lionel Granjon1, Michel Isingrini1;
1UMR CNRS, Université François-Rabelais de Tours — A hallmark of cognitive aging is a deficit in episodic memory, which reflects structural and
functional cerebral changes. The purpose of the present study was to
investigate age differences in electrophysiological correlates of retrieval
success in a word-stem cued recall task. To do so, event-related potentials
(ERPs) were recorded while young (M ± SD: 21.4 years ± 1.9) and older
(M ± SD: 65.1 years ± 3.3) adults tried to complete stems with a previously
studied item or with any other suitable word if a studied item cannot be
recalled. Behavioural data indicated that correct recall rate was significantly lower for older than for young participants. Robust event-related
brain potential (ERP) old/new effects were identified in both age groups:
event-related potentials evoked by stems completed with studied words
were more positive than those evoked by stems completed with unstudied items. The main age differences were observed in latency and lateralization of old/new effects. Young adults exhibited a parietal effect that
became focused over left parietal electrodes, whereas no asymmetry was
observed in older adults. These results are congruent with the hemispheric asymmetry reduction in older adults model. Moreover, ERP
effects were delayed in the older group relative to the young group.
Overall, these findings provide some evidence of the reduction of processing speed during aging and suggest that young and older adults may
recruit distinct cerebral patterns during episodic cued recall.

Poster Session D

D84
PROTECTIVE ROLE OF EDUCATIONAL LEVEL ON MEMORY
AGING: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Lucie Angel1,
Michel Isingrini1, Séverine Fay1, Badiâa Bouazzaoui1, Laurence Taconnat1;
1UMR-CNRS University François-Rabelais of Tours, France — The
present
experiment aimed at investigating whether educational level could modulate age effects on episodic memory and on the electrophysiological correlates of retrieval success (old/new effects). Participants were
dissociated into four groups of 14 adults according to age (young vs. old)
and educational level (high vs. low). Event-related brain potentials
(ERPs) were recorded while participants were performing a word-stem
cued recall task. A significant interaction between education and age
indicated that age-related memory deficits were greater for the less educated individuals. Old/new effects differed according to age and education. The young groups exhibited effects on both frontal and parietal
areas. For the young-high group, the parietal effect was predominant
over the left hemisphere whereas for the young-low participants, it was
entirely left-sided. In addition, the parietal effect was earlier, longer and
greater for the more educated young adults. Long-lasting old/new
effects that were symmetrically distributed on both hemispheres were
also reported in the old-high group on frontal and parietal electrodes. No
age effect was observed on frontal areas whereas the magnitude of the
parietal effect was reduced in old-high relative to young-high participants. Old-low adults showed a late and short ERP effect on the right
parietal site, smaller than for young-low participants. This study demonstrated that age effects on episodic memory and ERP correlates of
retrieval success were reduced in high-educated relative to less-educated
individuals. These findings provide support for the brain reserve hypothesis and raise the need for considering individuals differences when
studying cognitive and cerebral changes in aging.
D85
FORGETTING OF EMOTIONAL VERSUS NEUTRAL IMAGES IN
THE AGING BRAIN Håkan Fischer1, Stuart MacDonald2, Anna
Rieckmann1, Joachim Gavazzeni1, Lars Bäckman1; 1Karolinska Institute,
Sweden, 2University of Victoria, Canada — Forgetting is a memory-related
process that begins immediately following the initial encoding of information and proceeds across time. Our objective was to investigate the
neurobiological basis of the forgetting process by means of event-related
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Of chief interest was the
extent to which aging and the emotional valence of images affect patterns
of functional brain activation over time. Twenty younger (20-30 years)
and 20 older (65-75 years) adults were scanned during encoding. Episodic memory performance was assessed on three separate occasions,
and forgetting slopes were regressed on BOLD activations at encoding.
Initial results indicate that both aging and emotionality influence the neural correlates of forgetting. Countering previous claims, the present
results indicate that (a) rate of forgetting is not uniform across individuals, and (b) the neurobiological basis of forgetting varies as a function of
both age and the emotional content of images.
D86
THE UN-RESTED RESTING BRAIN: SLEEP-DEPRIVATION AS A
STATE OF ABERRANT DEFAULT-MODE ACTIVITY Ninad Gujar1,
Seung-Schik Yoo2, Peter Hu1, Matthew Walker1; 1Sleep and Neuroimaging
Laboratory, Psychology and Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of
California, Berkeley, California, 2Brigham and Women's Hospital, Radiology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA — The sleep-deprived brain has principally been characterized by examining dysfunction during cognitivetask performance. However, far less attention has been afforded the possibility that sleep deprivation may be as, if not more, accurately characterized on the basis of abnormal resting-state brain activity. Here we
report that one night of sleep deprivation significantly disrupts the
canonical signature of task-induced deactivation, resulting in a double
dissociation within the dorsal medial frontal cortex and precuneus of the
default network. Indeed, deactivation within these regions alone discrim-

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

inated sleep-deprived from sleep-control subjects with a 93% degree of
sensitivity and 92% specificity. In addition, the relative balance of deactivation within these default nodes significantly correlated with the
amount of prior sleep in the control group (and not extended time awake
in the deprivation group). Therefore, the stability and balance of taskinduced brain deactivation in key default-mode regions may be dependent on prior sleep, such that a lack thereof disrupts the intrinsic mode of
resting brain activity; findings that may offer explanatory insights into
conditions associated with sleep loss at both a clinical as well as societal
level.
D87
RELATIONAL
AND
NON-RELATIONAL
MEMORY:
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES
OF
NOVELTY
DETECTION, REPETITION DETECTION, AND SUBSEQUENT
MEMORY Eleonore Xian-Chay Soei1,2, Christian Bellebaum1, Irene
Daum1,2; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Neuropsychology, RuhrUniversity Bochum, Universitaetsstrasse, Bochum, 2International Graduate
School of Neuroscience, Ruhr-University Bochum — The dissociability of
novelty detection in relational and non-relational memory is currently
under debate. To further address the time courses and underlying brain
correlates of novelty detection, event-related potentials were analysed for
encoding and retrieval on three memory tasks in healthy subjects. Spatial
and non-spatial relational as well as non-relational memory were
assessed separately. The event-related potentials related to relational and
non-relational memory were dissociable for hits and correct rejections in
an early and late time window. An early old/new effect was observed for
non-relational memory. A late old/new effect replicated the frequently
reported recollection-associated old/new effect in terms of direction and
amplitudes. Four different novelty types (spatial relational, non-spatial
relational, horizontal non-relational and inverted non-relational) were
examined. The P3a related to novelty detection differed in horizontal vs.
inverted distractors in non-relational memory but not in spatial vs. nonspatial relational memory. Event-related potentials for repetition detection (hits during retrieval) and also for subsequent hits (encoding phase)
differed between relational and non-relational memory. These findings
are discussed in relation to potential brain correlates in relational and
non-relational memory during encoding and retrieval.
D88
NEURAL CORRELATES OF IMPLICIT LEARNING - EFFECTS OF
PERFORMANCE AND AGE Anna Rieckmann1, Håkan Fischer1, Lars
Bäckman1; 1Aging Research Center, Karolinska Institute, Sweden — There is
evidence that increases in striatal activation are accompanied by
decreases in hippocampal activation over time during implicit learning
(IL) in young adults. This study investigates this interaction in relation to
(a) performance and (b) to striatal integrity as a function of aging.
Twenty-seven adults (14 young and 13 old) performed a Serial Reaction
Time task (SRTT) during fMRI acquisition. Both groups showed comparable IL, but age differences appeared on the neural level. For young
adults, better IL performance was related to a larger increase in striatal
activation and a larger decrease in hippocampal activation over time. For
older adults, better IL performance was linked to a parallel increase in
both striatal and hippocampal activation. This interaction is interpreted
in terms of competing memory systems that may become more cooperative in advanced age for compensatory purposes. We also present preliminary data on the effects of a hippocampal-dependent dual task on
performance in the SRTT for both younger and older adults.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

127

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

D89
THE OPAQUE RECOLLECTION: AN ERP STUDY OF THE ROLE
OF SEMANTIC TRANSPARENCY IN THE RECOGNITION
MEMORY OF CHINESE TWO-CHARACTERS COMPOUND
WORDS Shih-kuen Cheng1, Shuo-Chieh Huang1, Daisy L. Hung1, Ovid J.L. Tzeng1,2; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Centra University,
Taiwan, 2Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taiwan — The Remember/Know judgments and ERP old/new effects were used in two experiments to investigate how the recognition memory for Chinese compound
words is modulated by the words’ semantic transparency. At study, participants made lexical decisions to 46 semantic transparent words [e.g., ?
(/cha/, tea) ? (/bei/, cup): teacup], 46 semantic opaque words [e.g., ? (/
yang/, sun) ? (/chun/, spring): plain], and 92 two-characters nonwords.
At test, they made old/new judgments to the 92 studied real words and
92 non-studied new words, among which half were transparent and the
other half were opaque. The frequency, neighborhood size, and concreteness were matched for the transparent and opaque words. The behavioral
results showed that opaque words gave rise to a higher hit rate than
transparent words. In addition, the proportion of Remember response
was higher for opaque words than transparent ones. The ERP results
showed that the mid-frontal old/new effect, thought to index familiaritybased recognition, was of similar magnitudes for both types of words.
Opaque words, when compared with transparent words, yielded a larger
parietal old/new effect, which has been thought to index recollectionbased recognition. These results demonstrated that opaque words are
better remembered than transparent ones, and the advantage for opaque
words is related to the contribution of recollection processes. The greater
recollection for opaque words than semantic ones may result from the
different morphological structures between the two types of words.
D90
CORTICAL-MTL CIRCUITRY DURING LONG-TERM MEMORY
FORMATION Katherine V. Roe1, Karen F. Berman1; 1Section on Integrative
Neuroimaging, Clinical Brain Disorders Branch, National Institute of Mental
Health, National Institutes of Health — The hippocampus and adjacent
medial temporal structures are critical to the formation of contextually
rich, multi-featured long-term memory (LTM) representations. The current study used event-related fMRI to investigate hippocampal-cortical
interactions necessary for binding different information types together in
LTM. Functional T2*-weighted gradient echo, echo planar images were
acquired at 3T while 24 participants performed a delayed match to sample task. Test items were drawn from a small, fixed set of distinct objectclasses (letters, shapes, and line-orientations), allowing for repeated
exposure to each item. Color and location of each item remained constant
across each presentation, and participants’ recollection of this contextual
information was assessed at the end of the session. Random effects analyses (p<.01, corrected) were used to identify regions differentially active
during short-term maintenance of different stimulus types and regions
crucial for encoding and recall of different contextual information (color,
location). Hippocampal-cortical interactions during successful multi-feature learning were also assessed. Results suggest regions involved in
learning item-context associations are similar to those needed for shortterm maintenance, with greater hippocampal involvement during successful multi-feature binding, independent of specific feature or context
type. Context recall varied across stimulus types, including greater IFG
recruitment during recall of letter-context information but greater parahippocampal (PHG) and parietal recruitment during recall of shape-context associations. Functional connectivity analyses demonstrated greater
coherence between hippocampus-PHG-parietal regions during shapecontext association formation, but greater hippocampal-fusiform coherence learning letter-context association learning. These data suggest the
MTL-cortical networks crucial for creating multi-faceted LTM representations depend on the specific associations being learned.

128

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

D91
PROCESSING OF LIVING AND NONLIVING OBJECTS DIVERGES
IN OCCIPITO-TEMPORAL CORTEX: EVIDENCE FROM MEG
Jessica Gilbert1, Laura Shapiro1, Gareth Barnes1; 1Clinical and Cognitive
Neurosciences Research Group, Aston University, Birmingham, UK — We
explored the time-course of category-specific effects using magnetoencephalography (MEG) in order to assess when processing living and nonliving objects diverges in the visual object-processing system. We used a
superordinate categorization task in which participants (N=10) were
shown a category label followed by a target object and were instructed to
decide whether the object and category label matched. A total of 78 target objects were displayed, drawn from 3 living and 3 nonliving categories. Each object was displayed twice, once as a congruent trial and once
as an incongruent trial. The behavioral data revealed no difference in
performance between living and nonliving objects. Utilizing a 400 ms
window beginning at target object onset, we directly contrasted living
and nonliving objects using a wide-band (1-80Hz) source analysis. This
group analysis identified a region in left occipito-temporal cortex showing greater power for living compared to nonliving objects We then constructed virtual electrodes at the peak location in this region for each
subject to assess the time at which these category differences occurred.
Time-frequency findings from this region identified a peak difference at
roughly 180-200 ms after a target object, driven by low-frequency (~1-20
Hz) differences in processing living and nonliving objects. These findings suggest an early, perceptually-driven difference in processing living
versus nonliving objects, which should be considered in current theories
of category-specificity. The influence of this early difference on later,
semantic processing will be discussed.
D92
COMPARISON OF THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF RETRIEVAL
SUCCESS IN TESTS OF CUED RECALL AND RECOGNITION
MEMORY Kaia Vilberg1, Kayoko Okada1, Michael Rugg1; 1Center for the
Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, University of California, Irvine — While
numerous event-related fMRI studies have characterized the neural correlates of successful recognition memory, almost none have studied cued
recall, and none have directly contrasted the correlates of successful recall
and recognition. The present study addressed this issue by identifying
commonalities and differences between retrieval success effects in these
two tasks. Participants (N = 19) underwent two study-test blocks. The
two study phases were identical, but one test phase involved word-stem
cued recall, whereas the other involved a yes/no recognition test.
Retrieval success (Hit > Correct Rejection (CR)) effects common to the
two tasks were found in bilateral medial (BA 7) and lateral parietal cortex
(BA39/40), and the right entorhinal cortex. The reverse contrast revealed
common CR > Hit effects in anterior cingulate/medial BA6, left inferior
prefrontal cortex (PFC), and left anterior intraparietal sulcus. Interaction
contrasts revealed greater Hit > CR effects for cued recall in a left inferior
lateral parietal region abutting the region showing the common effect.
More striking, the contrasts also revealed a cross-over interaction in right
dorsolateral and lateral anterior PFC, these regions demonstrating CR >
Hit effects for recall, and Hit > CR effects for recognition. These findings
suggest that medial and lateral parietal regions support processes
engaged by successful episodic retrieval regardless of how retrieved
information is accessed. The findings for the right PFC are consistent
with a role for this region in evaluating the outcome of a retrieval
attempt.
D93
TWO PATHS TO ATTRIBUTING TRUSTWORTHINESS: NEURAL
SIGNALS
OF
PERCEPTUALAND
MEMORY-DRIVEN
INFLUENCES John Rudoy1,2, Ken Paller1,2; 1Northwestern University
Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, 2Northwestern University,
Psychology — When people rate the trustworthiness of a novel face, their
judgments tend to resemble the consensus ratings made by others. Therefore, something about the appearance of a person’s face can bias one’s

Poster Session D

estimate of another’s trustworthiness. Fortunately, one can also use memory for past events when deciding who should be trusted. When participants in fMRI experiments view faces, amygdala activation correlates
more closely with consensus ratings more than with idiosyncratic trustworthiness ratings made by the participant (Engell, Haxby, & Todorov,
2007, J Cog Neurosci). Two processes may thus compete for control of
trustworthiness judgments: 1) a fast, amygdala-associated process of perceptual analysis, corresponding to consensus judgments, and 2) a slow
process of conscious retrieval, corresponding to idiosyncratic judgments.
We recorded EEG responses to faces to determine the relative timing of
these two hypothesized processes. First, faces were paired with positive
or negative attributes, such that attribute valence varied orthogonally
with consensus ratings of face trustworthiness. Subsequently, trustworthiness ratings for these faces were found to vary as a function of both
consensus trustworthiness and the previous attribute pairings. During
this rating phase, frontal brain potentials at about 400-600 ms were associated with consensus trustworthiness, independent of ratings, and posterior brain potentials at 800-1000 ms were associated with the valence of
the word paired with the face earlier. These findings thus provide evidence of both an early path to trustworthiness judgments based on perceptual analysis and a later path to trustworthiness judgments based on
memory retrieval.
D94
EFFECTS OF AGE AND MEMORY FUNCTION ON THE NEURAL
CORRELATES OF SUCCESSFUL ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY
ENCODING Marianne de Chastelaine1, Tracy H. Wang1, Brian Minton1,
Heekyeong Park1, Michael Rugg1; 1University of California, Irvine — Studies
of age-related differences in the neural correlates of successful memory
encoding often report encoding-related activity that is more bilaterally
distributed in older adults compared to young individuals. This tendency
towards bilateral distribution of encoding-related activity has recently
been associated specifically with relatively low levels of memory function
rather than with the effects of age per se. These findings are inconsistent
with proposals that the relative preservation of memory performance
with increasing age depends upon right prefrontal ’over-recruitment’.
Here, we used an associative memory task to further investigate the relationship between the lateral distribution of encoding-related activity and
memory function in older adults. Eighteen young, and 36 older, adults
were scanned while they made relational semantic decisions on a series
of visually presented word pairs. Participants later made associative recognition judgments on studied, rearranged and new pairs. Older adults
were segregated according to a median split of their performance on a
standard neuropsychological test of memory function, the California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT). Analyses of subsequent memory effects in left
prefrontal and homotopic right prefrontal voxels revealed that the effects
were more bilaterally distributed in the older adults. As was found previously, this age-related laterality difference was confined to low-performing older adults. Additionally, CVLT performance was positively
correlated with the level of asymmetry of prefrontal subsequent memory
effects, and was negatively correlated with the magnitude of the right
prefrontal effect. These findings are consistent with proposals that right
prefrontal over-recruitment reflects age-related degradation of cortical
function.
D95
HUMANS DISPLAY CONDITIONED PLACE PREFERENCES FOR
VIRTUAL ROOMS PAIRED WITH NICOTINE Robert Astur1,2, Seth
Shipman1, Heather Breslawski1, Albert Rizzo3, Shepard Seigel4; 1Olin
Neuropsychiatry Research Center, Institute of Living, Hartford, CT, 2Yale
University School of Medicine, Psychiatry, New Haven, CT, 3Institute for
Creative Technologies, School of Gerontology, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, 4McMaster University, Psychology, Neuroscience
and Behavior, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada — Within human research, there
has been a lack of research aimed at elucidating how environmental or
contextual factors provoke drug cravings. Within rodent research, these

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

factors are studied using a conditioned place preference (CPP) paradigm,
whereby a specific environment is paired with a positive reinforcer such
as cocaine, alcohol, sex, or food, and via classical conditioning, a preference exists for the reinforcer-paired environment in the absence of the
reinforcer. To study this in humans, we have created a virtual analogue
of the CPP to examine whether such a preference can be established in a
virtual reality environment. In this study, 34 social or heavy nicotine
smokers were given repeated pairings of nicotine via cigarettes in one
specific virtual environment, and a placebo in a different virtual environment. We also collected data on how much the participants enjoyed their
laboratory drug use and also how negative they felt about their overall
drug use. Accounting for the relative reinforcement strength of the nicotine strongly predicts the extent to which participants display a CPP. Specifically, the more that the participants preferred the nicotine cigarettes,
the stronger their place preference for the nicotine-paired room, r = 0.83,
p < 0.001. Interestingly, this effect is different for the social vs. the heavy
smokers. We discuss how reinforcement and design factors account for
these differences. Nonetheless, we can establish a CPP in humans using
nicotine, and we are now poised to attempt to block CPPs in humans.
D96
MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE CONTRIBUTIONS TO RAPID
ACQUISITION AND FLEXIBLE TRANSFER OF EPISODIC
MEMORIES Dagmar Zeithamova1,2, Nicolaus Schmandt1,2, Alison
Preston1,2; 1University of Texas at Austin, Psychology, 2University of Texas at
Austin, Center for Learning and Memory — The medial temporal lobe
(MTL) is thought to support rapid acquisition of episodic experience and
to create memories that are flexible in nature, allowing for generalization
from previous experiences to novel events and stimuli. One theory suggests that such generalization stems from inference based processes at the
time of retrieval, while a competing hypothesis proposes that generalization results from integrative processes at the time of encoding of overlapping events. The goal of the present study was to test these competing
hypotheses by using an associative inference paradigm (AIP) where participants rapidly learned overlapping associations in a single trial and
were subsequently probed with novel stimulus combinations that
required flexible transfer of learned information. Functional MRI
revealed MTL regions, including hippocampus and surrounding MTL
cortices, that were preferentially active during encoding of the overlapping associations. Subsequent memory analyses further revealed that
encoding activation in MTL regions predicted later transfer performance
both within and across participants, consistent with the integrative
encoding hypotheses. During flexible transfer, we identified MTL regions
distinct from those at encoding whose activation differed based on correct transfer performance, consistent with the hypothesis of inferential
processes during retrieval. Additional high-resolution fMRI data further
localized these encoding and retrieval effects to specific MTL subregions.
These findings suggest that flexible generalization of rapidly acquired
episodic experience depends on integrative processes during encoding as
well as inferential processes during retrieval.
D97
DEEP BRAIN STIMULATION OF THE SUBTHALAMIC NUCLEUS
IMPROVES IMPLICIT SEQUENCE LEARNING AND LEARNINGRELATED CORTICO-STRIATAL ACTIVATION IN PARKINSON’S
DISEASE. EVIDENCE FROM A [15O]H2O-PET STUDY Leonora
Wilkinson1, Gary Hotton2, Yen Tai2, Nicola Pavese2, David Brooks2, Marjan
Jahanshahi1; 1Sobell Motor Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, UCL, 2MRC
Cyclotron Building, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College, London — Implicit
sequence learning during the serial reaction time task (SRTT) has been
shown to be mediated by the cortico-striatal circuits. Patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD) show attenuated learning on the SRTT, which is
completely abolished following surgical lesioning of the internal segment
of the globus pallidus The present study examined the effect of deep
brain stimulation (DBS) of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) on SRTT learning in PD and on associated patterns of brain activation. 7 PD patients

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

129

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

with DBS of the STN assessed after overnight withdrawal of dopaminergic medication and 9 matched controls were studied with a [15O]H2OPET. PD patients completed the SRTT (5 scans) or a control random
sequence (1 scan) with DBS on and off, with order counterbalanced and
using parallel sequences. Controls also performed the SRTT (5 scans) and
random sequences (2 scans) twice during PET scanning. Controls showed
significant SRTT learning-related activation in the -striatal circuits. In
contrast, with DBS off, PD patients, showed no learning and no learningrelated activation in the striatum. However, with DBS on, PD patients
showed significantly more learning and more learning-related activation
in the cortico-striatal circuits. The results provide evidence for the modulation of the cortico-striatal circuits involved in implicit sequence learning by DBS of the STN in PD. The differing effects of DBS of the STN and
pallidotomy on SRTT in PD suggest that their mechanisms of action are
different.
D98
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SEMANTIC AND EPISODIC MEMORY
IN
HEALTHY
ELDERLY
SUBJECTS:
A
MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHIC (MEG) STUDY Valentina
La
Corte1,2,3,4, Nathalie George2,3,4, Bruno Dubois1,3, Line Garnero2,3,4,
Gianfranco Dalla Barba1,3,5; 1INSERM Unité 610, Hôpital de La Salpêtrière,
Paris, France, 2CNRS, UPR 640, Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives et
Imagerie Cérébrale, Hôpital de La Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3Université Pierre
et Marie Curie-Paris 6, France, 4Centre MEG/EEG, Hôpital de La Salpêtrière,
Paris, France, 5AP-HP, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Service de Neurologie, Créteil,
France — The hierarchical hypothesis assumes that episodic memory is a
specific subsystem of semantic memory and that the neural networks
implicated in the two systems largely overlap. In this study, we used
MEG in 17 healthy elderly subjects who performed a semantic and an
episodic memory task. The aim of this work was to determine the neural
correlates and the temporal dynamic underlying the semantic and episodic components of face recognition in cognitive aging. In the semantic
task, 56 faces (28 famous and 28 unknowns) were presented and subjects
had to decide for each face whether it was famous or unknown. In the
episodic task, subjects were asked to recognize among distracters the
faces they had seen in the semantic task. Behavioral results show that the
level of semantic awareness of an item affects the recognition of that same
item in the episodic memory task. At physiological level, in the semantic
task, evoked fields associated to famous faces were stronger than those
associated to unknown faces, in the right temporal region between 400
and 600 ms and in the left fronto-temporal region between 600 and 800
ms. During episodic task, evoked fields associated to the recognition of
the studied faces were stronger than those associated to new faces,
between 400 and 600 ms, and between 600 and 800 ms in temporo-parietal sensors (old/new effect). Consistently with the hierarchical hypothesis, our results show that episodic memory strongly relies on semantic
memory and that the neural correlates of the two systems largely overlap.
D99
DIFFERENTIAL PATTERNS OF HIPPOCAMPAL ACTIVITY
DURING CONTINUOUS RECOGNITION: A HIGH-RESOLUTION
FMRI STUDY Maki Suzuki1, Jeffrey D. Johnson1, Michael D. Rugg1;
1
Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory & Neurobiology and
Behavior, University of California, Irvine — In a previous study (Johnson
and Rugg, 2008, Hippocampus), it was reported that different hippocampal regions responded to multiple repetitions of items in a continuous
recognition task in two distinct ways. Some regions demonstrated repetition-related response reductions that were ’graded’ (gradually diminishing responses across repetitions), whereas other regions demonstrated a
’categorical’ repetition effect (asymptotic response reduction on the first
repetition). Here, we used high-resolution functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) to investigate whether medial temporal lobe (MTL) activity varies across successive item presentations when the requirement was
to track the number of presentations of each item. While being scanned,
16 subjects were presented with a series of pictures and were required to

130

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

respond with one finger to items presented for the first or the third time,
and with another finger to items appearing for the second or the fourth
time. Repetitions were separated by a mean of 23 trials. Consistent with
previous findings, new items elicited larger fMRI responses than
repeated items in both bilateral hippocampus and parahippocampal cortex. There were no MTL regions where activity was greater for old items.
Both graded and categorical response profiles were evident within adjacent hippocampal regions. Other regions, however, demonstrated profiles that varied between these two extremes. These findings highlight the
ubiquity of hippocampal ’recognition suppression effects’ during continuous recognition, and add to the evidence that different hippocampal
regions respond to the relative novelty/familiarity of stimulus events in
very different ways.
D100
WHAT DOES THE POSTERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX (PPC) TELL
US ABOUT EPISODIC ENCODING? A META-ANALYSIS OF PPC
SUBSEQUENT MEMORY EFFECTS Melina
Uncapher1,
Anthony
Wagner1,2; 1Stanford University, Psychology, Stanford CA, 2Stanford
University, Neurosciences Program, Stanford CA — The formation of episodic memories -- memories for life events -- is affected by attention during event processing. A leading neurobiological model of attention posits
two separate yet interacting systems that depend on distinct regions in
lateral posterior parietal cortex (PPC). From this dual-attention perspective, dorsal PPC is thought to support the goal-directed allocation of
attention, whereas ventral PPC is thought to support reflexive orienting
to information that automatically captures attention. To advance understanding of how parietal mechanisms may impact event encoding, we
present a meta-analysis of functional MRI studies that document the relationship between lateral PPC activation during encoding and subsequent
memory performance (e.g., later remembering or forgetting). This metaanalysis reveals that (a) encoding-related activity is frequently observed
in human lateral PPC, (b) increased activation in dorsal PPC is associated
with later memory success, and (c) increased activation in ventral PPC
predominantly correlates with later memory failure. From a dual-attention perspective, these findings suggest that allocating goal-directed
attention during event processing increases the probability that the event
will be remembered later, whereas the capture of reflexive attention during event processing may have negative consequences for event encoding. The prevalence of encoding-related activation in parietal cortex
suggests that neurobiological models of episodic memory should consider how parietal-mediated attentional mechanisms regulate encoding.
D101
MODULATION OF THE EMOTIONAL MEMORY NETWORK
DURING FREE VIEWING OF A BASKETBALL GAME Anne
Botzung1, Kevin S LaBar1, Amanda Miles1, Philip Kragel1, David C Rubin1;
1
Duke University, Psychology & Neuroscience — Our aim was to investigate
brain activity associated with the encoding of realistic, highly emotional
and self-relevant stimuli. A 30-minute portion of a basketball game
involving a traditional college basketball rivalry, Duke vs. UNC, was presented in the fMRI scanner to dedicated fans from the two opposing
schools. During a subsequent recognition memory task outside the scanner, the participants were shown eighty 15-s video clips depicting plays
from the most exciting periods of the game, stemming either from the
portion viewed before (targets), or from non viewed portions of the same
game (foils). Half the clips were emotionally positive and half emotionally negative for fans of each team. After an old-new judgment, participants provided memory confidence, and emotional valence and intensity
ratings for each clip. fMRI signal acquired during the entire free-viewing
session was decomposed into spatially independent networks using
independent component analysis. A correlation analysis was performed
between neural activity associated with each component during the previously selected 15-s portions of the game and corresponding post-viewing ratings. Interestingly, the component showing the highest level of
correlation with intensity included key regions of both memory and emo-

Poster Session D

tional circuitries: respectively, the hippocampus bilaterally, visual cortex,
medial posterior cingulate and precuneus, medial and orbital prefrontal
cortex, as well as the amygdala. These findings contribute to our understanding of the effects of emotion on the encoding process of real-life
emotional stimuli.
D102
EFFECT OF SUBCHRONIC NOISE STRESS ON SPATIAL
MEMORY AND LEARNING IN WISTAR RATS Leonardo Hernandez1,
Jassica Soria-Fregoso1, Alma Cisneros-Esparza1, Gabriela Camargo1;
1
Neurociencias, CUCS, Universidad de Guadalajara — Background: Central
Nervous System is (CNS) strongly involved in response to chronic and
acute stress. If a stressful event is intense and long, the limbic, hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal system undergoes changes which depend on
intensity and duration of stimulus. However, in case of non extreme conditions of stress is not clear. In this sense, we explore implications on spatial memory and learning in rats undergoing subchronic noise stress.
Methods: We used 16 young male Wistar rats were distributed as following: a) Control , 8 animal in standard conditions of vivarium and b) Test,
8 rats in noise condition. Noise exposition consisted in expose animals to
high frequency tones (22KHz, at 80-90 dB) 8 hours at day during 10 days.
Spatial memory and learning were evaluated in both groups using Morris water maze (MWM), in its classic and reverse learning variant. The
quantified parameters were Latency, Spatial specificity, navigation velocity, and locomotion. Results: Noise exposed rats show a better performing in relation of control in both variants of MWM in both variants,
classical and reverse learning. Conclusion: Apparently, subchronic noise
stress conditions improve the construction of cognitive maps in Hippocampus, (which able to spacial navigation in rats), and optimize the synaptic plasticity mechanisms at hippocampus. These results are different
from those reported for chronic or acute stress, where the cognitive
impairment and hippocampus plasticity constriction were found.
D103
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL, EPISODIC, AND SEMANTIC MEMORY:
MODELING OF A COMMON FUNCTIONAL NETWORK Hana
Burianova1,2, Cheryl L. Grady1,2; 1The Rotman Research Institute, 2University
of Toronto — The objective of this study was to delineate a functional network common to autobiographical, episodic, and semantic types of
retrieval. Autobiographical retrieval was defined as the recollection of
personally relevant events, episodic retrieval as the recollection of stimuli
presented in the laboratory, and semantic retrieval as the recollection of
factual information and general knowledge about the world. Young
adults participated in an event-related functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) study in which pictorial stimuli were presented as cues
for retrieval. By manipulating retrieval demands, autobiographical, episodic, or semantic memories were extracted in response to the same stimulus. We conducted a three-seed partial least squares (PLS) analysis to
determine whole-brain functional connections with the left hippocampus, left lingual gyrus, and right caudate nucleus. We delineated a largescale functional network common to the three memory conditions that
comprised 21 functionally connected neural areas (i.e., their activity covaried during any type of declarative retrieval), including the inferior and
medial frontal gyri, as well as a number of temporal and parietal areas.
These findings lend support to the notion of a common network, which is
hypothesized to give rise to declarative memory retrieval, regardless of
the type of information processed, along a contextual continuum (i.e.,
highly contextualized or highly decontextualized).
D104
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL CORRELATES OF MEMORY
STRENGTH FOR SOURCE JUDGMENTS Brion
Woroch1,
Brian
1
1
Gonsalves ; Beckman Institute, Univ. of Illinois Urbana-Champaign — Eventrelated potential (ERP) studies of recognition memory have shown dissociations between item recognition and source memory, wherein item recognition is associated with the mid-frontal FN400 component, which
varies continuously with item memory strength, while source memory is

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

associated with the late parietal effect (LPC). There is current debate
about whether source memory can vary along a continuum of memory
strength or is a threshold process. The LPC has been shown to be generally sensitive to correct versus incorrect source judgments, but varying
levels of ’source strength’ have not been tested. The current experiment
had participants encode novel visual objects in one of two different task
contexts by performing either a conceptual or perceptual judgment about
the object. On a subsequent memory test, participants made an old/new
decision on a 4-point confidence scale followed by a source memory confidence judgment, in which they indicated their confidence about which
task they had performed with the object at encoding. ERPs from the
memory test were examined for electrophysiological correlates of both
item and source memory strength. Item memory was associated with
differences in the 300-500ms time window, consistent with the timing of
the FN400. Differences in the amplitude of the LPC were observed
between correct and incorrect source decisions, consistent with previous
findings. Comparing low and high confidence source decisions also
revealed differences, suggesting that the LPC is also sensitive to variations in the strength of source memory.
D105
BEHAVIOURAL AND ERP MEASURES OF FAMILIARITY AND
RECOLLECTION:
EVIDENCE
AGAINST
THE
DOMAIN
DICHOTOMY VIEW OF ASSOCIATIVE RECOGNITION Iain
M.
Harlow1, Graham MacKenzie2, David I. Donaldson3; 1University of Edinburgh,
Neuroinformatics DTC, 2University of Glasgow, Psychology, 3University of
Stirling, Psychology — Episodic recognition memory is mediated by familiarity and recollection, whose relative engagement depends on both the
nature of the stimuli being retrieved and the manner in which memory is
tested. For associative retrieval tests, it is unclear exactly what stimulus
parameters determine the engagement of familiarity and recollection.
One recent proposal, the Domain Dichotomy view (Mayes et al., 2007),
states that familiarity should contribute more to associative recognition
when pairs of stimuli are similar (i.e., within-domain) than when they are
distinct (i.e., between-domain). We tested this prediction using neuroimaging and behavioural measures of familiarity (Event-Related Potentials
or ERPs; the Modified Remember Know procedure; and Receiver Operator Characteristics). Participants studied stimulus pairs, and at test discriminated intact from rearranged pairs. Stimuli were either withindomain (word-word or image-image pairs) or between-domain (wordimage pairs), allowing familiarity to be estimated for each condition.
Contrary to the Domain Dichotomy view, behavioural measures revealed
that the contribution of familiarity (and consequently recognition performance overall) was at least as high for the between-domain condition as
either within-domain condition. Moreover, ERPs measured at retrieval
did not reliably differ between conditions; each revealed a central positivity between 500-1000ms for hits to intact pairs compared to correct rejections of rearranged pairs. When pairs of new items were included as a
baseline (in an otherwise identical follow-up study) standard early midfrontal and left parietal old/new effects were observed in each condition.
The results provide convergent evidence that familiarity and recollection
support associative retrieval, but not in the way Domain Dichotomy predicts.
D106
BEHAVIOURAL AND EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL EVIDENCE
FOR A DOUBLE DISSOCIATION BETWEEN WORKING AND
LONG-TERM MEMORY Chia-Yun Wu1, David E. J. Linden1, Christoph
Klein1, Stephan G. Boehm1; 1School of Psychology, Bangor University, United
Kingdom — Working and long-term memory have long been considered
distinct memory types. Based on recent neuroimaging studies and a critical re-evaluation of earlier lesion studies, a high degree of overlap
between the areas subserving both types of memory has been highlighted, raising doubts on a double dissociation of working and longterm memory. Furthermore, it is widely accepted that working memory
is the pathway to long-term memory. Here, we investigated whether

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

131

Sunday, March 22, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

working memory encoding is indeed a pre-requisite for successful formation of long-term memory. Additionally, we used event-related potentials to investigate whether similar neural processes support both types of
memory. Participants were engaged in a working memory task for
famous faces, which was followed by a long-term memory test for faces
presented during the working memory task. Behavioural results showed
a considerable degree of independence between performance in working
memory and long-term memory. Clear neural signatures of successful
encoding into working and long-term memory were present between
550-1100 ms; the spatial distributions of these potentials indicate different
encoding between working and long-term memory. Positive old/new
effects were present for both working (300-500 ms, 500-700 ms) and longterm memory (500-800 ms). The topographies of all these old/new effects
were significantly different from each other. Both our behavioural and
event-related potential results support at least partially distinct memory
systems for working and long-term memory. Our results raise questions
on the idea of working memory as the pathway into long-term memory
and support a high degree of dissociation between working and longterm memory.
D107
IMPLICIT SEQUENCE LEARNING: BEHAVIORAL AND FMRI
EVIDENCE FOR DISTINCT UNDERLYING REPRESENTATIONS
AND NEURAL STRUCTURES Freja Gheysen1, Filip Van Opstal1,
Chantal Roggeman1, Hilde Van Waelvelde1, Wim Fias1; 1Ghent University,
Belgium — Sensitivity for serial order has been the topic of cognitive psychology research for many years. The cognitive ability to encode serial
information from the environment allows us to predict and prepare for
upcoming events, even without the need of having full conscious knowledge of this information. In this study, the question concerning which
representation (stimulus or response) contributes to the implicit learning
process and which brain structures play a significant role in the acquisition and storage of these representations is addressed. In the original
Serial Reaction Time task (Nissen & Bullemer, 1987), many types of
sequential information are intermixed. To distinguish perceptual from
motor sequencing, we developed a new serial reaction task and controlled for confounds occurring in previous studies. First, behavioral
results from this serial color matching task demonstrated that both stimulus and response contingencies contribute to sequence acquisition. However, perceptual sequence learning seems less robust than the learning
process of motor sequences. Next, this behavioral work was related to
brain function. The distinct areas engaged in the early and advanced
stages of sequence acquisition were investigated using a blocked fMRI
design with the same paradigm. Subjects were scanned over two sessions
with additional sequence training in between. Moreover, the study aimed
at exploring specifically the role of the cerebellum in learning different
types of sequential information.

132

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

Poster Session E
Memory: False memory
E1
NEURAL ACTIVITY PREDICTS TRUE AND FALSE MEMORIES IN
THE MISINFORMATION PARADIGM Carol Baym1, Brian Gonsalves1,2;
1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Psychology, 2Beckman Institute,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — False memories occur when
people report having encountered something they have not actually experienced. Of interest here are the neural mechanisms that underlie this type
of memory failure. In the current study, 18 healthy young adults viewed
vignettes of common activities such as preparing dinner while we monitored their brain activity using functional magnetic resonance imaging. In
the Original Event Phase (OE) participants viewed photographs of actors
portraying the scenarios. Later, in the Misinformation Phase (MP), participants viewed sentences describing the previously seen photographs and
were instructed to visualize the corresponding photograph. Critically,
some of the verbal presentations contained information conflicting with
that depicted in the photographs. Twenty-four hours later, participants
returned for a memory test for what they had seen in the photographs.
Our manipulation showed reliable creation of false memories, defined as
instances where the participant reported information that was not in the
photographs, but was presented in the verbal information. Consistent with
previous findings (Gonsalves, 2004), participants who were most susceptible to false memory formation showed activity in medial prefrontal cortex,
right parietal cortex, and visual areas during the MP when they would
later report a false memory compared to a true memory. Region-of-interest
analyses showed that activity in several regions during the OE predicted
later accurate memory and resistance to misinformation. These findings
suggest that different patterns of neural activity at encoding predict subsequent accurate and false memory.
E2
THE FUNCTIONAL LOCUS OF MEMORY DISTORSIONS:
ENCODING OR RETRIEVAL? Eve Attali1,2, Victoria Cristancho1,2,
Gianfranco Dalla Barba1,3; 1INSERM U 610 Paris, 2UPMC Univeristé Paris VI,
3
Hopital Henri Mondor Créteil — Many current accounts of the origin of
intrusions and other confabulatory-like phenomena emphasize the role of
a retrieval or postretrieval deficit in these disorders. Our previous experiments showed that the probability of false memories production was associated with the quality of the memory trace. However, this memory trace is
elaborated during encoding processes. One might then ask the question
whether the origin of memory distorsions is located at encoding or at
retrieval. We propose to disturb differentially these two stages of processing by the addition of a divided attention (DA) task at encoding and at
retrieval. Methods Forty young and 40 older adults participated in two
studies. The first task consists in a free recall of three different types of stories, and the second one is a words recognition test based on High and
Low frequency words. These two tasks were administrated under three
conditions: -1: full attention at encoding/ full attention at retrieval -2: DA
at encoding/ full attention at retrieval -3: full attention at encoding/ DA at
retrieval Results In both tasks, DA at encoding was associated with both a
decrease of memory performance and an increase of false memories
whereas DA at retrieval had little effect on both the accuracy of the
retrieval and the probability in creating memory distorsions. Conclusion
The greater number of confabulations and false recognitions when divided
attention was provided at encoding than at retrieval suggests that encoding processes might be strongly involved in the generation of memory distorsions.

E3
TRUE MEMORY, FALSE MEMORY, AND THE EFFECT OF
REPEATED
ITEMS
ON
EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS
REGARDLESS OF MEMORY Matthew Burden1, Alissa Westerlund2, Gina
Muckle3, Pierre Ayotte3, Eric Dewailly3, Charles Nelson2, Sandra Jacobson1,
Joseph Jacobson; 1Wayne State University School of Medicine, 2Children's
Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, 3Laval University — Event-related
potential (ERP) studies often show a larger late positive component (LPC)
associated with repeated, successfully remembered items. Little is known,
however, about how the LPC and preceding components are influenced by
repetition in true vs. false memory. We recorded ERPs during a continuous recognition memory task in which children (N = 103; mean age = 11.3
yr) determined if each visually presented object was "new" (seen once) or
"old" (repeated). ERPs were analyzed with respect to hits (old/correct),
misses (old/incorrect), false alarms (new/incorrect), and correct rejections
(new/correct).
Bonferroni-adjusted comparisons showed that, as
expected, LPC peak amplitude (500-650 ms) at Pz was larger for mean (?V)
hits (18.3) vs. correct rejections (14.1), false alarms (14.5), and misses (15.6;
ps < .01); planned comparisons showed that the peak for misses was also
larger than correct rejections (p < .05), which did not differ from false
alarms (p = .63). By contrast, the P2 peak (250-400 ms) at Pz was virtually
identical for mean (?V) hits and misses (14.2 vs. 14.1, respectively, p = .99),
and both were larger than the corresponding P2 for correct rejections (11.5;
ps < .001), which did not differ from false alarms (12.6; p = .74). These
findings suggest that the early P2 component is sensitive to repetition
effects ("old" vs. "new") regardless of memory, perhaps reflecting equally
successful visual encoding of repeated items, and the LPC, which is partially enhanced by repetition alone (misses) but unaffected by false memory (false alarms), reflects true memory retrieval.

Memory: Memory disorders
E4
TEMPORAL REPRODUCTION AS AN EARLY MARKER OF
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Ashley Bangert1, Jeremy Missuk1, David Balota1;
1Washington University in St. Louis, Psychology — Early stages of dementia
of the Alzheimer’s type (DAT) are marked by deficits in attentional control
(Balota & Faust, 2001). Changes in attention and executive control influence the temporal perception of supra-second durations (Lewis & Miall,
2003). In the current study, young adults (YA), healthy older adults (OA),
and individuals classified as very mildly demented (CDR .5) on the Clinical Dementia Rating Scale (Berg, 1988) performed a continuous tapping
task with 500, 1000, and 1500 ms intervals. We hypothesized that CDR .5
would show poorer performance than YA and OA especially on longer
durations as a consequence of higher attentional demands. Despite equivalent performance to YA during paced tapping, both OA and CDR .5 individuals produced significantly less accurate reproductions compared to
YA during 1000 ms and 1500 ms unpaced tapping. Additionally, CDR .5
were less accurate than OA for the 1500 ms condition. Performance in this
condition also discriminated carriers from non-carriers of the APOE e4
allele in a subset of OA. These results suggest that CDR .5 and OA who
are at risk for developing DAT due to e4 status have difficulty continuously monitoring and updating the passage of time in order to maintain
the appropriate temporal task set. Moreover, finding that a simple repetitive timing task is sensitive to differences between OA and CDR .5 individuals as well as e4 status has implications for the development of simple
diagnostic tools for early detection of DAT. This work was supported by
NIA PO1 AGO3991 and T32 AG000030-32.
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

133

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Poster Session E

E5
RELATIONS BETWEEN STM DEFICITS AND EXECUTIVE
FUNCTION Corinne Allen1, Randi Martin1; 1Rice University,
Psychology — Hoffman and colleagues (2008) claimed that executive function (EF) deficits cause semantic and semantic short-term memory (STM)
impairments in aphasic patients. Consistent with this claim, Hamilton
and Martin (2007) demonstrated a verbal inhibition deficit in a patient
with a semantic STM deficit. The present study investigated whether EF
deficits are related to semantic but not phonological STM deficits. We
used complex EF tasks and tasks tapping basic EF components (inhibition, updating, and shifting). Seventeen aphasic patients with varying
degrees of semantic or phonological STM deficits were tested on semantic, STM, and EF tasks. Wisconsin Card Sorting Task (WCST) performance correlated with phonological retention and semantic ability
whereas Tower of Hanoi (TOH) performance did not, suggesting a
greater verbal component to the WCST than the TOH. For basic EF components, inhibition correlated with semantic retention, but also correlated
with phonological retention. Interestingly, verbal and nonverbal updating tasks correlated with several span tasks tapping phonological retention, despite the fact that the updating tasks only required retaining one
item. Finally, shifting was unrelated to semantic or phonological retention. These results provide little support for the notion that global EF deficits cause STM deficits, given that TOH performance was unrelated to
STM. Instead, causation may go in the other direction-deficits in phonological retention may cause deficits on complex and simple EF tasks that
have verbal components. The claim that verbal inhibition deficits are the
source of semantic STM deficits remains viable; however inhibition deficits also appear to be related to phonological STM.

E7
EFFECTS OF COGNITIVE REHABILITATION ON MEMORYRELATED FUNCTIONAL BRAIN ACTIVATION IN PEOPLE WITH
EARLY STAGE ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Jorien van Paasschen1, Linda
Clare1, Robert T. Woods1, David E.J. Linden1; 1School of Psychology, Bangor
University — Recent studies show that using learning strategies in combination with teaching personally relevant information can be effective in
improving memory for that information in people with Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Six people participating in an eight-week cognitive rehabilitation intervention programme were taught a mnemonic strategy to
(re)learn the names of familiar people. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), possible changes in brain activation during facename learning were examined pre and post treatment while participants
learned and recognised unfamiliar face-name pairs, and engaged in a
control task (making decisions about the gender of a face). Behaviourally,
we observed small improvements on immediate recognition of the facename associations as well as on the control task. On a neural level, brain
activity was generally higher prior to than following the treatment during memory-related processing. During encoding, activation decreases
following treatment occurred mainly in visual areas. The most prominent
alterations occurred during recognition, where activation was lower following the intervention period in mainly parietal, occipital and temporal
regions. Changes in brain activity during the control task were minimal.
Although preliminary, the results were suggestive of more effective inhibition of regions comprising a default mode network. The approach
adopted here to study the neural bases of cognitive rehabilitation has not
been reported before, and the present findings indicate that this method
can feasibly be employed with people with AD.

E6
GENERALIZATION GRADIENTS IN HUMAN CATEGORY
LEARNING:
AMNESIC
PATIENTS
CAN
OUTPERFORM
CONTROLS ON HIGH-DISTORTION EXEMPLARS Catherine
Myers1, Ramona Hopkins2,3, A. J. Wills4, Mark Gluck5; 1Rutgers University,
Psychology, Newark, NJ, 2Brigham Young University, Psychology, UT,
3Medicine, LDS Hospital and Intermountain Medical Center, Salt Lake City,
UT, 4University of Exeter, Psychology, Exeter, UK, 5Center for Neuroscience,
Rutgers University, Newark, NJ — Prior work has suggested that the hippocampal region is important for contextual and configural processing,
but is not required for simple stimulus-response learning. We tested 9
amnesic patients with bilateral hippocampal damage and 9 healthy controls on a categorization task (Wills & McLaren, 1997) in which subjects
learn by trial and error to categorize prototype-structured patterns of 12
symbols; symbols are selected from two sets, A and B, and each pattern
belongs to the category from which a majority of its symbols are taken.
This task can be solved by configural learning about groups of symbols
that reliably co-occur and signal category membership, or by forming
individual symbol-category associations and then using a majority rule to
deduce category membership. If the hippocampal region mediates contextual/configural learning, the configural strategy should be hippocampal-dependent but the associational strategy should not. Training was
followed by a test phase in which subjects categorized new patterns
including prototypes (all 12 symbols from one class) as well as high- and
low-distortion exemplars. On the test phase, controls showed high accuracy for prototypes, with a generalization gradient that declined
smoothly for progressively more distorted exemplars. Consistent with
prior findings, amnesic patients performed as well as controls on classifying prototypes and low-distortion exemplars; but on high-distortion
exemplars, amnesics actually outperformed controls. This is consistent
with the idea that the amnesic patients are biased to form individual cuecategory associations, leading to good performance on high-distortion
exemplars, since categorization is made by majority vote based on the
symbols present.

E8
EFFECTS OF INTIMATE PARTNER VIOLENCE ON MEMORY
Carolyn Edwards1, Robert Astur2, Sarah Raskin1; 1Neuroscience Program,
Trinity College, Hartford CT, 2Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center, Institute
of Living, Hartford CT — This study examined prospective, spatial and
verbal memory deficits in female victims of intimate partner violence
(IPV). Eighteen women who had experienced IPV were given tests of
memory, posttraumatic stress disorder, daily stress inventory, a brain
injury screening measure, Beck Anxiety Inventory, Beck Depression
Inventory, the Cognitive Difficulties Scale and a quality of life measure.
Memory tests included the Memory for Intentions Screening Test (MIST),
the virtual radial arm maze, and the Hopkins Verbal Learning Test
(HVLT). The aim of the study was to determine how various health outcomes such as brain injury, post-traumatic stress disorder, and depression affect memory in these women. Results indicated that women with
increased stress performed better on the memory tasks than women
reporting less stress. Other results verified previous findings that women
who had suffered more severe IPV were more likely to be experiencing
PTSD, depression, anxiety, and a lower quality of life. Women who had
undergone more severe IPV were more likely to report having cognitive
difficulties, however, there was no correlation between increased IPV
severity and performance on standardized memory tests.

134

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

E9
REDUCED ERP WORD REPETITION EFFECTS IN PATIENTS
WITH FRAGILE X-ASSOCIATED TREMOR/ATAXIA SYNDROME
John Olichney1,2, Shiao-hui Chan1,2, Andrea Schneider3, Adam Niese1,2,4,
Kelsey Laird5, Rawi Nanakul1,2, Flora Tassone3, Randi Hagerman3; 1UC Davis,
Neurology, 2Center for Mind and Brain, UC Davis, 3MIND Institute, UC
Davis, 4University of Iowa, Psychology, 5UC Davis, Neuroscience — Fragile
X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS), a neurodegenerative disorder associated with premutations of the FMR1 gene, affects many carriers in late-life. Patients with FXTAS typically have cerebellar ataxia,
neuronal intranuclear inclusions (especially in hippocampus), and cognitive impairment. Neuropsychological tests have shown similar deficits in
FXTAS dementia and AD. Thus, we sought to characterize the P600 and
N400 word repetition effects in patients with FXTAS. We hypothesized

Poster Session E

that FXTAS patients with poor declarative verbal memory will have pronounced abnormalities in the P600 repetition effect. Methods: Auditory
category statements were each followed by an associated visual target
word (50% "congruous" category exemplars, 50% "incongruous" nouns)
while 32 channel ERPs were recorded during a category decision task.
Two-thirds of the stimuli were repeated, either at short-lag (~10-40 seconds) or long-lag (~100-140 seconds later). Results: Preliminary group
ANOVAs showed a highly significant reduction of the N400 repetition
effect (F=12.7; p=0.001), but not of the P600 repetition effect, in FXTAS
(n=16, mean age=68.7, MMSE=26.4). However, the FXTAS patients with
abnormal verbal memory also had reduced P600 word repetition effects,
with significant within-group correlations (r’s > 0.55 with free and cued
recall measures). The relationship between P600 and N400 effects, CGG
repeat length, FMR1 mRNA expression levels, and memory performance
will be discussed. In conclusion, ERP word repetition effects appear sensitive to the memory dysfunction present in patients with FXTAS. Their
more severe reduction in N400, than P600, repetition effect is in contrast
to the reverse pattern found in amnestic MCI (Olichney et al 2002 JNNP).
E10
DIFFERENTIAL IMPAIRMENT OF RELATIONAL VERSUS ITEMSPECIFIC MEMORY IN SCHIZOPHRENIA J. Daniel Ragland1, Robert
Blumenfeld2, Ian Ramsay1, Marjorie Solomon1, Stefan Ursu1, Michael
Minzenberg1, Jong Yoon1, Cameron Carter1, Charan Ranganath3; 1UC Davis,
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 2UC Berkley, Psychology, 3UC Davis,
Psychology — Although individuals with schizophrenia have severe long
term memory (LTM) deficits, they are not densely amnestic. Like frontal
lobe lesion patients, individuals with schizophrenia are most impaired
when required to generate strategies to organize information during
encoding, and to control and monitor search processes during retrieval.
There is also evidence for a relative deficit in recollection versus familiarity-based retrieval. This study tests the hypothesis that strategic memory
deficits in schizophrenia are due to specific impairment in control of relational processing, whereas item-specific processing is relatively intact.
This hypothesis was tested by administering a previously validated relational and item-specific encoding task during fMRI to 16 individuals with
schizophrenia and 15 healthy volunteers. Subsequent memory performance was evaluated using signal-detection analysis of receiver operator
characteristics (ROC). This revealed predicted group by task interactions.
Specifically, controls showed better LTM performance following relational than item-specific processing, whereas patients showed no performance benefit from relational processing. This was true for a standard
measure of recognition accuracy (da) and for a measure sensitive to relational binding (Triplet Memory). The ROC analysis revealed that patients
had a specific impairment in recollection (R) but not in familiarity (dprime) following both item-specific and relational encoding. These convergent behavioral results reveal a relative preservation of item-specific
encoding and familiarity based retrieval in schizophrenia that has important implications for developing behavioral and pharmacological interventions to target the remaining severe deficits in recollection and
relational memory that limit these individuals’ daily function.
E11
MEMORY FAILURE AND SLEEP DISRUPTION IN AMNESTIC
MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT Carmen E. Westerberg1, Bryce A.
Mander1, Susan M. Florczak1, Sridhar Jatla1, Sandra Weintraub1, M.-Marsel
Mesulam1, Phyllis C. Zee1, Ken A. Paller1; 1Northwestern University —
Declarative memories are not static. Rather, they undergo a consolidation
process whereby memory fragments stored in distinct neocortical zones
can become more effectively bound together. If memory processing during sleep contributes to consolidation, poor sleep may exacerbate memory problems in patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Sleep
disruptions are common in AD, but a direct link between disease-related
sleep disruptions and memory dysfunction has not been established. It is
unknown whether sleep is also disrupted in amnestic mild cognitive
impairment (a-MCI), a condition that may precede AD and that is charac-

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

terized by circumscribed memory deficits not severe enough to disrupt
daily living activities. To explore possible connections between memory
dysfunction and sleep, we used polysomnography (PSG) to obtain electrophysiological measures of sleep in patients with a-MCI and cognitively healthy age- and education-matched individuals. Two declarative
memory tests (for word pairs and for fictitious biographical facts associated with studied faces) and a priming test (speeded decisions for common-object pictures) were administered prior to sleep and after waking
each morning in a 4-night protocol. PSG data revealed reduced stage-2
sleep and reduced sleep efficiency in a-MCI. Across-subject correlations
showed that declining sleep efficiency was associated with declining
declarative memory accuracy for information learned the previous night,
but not with priming. Thus, mild alterations of sleep architecture are
present in a-MCI and may interfere with declarative-memory consolidation. Additional findings supporting the possibility that the forgetfulness
of a-MCI patients partly stems from deficient memory processing during
sleep will also be discussed.
E13
IMAGINING THE PAST AND THE FUTURE: SIMULATION
DEFICITS IN HEALTHY AGING Donna Rose Addis1, Regina M.
Musicaro2, Ling Pan2, Daniel L. Schacter2,3; 1The University of Auckland,
Psychology, New Zealand, 2Harvard University, Psychology, Cambridge MA,
3Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Charlestown MA — We
recently reported that older adults generate fewer episodic details than
younger adults when remembering past events and simulating future
events. Moreover, performance on the remembering and imagining tasks
was tightly correlated. We suggested that the simulation findings reveal
an age-related deficit in recombining episodic details into novel events,
but they could also result from older adults simply ’recasting’ entire past
events as future events. In the current study, we used an experimental
recombination paradigm to prevent ’recasting’ while imagining, and to
compare imagining the future with imagining the past. Eighteen young
and eighteen older adults imagined future and past events using event
details taken from memories recalled in a prior session and randomly
recombined. Subjects also recalled past events. Event transcriptions were
segmented into internal (episodic) and external (non-episodic) details.
Older adults generated fewer internal episodic details for imagined and
recalled events than younger adults. Both groups generated more episodic detail during recall relative to imagining, and more episodic detail
for events imagined in the past versus future. We also replicated the finding that older adults generate significantly more external detail than
younger adults. Across both groups, imagined future events were associated with more external information than imagined past events. Importantly, the number of internal and external details both showed
correlations between recalled and imagined events. This study extends
the age-related simulation deficit to conditions of recombination, and
shows that deficits in imagining episodic detail are evident for imagined
past events, and not specific to imagining the future.
E14
SEMANTIC MEMORY AND TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Fanpei
Yang1, Navid Khodaparast1, Kourosh Zakeri1, Daniel Krawczyk1,2; 1Center for
Brain Health, University of Texas at Dallas, 2University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Psychiatry, Dallas — Figurative language (e.g., irony, metaphor, and idiom) comprehension has been identified as a domain of
impairment in adults that have sustained Traumatic Brain Injuries (TBI).
Declines in working memory and in figurative language comprehension
in TBI patients are inferred based on observed deficits in higher-order
comprehension skills, such as inference understanding, as well as a
reported correlation between working memory and several types of figurative language in older adults. No previous studies have employed
functional neuroimaging techniques in order to test the hypothesis that
impaired complex language comprehension is directly dependent on
working memory efficacy. In a previous fMRI experiment on metaphor
comprehension in normal subjects, we established that the left inferior

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

135

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

frontal gyrus (LIFG) was most involved with novel metaphor comprehension. This finding is consistent with results reported in other imaging
studies of complex language processing. The purpose of the present
research was to uncover the most influential cognitive factor for TBI
patients’ deficits in figurative language processing. Our results indicated
that patients with TBI, regardless of lesion location, showed lowered
LIFG activation, which is a primary control region involved in processing
semantic memory representations. We observed no differences in activation related to subjects’ working memory ability. Based on the regional
activation observed in this study, we suggest that semantic memory
rather than working memory may have the greatest efficacy in terms of
isolating potential biomarker regions in the brain related to the degeneration of complex language processing due to injuries.
E15
THE S.M STORY: EPISODIC, BUT NOT SEMANTIC,
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY IMPAIRMENT IN A HEALTHY
PERSON Daniela Palombo1,2, Allison Mackey2, Hedvig Söderlund2, Namita
Kumar2, Brian Levine1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research
Institute — We report the case of S.M., a healthy woman who is unable to
re-experience her past. S.M.'s development was normal, with no evidence
of trauma, psychiatric history or brain injury. Autobiographical memory
tests revealed dysfunction of episodic memory (re-experiencing of
events), while semantic memory (factual information) was well preserved. Importantly, S.M. did not show any other cognitive deficits, with
normal performance on standardized neuropsychological tests. Structural MRI revealed volume loss in a number of brain regions, including
extra-hippocampal medial temporal lobe (MTL) structures (i.e., perirhinal and entorhinal cortices). During functional MRI of autobiographical
memory retrieval, S.M. showed reduced activation relative to control participants in midline frontal regions and the MTL. These regions have
been consistently identified as part of the autobiographical memory network. We also collected event-related potential (ERP) measures of recognition memory. Previous research has shown that ERPs can be used to
topographically dissociate recollection and familiarity. Recollection is
closely tied to episodic memory, whereas familairity is thought to be an
expression of semantic memory. In the present study, S.M. did not show
the ERP index associated with recollection, whereas control participants
reliably did. By contrast the ERP index of familiarity, was found in both
S.M. and control participants. These data provide support for a dissociation between episodic and semantic memory systems. Further, to our
knowledge, S.M. is the first reported case of a healthy person to show an
episodic memory deficit and, as such, is of great significance in our
understanding of the neural correlates of memory.

Memory: Memory systems
E16
AGE-RELATED CHANGES OF ITEM AND SOURCE MEMORY FOR
EMOTIONAL
FACES:
EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL
EVIDENCE Maria Gruno1, Sophia Wilhelm1, Katja Werheid1, Norbert
Kathmann1; 1Institute of Psychology, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Berlin,
Germany — Negative emotion boosts episodic memory. However, it is
still debated whether negative emotion enhances memory for the central
event (item memory) or memory for its contextual details (source memory) and how aging influences the emotion memory coupling. The
present study used event-related potentials (ERP) to examine the impact
of emotion and age on retrieval processes underlying item and source
memory. Young (n = 18; mean age = 25) and older adults (n = 18; mean
age = 67) studied negative and neutral faces along with context information. In a later recognition test they were asked to classify faces as studied
or non-studied and assign them to their proper context. Results showed
enhanced source memory for negative faces in both age groups, despite
generally reduced memory performance in the elderly. ERP correlates of

136

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

source memory were reduced in older compared to younger adults.
Moreover, the effects of negative emotion on item and source memory
varied as a function of age as reflected in the ERP old/new effects. Thus,
these findings suggest that aging affects the action point of negative emotion on source memory.
E17
NEURAL DYNAMICS OF CONTROLLING CONFLICT FROM
INTERFERING REPRESENTATIONS DURING LONG-TERM
MEMORY RETRIEVAL Patrick Khader1, Kerstin Jost1, Frank Rösler1;
1
Experimental and Biological Psychology, Philipps-University Marburg,
Germany — Psychobiological research on long-term memory (LTM) representations primarily focused on brain structures where information is
consolidated and reactivated, but paid less attention to processes that
control memory retrieval by amplifying relevant and suppressing interfering information. Therefore, we developed an experimental paradigm
suited to evoke conflicts between LTM representations. During an acquisition phase words became associated to either a face stimulus, a spatial
position, or to both. During recall participants had to decide whether two
words are linked to each other via a common association. Prior to every
block of six trials a cue indicated the to-be-compared material type.
Retrieval conflict arose when the words were associated with two material types, but only one was task-relevant. In an EEG and an fMRI study
with the same participants we were able to detect co-activation of the
irrelevant associations on a behavioral and neurophysiological level.
First, response times were prolonged when irrelevant associations had to
be suppressed. Second, the topography of event-related slow potentials
differed in a material-specific way depending on the type of irrelevant
information. Finally, material-specific fMRI activations were found for
the irrelevant material type in posterior brain areas that are assumed to
house the representations of positions and faces. In addition to the posterior differences stronger fMRI activation was found in the left prefrontal
cortex during conflict trials, suggesting a role of this region for control
processes that serve to solve conflict and interference during LTM
retrieval.
E18
IMPLICIT SWITCH TO MEMORY RETRIEVAL: A CORTICAL
TOOL FOR BOOSTING PERCEPTION Mor Nahum1, Luba Daikhin2,3,
Yedida Lubin4, Yamit Cohen3, Merav Ahissar1,2; 1Interdisciplinary Center for
Neural Computation (ICNC), Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Hebrew
University, Psychology, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Institute of Medical Sciences,
Hadassah Medical School, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel, 4Hebrew
University, Cognitive Science, Jerusalem, Israel — One of the hallmarks of
human perception is our remarkable discrimination ability: numerous
studies documented very fine resolution along basic physical dimensions, when two stimuli are compared, with best resolution typically
achieved when one of the stimuli is consistently repeated across trails
("reference"). Here we tried to decipher whether this resolution indeed
reflects accurate comparison mechanisms, as commonly assumed. We
measured subjects’ behavioral thresholds and ERPs, while they performed a two-tone frequency discrimination task under different protocols, with the reference stimulus either having a fixed temporal position
(first or second), alternating between positions, or eliminated altogether.
We found that the advantage of the temporally-consistent reference protocols was quickly obtained, following only a few trials, and resulted in
more than a three-fold advantage in thresholds over the no-reference protocol. Although subjects reported comparing the two tones, their ERPs
showed that a decision wave (the P3) always followed the informative,
non-reference interval, even when it preceded the reference. When the
reference alternated between intervals, thresholds (and corresponding
P3) were as good only for the reference in the initial interval, indicating
that the mere presence of a reference does not suffice. We conclude that
best resolution is achieved quickly and implicitly, but only when online
comparisons are avoided and replaced with memory-based tagging. Our
perceptual system attempts to perform this switch to memory retrieval,

Poster Session E

yet cannot track simple temporal structures that boost performance. Such
conditions reveal simple heuristics for detecting stimulus consistencies
which are necessary for replacing online comparisons with stimulusresponse tagging.
E19
SUBSEQUENT MEMORY EFFECTS PREDICTIVE OF SUCCESSFUL
CUED RECALL ARE SENSITIVE TO STUDY TASK Lauren
J.
Gottlieb1, Michael D. Rugg1; 1Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and
Memory, and Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California at Irvine —
Several studies have demonstrated that encoding-related activity (subsequent memory effects) predictive of successful recognition memory is
sensitive to the nature of the study task. However, it is not yet known
whether subsequent memory effects predictive of successful cued recall
are similarly task-sensitive. The present fMRI study addressed this issue
by contrasting the subsequent memory effects associated with successful
versus unsuccessful cued recall for items encoded in two study tasks previously shown to generate dissociable effects for recognition. Subjects
studied words presented in the context of either a semantic (pleasant/
unpleasant decision) or a syllabic (odd/even number of syllables) study
task. In the subsequent memory test, subjects used three-letter word
stems to attempt to recollect the studied words, completing the stems
with the first word to come to mind if recollection failed. They were further required to explicitly endorse each completion as ’old’ or ’new’. Subsequent memory effects were estimated for study words associated with
successful versus unsuccessful recollection on the recall test. Effects
unique to the semantic task were identified in left ventromedial prefrontal cortex and right hippocampus. By contrast, syllabic subsequent memory effects were found bilaterally in posterior cingulate cortex. These
findings extend prior observations of task-selective subsequent memory
effects to cued recall, and add weight to the proposal that episodic encoding of a stimulus event is supported by enhanced activity in cortical
regions engaged during the on-line processing of the event.
E20
ERP CORRELATES OF SOURCE MEMORY: UNITIZED SOURCE
INFORMATION INCREASES FAMILIARITY-BASED RETRIEVAL
Rachel A. Diana1, Wijnand Van den Boom2, Andrew P. Yonelinas1, Charan
Ranganath1; 1University of California, Davis, 2Leiden University — Performance on tests of source memory is typically based on recollection of
contextual information associated with an item. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses have indicated that unitization of item and
source information, defined as encoding of source information as a detail
of the item being processed, may increase the role of familiarity in source
memory (Diana, Yonelinas, & Ranganath, 2008, Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition). However, the interpretation of ROC analyses is controversial. To assess converging evidence, we
conducted an event-related potential (ERP) study testing the hypothesis
that unitization leads to contributions from qualitatively different recognition processes in source memory. Participants studied associations
between words and background colors either in a unitized manner
(“Imagine this item being red/green”) or in a nonunitized manner
(“Imagine this item associated with a stop sign/dollar bill”). ERPs were
recorded while participants were given a source memory test in which
they were shown each studied item and asked to make a confidence judgment about whether it was studied with a red or green background. ERP
results revealed two topographically and temporally distinct neural correlates of source recognition, one that was associated with familiaritybased source memory in the unitized condition only and another that
was associated with recollection-based source memory in both the unitized and nonunitized conditions. These findings converge with the ROC
analyses, indicating that familiarity can contribute to source recognition
when item and source information are unitized.

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

E21
NEURAL CORRELATES OF VISUAL MEMORY FOR SPATIAL AND
NON-SPATIAL MATERIALS IN AN OBJECTIVE MANIPULATION
PARADIGM Dorian Pustina1,2, Boris Suchan1, Irene Daum1,2; 1Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany, 2International
Graduate School of Neuroscience, Bochum, Germany — Previous
research
has suggested a dual process model of human memory. In behavioural
terms subjects exhibit a graded range of memory confidence for the memorized items, which is used to estimate "familiarity" and "recollection"
through receiver operating characteristic curves (ROCs). In our paradigm
we present morphed stimuli similar to targets in controlled steps of 0%
(identical), 20%, 40% or 60% different. By manipulating the stimuli we
introduce an objective experimental manipulation which is shown to
affect linearly the memory performance. Neural correlates of such manipulation are investigated with magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and
event related potentials (ERPs). Faces and scenes constitute two types of
material under investigation. The classical comparison of Hits vs. Correct
Rejections (CRs) is expanded to include Hits0%, Hits20% and Hits40%.
There is no difference in Hits for scenes, while the classical dissociation of
CRs vs. Hits is significant from N400 to later components. The relation of
ERP components to memory performance is thus independent of visual
morphing and visual priming doesn’t seem to affect ERPs. Face stimuli
exhibit e more complex pattern still under investigation. The fMRI results
show a preliminary pattern of linear activation of the right hippocampus
and bilateral posterior cingulate for scenes, and left hippocampus and left
fusiform face area for faces. The behavioural results show a gradual shift
both in familiarity and recollection estimates for each morphing step. The
existence of a recollection process even at low memory rates is discussed
along with physiologic evidence from ERPs and fMRI.
E22
NEURAL ACTIVATION IN SEMANTIC, EPISODIC AND
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL IN YOUNG AND
OLDER ADULTS Marie St-Laurent1,2, Hana Burianova2,3, Cheryl
Grady2,3; 1Toronto Western Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, CA,
2University of Toronto, Psychology, Ontario, CA, 3Rotman Research Institute,
Baycrest, Toronto, Ontario, CA — Our goal was to assess the effects of
healthy aging on the neural correlates of declarative memory retrieval.
Young (age = 21-31) and older adults (age = 63-77) were tested on a functional magnetic resonance imaging paradigm designed to contrast the
neural correlates of autobiographical (i.e. personal events), episodic (i.e.
events presented in the laboratory) and semantic memory (i.e. general
knowledge) retrieval. Memory was cued by a pictorial stimulus, and
retrieval demand was manipulated to extract one of the three memory
types. A Spatial Temporal Partial Least Square (ST-PLS) analysis was
conducted on data from both age groups to identify the patterns of brain
activity that best characterized the different task conditions. Brain regions
including the left inferior and middle frontal gyri, the thalamus, and the
right temporo-parietal junction were activated by all three memory conditions in both groups, although younger adults had more activity than
older adults for autobiographical memory. An additional pattern of activity was found in both groups that included activation of the precuneus
and the inferior and medial prefrontal cortex for autobiographical, and
temporal poles and occipital regions for semantic memory. Activity in
these regions differentiated the conditions to a greater degree in young
adults. These results suggest that networks recruited during declarative
memory may not change markedly with age but degree of activation in
these areas is reduced, consistent with less differentiation of function in
older adults.
E23
THE ROLE OF FAMILIARITY AND RECOLLECTION IN FAME
JUDGEMENTS: A RECEIVER OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS
(ROC) ANALYSIS Ben Bowles1, Melissa Gordon1, Stefan Köhler1;
1
University of Western Ontario, Psychology — Recognition memory is supported by two processes, recollection and familiarity. Recollection pro-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

137

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

vokes recall of contextual detail with respect to a prior episode, and
familiarity signals a sense of prior occurrence in the absence of such
recall. The experimental study of familiarity and recollection is typically
based on the study-test paradigm, in which subjects are required to reference a specific study session when making their recognition judgments.
An influential view is that the assessment of familiarity is supported by a
signal-detection process whereas recollection relies on a high-threshold
discrimination process. Here, we ask whether familiarity and recollection
also operate according to these principles when recognition demands
lack a discrete reference to any particular study episode. In two experiments, subjects discriminated between famous and non-famous names,
and indicated their confidence for each decision. Subsequently, the basis
of their fame decisions was probed by examining the availability of specific recollections and of semantic knowledge. ROC analyses showed that
recognition of famous names is largely supported by a high-threshold
process. This was true even when responses associated with available
recollections were excluded from the analysis. To the extent that these
memory decisions reflect recognition of prior occurrence without recollection our finding suggests that familiarity contributes to name recognition in a high-threshold manner. Additional analyses revealed that this
high-threshold process is closely linked to the availability of semantic
knowledge. This suggests that generation of semantic knowledge may
contribute to name recognition in a way similar to that of recollection in
the typical study-test paradigm.
E24
CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE PERIRHINAL CORTEX TO
ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY FORMATION Bernhard Staresina1, Lila
Davachi1,2; 1New York University, Psychology, 2Center for Neural Science,
New York University — Many neuroimaging studies using the subsequent
memory paradigm have consistently reported a role of the human perirhinal cortex (PrC) in non-associative item encoding. More recently,
however, evidence has been accumulating that certain types of associations recruit PrC encoding operations. In particular, PrC activation has
been found to correlate with the associative binding of item-related
details (Staresina and Davachi, 2006; 2008) and the formation of a unitized representation from two separate elements (Haskins et al., 2008).
What is the exact function of PrC engagement during associative encoding, and how does it interact with hippocampal binding operations? One
possible mechanism by which PrC contributes to associative encoding is
by creating and/or maintaining an item representation from separate
constituents, which may then be further processed by the hippocampus.
In this fMRI study, we presented objects and a to-be-associated color in
three different ways: While the object was always surrounded by a color
square, the object itself was presented either intact or scrambled into two
or four pieces. Thus, in order to bind the same color detail to the object,
the object had to be assembled and maintained in the scrambled condition. Preliminary data from 10 subjects reveal hippocampal, but not PrC,
activation correlating with successful binding of the color to intact object
representations. Critically, however, for scrambled object presentations,
both PrC and the hippocampus appear to correlate with successful
object/color binding. This may suggest that the PrC is needed to establish
and maintain item representations while the hippocampus effectively
binds associated details.
E25
HIPPOCAMPAL CONTRIBUTIONS EXTEND BEYOND LONG
TERM MEMORY TO INCLUDE ON-LINE PROCESSING David
Warren1, Unni Jensen2, Aashesh Verma1, Melissa Duff2, Daniel Tranel2, Neal
Cohen1; 1Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
2
University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Neurology — The
current
research examines the possibility that the medial temporal lobes (MTL),
and more specifically the hippocampus, may be involved in aspects of
memory critical for processing of certain kinds of information across very
brief intervals, perhaps even within the span of processing a single item.
Several different experimental paradigms were employed to test the abil-

138

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

ity of neurological patients with hippocampal damage to generate and
maintain on-line representations as compared to healthy comparison participants. Among the stimuli we used were fragmented outlines of
familiar objects presented either simultaneously or sequentially, overlapping outlines of novel or familiar objects, and fragmented novel and
familiar objects. The patients with hippocampal damage were impaired
relative to the comparison group on many measures indicating that they
may lack the capacity to maintain complex or fragmentary information
normally even within the span of working memory. We suggest that the
role in memory of the hippocampus extends across timescales and
includes the formation and maintenance of on-line representations critical for processing complex objects.
E26
’MATCH’ AND ’MISMATCH’ SIGNALS IN THE HUMAN
HIPPOCAMPUS: A HIGH-RESOLUTION FMRI STUDY Katherine
Duncan1, Nicholas Ketz1, Lila Davachi1,2; 1New York University, Psychology,
2New York University, Center for Neural Science — Although it is well
established that the hippocampus is involved in both the formation and
retrieval of episodic memories, the mechanisms by which it performs
these functions are still poorly understood. The degree to which an environment matches previous experience has been found to modulate the
response of hippocampal neurons (Lee, 2004). These results are in line
with computational models predicting that hippocampal subfields will
switch between encoding and recall states depending on the degree of
’match’ and ’mismatch’ between cues and stored representations (Hasselmo, 1995). We sought to examine the role of different human hippocampal subfields in ’match’ and ’mismatch’ signals and to further explore
the nature of these signals. Using fMRI at conventional resolution, we
recently found that ’match’ signals in the human hippocampus reflected
matches to goal states while ’mismatch’ signals were driven by salient
perceptual changes (Duncan, in press). The current study uses high-resolution (1.5 x 1.5 x 2mm voxels) fMRI to investigate the contributions of
different hippocampal subfields to these complementary signals while
further investigating their links to intentional states. To this end, we
modulated the number of relational and item changes made to previously studied scenes. Subjects performed two memory tasks while undergoing functional scanning, one based on relational changes and one
based on item changes, while ignoring changes to the irrelevant dimension. Preliminary imaging results from ten subjects provides evidence for
both ’match’ and ’mismatch’ signals throughout the hippocampus, but
also suggests that the predominate type of signal differs across hippocampal subfields.
E27
THE IMPACT OF DISTRACTION DURING LONG-TERM MEMORY
RETRIEVAL Peter Wais1, Adam Gazzaley1; 1University of California, San
Francisco — Episodic memory depends upon the retrieval of contextual
information that is associated with a specific prior experience. This recall
process can be conceived as mental time travel (Tulving, 1985) and as
involving mental imagery for a detailed reconstruction of the event from
one’s past (O’Craven & Kanwisher, 2000). Interference from environmental stimuli can disrupt the mental imagery evoked during recall and, consequently, diminish the fidelity of episodic memory. In our experiment,
we tested the hypothesis that visual distraction diminishes recall performance. Participants studied pictures that contained one to four images of
a common object and then, after a delay, were probed with auditory cues
that either matched a study object or were lures. Participants’ recall of the
number of study objects was tested in three alternate conditions: eyes
held shut (SHUT); eyes open with constant gaze at a solid gray screen;
and eyes open with constant gaze at a visual distractor (VD). The behavioral results show that the VD condition was accompanied by reduced
recall in comparison to the SHUT condition and, therefore, that recall performance suffers when irrelevant stimulation is not ignored. fMRI data
will be presented to explore the hypothesis that interference with mental
imagery during recall is diminished by cognitive control processes that

Poster Session E

suppress the bottom-up influence from environmental distraction (i.e.,
top-down modulation).
E28
THE ROLE OF THE INFERIOR PARIETAL LOBULE DURING
INCIDENTAL RETRIEVAL Pamela Perschler1, Reza Habib1; 1Southern
Illinois University, Carbondale — Most prior research on the role of the
inferior parietal lobe (IPL) in episodic memory has focused on intentional
retrieval tasks (i.e. recall, recognition). The goal of the present study was
to determine, with fMRI, whether activity in the IPL was modulated by
stimulus familiarity during an incidental retrieval task. Subjects were
scanned while incidentally encoding novel and repeated picture-word
associations. Repeated associations were scanned on their second,
fourth, and eighth presentation. On half of the repeated trials, the word
associated with each picture was replaced with a new word at the time of
scanning, resulting in repeated-intact and repeated-new conditions. Relative to novel associations, repeated associations activated bilateral IPL.
In addition, activity in the left IPL increased linearly as a function of repetition (8 > 4 > 2) in the repeated-intact but not repeated-new condition.
In addition to the well-established role of the IPL during intentional
retrieval, these results indicate that activity in the IPL is also enhanced
during incidental retrieval (encoding of familiar picture-word associations) and modulated by the relative familiarity of the associative information.
E29
IMPAIRMENT OF SPATIO-SPATIAL ASSOCIATIVE SHORT-TERM
MEMORY IN HUMANS WITH HIPPOCAMPAL DAMAGE Carsten
Finke1, Mischa Braun1, Florian Ostendorf1, Christoph J. Ploner1; 1Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin — Increasing evidence suggests an involvement of the hippocampal formation in short-term memory. We recently
demonstrated that in patients with post-surgical lesions of the right hippocampus short-term memory of visuo-spatial associations is impaired,
while short-term memory of non-associative spatial and visual information is normal. Here, we investigated whether this finding reflects a special role of the human hippocampus for processing of spatial associations
in general or its specialization for processing of between-domain associations involving spatial information. Patients with post-surgical lesions of
the right hippocampal formation performed memory-guided saccade
paradigms (5-s delay) where the memory-cue was presented simultaneously with a spatial reference with unpredictable spatial relationship to
the cue. Three variants were tested, requiring either (1) non-associative
memory only, (2) non-associative or associative memory, or (3) associative memory only. In contrast to previous ("allocentric") memory tasks,
all tasks were purely spatial and did not require the integration of visual
and spatial information into a map-like representation of the stimuli.
Compared to controls, patients showed a selective impairment in task (3),
while performance in tasks (1) and (2) was intact. These results suggest
that the right hippocampal formation is particularly involved in spatial
associative memory at short delays, even for simple and purely spatial
associations. Furthermore, the data provide evidence that non-associative
memory can sufficiently compensate for impaired associative memory in
situations that allow for both memory strategies. We suggest that the
observed deficits may significantly contribute to impaired short-term
memory of more complex visuo-spatial material in humans with hippocampal damage.
E30
BEHAVIORAL EVIDENCE FOR COMPETITION BETWEEN
PROCEDURAL-LEARNING AND EXPLICIT-RULE CATEGORY
LEARNING SYSTEMS Matthew J. Crossley1, Amy E. Hadden1, F. Gregory
Ashby1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara — There is now overwhelming evidence that human category learning is mediated by multiple systems. Much evidence suggests that one system relies on
procedural-learning and one system learns to apply explicit rules.
Although many studies have reported evidence for separate systems,
almost no research has been directed at the question of how these differ-

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

ent systems interact. In fact, the only evidence on this issue appears to
come from neuroimaging studies that have reported negative correlations between task-related activation in the striatum and medial temporal
lobes. This result has been interpreted as support for inhibitory or competitive interaction between procedural-learning and explicit-rule systems. To our knowledge, however, no behavioral data address this
question. Two experiments are reported that provide strong behavioral
evidence for system competition. Both experiments used hybrid categories in which optimal responding required participants to use explicit
rules for some stimuli and procedural learning for others. In Experiment
1, participants inappropriately used simple one-dimensional explicit
rules on all stimuli. In Experiment 2, participants first trained on either
the procedural-learning rule that they needed to use on some hybrid categorization trials or on the explicit rule they needed to apply on the other
hybrid categorization trials. Following this training period, they then all
transferred to the hybrid category structures. Despite this difference in
initial training, both groups failed to use hybrid strategies on transfer.
Thus, it appears that use of an explicit rule on some trials inhibits the use
of procedural-learning strategies on other trials.
E31
PATTERNS OF REMOTE MEMORY IMPAIRMENT IN PATIENTS
WITH FOCAL HIPPOCAMPAL AND MORE WIDESPREAD
TEMPORAL LOBE DAMAGE Peter Bright1, Michael Kopelman2; 1Anglia
Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK, 2Kings College, London, UK — Objectives and Methods: There is considerable controversy concerning the
theoretical basis of retrograde amnesia. We compared medial temporal,
medial plus lateral temporal, and frontal lesion patients on a new autobiographical memory task and measures of the more semantic aspects of
memory. We also present a more detailed analysis comparing individual
patients with quantified pathology restricted to specific critical brain
structures. Additionally, we employed a range of methods for coding
elicited memories to ensure that we successfully differentiated episodic
from semantic detail. Results: Only those patients with damage extending beyond medial temporal cortex into lateral temporal regions showed
severe impairment on free recall remote memory tasks, and this held for
both the autobiographical and more semantic memory tests. We found no
clear evidence for remote memory impairment in the frontal group on
any test. These findings, in the context of our further detailed analysis of
individual cases, raise the possibility that, although medial and temporal
regions may form part of a distributed neural network subserving memory retrieval, damage needs to be quite extensive and exceed a certain
critical volume before a significant remote memory impairment can be
observed. Conclusions: Across all memory coding methods, our results
were more consistent with consolidation theory than multiple trace theory. Nevertheless, the findings indicate a more complex characterization
of long term consolidation in which a widely distributed network of
regions underlies the retrieval of past memories, within which the extent
of lateral temporal involvement is critical to the emergence of a severe
remote memory impairment.
E32
A REDUCTION IN SUSTAINED HIPPOCAMPAL ACTIVITY
UNDERLIES AGE-RELATED DEFICITS IN THE EPISODIC
RICHNESS OF AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORIES Peggy L. St.
Jacques1,2, David C. Rubin2, Philip Kragel2, Roberto Cabeza1,2; 1Center for
Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, 2Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke
University — The retrieval of autobiographical memories (AM), memory
for our personal past, is a protracted process that allows for the segregation of the spatiotemporal dynamics of retrieval using fMRI. Understanding the time-course of retrieval has important implications in aging,
because older adults might be impaired on later elaboration processes
rather than initial search processes. Older adults show a reduction in episodic richness in AMs, but the neural mechanisms underlying this deficit
are largely unknown. Thus, the goal of the present fMRI study was to
examine the neural bases of age-related reductions in the episodic rich-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

139

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

ness of AMs. We used a self-paced design in which young and older
adults searched for an AM elicited by a generic cue word, pressed a key
when one was found, and finally elaborated on the memory until the end
of the trial. After scanning, participants described the memories for subsequent objective coding of episodic richness. We predicted that episodic
richness of AMs would be attenuated in older adults due to a reduction
in hippocampal activity during the elaboration phase. Behavioral results
indicated that older adults recalled less episodically rich AMs. Consistent with this, the fMRI results revealed a reduction in the sustained
response of the hippocampus during elaboration. Furthermore, episodic
richness modulated hippocampal activity during elaboration. In sum,
these results suggest that the age-related reduction in the episodic richness of AMs is the result of a deficit during elaboration, when older
adults fail to sustain hippocampal activity.
E33
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL DISSOCIATION OF CATEGORY
LEARNING MECHANISMS Robert Morrison1, Paul Reber1, Ken Paller1;
1Northwestern University, Psychology — Behavioral,
neuropsychological,
and neuroimaging evidence has suggested that categories can often be
learned via either explicit mechanisms critically dependent on medial
temporal and prefrontal brain regions, or implicit mechanisms relying on
the basal ganglia and sensory cortex. In this study we used a visual category-learning paradigm (Maddox, Ashby, & Bohill, 2003) in which subjects learn to categorize Gabor patches based on their spatial frequency
(i.e., how striped the patch is) and/or spatial orientation (i.e., the angle of
the lines in the patch). These features are systematically combined with
respect to decision thresholds to build category distributions that encourage participants to use either explicit rule-based or implicit information
integration strategies to categorize stimuli. On each trial participants
choose whether the Gabor patch is an "A" or "B" and then receive feedback as to whether they were correct or not; they receive no explicit
instruction on how to categorize stimuli. We monitored brain activity
with scalp encephalography while participants (1) passively observed
Gabor patches, (2) categorized patches from one distribution, and, one
week later, (3) categorized patches from another distribution. Behavioral
observations of learning were similar across the two learning conditions.
Analysis of EEG collected during both categorization and feedback using
both event-related potentials and time-frequency methods provided evidence for distinct brain mechanisms supporting rule-based versus
implicit information integration category learning, New insights into this
distinction can thus be obtained by monitoring relevant neurocognitive
processes in real time using these methods.
E34
CATEGORY LEARNING, BINDING, AND THE MEDIAL
TEMPORAL LOBE: EVIDENCE FROM EARLY ALZHEIMER'S
PATIENTS Jared X. Van Snellenberg1, Janet Metcalfe1, Murray Grossman2,
Edward E. Smith1; 1Columbia University, Psychology, 2University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine — Despite considerable impairments in
explicit memory, patients with medial temporal lobe (MTL) lesions and
patients with Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) have been shown to have intact
learning in a number of implicit learning paradigms, including category
learning, suggesting that implicit learning does not depend on the integrity of the MTL. Recent evidence, however, suggests that the implicitness
or explicitness of a learning paradigm may not be the critical determinant
of learning in individuals with a compromised MTL. One alternative is
that a ’binding’ process, in which distinct elements of a stimulus or event
become associated in memory, is critically mediated by MTL. In a test of
this hypothesis, we showed that AD patients are at chance performance,
and significantly worse than control participants, on an implicit two-category learning task that requires binding for successful performance.
These results indicate that some forms of implicit category learning are
not intact in patients with MTL pathology, suggesting that the MTL subserves a binding process in learning and memory rather than explicit
forms of learning per se.

140

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

E35
DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF ROUTES TRAVELLED, BUT NOT
MAP-LIKE KNOWLEDGE, CORRELATES WITH TESTS OF
HIPPOCAMPAL FUNCTION IN OLDER ADULTS Marnie
Hirshhorn1,2, Leorra Newman1, Morris Moscovitch1,2; 1University of Toronto,
Psychology, 2Rotman Research Institute — We examined hippocampal contribution to remote spatial memory in older adults by correlating their
performance on tests sensitive to hippocampal damage with their
description of routes they traversed many times or only once, and with
their map-like knowledge of downtown Toronto. We found that performance on table-top tests of spatial location (Smith & Milner, 1984) and on
paired-associate learning, and the number of Internal Details on the
Autobiographical Interview (Levine et al, 2002) all correlated significantly with the number and type of perceptual details used in describing
routes one has traversed, but not with map-like knowledge of Toronto.
No significant correlations were found with performance on tests of frontal function (WCST, phonemic fluency, backward digit span). We conclude that the hippocampus is implicated in vivid re-experiencing of a
familiar route, but not with map-like knowledge of a large-scale environment. These findings are interpreted as consistent with Multiple Trace
Theory, but as problematic for Cognitive Map Theory.
E36
HIPPOCAMPAL,
PARAHIPPOCAMPAL
AND
STRIATAL
ACTIVITY PREDICTS OBJECT-LOCATION RECALL DURING
ACTIVE NAVIGATION Oliver Baumann1, Edgar Chan1,2, Jason B.
Mattingley1,2; 1Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland,
2School of Psychology, The University of Queensland — In humans, hippocampal, parahippocampal and striatal circuits have been implicated in
object-location memory and navigation, but it remains unclear how these
areas contribute to the distinct processes of encoding and retrieval of
object-locations in three-dimensional space. We used event-related fMRI
to measure neural responses during active navigation within an immersive virtual environment. Healthy male volunteers were asked to encode
the location of a single target object relative to three cylindrical landmarks and, following a delay period, to retrieve that location from memory by navigating back to the target’s original position. The relative and
absolute locations of landmarks and the target object were changed on
every trial, and no feedback on accuracy was provided. Within subjects,
activity in the right hippocampus, the parahippocampal gyrus bilaterally,
and the striatum was strongly correlated with accuracy in navigating
back to the original target location during retrieval. Between subjects,
accuracy and consistency of responses during retrieval also correlated
significantly with levels of activity in the parahippocampal gyrus and
basal ganglia. These results provide the first evidence that purely landmark-related learning is mediated by hippocampal, parahippocampal
and striatal systems, even within a single trial and without reinforcement. We suggest that activity in the hippocampus reflects an allocentric
place computation, whereas activity in the parahippocampus reflects a
perceptual representation of the landmarks. The concurrent activity in
the striatum probably reflects a procedural component of the learning
and retrieval process.
E37
CONTRIBUTIONS OF PARIETAL CORTEX TO ATTENTION AND
MEMORY: DIVERGENT PROCESSES OF VISUAL ATTENTION
AND EPISODIC RETRIEVAL J. Benjamin Hutchinson1, Melina R.
Uncapher1, Anthony D. Wagner1,2; 1Stanford University, Psychology,
2
Stanford University, Neuroscience Program — Functional
neuroimaging
studies of humans engaged in retrieval from episodic memory have
revealed a surprisingly consistent pattern of retrieval-related activity in
lateral posterior parietal cortex (PPC). Given the well-established role of
lateral PPC in subserving goal-directed and reflexive attention, it has
been hypothesized that PPC activation during retrieval reflects the
recruitment of parietal attention mechanisms during remembering. Here,
we evaluate this hypothesis by considering the anatomical overlap of

Poster Session E

retrieval and attention effects in lateral PPC. Specifically, we briefly
review the literature implicating dorsal PPC in goal-directed attention
and ventral PPC in reflexive attention, as well as the pattern of dorsal and
ventral PPC activation during episodic retrieval. This assessment
revealed that apparently divergent subregions of lateral PPC are engaged
during acts of episodic retrieval and during goal-directed and reflexive
attention, suggesting that PPC retrieval effects reflect functionally distinct mechanisms from these forms of attention. Consistent with this conclusion, we then discuss the findings from a recent fMRI study of
episodic retrieval and goal-directed attention that revealed within-subject
divergence between parietal retrieval and attention effects. Although
attention must play a role in aspects of retrieval, the data reviewed here
suggest that further investigation into the relationship between processes
of attention and memory, as well as alternative accounts of PPC contributions to retrieval, is warranted.
E38
NEURAL CORRELATES OF FACE MEMORY AS A FUNCTION OF
RACE-BASED ATTENTION AND CATEGORIZATION Heather
Lucas1, Joan Chiao1,2, Ken Paller2,1; 1Northwestern University, Psychology,
2Northwestern University, Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program — Memory for faces from one’s own racial group is typically more accurate than
memory for faces from another racial group. Recent social-cognitive
models suggest an instrumental role of social categorization in this phenomenon. Indeed, neural correlates of attention to social category membership have been identified previously, but the relationship of such
measures to recognition memory is unknown. In the present study,
event-related potentials were recorded during face encoding and
retrieval to examine neural correlates of memory for same-race (SR) and
cross-race (CR) faces. CR faces were presented in two conditions that differentially emphasized social-categorical encoding. Faces in the CR1 condition were racially uniform, whereas faces from five racial groups were
shown in the CR5 condition such that each face differed in race from the
majority of others within the same block. Recognition memory was
impaired for both CR conditions compared to the SR condition. Eventrelated potentials differed between CR faces presented within a homogenous (CR1) and heterogeneous (CR5) context beginning around 150 ms
after face onset, reflecting early attentional biases. Subsequent-memory
analyses suggest that these race-sensitive potentials index processing that
is particularly relevant for later recognition memory for CR faces. Thus,
results provide neural evidence linking markers of social-categorical
attention at encoding with memory for cross-race faces. Furthermore,
FN400-like potentials at retrieval in the CR5 condition suggest that categorical encoding of faces engenders distinct retrieval-related processing.
Results are discussed in terms of social-cognitive influences on face memory and the cognitive and mnemonic processes reflected in race-sensitive
brain potentials.
E39
DOES LONG-TERM SEMANTIC PRIMING ACTUALLY REFLECT
ANTIPRIMING? Katrina Schleisman1, Matthew Olson2, Kim Ahneman1,
Rachel Ryan1, Nicole Landi1, Chad Marsolek1; 1University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, 2Macalester College, St. Paul, MN — Our previous work
indicates that the visual representation of an object is strengthened via
small representational changes after the object is identified. These
changes are responsible for both facilitating subsequent identification of
that object (repetition priming) and impairing subsequent identification
of other objects whose representations are superimposed with the representation of the primed object (antipriming). In this study, we investigate
whether antipriming extends beyond visual object processing and can
also be observed in semantic processing. We measured both priming and
antipriming relative to a baseline condition in a long-term semantic priming paradigm. First, we obtained measures of visual word naming performance that were unaffected by repetition priming or antipriming
(baseline word naming). Next, participants heard a new set of words and
made like/dislike judgments to them. Finally, participants performed

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

another visual word naming task in which half of the words were
repeated from the preceding phase (to measure repetition priming) and
the other half were new words that were unrelated to any words presented previously (to measure antipriming). As expected, repeated
words were named faster than new words, but this difference was due to
antipriming and not to priming. That is, the antiprimed words were
named slower than baseline, while the primed words did not differ from
baseline. This suggests that the same principles responsible for visual
object antipriming extend to the processing of semantic concepts. Ongoing event-related potential (ERP) investigations will help to clarify the
underpinnings of these effects.
E40
CORTICAL REINSTATEMENT DURING RECOLLECTION- AND
FAMILIARITY-BASED MEMORY: A MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN
ANALYSIS STUDY Jeffrey D. Johnson1, Susan G. Robison McDuff2,
Michael D. Rugg1, Kenneth A. Norman2; 1Neurobiology and Behavior and
Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, University of California,
Irvine, 2Psychology and Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton
University — Episodic memory retrieval is hypothesized to involve the
reactivation (reinstatement) of processing engaged during encoding.
Recent fMRI studies have supported the reinstatement hypothesis by
demonstrating that the neural correlates of retrieval (recollection) differ
according to episodic content, and that content-specific retrieval effects
overlap with analogous effects observed during encoding. It remains
unclear, however, whether cortical reinstatement is restricted to instances
where subjects report recollection of episodic details, or if it also occurs
when responses are reportedly based on familiarity. The present study
(N=16) used fMRI and multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) to investigate the relationship between reinstatement, recollection, and familiarity.
Subjects studied words in one of three encoding tasks and then undertook a recognition memory test. The test employed a modified remember/know procedure, in which subjects designated items as either
recollected, or if not recollected, rated the confidence that words were old
vs. new using a 4-point scale. fMRI data from the study phase were used
to train a pattern classifier to discriminate between patterns of brain
activity associated with the three encoding tasks. The classifier was then
tested on fMRI data from the test phase to determine the degree to which
the encoding-related activity patterns were reinstated. Reinstatement was
evident for words that were given remember responses and, in addition,
for words judged to be highly familiar, with stronger reinstatement
effects observed in the former case. The findings indicate that although
reinstatement of encoding-related activity may be necessary for the subjective experience of recollection, it is not sufficient.
E41
FUNCTIONAL MR ACTIVATION DURING ENCODING FOR
SUBSEQUENTLY PRIMED CONCEPTUAL AND PERCEPTUAL
ITEMS Wei-chun Wang1, Charan Ranganath1, Andrew P. Yonelinas1;
1University of California, Davis — Does conceptual implicit memory rely
on regions within the medial temporal lobe? Although previous research
has indicated that encoding related activity in the perirhinal cortex is predictive of subsequent familiarity-based recognition, few studies have specifically explored whether this region contributes to implicit memory at
encoding. Neuroimaging and behavioral evidence indicates that familiarity-based explicit memory and perceptually-driven implicit memory may
be dissociable, but familiarity and conceptual implicit memory are sensitive to the same kinds of manipulations. Mildly hypoxic amnesic patients
that are expected to have relatively restricted hippocampal damage
exhibit normal levels of familiarity and conceptual priming, while
patients with extensive left hemisphere medial temporal lobe damage
including the hippocampus as well as the surrounding perirhinal and
parahippocampal cortex show significant deficits in both familiarity and
conceptual priming. Moreover, to date no study has specifically examined the neural substrates of conceptual implicit memory at encoding. In
the current study, we conducted an event-related functional magnetic

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

141

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

resonance imaging study to examine the neural correlates of conceptual
and perceptual priming, in order to test the hypothesis that the perirhinal
cortex plays a critical role in conceptual implicit memory. Healthy young
adult participants were scanned as they completed a pleasantness rating
task. After scanning, they completed conceptual (i.e., category exemplar
generation) and perceptual (i.e., word fragment completion) implicit
memory tasks. Preliminary analyses revealed medial temporal lobe
recruitment during the rating task, and that encoding activity leading to
successful conceptual priming could be dissociated from encoding activity leading to perceptual priming.
E42
THE HIGH QUALITY OF VISUAL MEMORY Ilja G. Sligte1, H. Steven
Scholte1, Victor A.F. Lamme1,2; 1Cognitive Neuroscience Group, Psychology,
University of Amsterdam, 2Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, part of the
Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW) — While we experience a rich and detailed world, we can only represent a few objects in
visual short-term memory (VSTM). Based on these observations, many
authors have suggested that our mental representations of the world are
sparse and lack quality. Here, we test this claim by inspecting the representational quality of iconic memory, VSTM and a recently discovered
form of visual memory that lies intermediate of iconic memory and
VSTM both in terms of life-time (up to four seconds) and capacity (up to
16 objects). We used a variant of the delayed matching-to-sample paradigm that can measure these three forms of visual memory (Sligte et al.,
2008). In the basic design, subjects have to detect changes between sample and match displays across a brief retention interval and changes
occur in 50 percent of the trials. After each change trial, we presented an
identification display that contained the object present in the sample display, but not in the match display (so-called pre-change item) among
three distracter items. On the assumption that high-quality representations support both change detection and identification of the pre-change
item, we found that people could represent six high-quality representations in iconic memory, three and a half high-quality representations in
the intermediate store and only one high-quality representation in VSTM.
This clearly suggests that people build up a much richer internal picture
than is evident from VSTM alone and people can access these additional
rich mental representations when they direct attention to them.
E43
THE DEVELOPMENT OF NEW CONCEPTS IN THE ADULT
BRAIN Rasha Abdel Rahman1, Kerstin Unger1; 1Humboldt-University
Berlin, Psychology — The formation of conceptual representations in the
adult brain was tracked with event-related brain potentials in a multistep learning procedure, in analogy to the incremental enrichment of the
semantic system in children. Adult participants were confronted with
pictures of initially unfamiliar objects and received gradually increasing
functional information about the objects in consecutive sessions. Each
session was followed by a test block in which the newly learned objects
were presented randomly alternating with well-known objects. Gradual
concept development was investigated with different semantic and nonsemantic tasks. Initially, electrophysiological parameters associated with
newly learned and well-known objects were markedly different in amplitude and distribution across tasks. The cumulative enrichment of object
concepts was associated with gradually decreasing differences between
newly learned and well-known objects until, in the last session, they were
indistinguishable. These effects related to the development of new concepts were highly stable over time, as suggested by a follow-up test session six months after learning.
E44
INTENTIONAL FORGETTING AND REMEMBERING OF ANGRY
AND NEUTRAL FACES - AN ERP STUDY Johanna Kissler1, Bastian
Zwissler1, Anne Hauswald1; 1University of Konstanz, Psychology — The
present study investigated behavioral and electrophysiological mechanisms of intentional forgetting and remembering of faces with angry and
neutral expressions using item method directed forgetting. Event-related

142

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

potentials (ERPs) were recorded as participants viewed random
sequences of angry and neutral faces, each face followed by a cue designating the previous face as ’to-be-remembered’ or ’to-be-forgotten’.
Results from a subsequent forced choice recognition memory task
revealed overall superior recognition memory for angry faces. However,
the ’forget’ instruction reduced memory for both angry and neutral faces.
ERPs revealed the following effects: First, during face presentation a parietal positivity between 450 and 700 ms after picture on-set was more pronounced for angry than for neutral faces. Second, an enhanced frontal
positivity between 500 and 700 ms after cue on-set appeared selectively
for ’forget’ cues following angry faces. Third, a parietal positivity
between 400 and 550 ms after cue onset was largest for ’remember’ cues
following neutral pictures. The results suggest two different processes
contributing to the behavioral directed forgetting effects for neutral and
angry faces: For angry faces, initial superior encoding during face viewing as evidenced by an enhanced parietal positivity may be attenuated by
frontally mediated active suppression during presentation of ’forget’
cues. By contrast, for neutral faces primarily selective rehearsal during
presentation of remember cues, reflected in an enhanced parietal positivity, appears to contribute to the effect.
E45
BLACK AND WHITE ISSUES: COLOR PERCEPTION AND
OBJECT COLOR KNOWLEDGE Nina
S.
Hsu1,2,
Steven
M.
Frankland1,2, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill1,2; 1University of Pennsylvania,
2
Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania — Various
theories of semantic memory suggest that our knowledge about objects is
grounded in the same neural substrates responsible for perceiving and
acting on those objects. In accordance with this view, color knowledge
retrieval has been shown to activate some of the same cortical regions
involved in color perception, which are defined as those responding
more to chromatic than grayscale stimuli (Simmons et al., 2007). It is
unclear, however, whether these regions are also differentially engaged
by the retrieval of color knowledge about chromatic and achromatic
objects. To address this issue, subjects performed two tasks while undergoing fMRI. First, subjects made lighter/darker judgments on pairs of
words that named either chromatic (e.g., BASKETBALL - LEMON) or
achromatic objects (e.g., COAL - SNOW). To localize color perceptual
regions, subjects saw blocks of the Farnsworth-Munsell 100 hue stimuli in
which they judged whether color and grayscale wedges were sequentially ordered. Within those regions responding more to color than to
grayscale perceptual stimuli, we compared activation during lighter/
darker chromatic judgments to that during achromatic judgments. We
report co-localization of chromatic perceptual and chromatic object
knowledge retrieval processes in the lingual gyrus. Taken in conjunction
with Simmons et al.'s report of co-localization in the anterior fusiform
gyrus, our results may help to distinguish between brain regions
involved across perceptual and conceptual tasks in hue representation,
and those involved in higher-level categorical color processing. This is
consistent with a general posterior to anterior, perceptual to categorical,
transformation in information representation in ventral occipito-temporal cortices.
E46
ANXIETY MODULATES HIPPOCAMPAL INVOLVEMENT IN
CLASSIFICATION LEARNING AND EXPLICIT MEMORY Ajay
Satpute1,2, Russell Poldrack1, Bruce Naliboff1; 1University of California, Los
Angeles, 2Columbia University — BACKGROUND: Memory is characterized by multiple systems with distinct processing capabilities and neural
substrates, broadly characterized into declarative and non-declarative
systems. Under some circumstances, these systems have been shown to
compete with each other in learning and expressing new skills, and this
competition can be modulated by factor such as distraction. AIMS: The
present study examined whether anxiety may also modulate the relative
engagement of these memory systems. METHODS: Participants engaged
in two identical, interleaved probabilistic classification learning tasks

Poster Session E

either behaviorally or while undergoing fMRI. One task was completed
while under a high state of anticipatory anxiety as induced by threat of
shock, and the other was completed under no threat ('safe'). A test probe
was administered after learning to index memory-related neural activity,
since neural activity in the learning portion is confounded with the anxiety manipulation. RESULTS: Behavioral measures, consisting of performance (percent correct) and explicit awareness- a verbal report measure
indicating the extent to which participants had awareness of associations
obtained while learning, were correlated with neural activity in hippocampus, but only for the task learned under threat of shock. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that anticipatory anxiety may modulate
hippocampal memory processes, but that it does not increase the reliance
upon nondeclarative memory as suggested by some rodent studies.
E47
A COMBINED DTI AND FMRI ANALYSIS OF THE NEURAL
CORRELATES OF IMPLICIT PROBABILISTIC SEQUENCE
LEARNING Ilana J. Bennett1, Jessica R. Simon1, David J. Madden2,
Chandan J. Vaidya1, James H. Howard Jr.1,3,4, Darlene V. Howard1;
1
Georgetown University, Psychology, 2Center for the Study of Aging and
Human Development, Duke University Medical Center, 3The Catholic
University of America, Psychology, 4Georgetown University Medical Center,
Neurology — Implicit probabilistic sequence learning involves distributed
neural substrates, including fronto-striatal and possibly medial temporal
lobe (MTL) networks. Integrity of white matter connecting these networks may mediate relationships between functional activation and
learning. To test this hypothesis, 10 younger adults underwent diffusion
tensor imaging (DTI) and three runs of functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) while performing the Triplets Learning Task (TLT). In
this task, participants respond to the location of the last stimulus (target)
in a series of three stimuli, without knowing that the location of the first
stimulus predicts one target location on most trials (High Probability)
and another location on remaining trials (Low Probability). Correlations
were conducted among TLT learning (regression of triplet probability
and reaction time), learning-related fMRI activity (regions more active in
High minus Low Probability contrast), and white matter tract fractional
anisotropy (FA, degree of directionally restricted water diffusivity).
Results revealed that early learning (run 1) was negatively correlated
with fMRI activity in the hippocampus and later learning (run 3) was
positively correlated with caudate and dorsolateral prefrontal cortical
(DLPFC) activity. However, there was no evidence that FA mediated the
learning-activation relationships. For example, caudate-DLPFC tract FA
was marginally negatively correlated with later DLPFC activity, but it
was not correlated with later learning. Instead, caudate-DLPFC tract FA
was negatively correlated with learning in run 1, possibly indicating that
fronto-striatal integrity interferes with early learning, which was functionally correlated with MTL activity. In general, findings revealed complex interactions between the structure and function of these distinct
networks.

Memory: Working memory
E48
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN
SPATIAL AND WORKING MEMORY AND CORTICAL
ACTIVATION DURING A DECEPTIVE TASK: AN FMRI STUDY
Scott W. Meek1, Michelle C. Phillips1, Laura Bradshaw-Baucom1, Jennifer M.
C. Vendemia1; 1University of South Carolina — Individual differences in
working memory performance on prefrontal cortical activation during a
deception task was studied in 21 participants (M=20.7). Reaction time
studies have shown that working memory capacity has a significant
effect on deceptive response times (Vendemia, Buzan, & Simon-Dack,
2005). Working memory has been associated with prefrontal cortical activation in the literature (Rypma, Berger, & D’Esposito, 2002). Baddeley’s

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

model of working memory includes a central executive, a phonological
loop, and a visual spatial sketchpad (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974). We
hypothesize that deception is associated with the phonological loop in
order to maintain relevant deceptive information in memory. Participants viewed questions in which they were randomly prompted to
respond truthfully (20%) or deceptively (80%). Data were collected from
two tests of working memory, the verbal recognition memory (VRM) and
spatial span (SSP) tasks, found in the CANTAB neuropsychological test
battery. Activation scores across deception were analyzed for all participants and then correlated against VRM (M=8.587, SE=0.189) and SSP
(M=7.065, SE=0.132) scores. Analysis indicates that participants who
deceived to a higher number of trials showed stronger frontal lobe activation when lying than when telling the truth, specifically in the right and
left superior and middle frontal gyrus (BA 8 and 46). The data show that
greater activation for lying than truth telling when repeatedly deceiving
can be explained by individual variations in verbal working memory
(p=.007), supporting our hypothesis that the phonological loop is more
heavily involved in deception than in truth telling.
E49
NEURAL CORRELATES OF WORKING MEMORY TRAINING IN
OLD AGE Yvonne Brehmer1, Helena Westerberg1, Anna Rieckmann1, Lars
Bäckman1; 1Aging Research Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden — Working memory (WM) is essential for many higher-order
cognitive functions and is anatomically related to a widespread frontoparietal network. WM declines in old age. These WM deficits underlie
decline in other cognitive domains (e.g., episodic memory, reasoning)
seen in old age. Prior research demonstrates that WM can be improved
by intense training in children as well as in younger adults. The aim of
the current project is to investigate whether older adults can benefit from
intensive WM training, and how the related brain-activity patterns
change following training. Twenty-four older adults (M = 63.7) participated in a five-week computerized training study. To test the effectiveness of the WM training program, half of the sample received adaptive
training (i.e., individually adjusted task difficulty to bring individuals to
their performance maximum), whereas the other half served as active
controls (i.e., fixed low-level practice). Individuals’ brain activity was
measured before and after training with functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), while performing a WM task under two task-difficulty
levels. Results indicate that (a) individuals improve their WM performance through training, (b) adaptive training as well as low-level practice result in decreased brain activity in task-relevant regions (frontal,
parietal, and temporal), and (c) under the high task-difficulty condition,
adaptive training results in larger decreases in right frontal areas compared to the active control group. To conclude, intensive WM training
improves older adults’ functioning and neural efficiency. However, the
advantage of adaptive training is most apparent under high task difficulty conditions.
E50
TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF RESOURCE ALLOCATION IN VISUAL
WORKING MEMORY Paul Bays1,2, Nikos Gorgoraptis1,2, Raquel
Catalao1,2, Masud Husain1,2; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University
College London, UK, 2Institute of Neurology, University College London,
UK — Our ability to remember what we have seen is remarkably limited.
A longstanding model of visual working memory states that storage is
limited to a fixed number of memory ’slots’ - usually four - each holding
one visual item. However there has been little investigation of the resolution with which visual information is maintained. Using a discrimination
task, we recently probed the precision of subjects’ memory for object
locations and orientations (Bays & Husain, Science, 2008). We found that
precision declines rapidly with increasing number of items, even when
this number is well below the proposed limit. Rather than being stored in
separate slots, these results suggest there is a common memory resource
which must be distributed between visual objects. Allocation of this
resource is flexible, so that salient items are stored with enhanced preci-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

143

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

sion. Here, we probe the temporal dynamics of visual working memory
by varying the presentation time of multi-item displays, followed by pattern masks. For very brief exposures (<100ms), we find that recall is limited by incomplete encoding; but at the longest exposures, recall becomes
limited by the working memory resources available for each item. Intermediate presentation times reveal the dynamic allocation of visual
resources to items in the scene. Accurate recall of an item depends not
only on maintaining precise representations of its individual features, but
also correctly storing features that belong to the same object together.
Further analysis of our data demonstrates that precision and binding
independently influence our ability to remember objects in the visual
scene.
E51
AGE EFFECTS ON EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL AND
CARDIOVASCULAR PARAMETERS IN A WORKING MEMORY
TASK Sergei A. Schapkin1, Gabriele Freude1; 1Federal Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health, Berlin, Germany — Working
memory
(WM) is considered to be quite susceptible to age (e.g. West, 1996) that
may cause problems in older employees who are occupied with complex
work requiring WM. Under WM load older employees were hypothesised to involve controlled processing sub-served by frontal lobes to prevent performance decline and that enhanced frontal activity can provoke
maladaptive cardiovascular reactions to changing task demands. 21
younger (28±3 years) and 21 older (54±3 years) employees had to perform
a visual oddball and n-back tasks. In the 2-back task older employees
responded slower and less accurately than younger, while no age affects
in oddball task were found. In younger employees the target P3 of the
event-related potential was progressively reduced from parietal to frontal
sites, while more evenly distributed P3 upon the scalp in older employees
was found. P3 latency was shorter in younger than in older employees.
Heart rate (HR) was higher, both heart rate variability (HRV) and baroreflex sensitivity (BRS) were lower in older than in younger employees.
Older employees showed lower responsivity of BRS, HRV and HR to task
demands and delayed cardiovascular recovery as compared to younger
employees. The results suggest that WM load in older employees can
impair target categorization and lead to compensatory involvement of
frontal lobes to enhance controlled processing and mental effort. In turn,
the increase in frontal activity can induce maladaptive functioning of cardiovascular system in terms of a reduced responsivity to alternating task
demands and a delayed recovery in healthy older employees.
E52
VERBAL WORKING MEMORY MAINTENANCE DEPENDS ON
LANGUAGE PRODUCTION SYSTEMS: A FUNCTIONALLYGUIDED TMS INVESTIGATION Daniel Acheson1, Bradley Postle1;
1University of Wisconsin - Madison — The emergent-property perspective
of working memory (WM) states that the same brain regions involved in
long-term processing of different types of information also subserve WM
maintenance. Consistent with this view, several recent studies have demonstrated a critical role for the posterior superior temporal gyrus (pSTG),
a region that has also been implicated in phonological ordering processes
in language production, in verbal WM maintenance. We explored the
functional relationship between language production and verbal WM by
targeting language production regions with functionally guided repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS). First, functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to elicit activity in pSTG and middle
temporal gyrus (MTG), respectively, during two stages of production:
phonological ordering and lexical-semantic retrieval. Next, these regions
were targeted with rTMS during three tasks: rapid paced reading; picture
naming; and delayed serial recall (i.e., verbal WM). We hypothesized that
rTMS of pSTG would alter phonological ordering processes, and would
thus disrupt both rapid reading and serial recall of nonwords, but would
only minimally impact lexical-semantic processes (picture naming);
rTMS to the MTG would produce the opposite pattern. The results confirmed the theoretically critical prediction that rTMS applied to the pSTG

144

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

increases errors in rapid reading and in delayed serial recall, whereas
rTMS to the MTG has no effect on these tasks. Picture naming (the control
task) was sensitive to rTMS to both brain regions. Verbal WM maintenance may thus be nothing more than speech production processes (specifically, phonological ordering) "looping" for the duration of the delay
period.
E53
PRECISION
OF
VISUAL
WORKING
MEMORY
FOR
SEQUENTIALLY PRESENTED STIMULI Nikos Gorgoraptis1,2, Paul M
Bays1,2, Masud Husain1,2; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2Institute of
Neurology, University College London, UK — Recent work has shown that
visual working memory capacity is not fixed by number of items, but
rather is a limited resource, flexibly allocated across space (Bays &
Husain, Science, 2008). Importantly, these findings emerged when investigators probed the precision with which visual information is maintained, rather than using change detection as an index of memory
capacity. Here we investigate the allocation of visual working memory
resources across time, using a discrimination rather than change detection task. We assess the precision of subjects’ memory for the orientation
of sequentially-presented visual stimuli (coloured bars) all displayed at
central fixation. Precision is very high for a single item, but decreases as
increasing numbers of stimuli are presented after that item. Memory for
the intervening items falls with increasing sequence length but importantly delay length itself is not able to account for these effects. When a
predictive cue is given for one of the stimuli (62.5% validity), recall for
this item is considerably enhanced. Precision for non-cued items shows a
corresponding reduction compared to trials where no cue is present. The
findings support the concept of a limited resource that can be allocated to
maintaining items in working memory. The allocation of this resource is
flexible, not only across space but also over time, and can be modulated
according to the relevance of stimuli to task goals.
E54
POSTERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX MEDIATES ENCODING
PROCESSES IN CHANGE BLINDNESS Philip
Tseng1,
Tzu-Yu
Hsu2,3,4, Neil Muggleton5, Ovid Tzeng2,3,4,6, Daisy Hung2,3,4, Chi-Hung
Juan2,3; 1University of California, Psychology, Santa Cruz, CA, 2Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University, Jhongli, Taiwan,
3
Laboratories for Cognitive Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan, 4Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan, 5Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience & Psychology, University
College London, London, United Kingdom, 6Institute of Linguistics, Academia
Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan — It is commonly accepted that right posterior parietal cortex (PPC) plays an important role in updating spatial representation, directing visuospatial attention, and planning actions. Recent
change blindness studies in combination with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) techniques from Beck and colleagues (2001 & 2006), however, suggest that
right PPC is also a critical component of processes that are "more conscious", such as detecting a change between two pictures (picture A and
A’) in a change blindness paradigm. The present study seeks to apply
TMS in briefer and different time intervals to investigate the process of
which the right PPC is involved. Since change detection requires proper
encoding of visual features during viewing of picture A and successful
comparison between the features during viewing of picture A’, we
applied TMS pulses either during the presentation of picture A (early
TMS) or A’ (late TMS) in a one-shot change blindness paradigm in order
to selectively disrupt the encoding or comparison processes, respectively.
Our results show that right PPC TMS was most effective during the
encoding phase, thus suggesting that the right PPC is responsible for
encoding visual features into our visual short-term memory. In addition,
our change blindness paradigm did not alter any spatial components of
the stimuli. Therefore, contrary to the belief that the right PPC is only
responsible for the spatial aspect of a stimulus, our results imply that it is
also involved in encoding certain identity-based information.

Poster Session E

E55
WHEN 'WHAT' IS NEGLECTED BASED ON 'WHERE' IN
NEGLECT PATIENTS Arnaud
Saj1,2,3,
Patrik
Vuilleumier1,2,3;
1Neuroscience, University of Geneva, 2Center for Neuroscience, University of
Geneva, 3University Hospital, Neurology, Geneva — Recent
findings
in
healthy subjects indicate that memory capacity for spatial locations but
not colors may increase when the items are separated between the two
visual fields, rather than presented within the same hemi-field. This
observation suggests some independence between the two hemi-fields
for encoding spatial locations. We used a similar task to test patients with
right hemispheric brain lesion with or without neglect syndrome. To
examine whether a complete independence of the two visual fields can be
observed, the squares could appear in two frames from the same hemifield; or in two frames from different hemi-fields. In the two first experiments, participants indicated whether colors or locations of the squares in
the test display were the same as, or different from, the ones in the sample display. In a last experiment, the task was similar to exp 1 but the
squares also changed locations (but locations were always task irrelevant). Altogether, our results demonstrate that patients with spatial
neglect have impaired spatial working memory capacity for location,
whatever the visual field. However, no deficit was found for color capacity unless there was a concomitant change of location in left space. In conclusion, an independence between the two hemi-fields was not present in
neglect patients, and their working memory showed selective impairment for location but not color in both fields. The deficits found in exp 3
suggest an inability to code for object properties across different spatial
locations which may contribute to exploratory deficits spatial, typically
observed in right-brain-damaged patients with spatial neglect.
E56
WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY AND INHIBITION IN AX-CPT
Yukio Tsuchida1, Harumitsu Murohashi2; 1Graduate School of Education,
Hokkaido University, 2Faculty of Education, Hokkaido University — Individual differences in working memory capacity (WMC) reflect the ability to
control attention. This ability is related to response inhibition as a Stroop
task, meanwhile is not related to simple response inhibition as a stop-signal task. We examined the relationship between two types of response
inhibition and individual differences in WMC by ERPs. Participants were
low- and high-WMC group assessed in a reading span test. We used an
AX-CPT paradigm that consisted of cue and probe pairs. The probability
of A-X trial was 70%, other trials (A-nonX, nonA-X, and nonA-nonX) was
10%, respectively. In the no-go condition (simple response inhibition),
participant was asked to press a button when X followed A. In the 2choice condition (response inhibition and selection), participant was
asked to press one button when X followed A, and another button for all
other letters. P300 amplitude for the cue in both conditions was larger for
the high-WMC group than for the low-WMC group. However, there was
no difference in P300 amplitude for all probes. N200 amplitude for the AnonX probe in the 2-choice condition was larger in the low-WMC group
than in the high-WMC group. There was no difference in N200 amplitude
for other probes. These results suggest that response inhibition per se was
not related to WMC. Rather, WMC is related to the ability to maintain an
appropriate state of readiness based on the processing of cue information.
Therefore, the enhanced N200 amplitude in the low-WMC group may
suggest a deficiency of appropriate readiness.
E57
SEARCHING FOR TARGETS WITHIN VISUAL SHORT-TERM
MEMORY Bo-Cheng Kuo1,2, Anling Rao1, Jöran Lepsien3, Anna Christina
Nobre1; 1Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK, 2National
Taiwan University, Psychology, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Max Planck Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — Recent
studies
have revealed that the internal representations that we construct from the
environment and maintain in visual short-term memory (VSTM) to guide
behavior are highly flexible, and can be selectively modulated and
accessed by attentional mechanisms according to our task goals and

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

expectations. However, how these attentional mechanisms operate upon
VSTM representations is largely unknown. In the current experiment, we
investigated whether VSTM representations contain an intrinsic spatial
layout that is related to that in the perceptual array from which it is constructed; and tested whether searching for relevant target items from
within VSTM representations involves spatially specific, retinotopic biasing of neural activity in a manner analogous to that which occurs during
visual search for target items in perceptual arrays. Two ERP experiments
revealed that selection of a target object within a search array maintained
in VSTM proceeds through similar mechanism as that in the perceptual
domain. In line with previous results, an N2pc potential was obtained
when targets were identified within a perceptual visual-search array.
Interestingly, a similar N2pc was also elicited when target items were
identified within a VSTM representation. The N2pc in the visual and
VSTM domains had equivalent time-courses and topographies, suggesting a large degree of overlap in the spatially specific neural mechanisms
of target selection in the two cases.
E58
ANXIETY MODULATES NEURAL EFFICIENCY OF PROCESSING
IN WORKING MEMORY Ulrike Basten1,2,3, Christine Stelzel1,2,3,
Christian J. Fiebach1,2,3; 1University of Heidelberg, Psychology, Germany,
2
University of Heidelberg, Neuroradiology, Germany, 3University of
Heidelberg, Neurology, Germany — It has been postulated that anxiety
impairs the efficiency of performance in cognitive tasks, specifically in
tasks requiring the processing of information in working memory (WM)
as opposed to pure WM maintenance. In comparison to non-anxious
individuals, it is assumed that anxious individuals reach a given level of
performance only by the investment of additional effort, which makes
processing less efficient. In the present study, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to explore how state anxiety is associated
with neural efficiency, measuring BOLD activation in tasks addressing
different processing functions of WM, i.e. monitoring, updating, and
manipulation of information. We hypothesized that activation in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) - a brain region critically involved in the
processing of WM contents and executive functioning - shows a positive
correlation with state anxiety (measured using Spielberger’s state-trait
anxiety inventory, STAI). During the task phase of a delayed response
task, N = 48 subjects either monitored, updated, or manipulated a memory set of four letters. A conjunction of task-related BOLD activation
revealed that bilateral DLPFC was commonly activated by the different
conditions. In right DLPFC, activation was modulated by anxiety. Specifically, in all three conditions individuals scoring higher on state anxiety
showed stronger DLPFC activation, independent of their performance.
We interpret this result as evidence for a lower degree of neural efficiency
in anxious individuals. The finding suggests that anxiety affects neural
processes common to different component processes of WM that require
the handling and processing of contents in WM.
E59
GENE-GENE-INTERACTION OF COMT VAL158MET AND DRD2
POLYMORPHISMS ON UPDATING BUT NOT MAINTENANCE
Christian Fiebach1, Ulrike Basten1, Christine Stelzel1, Christian Montag2,
Martin Reuter2; 1University of Heidelberg, Psychology, Neuroradiology, and
Neurology, Germany, 2University of Bonn, Psychology, Germany — Imaging
genetics recently investigated how dopamine gene polymorphisms, particularly the Catechol-O-Methyltransferase Val158Met polymorphism,
influence working memory (WM) performance, mostly relying on one
behavioral paradigm, the n-back task. Dopaminergic influences on cognition, however, are multigenetic in nature, and WM involves different
component processes not separable in the n-back task, such as maintenance of information in WM, and updating of WM contents. We explored
how two polymorphisms related to dopaminergic activity, Val158Met
and the DRD2/ANKK1-TaqIa receptor gene polymorphism, modulate
maintenance vs. updating. 12 participants were randomly drawn for each
of four genotype groups, Val+/A1-, Val+/A1+, Val-/A1-, Val-/A1+.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

145

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

While genotype group had no influence on performance, fMRI responses
revealed task specific genotype effects in prefrontal cortex (PFC). When
maintaining four letters, no gene-gene interactions were observed in PFC.
Maintenance of six letters, as well as updating, elicited a COMT/DRD2
interaction of activity in left DLPFC. Updating of WM contents additionally showed a COMT/DRD2-modulation of activity in the right inferior
frontal junction area, known to be involved in the prefrontal control of
executive task demands. Both gene-gene interactions showed increased
activation for a genetic equilibrium, i.e., when high levels of dopamine
concentration meet an increased receptor density, or when lower dopamine levels coincide with reduced receptor densities. These results suggest
that dopamine system activity influences the efficiency of prefrontal cognitive processing, that these effects depend on multiple genetic factors
related to dopamine, and that distinct prefrontal component processes
such as maintenance and updating are differentially modulated by the
activity of the dopamine system.
E60
IT’S NOT WHAT THEY DO BUT THE WAY THAT THEY DO IT:
EXPLORING DIFFERENCES IN VERBAL WORKING MEMORY IN
PARENTS OF CHILDREN WITH SPECIFIC LANGUAGE
IMPAIRMENT Johanna Barry1, Beate Sabisch1, Jens Brauer1, Angela
Friederici1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognition and Brain Sciences —
Children affected by Specific Language impairment (SLI) typically demonstrate deficits in verbal working memory (VWM). SLI is highly heritable and, since parents of these children have a higher prevalence of poor
VWM than parents of typically developing children, it has been suggested that this serves as heritable risk factor for the disorder. In this
study, we used fMRI to tease apart factors contributing to the poorer
VWM in parents of children with SLI. We included 32 parents; 16 parents
of affected children and 16 of typically-developing children. We simultaneously presented verbal stimuli in both the auditory and visual modalities (encoding phase) and participants were required to subvocally
rehearse either the seen or the heard stimuli for an extended period of
time before performing a recognition task. We predicted similar cortical
responses in both groups during the encoding phase of the task, with differences in activations emerging later, during the rehearsal and recognition phases and being localised to the inferior frontal gyrus, and the
Sylvian-parieto-temporal and supramarginal areas. Preliminary results
largely confirm these predictions. Notably, however, little evidence was
found for deviant information-processing in the parents of children with
SLI, instead group differences reflect considerably reduced levels of activation particularly across the frontal lobes in these adults.
E61
THE EFFECT OF RETRO-CUEING ON AN ERP MARKER OF VSTM
MAINTENANCE Alexandra Murray1, Bo-Cheng Kuo1, Mark Stokes1,
Anna Christina Nobre1; 1University of Oxford, Experimental Psychology —
Previous research has found that Contralateral Delay Activity (CDA) is
correlated with the number of items maintained in Visual Short Term
Memory (VSTM) from one visual field (VF) (Vogel & Machizawa, 2004).
CDA is usually elicited by a to-be-remembered array after a prospective
cue (pro-cue) signalling the relevant side of the visual display, and is
interpreted as a putative electrophysiological signature of WM maintenance. Attention can also be directed to the contents of VSTM, after the
presentation of a visual array, using a retroactive cue (retro-cue) (Nobre,
Griffin, & Rao, 2008). Because retro-cueing directs attention within a
memory trace, potentially reducing the load of items to be maintained,
we hypothesised that this would significantly attenuate the CDA. Participants were initially presented with a spatial pro-cue which reduced the
number of to-be-remembered items to one side. After a delay, a memory
array of either four (low load) or eight (high load) items was displayed. A
retro-cue then cued participants to one location within the relevant VF,
further reducing the load of to-be-remembered items; or provided no
information, requiring participants to hold all items in the relevant VF.
At the end of the trial, participants performed a same/different judge-

146

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

ment on a test stimulus. Retro-cues significantly improved VSTM performance. Unexpectedly, the CDA was abolished by the presentation of
both spatially predictive and neutral cues, independently of the VSTM
load participants had to maintain.
E62
CATEGORICAL AND COORDINATE SPATIAL RELATION
PROCESSING IN WORKING MEMORY, AN FMRI STUDY Ineke
van der Ham1, Mathijs Raemaekers2, Richard van Wezel2, Anna Oleksiak2,
Albert Postma1; 1Helmholtz Institute, Experimental Psychology, Utrecht
University, 2Helmholtz Institute, Functional Neurobiology, Utrecht
University — Spatial relations can be subdivided into two main types; categorical relations concern the more abstract, qualitative relations like "left
of", while coordinate relations entail more metric relations such as "two
meters away". Previous theoretical and experimental claims have been
made about hemispheric lateralization dissociating the two types: categorical processing is suggested to show a left hemispheric advantage,
while coordinate processing is proposed to show a right hemispheric
advantage. Furthermore the brain areas suggested to be involved in this
type of processing mainly lie within the parietal cortex. To expand the
limited imagery data on this topic we have attempted to address this
issue with an fMRI study using a new experimental paradigm. The
design involves a match-to-sample working memory setup to assess
activity during categorical and coordinate processing at different retention intervals (500 ms and 2000 ms). Behavioural data indicate the
hypothesized double dissociation of hemisphere and task. Imaging data
reveal a clear involvement of parietal regions, mainly during categorical
processing, while some frontal activity is also found, related more to
coordinate processing. One effect of laterality has also been found, limited to the superior parietal cortex and the 2000 ms retention interval. We
therefore conclude that lateralization is not as strong as some previous
studies have suggested. However, there is evidence that in certain circumstances categorical processing has a left hemispheric advantage,
while coordinate processing shows a right hemispheric advantage.
E63
THE ROLE OF HIPPOCAMPAL THETA OSCILLATIONS IN
WORKING MEMORY Nathan Cashdollar1,2, Ulrike Malecki3, Fergus J.
Rugg-Gunn4, John S. Duncan1,4, Emrah Duzel2,3; 1Institute of Neurology,
UCL, London, UK, 2Institute for Cognitive Neuroscience, UCL, London, UK,
3Institute of Cognitive Neurology and Dementia Research, O.v.G University,
Magdeburg, Germany, 4National Hospital for Neurology & Neurosurgery,
UCL, London, UK — The relative contribution of the hippocampal formation to short-term working memory is currently under debate. In a series
of working memory experiments using Magnetoencephalography (MEG)
we investigated cortical synchronization within the theta band during the
active maintenance of configural or non-configural visual stimuli in
delayed-match-to-sample tasks (DMS) in healthy adults and patients
with bilateral hippocampal lesions. Object-based maintenance of nonconfigural information enhanced theta coupling along fronto-parietal
sensors. However, the active retention of spatial configurations engaged
a characteristically alternative network of occipito-temporal and frontotemporal theta synchrony. This pattern was abolished in patients with
bilateral hippocampal injury who displayed selective impairments in
configural DMS tasks, but intact visual discrimination of complex scenes.
Additional behavioral testing after configural and non-configural DMS
tasks revealed increased long-term recognition memory performance for
configural stimuli compared to non-configural in healthy controls.
Enhanced recognition memory performance for configural stimuli was
evident in epilepsy patients with structurally intact hippocampi where
no differences were found in patients with bilateral hippocampal atrophy. These results conclude that hippocampal integrity is critical to the
process of actively maintaining spatial configurations over a delay and in
turn results in more successful long-term memory. Overall, this suggests
that occipito-temporal/fronto-temporal theta synchrony reflects recruitment of regions conventionally thought of as a long-term working mem-

Poster Session E

ory system, and is necessary to support this form of working memory
maintenance by orchestrating a qualitatively different neural network
than fronto-parietal object maintenance.
E64
COMBINING ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY AND NEARINFRARED SPECTROSCOPY TO EXPLORE INSTANTANEOUS
AND CONTINUOUS MENTAL WORKLOAD STATES Krysta
Chauncey1, Leanne Hirshfield2, Erin Solovey2, Audrey Girouard2, Robert
Jacob2, Angelo Sassaroli3, Sergio Fantini3; 1Neurocognition Laboratory, Tufts
University, 2Human-Computer Interaction Laboratory, Tufts University,
3Biomedical Engineering, Tufts University — Electroencephalography
(EEG) and functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRs) are complimentary to each other in both temporal and spatial resolution, and both have
been used to classify participants’ working memory load; however, they
have yet to be integrated in a way that takes advantage of the millisecond-by-millisecond temporal resolution of EEG and the millimeter-fine
spatial resolution of fNIRS. This work explores ways that these two
methods can be combined by creating a subsegmentable task, which can
be informative when examined using either the timeframe of EEG or that
of fNIRS. Participants viewed trials of rows of red and blue airplanes
(only one row was visible at a time), and were asked to keep track of the
total number of each color for blocks of 60 seconds. Working memory
load was manipulated by the number of planes per row (two, eight, or
variable). EEG analysis was done on a trial-by-trial basis, and fNIRS
analysis was done by blocks of 60 seconds. EEG data showed increased
event-related synchronization (ERS) to increasing memory load at the
single-trial level, while fNIRS data showed increased blood oxygenation
to increasing memory load in continuous load conditions, but could not
differentiate between the variable-load blocks and the high-load blocks.
These findings will be discussed in the context of current models of working memory and task management.
E65
MDMA AND POLYDRUG USE ERP EFFECTS IN MEMORY
SCANNING Brian Lopez1, John Polich1; 1The Scripps Research Institute —
Short-term memory processing was assessed with a memory scanning
paradigm in substance-using college students. Substance use was categorized into two groups: (1) MDMA users who primarily have used ecstasy
with no or very little other substance use, and (2) polydrug users who
have used many substances in addition to ecstasy. A third group consisting of non-using controls was also assessed. A total of 12 females and 12
males comprised each drug use-group. Participants were instructed to
memorize a list of two, four, or six digits and were subsequently presented with single probe digits that were either present or absent in the
preceding memory set. Participants responded to the probes while
event-related brain potentials (ERPs) were recorded in the three memoryload conditions. Consistent with classic memory scanning findings,
response time to positive and negative probes increased with memory set
size and were shorter for positive probes versus negative probes. However, no performance differences were observed among drug-use groups.
P300 amplitude decreased and latency increased as set size increased.
Within each condition, positive probes yielded larger P300 component
size and shorter peak latency than negative probes. No reliable differences in P300 amplitude or latency were observed among the three druguse groups. MDMA and polydrug use does not appear to affect behavioral performance or neuroelectric assessment of short-term memory
scanning.
E66
BACK
TO
THE
FUTURE:
DISTRACTION
REVEALS
PREEMINENCE OF PROSPECTIVE VS. RETROSPECTIVE
REPRESENTATIONS IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY Jarrod
Lewis-Peacock1, Bradley Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — Delayperiod activity in inferior temporal (IT) cortex of the monkey can represent both retrospective and prospective information, and by one account
only the latter is robust to interference (Takeda et al., 2005). We explored

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

the effects of visual distraction on the short-term retention of information
in humans. First, subjects performed delayed recognition in the fMRI
scanner and a pattern classifier learned to identify delay-period activity
associated with the retention of faces, scenes, and objects. Second, subjects learned (offline) arbitrary cross-category pairings of stimuli from the
original set. Third, subjects returned to the scanner to perform delayed
paired-associate recognition with distraction from irrelevant stimuli, and
the pattern classifier was used to decode delay-period activity. Half of the
subjects were instructed to concentrate on the initial target stimulus during the delay period (and thus engage a retrospective code), and half to
concentrate on the anticipated memory probe (a prospective code). Performance was near ceiling. Delay-period classification results from the
"prospective" group indicated that prospective representations in IT cortex (and other posterior brain regions) were eclipsed while distractors
were on the screen, but re-emerged following the offset of distraction. In
"retrospective" subjects, however, these regions were seemingly unable to
sustain a retrospective representation across distracted delay periods,
instead switching over to a prospective code with the onset of distraction.
Thus, the pattern of robust prospective coding vs. mutable retrospective
coding extends to humans. More generally, it is consistent with the view
that the brain prioritizes preparing for the future over remembering the
past.
E67
VISUO-MOTOR REPRESENTATIONS VARY AS A FUNCTION OF
ONLINE FEEDBACK:
VISUALLY-GUIDED VERSUS MEMORYGUIDED TRACKING Joseph
Geeseman1,
Matthew
Schlesinger1;
1Southern Illinois University, Carbondale — Visual information is typically
available both prior to and during visually-guided behaviors such as
reaching and pointing (i.e., offline and online, respectively). The current
study investigated the conditions under which subjects exploit offline
information that is available before movement begins. Accordingly, neural activity was measured with functional MRI as subjects tracked and
"intercepted" a moving target. Prior to each trial, the path of the target
was cued by briefly presenting four points along the target’s trajectory.
Online feedback was manipulated by occluding the center portion of the
target’s trajectory on half of the trials (i.e., Occluded vs. Visible). As
expected, availability of online feedback influenced the observed pattern
of neural activation. In particular, a comparison of Occluded and Visible
trials revealed higher activity during the Occluded trials in parietal and
frontal regions versus higher activity in occipital areas during Visible trials. This pattern suggests that subjects may rely less on offline or premovement information when visual feedback is available during the
movement.
E68
INFLUENCE OF SPEED OF PROCESSING TRAINING ON
WORKING MEMORY IN OLDER ADULTS Anne S. Berry1, Theodore
P. Zanto1, Aaron M. Rutman1, Wesley C. Clapp1, Joseph L. Hardy2, Adam
Gazzaley1; 1University of California, San Francisco, Neurology and Physiology,
2
Posit Science Corporation, San Francisco — Computer-based training programs designed to improve cognition have been utilized with apparent
success in the auditory modality for children with autism and for older
adults. These results have inspired interest in plasticity-based training
approaches targeted at other modalities, such as vision to improve perception, attention, and working memory (WM). The burden of such studies is in demonstrating that training-related gains transfer to independent
tasks and that these improvements are associated with neural change.
The goal of this electroencephalography (EEG) study was to assess
whether older adults receiving extensive training on a basic motion perception discrimination task (a module in Posit’s InSight TM visual training package) show improved perceptual discrimination and WM
performance on an independent visual motion task. To evaluate
improvement associated with training, behavioral performance and neural recordings were collected at two time points for training (before and
after training) and no-contact control groups. WM improvement was

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

147

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

tested using a delayed match to sample task with and without distractors.
So that differences in motion direction discrimination between individuals was not a factor in WM task performance, perceptual discrimination
was tested using a perceptual thresholding procedure prior to the WM
experiment. Preliminary results reveal training improves perceptual discrimination and WM memory performance compared to controls. Interestingly, WM enhancement may only be present when post-training
participants are tested at their pre-training threshold. These results suggest improved perceptual processing drives WM improvement. Spectral
and event-related potential results for the cue period suggest more efficient visual processing after training.
E69
VISUAL WORKING MEMORY AND CONSCIOUS AWARENESS
Weiwei Zhang1, Steve Luck1,2; 1University of California, Center for Mind &
Brain, Davis, CA 2University of California, Psychology, Davis — Researchers
have proposed working memory representations are tightly tied to
awareness. To explore this hypothesis, we combined a color recall paradigm with a confidence rating procedure. Participants viewed briefly
presented arrays of colored items and recalled one of the colors after a
900-ms delay. They then used a 7-point scale to indicate their confidence.
We found that observers tended to have high confidence levels when
they were holding the tested item in working memory. When observers
were not holding the tested item in working memory, they exhibited a
reduced likelihood of indicating the highest level of confidence (level 7).
These results indicate that the presence of a representation in working
memory is associated with awareness of a representation. In addition,
when the item was present in working memory, observers were able to
use the whole confidence scale in a meaningful way, providing further
evidence of a close tie between the presence of a representation and
awareness of the representation. However, when the item was not
present in working memory, observers could not use levels 1-6 of the
scale in a meaningful way, suggesting that the absence of a representation does not provide any details that can be represented in awareness.
Finally, although observers were aware of the presence of working memory representations, they did not have meaningful information about the
accuracy of the representations that were in memory. Thus, awareness is
linked to the presence but not the accuracy of working memory representations.
E70
THE EFFECTS OF MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE DAMAGE ON
PROACTIVE INTERFERENCE Craig Brozinsky1, David Badre2, Mark
DEsposito; 1University of California Berkeley, 2Brown University — Recent
findings demonstrate that patients with medial temporal lobe damage
have subtle deficits on short-term item recognition tasks. Their deficits
could reflect dysfunctional maintenance and storage processes, or they
could reflect a reduced ability to resist interference that has built up
across a test session. We tested this latter hypothesis by using a variant of
Monsell's recent probes task, which has previously been related to prefrontally mediated processes such as inhibitory control and episodic
retrieval. On this task, normal subjects perform more slowly and less
accurately on trials where a memory probe was not a member of the current rehearsal set, but was a member of the previous trial's rehearsal set.
We hypothesized that, under normal circumstances, recollection helps to
reject these familiar lures. Accordingly, we predicted that patients with
focal hippocampal damage, who tend to have impaired recollection and
relatively normal familiarity, would be heavily susceptible to interference
from previous trials. In patients with more extensive medial temporal
lobe damage (unilateral hippocampus, perirhinal, and entorhinal cortices), who tend to have both familiarity and recollection deficits, we predicted that familiarity would minimally be generated, and thus protect
against interference effects. The two patient groups were compared to
controls on a letter and a shape version of the recent probes task. Despite
having lower baseline recognition accuracy and slower reaction times,
the focal hippocampal patients did not have magnified interference

148

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

effects. These results suggest that cross-trial interference does not mediate short-term recognition deficits in focal hippocampal patients.
E71
RETRIEVING
INFORMATION
FROM
A
NEW
EVENT
SELECTIVELY ACTIVATES THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBES
Jeffrey M. Zacks1, Khena M. Swallow1, Deanna M. Barch1, Denise Head1, Corey
J. Maley1, Derek Holder1; 1Washington University in Saint Louis — When
watching others’ activities, observers segment it into meaningful events.
For example, when watching another person make tea, an observer might
segment the activity into filling a mug with water, heating the water, and
putting a tea bag in the mug. Event Segmentation Theory (EST, Zacks et
al., 2007, Psychological Bulletin) proposes that retrieving information
across an event boundary should rely more on episodic retrieval systems
and medial temporal lobe structures than retrieving information within
an event. Using functional MRI, we measured participants’ brain activity
while they watched movie clips in which a variety of objects appeared.
Five seconds after an object left the screen the movie paused for a recognition test and participants distinguished between the object that was in
the clip and a new object that had not appeared in the clip. An independent group of observers identified event boundaries by watching the
clips in their entirety and dividing them into discrete units of activity.
Brain activity during the recognition test was analyzed based on whether
an event boundary occurred during the 5-s delay between object presentation and test. Thus, information was either retrieved across an event
boundary or from within the current event. As predicted, the medial temporal lobe showed greater activity when participants retrieved information across an event boundary than when they retrieved information
from within the current event. These differences were observed despite
the equivalent delay across conditions. These data provide compelling
evidence that event boundaries act as a form of control over some memory processes.
E72
NEUROPLASTICITY-BASED COGNITIVE TRAINING IMPROVES
WORKING
MEMORY
IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA
PATIENTS:
BEHAVIORAL AND FMRI ASSESSMENTS Sophia
Vinogradov1,
Karuna Subramaniam1, Tracy Luks1, Stephanie Aldebot1, Adelaide Hearst1,
Arul Thangavel1, Melissa Fisher1, Gregory V. Simpson1, Srikantan Nagarajan1;
1
UCSF — Previous research has demonstrated that schizophrenia
patients show impairments in attention, working-memory (WM) and
cognitive control functions, and show decreased activation in DLPFC
when performing these tasks compared to healthy controls (HCs). Here,
we investigated whether neuroplasticity-based cognitive training would
improve working memory functions in schizophrenia patients. We used
fMRI to measure brain activity in 24 patients and 12HCs while they performed three N-Back tasks, of increasing levels of WM load (0,1,and 2Back tasks). Twelve patients were then randomly assigned to 16 weeks of
computerized targeted cognitive training (TCT) focusing on auditory and
visual processing, affect recognition, and mentalizing tasks, while the
remaining 12 control patients played computer games (CGs). All subjects
repeated the fMRI task after 16 weeks. BOLD fMRI activity was measured on a 3T-GE scanner before and after intervention. Whole-brain
analyses of the N-back task focused on regions showing greater activation on the 2-back compared to the 0-back task. At baseline, HCs demonstrated greatest activation in the right middle/inferior frontal gyrus (M/
IFG). After 16 weeks of training compared to baseline, the TCTs had
increased activation in the right M/IFG, while CGs did not show any
change. These fMRI results indicate a possible "restorative" effect of training in schizophrenia subjects, not observed in control patients, where
behavioral performance improved and fMRI activity increased in the
right M/IFG during a WM task. These findings suggest that training
generalizes to improve working memory functions in schizophrenia
patients.

Poster Session E

E73
NEURAL MEASURES OF AGE DIFFERENCES IN VISUAL
WORKING MEMORY: THE ROLE OF FILTERING EFFICIENCY
Kerstin Jost1, Rick Bryck2, Edward K. Vogel2, Ulrich Mayr2; 1PhilippsUniversity Marburg, 2University of Oregon — It is well-known that working memory (WM) functions decline with age. The reasons for this
decline, however, are not completely understood. Here we tested
whether the ability to prevent irrelevant information from being stored is
a critical factor for age differences in WM. In order to address this question we compared younger (18-30 years) and older (65-80 years) adults’
performance in a visual WM task. In each trial participants were presented with an array of colored rectangles and had to remember only the
red ones. During the retention interval the so-called contralateral delay
activity (CDA) of the EEG was recorded. The CDA allows an online measurement of the number of active representations, because its amplitude
increases with the number of stored items. Participants who are good in
filtering should show CDA amplitude increases for red items only,
whereas the amplitude for participants who are not good in filtering
should depend on the numbers of both relevant and irrelevant items [see
Vogel, E.K. et al. (2005). Nature 438, 500-503]. In both groups filtering efficiency, quantified by CDA amplitudes, substantially varied across individuals and was correlated with WM capacity: individuals with low
capacity were less efficient in filtering out irrelevant information than
high-capacity individuals. Although filtering efficiency seems to be
responsible for interindividual differences, it did not explain the obtained
age effects in WM capacity. This suggests that a filter deficit is not
responsible for the age-related WM decline.
E74
REPRESENTATION OF KEY IN NONVERBAL WORKING
MEMORY: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Laura
Manning1, Edward Golob2; 1Tulane University, Psychology, 2Tulane
University, Program in Neuroscience — Long-term memory (LTM) can
influence verbal working memory via knowledge of language. Similarly,
LTM may influence nonverbal working memory via knowledge of musical key. Here we tested the hypothesis that key repetitions across trials
facilitates encoding of musical chords in a working memory task. Eventrelated potentials (ERPs) were measured at encoding to determine if key
repetition affected sensory processing (early auditory ERPs) and/or topdown processing (late slow waves: 400-600 ms). Participants (N=15; ages
19-25; 6M/9F) heard trials consisting of 3 different chords followed by a
maintenance period (2 sec) and a probe chord. Participants pressed buttons to indicate whether the probe was a match or nonmatch to any member of the initial 3 chord set. Chords within a trial were in the same key,
but key either changed each trial (random) or remained the same for 3
consecutive trials (consistent). Accuracy was comparable among conditions (~77%). Auditory ERP measures (P50, N100, P200) did not differ
between consistent and random conditions. However, in the consistent
condition late frontal slow wave amplitudes were more negative for consistent trials 2 and 3 vs. the first trial (p<.05). Late slow wave amplitudes
in the random condition and consistent trial 1 were comparable. Results
suggest the influence of key develops over trials, and is most evident in
longer-latency, possibly top-down activity rather than early sensory processing.
E75
DRIVEN FROM DISTRACTION: IMPROVING VISUAL SHORTTERM MEMORY IN OLDER ADULTS WITH ATTENTIONAL
SELECTION Maha Adamo1, Carson Pun1, Susanne Ferber1; 1University of
Toronto, Psychology — One cognitive faculty that declines with age is
visual short-term memory (VSTM), or the ability to hold visual information in mind after it is no longer physically present. Specifically, older
adults typically show lower VSTM capacity estimates than do young
adults. This age-related decline, however, may be a derivative of
increased distractibility: Older adults’ memory performance may be
impaired not because of reduced storage capacity per se, but due to interference from additional items within VSTM. We used a "retro-cue" para-

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

digm to test whether attentional enhancement of information held in
VSTM reduces interference, manifesting as improved capacity estimates.
We presented a memory array of 1-6 colored circles for 1000ms, followed
by a blank period of 1000ms. Then, on "retro-cue" trials, we presented a
central arrow for 100ms pointing to the to-be-remembered location, followed by another blank display for 400ms. Finally, we presented a probe
display containing only the cued item, and participants indicated with a
button press whether the probe was the same color as the item presented
at that location previously. The comparison condition also included a
cue, which was presented simultaneously with the probe display after
the first blank period ("simu-cue"). Both young and older adults showed
improved estimates for retro-cue trials relative to simu-cue trials; critically, older adults’ performance improved to the level of young adults.
Thus, providing a cue for attentional selection of an item already held in
VSTM reduces the typically observed age-related decline, suggesting that
reducing distraction improves older adults’ memory.
E76
EARLY VISUAL COMPONENT DURING MENTAL IMAGERY
GENERATION WAS AFFECTED BY MEMORY ORDER Keiko
Yamazaki1, Junichi'Katayama1; 1Graduate School of Education, Hokkaido
University — ERP P2 reflected visual process of mental imagery generation in our previous study. In this study, we examined whether the P2
amplitude was affected by memory order of shape or not. There were
four kinds of shape to be memorized, two of which were SIMPLE shape
composed of three segments, and the others were COMPLEX shape of
five segments. 16 Participants memorized SIMPLE shape as "a" and "b" at
first, and COMPLEX shape as "c" and "d" next (SIMPLE first group).
Another 16 participants memorized COMPLEX shape as "a" and "b", SIMPLE shape as "c" and "d" (COMPLEX first group). They memorized these
shapes with sequence of the segments to be drawn. In the experiment, 5 x
5 grids with the name of shape in the central cell, and with an "X" probe
mark in another cell, were presented. Participants decided whether or not
the probe mark fell on the visualized shapes. Half of the trials were ON
trials where the mark fell on the shape. The significant P2 effect was
observed in the SIMPLE first group, which was consistent with our previous study, but not in the COMPLEX first group. They showed significant
P1 effect, which was larger for the SIMPLE trials than in the COMPLEX
trials. These results indicated that early visual components were affected
by both complexity of shape and memory order, and that these components might be first signal to the visual areas from memory.
E77
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY:
AN FMRI STUDY Vivek Prabhakaran1, Veena Nair1; 1University of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Radiology — Working
memory capacity is defined as the extent of resources available to perform on-line cognitive processing involving both working memory storage and working memory rehearsal. Lesion studies have posited that
posterior brain regions are involved in working memory storage while
prefrontal brain regions are involved in working memory
rehearsal(D’Esposito and Postle, Neuropsychologia 1999). To identify
whether individual differences in working memory capacity is secondary
to increased working memory rehearsal or increased working memory
storage, we conducted a fMRI study of working memory known to
invoke working memory capacity in which subjects(n = 12) perform an
item recognition paradigm where subjects maintain six letters over a
delay period versus a no-delay period. Working memory capacity is
measured in each of these subjects using a Digit span task. To isolate
areas involved working memory capacity, we correlate individual differences in working memory capacity with activity in brain regions
involved in the maintenance of working memory. Overall, maintenance
of working memory information involved a prefrontal-posterior network. Prefrontal brain regions showed greater activity with greater
working memory capacity across individuals. This suggests that individual differences in working memory capacity is secondary to increased
working memory rehearsal.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

149

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

E78
WORKING MEMORY AND SEMANTIC COMPETENCE IN OLDER
ADULTS' COMPLEX LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION Claire
Simpson1, Fan-Pei Gloria Yang1, Carlos Marquez de la Plata1,2, Kourosh
Zakeri3, Daniel Krawczyk1,2; 1Center for Brain Health, University of Texas at
Dallas, 2University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Texas,
3The University of Texas at Dallas — Previous aging studies suggest that
declining working memory is the primary cognitive factor that contributes to impaired comprehension of complex linguistic sentences. This is
based on the reported correlation between working memory and several
types of figurative language that use conventional neuropsychological
batteries. These studies have not considered other cognitive confounds
such as familiarity of the stimuli and semantic competence which we
observed to have an impact on neural activations in our previous imaging study. The goal of the proposed study is to investigate the correlation
between these cognitive factors and complex language processing. Sentences were presented on a computer screen and older adults were asked
to judge the valence of sentences by pressing buttons on the keyboard.
Some of the sentences were conventional and only assessed subjects’ verbal competence whereas novel metaphors tested their reasoning ability.
We also conducted several neuropsychological measures for working
memory (e.g.,Trails and Digit Span) and for semantic competence (e.g.,
Nelson-Denny). Subjects’ reaction times demonstrate that novel sentences were most difficult to process compared with conventional expressions. This indicated that familiarity was a crucial factor for aging
population’s language processing. We also found that, with verbal ability
controlled, subjects with declining working memory performed worse on
novel expressions but not on conventional metaphors. This suggests that
familiarity instead of figurative language (e.g., metaphor) has an impact
on working memory. We suggest that a combination of computerized
tasks and neuropsychological measures can give a more accurate assessment of older adults’ language performance and cognitive functions.

Perceptual processes: Auditory
processing
E79
HARMONY WANTS TO SIT IN THE FRONT Eduardo A. Garza
Villarreal1,2, Elvira Brattico3, Sakari Leino3, Leif Ostergaard1,4, Peter Vuust1,2;
1Aarhus University, Center for Functionally Integrative Neuroscience, 2Royal
Academy of Music, Aarhus, Denmark, 3University of Helsinki and Helsinki
Brain Research Center, Cognitive Brain Research Unit, Psychology, Finland,
4University Hospital of Aarhus, Neuroradiology — Deviations from auditory regularities elicit early negative electric potentials distributed over
the frontal regions of the scalp. The mismatch negativity (MMN) is elicited when local regularities of the auditory stimulation are violated and is
also affected by the familiarity with the stimuli, whereas the early right
anterior negativity (ERAN) appears when sounds diverge from a hierarchically organized musical regularity. In this study we wished to further
disentangle the functional roles of these two brain processes associated
with the detection of local vs. hierarchical musical violations by studying
the localization of the underlying generators. To this aim, fifteen subjects
listened to musical sequences constituted by seven chords. Each sequence
contained harmonically congruous chords, harmonically incongruous
chords, or harmonically congruous but mistuned chords. Simultaneously, an electroencephalography (EEG) was recorded and afterwards
brain electric source analysis (BESA) was performed. Incongruous chords
violating the rules of harmony elicited a bilateral early anterior negativity
(ERAN), the amplitude of which depended on the degree of the harmony
violation as expected, while mistuned chords violating the local rules of
relations between the sounds, elicited a bilateral mismatch negativity
(MMN) within chord sequences. We found that the dominant transcerebral sources for the ERAN were localized in Broca’s area and its right

150

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

homologue. The MMN signal was instead localized on the bilateral auditory cortex. These findings demonstrate the predominant role of the auditory cortices in detecting local auditory regularities and of the prefrontal
cortex in parsing hierarchical regularities in music.
E80
WHEN SOUNDS BECOME OBJECTS Lisa D. Sanders1, Rachel E.
Keen2, Richard L.. Freyman3; 1University of Massachusetts, Psychology and
Neuroscience and Behavior Program, Amherst, 2University of Virginia,
Psychology, 3University of Massachusetts, Communication Disorders,
Amherst — The ability to isolate a single sound source among concurrent
sources and reverberant energy is crucial for understanding the auditory
world. Our ability to localize sounds despite these echoes has been
explored with the precedence effect: identical sounds presented from two
locations with a short stimulus onset asynchrony are perceived as a single source with a location dominated by the lead sound. We recently
found that event-related potentials (ERPs) elicited by click pairs near
echo threshold differ when listeners do and do not report hearing the lag
sound as a separate source. Specifically, when participants report hearing two sounds, we observe a negativity 100-250 ms, previously termed
the object-related negativity (ORN). From previous research it is not possible to determine if the early neurosensory processing differences
indexed by the ORN reflect variability in subcortical representations that
result in a one- or two-sound interpretation or top-down influences. We
measured ERPs elicited by physically identical sounds in contexts that
resulted in listeners reporting either one or two sources. Repeating a
lead-lag sound pair several times made participants less likely to report
hearing the lag sound as a separate source. Presenting several lead-only
sounds before the pairs resulted in behavioral responses similar to those
for pairs presented in isolation. Sounds perceived as two auditory objects
elicited an ORN and a posterior positivity 250-500 ms. These results indicate that recent experience with the spatiotemporal properties of sound
allows listeners to form complex models of room acoustics that affect
early auditory object processing.
E81
DISCRIMINATION OF NATIVE AND NON-NATIVE VOWEL
CONTRASTS IN TURKISH-GERMAN AND GERMAN CHILDREN:
INSIGHT FROM MISMATCH NEGATIVITY Tanja Rinker1,2,3, Paavo
Alku4, Sibylle Brosch2, Markus Kiefer1; 1Section for Cognitive
Electrophysiology, Psychiatry, University of Ulm, Germany, 2Section for
Phoniatrics and Pedaudiology, ENT, University of Ulm, Germany,
3
Transfercenter for Neuroscience and Learning, University of Ulm, Germany,
4Laboratory of Acoustics and Auditory Signal Processing, Helsinki University
of Technology, Finland — The development of native-like memory traces
for foreign phonemes can be measured by using the Mismatch Negativity
(MMN), a negative deflection of the auditory event-related potential. Previous studies have shown that the MMN is sensitive to changes in neural
organization depending on language experience. In this study we measured the MMN-response in five year-old monolingual German children
and in bilingual Turkish-German children growing up in Germany.
MMN was investigated to a German vowel contrast and to a Turkish
vowel contrast. The results show that while an MMN is elicited in German children to the German vowel contrast, there is no MMN present in
Turkish-German children. Moreover, the early MMN-response to the
Turkish contrast is more prominent in monolingual German children.
Only in a later time window, Turkish-German children show a more
prominent response to the Turkish contrast. The temporal onset of the
MMN is delayed in the Turkish-German children for both vowel contrasts. Overall, the results suggest that the Turkish-German children have
not yet fully acquired the German phonetic inventory despite being
immersed in a German environment and that their phonetic inventory in
Turkish is affected by their bilingualism as well. Furthermore, the delay
in the MMN-response may reflect a slight general slowing due to the cognitive demands of processing two languages.

Poster Session E

E82
NEURAL CODING OF FRICATIVE SPEECH SOUNDS WITH AND
WITHOUT HEARING AIDS Sharon Miller1, Yang Zhang1,2; 1SpeechLanguage-Hearing Sciences, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN,
2Center for Neurobehavioral Development, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN — The present study used auditory event-related
potential (ERP) measures to investigate how the adult brain differentially
processes fricative speech sounds with and without the use of a hearing
aid. Three questions were addressed: (1) whether wearing a hearing aid
makes a significant difference in the ERP components, (2) whether the
ERP responses to fricatives consistently differ in both aided and unaided
conditions, and (3) whether phonological context significantly affects the
ERP responses. Eleven right-handed adult listeners with normal hearing
participated in the study. ERP responses were recorded in an electrically
shielded sound booth for digitally-edited /sa/, /sha/, /as/, and /ash/
stimuli in unaided and aided conditions using a randomized block
design. At least 160 trials per stimulus were averaged for each subject.
The results showed that (1) the basic ERP responses significantly differed
between the unaided and aided conditions, (2) the N1 amplitudes and
latencies to /s/ and /sh/ significantly differed in both unaided and
aided conditions as well as in syllable-initial and syllable-final positions,
and (3) phonological context significantly affected the N1 responses.
These results confirm that hearing aids alter neural coding of speech.
Unlike previous findings, however, there is strong evidence that the basic
information for fricative contrast perception through a hearing aid is not
entirely lost at the cortical level.
E83
MAPPING HUMAN AUDITORY CORTEX ACCORDING TO BOLD
FMRI RESPONSE TO CLICK-TRAIN STIMULI VARYING IN
PRESENTATION
RATE
AND
BINAURAL-LEVEL
CONFIGURATION Susan A. McLaughlin1, G. Christopher Stecker1;
1Speech and Hearing Sciences, University of Washington — Due to the highly
distributed nature of mammalian auditory cortex (AC) processing, no
single stimulus characteristic has proven sufficient to completely differentiate AC fields on a physiological basis. Mapping human AC with noninvasive methods remains a particular challenge. The goal of our study
was to discriminate and identify human AC fields using a "multiple functional marker approach," mapping regional variation in BOLD fMRI
response along multiple dimensions. Human AC responses to variation
in stimulus level, presentation rate, and interaural level difference were
measured using a sparse imaging paradigm (TR = 12 s, 32 slices, 3.0 x 3.0
x 4.5 mm, 3 T). Narrowband click-train stimuli were delivered in 12-second blocks, and varied pseudorandomly by 1) binaural-level configuration (sound or silence in one or both ears [sound levels at each ear varied
independently over a 30-dB range across blocks]) and 2) presentation rate
(fast or slow: 40 brief trains or 5 longer trains per second, respectively).
Listeners monitored stimuli for rare changes in inter-click interval. Consistent with previous reports, overall activations (sound minus silence) of
the superior temporal plane were greatest for slow (vs fast) presentation,
contralateral to the stimulated ear. Additional focal activations exhibited
regional and subject-to-subject variation in parametric sensitivity to overall level, binaural interaction, and presentation rate. The results are consistent with the view that neural populations vary along multiple
dimensions of stimulus sensitivity, and that these parameters can be used
to define a set of functional markers useful for mapping AC field structure. Supported by NSF IOB-0630338.
E84
LISTENING STRATEGY MODULATES NEURAL CORRELATES OF
AUDITORY RHYTHM PERCEPTION Amanda
Pasinski1,
Devin
McAuley2, Joel Snyder1; 1University of Nevada, Psychology, Las Vegas,
2
Bowling Green State University, Psychology — Two fundamentally different mechanisms have been hypothesized to underlie listeners’ perception
of rhythm: 1) A beat-based mechanism synchronizes with the rhythm,
similar to the beat people tap while listening to music, and listeners use

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

this synchronized pattern to generate expectations for the onset times of
new events; and 2) An interval-based mechanism calculates time intervals between consecutive events and listeners use the calculated time
intervals to compare with time intervals formed by new events. Recent
psychophysical evidence using a novel tempo discrimination paradigm
has shown that some individuals use a beat-based mechanism while others use an interval-based mechanism, even for the same rhythmic pattern
and set of instructions. This paradigm therefore presents a unique opportunity to identify brain processes underlying the two strategies. We used
this paradigm while measuring event-related potentials (ERPs) in 38 participants. Strongly beat-based and weakly beat-based listeners showed no
difference in sensory-evoked ERPs (N1, P2, N2). In contrast, the two
groups showed a marginal difference in the contingent negative variation
elicited by expectation of the final tone in the pattern and a significant
difference in the late positive component after the end of the pattern, with
larger responses in the more strongly beat-based listeners. These results
demonstrate that stronger beat-based listening is accompanied by
enhanced neural processing of tempo changes at the end of a rhythmic
pattern.
E85
SENSITIVITY TO WITHIN-GROUP AND BETWEEN-GROUP
SPEECH CATEGORIES IN EARLY, INTERMEDIATE, AND LATE
SPANISH-ENGLISH BILINGUALS WITH VARYING PROFICIENCY
LEVELS Pilar Archila1, Arturo Hernandez1, Jason Zevin2; 1University of
Houston, 2Weill-Cornell Medical College — The purpose of this study was
to examine differences in the categorization of speech in bilinguals who
varied in age of acquisition and proficiency level in the second language.
Spanish-English bilinguals (n=100) were classified as early (<5 years),
intermediate (6-9 years), or late (>10 years) for a syllable discrimination
task. Monolingual controls were used. Participants were asked to rate, on
a 4-point scale, the level of dissimilarity between two pairs of naturally
produced English syllables /saf, sef, sof, suf/ consecutively presented.
The perceptual responses to these syllables were analyzed using multidimensional scaling (MDS). Consequently, the perceptual distances within
and between clusters of stimuli indicated that early and high-proficient
bilinguals more closely resemble monolinguals, whereas late and lowproficient bilinguals show dissimilar patterns of perception. Separate
regression analysis demonstrated that proficiency is a significant predictor for the accurate categorization of between-group stimuli, while age of
acquisition is a better predictor for within-group stimulus distances.
Altogether, the results suggest that early learners of a second language
are particularly adept at attending to the phonemic boundaries between
vowel speech sounds and ignoring the minute variations within a vowel
sound. Yet, high proficiency, in intermediate and late bilinguals, can
favorably increase differentiation between vowel sounds, thus resulting
in better categorization. In the near future, we plan to investigate how
age of acquisition and proficiency affect the neural specialization of bilingual adults.
E86
PURE WORD DEAFNESS A NEUROLINGUISTIC STUDY Ravi
Nehru1, Amit Batla2, Farah Kanam3; 1DM Neurology DNB Psychiatry
Professor and Incharge Neurobehaviour Clinic and Neurolinguistics lab,
Neurology GB Pant Hospital, New Delhi, India, 2MD (Medicine) Senior
Resident Neurology G B Pant Hospital, New Delhi, India, 3MA Psychology and
PhD student, Neurology G B Pant Hospital, New Delhi, India — Background: Pure word deafness is caused by superior temporal gyrus lesions
in the dominant hemisphere that isolate Wernicke's area from incoming
auditory information. Most cases are reportedly caused by stroke. Aims
and Objects: To describe a 16 year old boy who developed pure word
deafness and study the case as an example of representation of speech in
human brain. Methods: The patient developed bilateral temporal lobe
infarction. With recovery, a speech comprehension defect became evident
by the 6th month. He was completely deaf for spoken speech, but could
identify and localize all environmental sounds and recognize voices. His

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

151

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

speech was normal and he could read and write correctly. Audiometry
revealed high frequency deafness. His BAER was normal. He had particular difficulty perceiving initial consonants, but did extremely well with
vowels. He used his ability to recognize vowels in listening to letters and
numbers. Reading aloud and reading for comprehension, writing spontaneously and naming to confrontation were normal. Conclusions:. Pure
word deafness serves as a model to understand localization of speech in
the temporal cortices. It appears that a selective phonemic perceptual deficit results in pure word deafness. This case serves to prove that there is a
fine grained highly selective representation of phonemes at cortical level.
E87
EARLY AUTOMATIC CATEGORIZATION OF SPEECH SOUNDS
IS NOT MISLED BY CHANGES IN THE SURFACE FORM Heidrun
Bien1, Lothar Lagemann2, Christian Dobel2,3, Pienie Zwitserlood1,3; 1Institute
for Psychology II, University of Muenster, Germany, 2Institute for
Biomagnetism and Biosignalanalysis, University of Muenster, Germany, 3OttoCreutzfeldt Center Center for Cognitive and Behavioral Neuroscience,
University of Muenster, Germany — During speech perception, sound is
mapped onto abstract phonological categories. Assimilation of place or
manner of articulation, which is quite common in connected speech, challenges this categorization. Does assimilation result in categorizations
which need to be corrected later on, or does the system get it right in the
first place? We presented participants with isolated nasals, extracted
from naturally produced German sentences. The nasals differed in their
place of articulation (/m/ labial, /n/ alveolar, and /n’/ regressively
assimilated towards labial). Behavioural two-alternative forced-choice
tasks showed that participants were able to correctly categorize the isolated /n/s and /m/s. The assimilated nasals were predominantly categorized as /m/, suggesting a changed place of articulation in the surface
form. The categorizations were also linearly influenced by a pitch variation. In a MEG experiment, we analyzed the N100m component elicited
by the same stimuli, with no categorization task on the nasals. In sharp
contrast to the behavioural data, this early, automatic brain response
ignored the assimilation in the surface form and reflected the underlying
category (/m/ elicited a smaller amplitude than /n/, independent of the
presence or absence of assimilation). These phonemic differences were
processed exclusively left-laterally (both in temporal and in parietal
areas), while the pitch variation was processed in temporal regions bilaterally. In conclusion, explicit categorization draws attention to the surface form - to the changed place and acoustic information such as pitch.
The N100 reflects automatic categorization, which exploits any hint of an
underlying feature.
E88
EMOTIONAL SPEECH INTELLIGIBILITY: NOT JUST A MATTER
OF THE RIGHT HEMISPHERE Sonja
A.
Kotz1,
Friedemann
Szymanowski1, Jonas Obleser1, Stuart Rosen2, Sophie K. Scott3; 1MPI for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2UCL, Division of
Psychology and Language Sciences, London, UK, 3UCL, Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, London, UK — Speech perception is tightly linked to activation of auditory association areas in the temporal lobes with a particular
role of the left anterior superior temporal sulcus (STS) in the perception
of intelligible speech (Scott et al., 2000; 2006). In the current study we
extended this approach to investigate emotional speech intelligibility
with noise-vocoded speech as previous evidence with filtered emotional
speech (Kotz et al., 2003; 2006) and non-speech vocal sounds (Belin et al.,
2004) suggest a role of the right anterior STS in processing paralinguistic
aspects of vocal expression (i.e., age, gender, emotional state; see also
Schirmer & Kotz, 2006). We confirm a speech intelligibility network consisting of the IFG (BA 45) and the anterior STS/MTG bilaterally, the left
STG (BA 41), and the left inferior parietal lobe (BA7). Emotional speech
intelligibility involved the anterior STS/MTG bilaterally, the left STG (BA
41), and the right posterior STG (BA 22). The data suggest that speech
intelligibility - whether neutral or emotional - relies on the bilateral anterior temporal STS/MTG, while emotional speech additionally recruits the

152

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

posterior STG. The data will be discussed in relation to models of vocal
and non-vocal expression in neutral and emotional speech.
E89
IT'S ONLY IN YOUR HEAD: HOW EXPECTANCY OF AVERSIVE
AUDITORY STIMULATION MODULATES AUDITORY CORTICAL
ALPHA ACTIVITY Thomas Hartmann1, Winfried Schlee1, Nathan Weisz1;
1
University Konstanz — INTRODUCTION: Recent publications have
shown that modulations of alpha oscillations play an essential role in
information processing. E.g. anticipation of target stimuli lead to a desynchronization of alpha oscillations in the respective sensory modalities.
These top-down effects are usually induced using differing stimuli or
instructions. METHODS: In the current study we set up a fake auditory
frequency discrimination task, in which always the same sound was presented to the left ear. Participants were instructed that one sound (the
high-pitch sound) would be followed by an aversive noise. Over the
experiment the expectancy which sound subjects perceived fluctuated
systematically. Oscillatory brain activity was acquired using a 64 channel
EEG system. RESULTS: 12 out of 16 subjects were included in the analysis (4 men; mean age 22.25; all right handed). We found a significant relationship between the number of previous equal feedback and expectancy
thus confirming the validity of the task. Time-frequency analysis using a
multitaper FFT approach revealed an overall 20% stronger alpha-desynchronization during sounds for which an aversive noise was expected.
Statistical analysis using a nonparametric permutation test revealed one
significant cluster over right-temporal regions. Source-localization using
a beamformer-approach localized the difference at right auditory cortical
regions. CONCLUSION: Extending previous research, we were able to
show that alpha-oscillations originating from auditory areas can be
"purely" modulated by top-down influences.
E90
A REVERSE STROOP EFFECT IN ABSOLUTE PITCH
POSSESSORS Lilach Akiva-Kabiri1,2, Avishai Henik1,2; 1Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Psychology, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2Zlotowski Center for
Neuroscience, Beer Sheva, Israel — Absolute pitch (AP) is the ability to
identify and produce musical pitch tones without using an external reference tone. The present study examined how automatic such identification
is. Eight participants with AP and eight musically trained controls participated in two auditory-visual Stroop-like tasks. In a given trial, participants were presented with an auditory tone and a tone name (e.g., do, re)
or a note. In separate blocks, they were asked to respond to the note or
the word and ignore the auditory tone or to respond to the auditory tone
and ignore the visual display. The irrelevant dimension could be congruent, neutral or incongruent with the relevant dimension. In the pitch-tone
naming task, only controls showed a significant congruity effect and
were slower in identifying tones in the incongruent conditions. In contrast, in the note reading task, only those with AP showed a significant
congruity effect. These results are in contrast with those of the original
reverse Stroop task (Stroop, 1935) where no effect was found when participants were asked to read the color name and ignore the ink color.
These findings demonstrate that pitch tones are processed automatically
in those with AP. Moreover, the AP participants showed a unique asymmetrical congruity effect, with a greater influence of the auditory dimension on the visual dimension.
E91
FUNCTIONAL COUPLING BETWEEN AUDITORY AND MOTOR
REGIONS IS MODULATED BY THE PERCEPTUAL DIFFICULTY
OF SPEECH Conor Wild1, Matt Davis3, Alexis Hervais-Adelman3,4, Ingrid
Johnsrude1,2; 1Centre for Neuroscience Studies, Queen’s University, Kingston,
ON, Canada, 2Queen’s University, Psychology, Kingston, ON, Canada, 3MRC
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, 4Cambridge University,
Physiology, UK — A number of recent neuroimaging studies have suggested that cortical motor activity is essential for successful speech perception (for reviews see Davis and Johnsrude 2007, Poeppel et al., 2008).
We suggest that this may be particularly true for degraded or masked

Poster Session E

speech. In this study, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) to examine whether interactions between auditory and somatomotor brain regions are stronger during the perception of degraded, relative to clear, speech. We presented subjects with English sentences that
were processed as clear speech, 3-band noise-vocoded speech (NVS), or
rotated 3-band noise-vocoded speech (rNVS). Whereas NVS is somewhat intelligible to naïve listeners, rNVS is unintelligible. Whole brain
fMRI data were gathered from 19 subjects with a sparse-imaging paradigm and analyzed using a beta-series functional connectivity method
(Rissman et al., 2004). We observed an increase in the functional coupling between motor cortex and peri-auditory regions during presentation of NVS speech, compared to either clear speech or rNVS; in other
words, these areas demonstrate significantly increased correlation of
activity when speech is hard to understand, compared to when it is unintelligible, or when it is clear and easily understood. The modulated auditory response was localized to belt and/or parabelt regions of auditory
cortex immediately surrounding Heschl’s gyrus. These results suggest
that auditory cortex may recruit motor cortex in situations of high auditory perceptual uncertainty; or, alternatively, that motor cortex modulates lower-level auditory processes under these conditions.
E92
BILINGUAL AND MONOLINGUAL VOWEL PERCEPTION: AN
ERP STUDY Monika Molnar1,2, Shari Baum1,2, Linda Polka1,2, Lucie
Ménard2,3, Karsten Steinhauer1,2; 1School of Communication Sciences &
Disorders, McGill University, Canada, 2Centre for Research on Language,
Mind, & Brain, McGill University, Canada, 3Université du Québec à Montréal,
Canada — In the present study, we addressed the question of whether
being a native speaker of one or two languages affects automatic speech
sound processing. Specifically, we investigated vowel perception patterns of monolingual (English, French) and simultaneous bilingual
(English/French) speakers using an auditory oddball paradigm. The
auditory discrimination abilities of each language group were measured
in response to four vowels: English /u/, French /u/, French /y/, and a
control /y/. The vowels were created using the Variable Linear Articulatory Model (VLAM) (cf. Boë & Maeda, 1998) which simulates realistic
vowels in terms of articulatory-to-acoustic relationships. In line with previous behavioral and electrophysiological findings, monolingual speakers exhibited increased sensitivity to the phonemic status of the vowels
than to the acoustic properties differentiating the sounds. For instance,
monolingual French speakers showed an early and robust mismatch negativity (MMN) effect when discriminating between two native vowels;
however, monolingual English speakers responded with a later and
smaller MMN to the same vowel contrast. Also, monolingual speakers
were able to detect subtle within-phonetic-category differences (i.e.,
English /u/ vs. French /u/) which elicited relatively late MMN components. Bilingual speakers, on the other hand, revealed a different type of
processing pattern. They demonstrated overall slower discrimination
responses to all sounds, but showed almost equal sensitivity to phonemic
and acoustic differences. Compared to the performance of the monolingual speakers, the overall results suggest that bilingual speakers exhibit a
more flexible but less uniquely-specified perceptual pattern.
E93
PHONEMIC PERCETION IN ENGLISH AS A FIRST AND SECOND
LANGUAGE: EVIDENCE FROM EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS
Pauline Peri1, Cheryl Frenck-Mestre1, Christine Meunier1; 1Université de
Provence — The present study investigated phonemic perception of
American-English vowel categories by French-English advanced learners, French monolinguals and native English speakers. Specifically, we
examined the discrimination of different vowel categories specific to
English and the amount of attentional resources allocated to these contrasts. A three stimulus oddball paradigm was used: /E/ as standard; /
ae/ as target and /I/ as deviant in the first experiment; /ae/ as deviant
and /I/ as target in the second experiment. In both experiments, early
ERP responses (N100) showed discrimination of the three vowels for all

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

groups, based on acoustic differences. In contrast, ERP responses associated to attentional and categorization updating processes (N200-P300)
showed differences between vowel categories across groups. In the first
experiment, all the participants showed a categorization response for the
vowel /ae/ against /E/. An "N2-P3" complex was also elicited for native
English speakers and advanced learners in response to the deviant /I/
but not for French monolinguals. In the second experiment, native
English speakers showed a larger N2-P3 response for the /I/ vowel.
Advanced learners showed a larger N2-P3 response when focusing their
attention on /I/ and a smaller response to the deviant /ae/. These results
suggest a difficulty for advanced learners to deal with the three categories at the same time. Finally, French monolinguals show a small
response to the /I/ vowel when it acts as a target. Results are fur...ther
discussed in terms of attentional demands and the influence of the
mother tongue when processing American-English vowel categories.
E94
MEANINGFUL NOVELTY PROCESSING DURING SLEEP IN
HUMANS Perrine Ruby1, Jean-Baptiste Eichenlaub1, Dominique Morlet1;
1
INSERM U821, Lyon, France — Up to which extent does the sleeping
brain process modifications in its sensory environment? To address this
issue, we investigated brain reactivity to meaningful sounds during sleep
in healthy subjects. EEG, EOG and EMG were recorded during wakefulness and all-night sleep, while a passive oddball paradigm (standards,
deviants and rare novels) was applied. Novel sounds were first-names
uttered by a neutral voice: the subject’s own name OWN and an unfamiliar first-name OTHER. During wakefulness recordings, subjects watched
a silent movie with subtitles. During sleep recordings, stimuli were presented continuously. During wakefulness, OWN and OTHER evoked N1
and P3a components. The P3a component peaked significantly earlier (15
ms) for OWN. OWN only, evoked a large parietal positivity peaking at
550 msec. An enhanced response to OWN was also detected during sleep
(stages 2, 4 and REM sleep), at late latencies, with a similar topography as
the one observed during wakefulness. Theses results demonstrate that,
during wakefulness, OWN induces an earlier reorientation of attention
than OTHER, possibly due to its greater familiarity or to its meaning.
OWN subsequently evoked a late positivity which may be interpreted as
a complex cognitive processing e.g. recall of memory associated to the
own name. Only late positivities were found in sleep stages 2, 4 and REM
for OWN, suggesting that only the latter effect is preserved during sleep.
In conclusion this study demonstrates verbal discrimination for the first
time in all sleep stages and suggests a possible preservation of stimulusdriven recollection during sleep.
E95
PURE WORD DEAFNESS FOLLOWING LEFT HEMISPHERE
STROKE
WITH
PRESERVED
INTERHEMISPHERIC
CONNECTIVITY L. Robert Slevc1, Philip C. Burton2, A. Cris Hamilton1,
Randi C. Martin1; 1Rice University, 2University of Minnesota — Pure word
deafness (PWD) is characterized by severely impaired speech perception
despite good hearing ability and preserved functioning in other language
domains (e.g., reading, writing and speaking). Despite its rarity, PWD
has attracted considerable attention because of its specificity to speech
sounds. ’Pure’ cases of PWD show dissociations not only between speech
perception and other types of linguistic processing but also between perception of speech stimuli and other complex auditory stimuli. The case
reported here shows exactly this pattern: severely impaired speech perception despite relatively preserved reading, writing and speaking ability, as well as preserved perception of complex environmental sounds
(Saygin, Dick, & Bates, 2005) and musical pitch. The patient has particular difficulty with stimuli characterized by rapid temporal transitions
(i.e., consonants), supporting accounts of PWD resulting from an underlying deficit in rapid spectrotemporal processing (cf. Stefanatos, Gershkoff, & Madigan, 2005). Although PWD typically results from bilateral
damage to the posterior superior temporal lobes, or more rarely from
damage to the left superior temporal lobe combined with damage to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

153

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

inter-hemispheric connections, this patient has only unilateral left temporal and parietal lobe damage, including superior temporal gyrus, supramarginal gyrus, and angular gyrus. Not only does he have an intact right
hemisphere, but he also has preserved white matter tracts connecting the
two hemispheres as shown by diffusion tensor imaging. These data thus
imply a crucial role played by the left superior temporal regions in the
processing of rapid temporal aspects of the speech signal and constrain
bilateral accounts of speech perception.
E96
LATE PARIETAL POSITIVE WAVES TO A SUBJECT’S OWN
NAME IN NON-COMMUNICATIVE PATIENTS Dominique
Morlet1,4, Irena Holeckova2,3,1, Perrine Ruby1,4, Jean-Baptiste Eichenlaub1,4,
Catherine Fischer3,1; 1INSERM U821, Lyon, France, 2Medical Faculty Plzen,
Charles IV University Prague, Czech Republic, 3Neurological Hospital, Clinical
Neurophysiology, Lyon, France, 4Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France — We
report a series of findings from passive oddball paradigms including the
subject’s own name (SON) presented as a novel (p ? 0.03) in healthy
awake subjects and in comatose patients. In a first experiment (15 subjects), the SON was randomly uttered either by an unknown or by a
familiar voice in the same stimulation block. A late parietal positive wave
(LPP) appeared after the novelty P3 (nP3) in response to the familiar
voice. In a second experiment (10 subjects), the unknown voice and the
familiar voice were presented in separate blocks. No LPP could be
observed in either condition. In a third experiment (11 subjects), the SON
and another proper name were randomly presented in the same block. A
large LPP followed nP3 only in response to the SON. In 50 severe comatose patients (on average 20 days after coma onset), an oddball paradigm
including the SON uttered by an unknown voice was applied. The SON
elicited a central-parietal P3 response in 21 patients, of whom 17 awoke
within the next 3 months. In 12 patients (of whom 11 woke up), we
observed an additional component with more pronounced parietal predominance, significantly prolonging the duration of the P3 response. In
healthy subjects, the presence of LPPs in response to SON depends
highly on the stimulation context. This result questions about the cognitive counterpart of these components. Moreover, LPPs could also be
observed in supposedly unconscious patients in whom they could highlight some residual cognitive functions.
E97
MENTAL ABILITY AND THE EFFECT OF PATTERN CHANGE ON
P300 AND MISMATCH NEGATIVITY Lauren Sculthorpe1, Robert
Stelmack1, Kenneth Campbell1; 1University of Ottawa — In
previous
research using event-related potential (ERP) recording procedures, compelling evidence of a relation between intelligence and speed of auditory
discrimination was presented. During an auditory oddball task with
backward masking, higher ability participants (HA) displayed more
accurate discriminations, faster response time, larger P300 amplitude,
and shorter P300 and mismatch negativity (MMN) latency than lower
ability participants (LA). The temporal effects suggested that the speed of
accessing short-term memory is faster for HA than LA. Since the MMN
occurs without focused attention, these effects were interpreted to reflect
differences in preattentive processing. We attempted to extend previous
sensory discrimination effects to higher-order cognitive mechanisms by
examining mental ability and variation in pattern change discrimination
as indexed by P300 and MMN. HA and LA participants were presented
with a two-tone alternating pattern (ABABAB...) with occasional deviant
repetitions (ABABBBAB...). The two tones of the pattern were separated
by 1 or 6 semitones in different blocks, under both ’ignore’ (reading) and
active response conditions. HA achieved better performance than LA,
particularly in the more difficult 1 semitone condition. This was mirrored
by a larger P300 and shorter P300 latency for HA than LA in the 1 semitone condition. MMN amplitude was larger for HA than LA across both
semitone conditions. These results suggest that mental ability is related
not only to sensory discrimination, but also to higher-order cognitive
processes of rule extraction that operate even at a preattentive level.

154

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

E98
THE INFLUENCE OF COMPETING STIMULI ON AUDITORY
SELECTIVE
ATTENTION:
A
BEHAVIORAL
AND
ELECTROPHYSIOGICAL STUDY Aparna Rao1, Yang Zhang1, Sharon
Miller1; 1Speech-Language-Hearing Sciences, University of Minnesota — This
research work investigates the neurophysiologic mechanisms involved in
selective listening. Behavioral and electrophysiological data were
obtained from 12 subjects with normal hearing in a selective attention
task (Garner filtering condition). In this paradigm, subjects were
required to identify signals that co-occurred with competing stimuli.
Pure tones mixed with filtered noise at a signal-to-noise ratio of +15 dB
were used as stimuli. In separate blocks, subjects judged the pitch of
tones while ignoring the random variation in filtered noise and vice
versa. Results were compared for the two conditions, i.e., when subjects
classified the pitch of tones and when subjects classified the pitch of filtered noise. Behavioral results indicated higher response accuracy and
shorter reaction times when subjects attended to tones (p<0.01). Electrophysiologic findings revealed greater amplitudes for P1, N1 and P2 when
subjects identified the pitch of tones (p<0.01). N2 was larger when subjects attended to the pitch of filtered noise (p<0.01). More importantly,
significant interactions (p<0.05) were obtained between tone classification, noise classification and attention condition for all behavioral and
electrophysiological measures, except the amplitude of N2. The effects of
auditory interference were asymmetric. Results suggest that behavioral
and electrophysiological responses to signals are altered by the presence
of competing stimuli.
E99
AREA SPT IN THE HUMAN PLANUM TEMPORALE SUPPORT
SENSORY-MOTOR INTEGRATION FOR SPEECH PROCESSING
Gregory Hickok1, Kayoko Okada1, John Serences2; 1Center for Cognitive
Neuroscience, University of California, Irvine, 2University of California,
Psychology, San Diego — Processing incoming sensory information and
transforming this input into appropriate motor responses is a critical and
ongoing aspect of our moment-to-moment interaction with the environment. While the neural mechanisms in the posterior parietal cortex (PPC)
that support the transformation of sensory inputs into simple eye or limb
movements has received a great deal of empirical attention - in part
because these processes are accessible to study in non-human primates little work has been done on sensory-motor transformations in the
domain of speech. Here, we used fMRI and multivariate pattern classification analysis techniques to demonstrate that a region of the planum
temporale (Spt) shows distinct spatial activation patterns during sensory
and motor aspects of a speech task. Our results demonstrate that just as
the PPC supports sensorimotor integration for eye and limb movements,
Spt is part of a sensory-motor integration circuit for the vocal tract.
E100
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES
OF
ECHO
SUPPRESSION IN HUMANS Kristina C. Backer1, Kevin T. Hill1,2, Lee
M. Miller1,2,3; 1Center for Mind and Brain, University of California, Davis,
2Neuroscience Graduate Group, University of California, Davis, 3Neurobiology,
Physiology, and Behavior, University of California, Davis — In
everyday
reverberant environments, the auditory system encounters an acoustically complex scene, consisting of primary sounds and their spatiallyscattered echoes. In order to localize an auditory object, the brain suppresses directional information from echoes occurring within a short
delay of the primary soundóa phenomenon known as the precedence
effect. In this study, we aimed to characterize the temporal evolution of
neural processes mediating the precedence effect. In a behavioral calibration session, we presented subjects with clicks from two locations in virtual acoustic space (+/- 45&deg;) with varying delays between them: a
primary (left) and an echo (right) click. On each trial, subjects reported
whether or not they heard a click on the echo side. This allowed us to
determine each subject’s echo-suppression threshold. In a follow-up EEG
session, subjects (n = 9, 4 males) were presented with either a single click

Poster Session E

in the primary click location, an obvious double-click pair (delay of 35
milliseconds), or a near-threshold click pair (delay based on the calibration, appx. 5ms). For near-threshold click trials, the right-lateralized N1c
ERP component was larger in amplitude when the echo was suppressed
compared to when the echo was audible. This suggests that enhanced
processing in lateral auditory cortex within 150ms of sound onset may
underlie the perceptual suppression of echoes.
E101
PERCEPTION OF PITCH DIRECTION IN NATIVE SPEAKERS OF
TONE AND NON-TONE LANGUAGES Edith
Kaan1,
Bethany
1
1
1
Rowlings , Ratree Wayland ; University of Florida — Tone languages such
as Thai and Mandarin Chinese use pitch differences to distinguish lexical
meaning. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effects of
language background on both involuntary and attentive perception of
linearly rising and falling syllables, abstracting over differences in average pitch. Native speakers of American English (a non-tone language)
and of Mandarin Chinese (a tone language) participated in a passive EEG
oddball paradigm, and behavioral discrimination and oddball detection
tasks. Seventeen rising and seventeen falling tokens of the syllable [ba:]
were generated, differing in overall pitch to mimic different speakers.
The critical stimuli, to which ERPs were recorded, were always in the mid
range of the pitch frequencies used. The English group (n=14) was better
at actively discriminating falling tokens from rising tokens than vise
versa. Preliminary data from the native Chinese speakers (n=4) showed
no differences. Both groups were faster at detecting falling oddball
tokens among rising standards than vise versa. Both groups showed a
later negativity (600-800ms) for deviants versus standards in both rising
and falling conditions. However, ERPs for the deviant versus standard
stimuli showed a mismatch negativity (MMN) for the rising deviants in
the English group only. This confirms the view that different experiences
with pitch contours through language affects both involuntary and conscious perception of pitch direction.
E102
NEURAL ACTIVITY UNDERLYING PASSIVE PERCEPTION OF
NATIVE VS. NON-NATIVE PHONETIC CONTRASTS Ran Liu1,2,
Jeremy Skipper1, Bruce McCandliss1,2, Jason Zevin1,2; 1Sackler Institute for
Developmental Psychobiology, 2Weill Cornell Medical College — Early
language experience shapes neural processing of phonetic contrasts in a
manner that promotes distinction between contrasts that are meaningful
in one's native language and generalization across those that are not. As
a result, second language learners often have difficulties learning, or even
perceiving, differences between phonemes that are non-contrastive in
their native language. To investigate the neural basis of this phenomenon, we used fMRI to scan 28 native Japanese speakers (all with extensive
naturalistic exposure to English) while they passively listened to two
English phonetic contrasts: one that is contrastive in Japanese (/d/ vs. /
g/) and one that is not (/r/ vs. /l/). Subjects heard trials of these speech
sounds in succession, each trial consisting of either four repetitions of the
same standard stimulus or three repetitions of the standard followed by
one deviant stimulus. The deviant > standard comparison reflects neural
processing of the phonetic contrast present in the deviant trials. Results
reveal activity in left posterior superior temporal gyrus and anterior
supramarginal gyrus responding specifically to change across the /d/-/
g/ contrast (native-language relevant) but not to the /r/-/l/ contrast
(native-language irrelevant). This suggests that neural responses to
speech contrasts may be susceptible to a sensitive period such that, even
after extensive naturalistic exposure, adult second language learners do
not activate regions typical of native speakers' during passive listening to
non-native contrasts.

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

E103
AUDITORY CORTEX SENSITIVE TO F1-F2 INTERACTION:
EVIDENCE FROM MEG Pedro M. Alcocer1, Brian Dillon1, William
Idsardi1,2; 1Linguistics, University of Maryland, 2Neuroscience and Cognitive
Science Program, University of Maryland — We report magnetoencephalographic (MEG) evidence that the M100 response is sensitive to interactions between first and second vowel formant (F1, F2) frequencies. Two
F1 (500Hz, 700Hz) and two F2 values (1100Hz, 1900Hz) were chosen and
crossed to give four different American English vowel categories: /^/
(500Hz/1100Hz), /E/ (500Hz/1900Hz), /a/ (700Hz/1100Hz), and /ae/
(700Hz/1900Hz). Four synthetic tokens were generated from these crossings. Comparison of subjects’ M100 responses to these stimuli revealed a
significant effect of F2 and a significant interaction of F1 and F2 values.
Subsequent pair-wise comparisons revealed the source of the effects: /
ae/ was significantly delayed relative to /a/, and there were additional
marginally significant delays of /E/ and /^/ relative to /a/. The pattern
of results suggests that neither F1 nor F2 is the primary factor modulating
M100 latency. Rather /a/ tentatively appears to have a privileged status
with respect to the other vowels in the study. If the view that the tonochronic properties of the M100 are largely predicated on formant structure is to be maintained, then the current set of results suggests a
hypothesis that is grossly consistent with the view outlined by Ohl and
Scheich (1997) and Diesch and Luce (2000), where it is claimed that the
auditory cortex does not specifically resolve different formant peaks, but
rather that the auditory cortex tracks a single value that represents a
transform of the F1 and F2 values.
E104
AUTOMATIC VERSUS
CONTROLLED PROCESSING OF
TEMPORAL STRUCTURE Michael Schwartze1, Maren SchmidtKassow1, Sonja A. Kotz1; 1MPI CBS, Leipzig, Germany — Recent years have
seen substantial progress in the specification of the functional and the
neural bases of temporal processing. It has been suggested to dissociate
between two timing systems. An automatic one, involved in short range,
discontinuous timing, and a controlled one, dependent on attention, and
involved in longer range, continuous timing (Buhusi & Meck 2005). To
investigate this position, the Electroencephalogram (EEG) of 24 subjects
was recorded in a first session (MMN), in which attention was directed
away from tonal stimuli towards a muted video, and in a second (P300)
session, in which attention was directed towards the tonal stimuli. Subjects listened to pseudo-randomized non-chunked as well as binary
chunked (CH) auditory oddball sequences consisting of 512 standard
(600 Hz) and 128 deviant (660 Hz) equidurational (300 ms) sinusoidal
tones that were presented with either isochronous (ISO) or random
(RAN) pause durations. For the P300 session, results show a significantly
reduced event-related response (ERP) to deviant tones in the RAN as
opposed to the ISO condition, whereas no such difference occurs when
attention is distracted in the MMN session. Chunking produces comparable results, but also reveals different ERP patterns as a function of deviant
position. Thus, the temporal structure of a stimulus sequence has direct
influence on ERPs evoked in auditory oddball paradigms. The results
support a separation of automatic and controlled timing systems. Furthermore, the facilitating effect of temporal predictability can be interpreted in favour of models that assume dynamic, stimulus-driven
allocation of attention (Barnes & Jones 2000).
E105
MODELING VOCAL PITCH PRODUCTION WITH PERTURBED
AUDITORY FEEDBACK Anja Hohmann1, Psyche Loui1,2, Gottfried
Schlaug1,2; 1Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 2Harvard Medical School —
Tone-deafness is a disorder whose phenotypical expression is characterized by an inability to sing in tune. Recent data suggests an underlying
auditory-motor disconnection, resulting in an inability to benefit from or
adjust to altered auditory perceptual feedback. Analogous studies in perceptuomotor feedback in vision have used the technique of altered feedback as in studies investigating prismatic adaptation. Using transposed

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

155

Monday, March 23, 8:00 - 10:00 am

auditory feedback, we tested the hypothesis that normal-hearing individuals may be sensitive to feedback perturbation. We presented subjects
with pure tones within their vocal range and asked them to reproduce
these pitches by humming. Fundamental frequency of subjects’ produced
pitch was extracted and played back in real time via headphones. In 50%
of trials, the feedback was transposed (perturbed) in frequency. The level
of perturbation was adapted to each participant’s individual, psychophysically-defined pitch-discrimination threshold. We recorded subjects’
vocal production and applied pitch-extraction offline. Similar to EEG/
ERP methods, data was artefact-rejected, baseline-corrected, and averaged across trials and subjects. Results were plotted as percent deviation
from a preperturbation baseline. Results demonstrated frequency-shifted
vocal production in the opposite direction of the applied perturbation for
the duration of altered feedback. This opposing response shows that persons with intact pitch perception are sensitive to perturbed auditory feedback and compensate if given the impression of being out of tune. Pilot
data from tonedeaf subjects suggest a lack of feedback-sensitivity. The
perturbed auditory feedback paradigm can be adopted to further investigate behavioral markers of tone-deafness and also the general development of auditory-motor connectivity.
E106
ABNORMAL RESPONSE DYNAMICS DURING COGNITIONRELEVANT AUDITORY INFORMATION PROCESSING IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA Corby L. Dale1,2, R. Alison Adcock3, Anne M.
Findlay1, Alex Genevsky2, Mary Vertinski2, Tracy L. Luks1, Gregory V.
Simpson1, Srikantan S. Nagarajan1, Sophia Vinogradov2,4,5; 1University of
California, Radiology, San Francisco, 2NCIRE, San Francisco VA Medical
Center, 3Duke University Medical Center, Psychiatry, 4San Francisco VA
Medical Center, Psychiatry Service, 5University of California, Psychiatry, San
Francisco — Accumulating evidence suggests that schizophrenia is associated with neurocognitive impairments in both higher order cognitive
functions and fundamental properties of sensory representations. Following on the premise that disorganized sensory representations are
more vulnerable to interference and perceptual errors, we investigated
the effect of speech-spectrum noise on the perception and representation
of successively-occurring speech sounds by characterizing magnetoencephalographic (MEG) responses to syllable pairs. Patients diagnosed
with schizophrenia and healthy comparison subjects performed a syllable discrimination task in both the presence and absence of noise. Statistical analyses of the M100 response over Superior Temporal cortex
indicate that schizophrenia subjects, relative to healthy comparison subjects, show smaller amplitudes during the auditory M100 response to the
first syllable and larger amplitudes to the second syllable in the presence
of noise. In contrast, syllable discrimination without noise produces relatively equal responses in patients and comparison subjects during the
first syllable, and a reduced response to the second syllable in patients.
Taken together, these data suggest that perceptual interference leads to a
less well-integrated response to the first syllable in schizophrenia
patients, with a subsequent lack of attenuation in the response to the second syllable. Findings are consistent with "noisier" cortical-based representations of sensory information and their interactions with higher order
cortex in schizophrenia patients, leading to faulty predictive processes
and cognitive deficits. Results will be discussed with respect to the application of cognitive training to improve auditory information processing
and its potential effects on physiological markers of sensory processing
dysfunction in schizophrenia.
E107
AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL INVESTIGATION OF THE
PHONEMIC RESTORATION EFFECT David Groppe1, Marvin Choi1,
Ben Topkins1, Marta Kutas1,2; 1University of California, Cognitive Science, San
Diego, 2University of California, Neuroscience, San Diego — The phonemic
restoration effect (Warren, 1970) refers to the tendency for people to hallucinate a phoneme within a word replaced by a non-speech sound (e.g.,
tone). The level of processing at which this illusion occurs is unknown.

156

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

One event-related brain potential (ERP) study (Sivonen et al., 2006) suggests that it begins within 120-180 ms of the onset of the non-speech
sound, but the result was confounded by physical stimulus differences.
In our study, absent this confound, participants read a word and then
heard a word; the two were identical on half the trials. Additionally, for
half the trials a tone replaced a non-initial phoneme in the spoken word;
for the other half, the spoken word and tone were coincident (overlapped). Participants indicated if the written and spoken words were
identical and whether or not the tone replaced part of the spoken word.
When the written and spoken words were identical (versus non-identical), participants more frequently reported that the tone did not replace
part of the word, whether or not it did. When the spoken and written
words were identical, a large late positivity beginning before tone offset
obscured other possible effects of the prior written word. High-pass filtering, however, dampened this positivity and revealed that the N1 to the
replacement tone is enhanced when the written and spoken words are
identical (vs not). This suggests that phonemic restoration begins early in
auditory processing and that linguistic context can affect early phases of
speech processing.
E108
FUNCTIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF P50 AND N100 SENSORY
GATING NEUROPHYSIOLOGY Carly A. Yadon1, Aubrey J. Anthony1,
Julie M. Bugg2, Marlisa Isom2; 1Colorado State University, 2Washington
University in St. Louis — The P50 auditory event-related potential is used
to measure sensory gating. This is typically in a paired-click paradigm in
which amplitude to the second click (test (T) click) is "gated" or suppressed compared to the first click (conditioning (C) click) when measured by a T/C ratio. Sensory gating is dramatically reduced in
individuals with schizophrenia and is highly variable among neurologically typical adults. For healthy adult participants, there is some evidence to suggest that P50 suppression varies with personality
characteristics (schizotypy) and endorsement of sensory disturbances.
However, the functional significance of poor P50 sensory gating is not
well understood for either group. The goal of the present study was to
better understand the functional implications of poor gating in a healthy
adult sample. Toward this end, we examined the relationships between
participants’ (N = 30) scores on the Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire-Brief version, self-reported sensory processing as measured by the
Sensory Gating Inventory, and neurophysiological measures of sensory
processing (e.g. P50 and N100 amplitude, latency and suppression) .
Interestingly, for the P50 wave, latency but not suppression related to
most of the subscales of the Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire and
the Sensory Gating Inventory whereas suppression but not latency
related to most of the subscales for the N100 wave (all data from electrode Cz). We consider several explanations for the differential patterns
we observed for the P50 and N100 measures.

Poster Session F
Attentional processes: Visual
F1
ATTENTION AND REWARD: INDEPENDENT OR INTEGRATIVE
MECHANISMS? Stephanie Baines1, Anling Rao1, Anna C. Nobre1;
1University of Oxford — Attention has been widely demonstrated to modulate perceptual processing. Advance information as to the location of a target stimulus provides benefits to accuracy and reaction times. Eventrelated potentials (ERPs) have shown neural responses to be facilitated
from early perceptual responses (e.g., visual P1 and N1). Reward has been
shown to influence decision-making and motor processing, but there has
been little investigation with regards to its possible effects upon perceptual
processing. We investigated whether reward was able to influence information processing at the perceptual stage, and asked whether reward utilised the attentional system or an independent mechanism to influence
behaviour and perception. We manipulated the probability of target location and reward availability to investigate how changing spatial and motivational expectations influence perceptual judgments. The task required
speeded orientation discriminations of peripheral Gabor stimuli, presented to the left or right of fixation. Spatial and reward expectations modulated behavioural performance in different and non-interactive ways.
Spatial attention shortened response times and improved performance
accuracy. Reward expectations also shortened response times, in an additive fashion, but had no effect upon accuracy. ERP recordings charted the
relative time-courses for the modulation of neural processing by spatial
and reward expectations, and determined the stages at which the two
sources of top-down biases interacted.
F2
ORIENTING ATTENTION BASED ON LONG-TERM MEMORY
IMPROVES PERCEPTUAL DISCRIMINATIONS E. Zita Patai1, Anling
Rao1, Jennifer Summerfield1, Anna Christina Nobre1; 1The University of
Oxford — The role of attentional orienting in daily life is to selectively
deploy both behavioural and neural resources towards events, based on
continually changing task goals and expectations, in order to optimize performance. In the following experiment, we show that attentional orienting
is influenced by long-term memories in a perceptual discrimination task.
In the learning phase, participants were trained on 120 ecologically valid
natural scenes, of which 80 contained a target. Their task was to locate the
target (a small key) on the screen by clicking on it with the mouse. One or
two days later, participants completed a cued perceptual discrimination
task. The same scenes that were studied before, but without any targets,
were presented as cues (50 ms duration), followed, after a delay (450ms),
by the scene again with or without the target (200ms). Participants discriminated covertly whether the key was present or absent from the second scene. There were three conditions: valid (key in learning and
discrimination task was in same location), invalid (key in learning and discrimination task were in different location) and neutral (there was no key
in learning phase). Behavioural results indicated that memory-guided
attention benefits both the sensitivity (d’) and speed of target identification
within natural scenes. A replication of the study is being carried out with
event-related potentials to chart the neural modulations that accompany
the perceptual enhancements observed behaviourally.

F3
AN ERP EXAMINATION OF THE DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF
SLEEP DEPRIVATION ON ENDOGENOUSLY CUED AND
EXOGENOUSLY CUED ATTENTION Logan T. Trujillo1, Caitlin S.
Tenison1, Natalie S. Dailey1, David M. Schnyer1; 1University of Texas,
Psychology, Austin — Moderate sleep deprivation (SD) is generally thought
to have the greatest impact on high-level cognitive functioning. Here we
show that SD can also affect relatively early-stage selective attention.
Twenty three human subjects performed modified Attentional Network
Tasks (ANTs) that used exogenously and endogenously cued letter target
stimuli to index brain networks underlying orienting attentional functions.
Event related potentials (ERPs) were recorded as subjects performed the
ANTs on 2 days separated by 24 - 36 hours of total sleeplessness. Typical
orienting effects were found on each day for both endogenous and exogenous tasks. Reaction times (RTs) to correctly categorize targets were significantly shorter for Spatial Cue trials (targets preceded by a 100% predictive
cue) vs. Neutral Cue trials (targets preceded by a non-predictive cue) and
Spatial Cue vs. No Cue trials. Additionally, the posterior N1 component of
the ERP was enhanced, and the P3 component diminished, for Spatial vs.
Neutral/No Cue trials. Sleep deprivation led to slowed RTs in both tasks.
Nevertheless, this RT slowing was greater for the endogenous ANT, which
exhibited faster RTs than the exogenous ANT during the fresh condition,
but not during the fatigued condition. Furthermore, SD affected ERPs in
the endogenous ANT only. The N1 was diminished and P3 enhanced in
response to endogenously cued targets during fatigued vs. fresh conditions. Additionally, the N1 response to endogenous cue stimuli was also
diminished with SD. These findings suggest that endogenously directed
attention is differentially affected by as little as 24 hours of SD.
F5
IMPAIRED EARLY VISUAL PROCESSING IS ASSOCIATED WITH
HIGH DISTRACTIBILITY IN CHILDREN WITH ADHD Risa
Sawaki1,2,3, Sharon Coffey-Corina1, Juníichi Katayama2, Blythe Corbett1, George
Mangun1; 1University of California, Davis, 2Hokkaido University, 3Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science — Attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder
(ADHD) is thought to involve high distractibility. However, it is still
unclear whether high distractibility in children with ADHD is due to
impaired cognitive control at late stages of processing, or rather it stems
from impaired early sensory processing. We recorded event-related brain
potentials from ADHD and typically developing children while they performed a simple visual discrimination task in which target or non-target
stimuli were serially presented at a central location. Participants were
asked to respond to target stimuli and ignore infrequent deviation. In the
change condition, task-irrelevant features of central stimuli were infrequently changed. In the appearance condition, distractors infrequently
appeared around central stimuli. Compared to typically developing children, ADHD children showed a smaller P1 for all stimuli in both conditions. Furthermore, although typically developing children did not show
significant differences in P3 between change and appearance deviations,
ADHD children showed a larger P3 for appearance deviation than for
change deviation. The P1 response reflects an early stage of visual processing in visual cortex and its amplitude can be affected by spatial attention,
while the P3 response reflects a later stage of attentional allocation. These
findings suggest that children with ADHD have reductions (perhaps perceptual or attentional) in early visual processing, which are associated
with high distractibility by salient deviations. One interpretation could be
that the reduced P1 reflects their difficulty in focusing spatial attention on

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

157

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

the to-be-attended zone of visual space, which then permits irrelevant
stimuli to induce greater distraction.
F6
CONTROL OF A SMART HOME WITH A BRAIN-COMPUTER
INTERFACE Christoph Guger1, Clemens Holzner1, Günter Edlinger1, Chris
Groenegress2, Mel Slater2; 1g.tec medical engineering GmbH/Guger
Technologies OEG, Austria, 2Centre de Realitat Virtual, Universitat Politècnia
de Catalunya, Spain — An EEG based Brain-Computer Interface (BCI)
measures and analyzes the electrical brain activity (EEG) in order to control external devices. Such a BCI system can be controlled e.g. by the P300
EEG response. Therefore different characters are arranged on a computer
screen and are highlighted in a random order. If the subject is focused on
one specific character that is flashing up the P300 response is induced and
the BCI system is able to recognize this response and therefore the character. The P300 based BCI system was connected to a Virtual Reality system and three subjects participated in the experiment. The virtual 3D
representation of the smart home had different control elements (TV,
music, windows, heating system, phone,...) and allowed the subjects to
move through the apartment. Therefore special control masks (arrangement of specific icons on the screen) for the BCI system were developed
containing all the different commands. The experiment for the P300
smart home control was divided into 3 parts with 15, 11 and 16 decisions
respectively. One task was e.g. to go to the living room, to switch on the
TV and to select a specific channel, ... The three subjects achieved an accuracy between 83 and 100 % depending on the control mask. The experiment yielded 2 important new facts: (i) instead of displaying characters
and numbers to the subject also different icons can be used, (ii) the BCI
system must not be trained on each individual character. Funded by EU
project PRESENCCIA.
F7
SUPPRESSION OF TASK IRRELEVANT INFORMATION AS
MECHANISM OF TASK SET INDUCED ATTENTIONAL
CONTROL IN THE STROOP TASK Sascha Purmann1,2, Christian J.
Fiebach1,2, Mark D.Esposito1; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute and
Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, 2University of Heidelberg,
Psychology, Neurology, and Neuroradiology — Using fMRI, we examined
the neural mechanisms of goal-directed, task-set induced top-down control of information processing. We had participants perform a color-word
Stroop task under two task sets, i.e., color naming in some task blocks vs.
word naming in others, using identical stimuli in both tasks. Consistent
with the literature, we found increased activity in a fronto-parietal network comprising the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), and parietal cortex,
when contrasting color naming with the less demanding word naming
blocks. Most importantly with respect to task-set induced top-down control, we found decreased activity for word relative to color naming in
color area V4, and decreased activity for color relative to word naming in
the visual word form area (VWFA), suggesting that implementation of
task sets involves the sustained suppression of task-irrelevant sensory
representations. Additionally, in a connectivity analysis the right IFG, left
DLPFC, and left superior lateral occipital cortex (LOC) showed a negative
correlation with VWFA. In contrast, the right supramarginal gyrus and
left inferior LOC showed such a relationship with V4.
F8
THE ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNATURE OF PHOSPHENE
PERCEPTION: COMBINED ONLINE TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC
STIMULATION AND EVENT RELATED POTENTIAL EVIDENCE
Paul Taylor1,2, Vincent Walsh2, Martin Eimer1; 1School of Psychology, Birkbeck
College, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience and Psychology, University
College London — We present electrophysiological evidence of trial-bytrial changes in the sensitivity of human primary visual cortex and of its
causal role in visual perception. Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)
was applied to the right primary visual cortex of 12 participants so that
they perceived phosphenes (brief flashes of light). Participants reported

158

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

whether phosphenes were present or absent with a manual button press.
By stimulating at the phosphene threshold intensity, phosphenes were
reported as present or absent on approximately equal numbers of trials.
We simultaneously recorded the event related potentials (ERPs) evoked
by each TMS pulse. Comparing the ERPs on trials where participants did
or did not see phosphenes (’phosphene-present’ or ’phosphene-absent’
trials) revealed statistically significant differences reflecting changes in
underlying visual cortical activity. The ERP elicited by the phosphene the ’phosphene-related potential’ - showed positive deflections on phosphene-present compared to phosphene-absent trials starting from 160ms
after the TMS pulse. This positive shift was present earlier or more
strongly in parieto-occipital cortex in the stimulated hemisphere than in
the left hemisphere or in frontal cortex. The position of the TMS coil was
confirmed using stereotactic registration to each participant’s magnetic
resonance imaging structural scan. The phosphene-related potential was
also clearly distinguishable from the ERP produced after TMS to a control
site in more dorsal parietal cortex when phosphenes were not perceived,
and to that on trials without any TMS. This phosphene-related potential
offers an index of visual cortical sensitivity that can be used as a tool in
future studies of cortical interactions and attention.
F9
SPATIAL SELECTION OF VISUAL REPRESENTATIONS IN
PERCEPTION AND WORKING MEMORY: EVIDENCE FROM
LATERALISED POSTERIOR EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS
COMPONENTS Silvia Dalvit1, Martin Eimer1; 1School of Psychology,
Birkbeck College, University of London — Selective attention can be allocated to sensory representation of currently present visual stimuli, and to
representations of previously seen stimuli in visual working memory
(Awh et al, 2006). Event Related Potentials (ERPs) were used to contrast
the attentional selection of representations in perception and in working
memory. The N2pc and SPCN components were measured as indicators
of allocating attention to perceptual and working memory representations, respectively. In a temporal integration task, participants were
asked to combine information from temporally separated visual displays.
In both displays, two semicircles, whose orientation was randomly
selected, were presented in the left and right visual hemifield. The interval separating both displays varied between 0 ms and 900 ms. The task
was to detect the location where the combination of the two successive
semicircles resulted in a complete circle. We observed the expected Ushaped pattern with high accuracy in the shortest and longest intervals
and low accuracy with intermediate intervals. The N2pc was most prominent for the shortest interval, and the SPCN was present for longer intervals. Lateralised posterior ERP components were smallest for
intermediate intervals where performance was poor. These results suggest that the allocation of attention to perceptual representations and to
visual working memory representation can be dissociated with ERP measures.
F10
A HIGH-LOADED HEMISPHERE SUCCESSIVELY IGNORES
DISTRACTORS Ritsuko Nishimura1, Kei Kuratomi2, Kazuhito Yoshizaki2;
1Japan Society for the Promotion of Science / Aichi Shukutoku University,
2
Aichi Shukutoku University — We investigated whether a distractor that
is presented to high-loaded visual-field/hemisphere (high-loaded hemisphere condition) is rejected more effectively, using a response competition paradigm. This question is motivated by both the findings derived
from the studies on interhemispheric interaction which suggested two
hemispheres have a separate resource and works in parallel (e.g., Banich,
1998; Friedman & Polson, 1981) and load theory of selective attention
(Lavie, 2005). Our previous study (Nishimura et al., 2008, CNS) demonstrated that a distractor under high-loaded hemisphere condition is
rejected more effectively. However, there was a procedural shortcoming
which allows for an alternative explanation of the finding. The present
study retested this finding with an improved paradigm. We asked righthanded participants to identify a target among a briefly presented set of

Poster Session F

five task-relevant letters and three noises (non alphabets), while ignoring
a peripheral distractor. We presented one task-relevant stimulus and
three noises in one visual-filed (low-loaded visual-field), and the remaining four task-relevant letters in the opposite visual-field (high-loaded
visual-field). We manipulated the visual-field where a distractor was presented (low-loaded versus high-loaded visual-field), as well as compatibility of target and distractor. In the low-loaded visual-field condition, a
distractor was presented in the low-loaded visual-field, whereas the
high-loaded visual-field condition, it was presented in the high-loaded
visual-field. We found a compatibility effect in the low-loaded visualfield condition, but not in the high-loaded visual-field condition. These
results supported our previous findings, suggesting that the distractor is
processed in the low-loaded hemisphere, in which more processing
resources are typically available.
F11
EFFECTS OF EXOGENOUS ATTENTION ON CONSCIOUS
DETECTION AND PERCEPTUAL DISCRIMINATION Ana Chica1,2,
Juan Lupianez3, Stefano Lasaponara4, Fabrizio Doricchi4, Paolo Bartolomeo1,2;
1
INSERM-UPMC UMR, Paris, France, 2Hopital de la Salpetriere, Paris,
France, 3University of Granada, Spain, 4Università degli Studi di Roma —
Introspection suggests that when we attend to an object we become conscious of it. However, recent evidence suggests that at least endogenous
attention is independent of conscious perception (Koch & Tsuchiya,
2007). Nevertheless, neuropsychological evidence suggests that exogenous attention might instead be crucial for conscious perception. Neglect
patients do not consciously perceive information contralateral to their
lesion; exogenous attention is biased in these patients, with a relative
sparing of endogenous attention (Bartolomeo & Chokron, 2002). In the
present research we explored the relationship between exogenous attention and conscious perception in neurologically intact observers. A noninformative peripheral cue precedes a target (a gabor stimulus oriented
to either the left or right) that was not consciously perceived in a proportion of trials. Participants were asked to first discriminate the orientation
of the gabor, or to give their best guess if they did not see it (discrimination response); and then to indicate whether they saw or not the gabor
(awareness response). Discrimination accuracy and conscious detections
were greater for cued than for uncued targets. Thus, exogenous attention
enhanced perceptual discrimination and also increased the probability of
consciously detecting the stimulus. However, there was no interaction
between the two effects, suggesting that exogenous attention improved
discrimination responses and consciousness independently: More targets
were correctly discriminated when exogenously attended, no matter
whether they were consciously detected or not. Our data support the role
of exogenous attention in perceptual discrimination and demonstrate
that unlike endogenous orienting, exogenous attention might be crucial
for conscious perception.
F12
ATTENTION SHIFT TO A TASK-IRRELEVANT FACE IS
INHIBITED BY PRESENTING AN ADDITIONAL FACE: AN ERP
STUDY Kanghee Lee1, Yang Seok Cho1, Hyun Taek Kim1; 1Korea
University, Psychology, Seoul, Korea — The interference effect caused by a
task-irrelevant face distractor is decreased simply by adding a face, but
not an object. To see the role of attention shift in this dilution effect, we
used event-related potentials (ERPs). Subjects were asked to categorize
the occupation of a presented famous name (target) while ignoring a distractor, which was a face of an individual person from the same occupational category of the target (congruent) or another occupational category
(incongruent). A face distractor was presented alone, or it was presented
with an anonymous face in Experiment 1 or a scene of house in Experiment 2. N2pc, the component that is related to attention shift, was measured at contralateral electrode site (T5 or T6) to a distractor face. The
behavioral data showed a decreased interference effect, which was not
significant, when the anonymous face was presented with the name and
the face distractor. For the ERP data, when the famous face and the name

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

were presented without an anonymous face or a house scene, N2pc
appeared with a more positive peak followed by a sharp negative peak.
The change of N2pc indicated that the distractor captured attention.
When a house scene appeared with them, a delayed positive change with
no negative rebound was observed. When an anonymous face appeared,
however, N2pc was not observed. These results imply that the presence
of the anonymous face inhibits attention shift to the distractor face indicated by a diminished N2pc, causing a decreased interference effect.
F13
ERP
CORRELATES
OF
ENHANCED
VISUO-SPATIAL
ATTENTION
ALLOCATION
UNDER
DIFFICULT
TASK
DEMANDS Stefanie Kehrer1,2, Stefan P. Koch1, Antje Kraft1, Kerstin
Irlbacher1, Herbert Hagendorf2, Norbert Kathmann2, Stephan A. Brandt1;
1Charité, Neurology, Berlin, 2Humboldt University, Institute of Psychology,
Berlin — Recent studies provide evidence that more difficult target selection lead to stronger attentional top-down control thereby reducing arising conflicts (Lavie & Fox, 2000; Kehrer et al., in press). In order to test
this assumption we combined the location negative-priming (NP) paradigm with a probe-technique (Kim & Cave 1999). Selection difficulty was
manipulated by comparing an easy and a difficult discrimination task.
The probe stimulus appeared in one of four possible stimulus locations in
half of the trials. It was equally distributed on a previous distractor (DT),
target (TT) or blank (BT) prime location. Subjects (N=52) had to detect the
probe stimulus by pressing a foot-pedal. Event-related potentials (ERP)
were recorded from 64 electrodes. A significantly delayed reaction time
(RT) for NP- as compared to control-trials, i.e. NP-effect, was only evident in the easy task. Further, we found generally faster detection rates
for probe stimuli in the difficult than in the easy task, indicating stronger
attention allocation. For probe locations RTs were faster in TT followed
by BT and DT in both tasks. ERP-analysis revealed a reduced frontal P2component for the difficult compared to the easy task. The N2pc, an
index for attentional allocation, was differentially modulated by probe
conditions with reduced amplitudes for DT compared to TT and BT. In
sum, these findings are consistent with our theory that increasing task
demands lead to stronger top-down control, thus reducing conflicts in
visuo-spatial attention.
F14
ATTENTION ENHANCES THE NEURAL PROCESSING OF
RELEVANT FEATURES AND SUPPRESSES THE PROCESSING OF
IRRELEVANT FEATURES IN HUMANS: AN FMRI STUDY OF THE
STROOP TASK Thad Polk1,2, Robert Drake2, John Jonides1,2, Mason
Smith1, Edward Smith3; 1University of Michigan, Psychology, 2University of
Michigan, Neuroscience Program, 3Columbia University, Psychology — We
present a functional MRI experiment investigating the neural basis of feature-based attention in humans using the Stroop task. Cortical areas specifically involved in color processing and word reading were first
identified in individual participants using independent tests. These areas
were then probed during the Stroop task (in which participants must
selectively attend to the font color of a word while ignoring the word
itself). We found that activation in functionally-defined color areas
increased during the task relative to a neutral color-naming task while
activation in functionally-defined word areas decreased. These results
are consistent with a biased competition model of feature-based attention
in which the processing of attended features is enhanced and the processing of ignored features is suppressed. (This work was supported by NIH
Grant R01-MH60655-01A1 and by the National Science Foundation.)
F15
SENSORY CONSEQUENCES OF DIRECTING ATTENTION AND
ACTION TO OPPOSITE LOCATIONS Elena Gherri1, Martin Eimer1;
1School of Psychology, Birkbeck College, University of London — Previous
event-related-potential studies have demonstrated that preparing an
action at a specific location selectively enhances the processing of visual
stimuli at that location, as demonstrated by enhanced N1 components to
visual probes presented close to the hand involved in a currently pre-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

159

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

pared response. These effects were similar to those previously found
observed as a result of covert spatial attention, suggesting that attention
and action both result in spatially selective modulations of visual processing. If this is the case, the attentional processing of visual stimuli on
one side should be less efficient when participants simultaneously prepare an action directed to the opposite side. To test this prediction, we
cued participants to shift their attention to the left or right side, and to
simultaneously prepare to lift the index finger of their left or right hand.
Imperative stimuli were either a central Go signal, requiring execution of
the prepared manual response, or a peripheral visual stimulus, which
required a visual target-nontarget discrimination only when presented
on the cued side. An enhanced N1 was elicited by visual non-target stimuli on the task-relevant attended side only when attention and action
were directed to the same side. In contrast, no such attentional N1 modulation emerged when they were directed to opposite locations. These
results demonstrate that selecting a visual stimulus on one side is less
efficient when simultaneously preparing an action on the opposite side,
and thus supports the hypothesis that shared mechanisms are involved
in the control of attention and action.
F16
GENDER DIFFERENCES IN ATTENTION TO SOCIAL AND NONSOCIAL STIMULI: AN ERP STUDY Anna Kresse1, Yenchen Chang1,
Heather Ford1, Nga Nguyen1, Kelly Snyder1; 1University of Denver,
Psychology, — Young infants exhibit gender differences in attention to
social and non-social stimuli (e.g., faces vs. mechanical mobiles). Specifically, females attend more to social than non-social stimuli, whereas
males show the opposite effect (Luchmaya & Baron-Cohen, 2002; Connellan, Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, Batki, & Ahluwalia, 2000). Previous
work in our lab found that 6-month-old females, but not males, showed
better long-term memory for social stimuli (i.e., objects with faces such as
people, pets, stuffed animals, etc.) compared to non-social stimuli (e.g.,
objects without faces such as furniture, toy cars, etc.). One possible explanation for these gender differences in memory is that they result from differences in attention at encoding, where greater attention toward one
class of stimuli (e.g., people) results in deeper encoding and thus better
memory for those stimuli. In the present study, we used high-density
electrophysiology to examine gender differences in attention to, and
memory for, social and non-social stimuli. Six-month old infants viewed
25 pictures of unfamiliar people and 25 pictures of unfamiliar cars, each
presented twice in immediate succession, while event-related potentials
(ERP) were collected. Preliminary analyses indicate that females exhibit
larger (i.e., more negative) amplitudes of a mid-latency negative component (Nc) thought to index attention in response to people (M = -18.8 uV)
compared to cars (M = -11.5 uV), whereas males show no difference in Nc
amplitude to people and cars. This pattern of findings suggests that
females direct more attention toward social than non-social stimuli, consistent with the findings from previous behavioral work.
F17
VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL LINE LENGTH COMPARISON IN
LEFT NEGLECT Pom Charras1,2, Paolo Bartolomeo2, Juan Lupiáñez1;
1University of Granada, 2INSERM 610 - Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière — Patients
with left unilateral neglect usually show a rightward bias when bisecting
horizontal lines. This effect has been accounted for by postulating a distortion of spatial coordinates with a progressive enlargement from the
right to the left (Bisiach et al, 1996). However, Urbanski et al (2008) have
demonstrated that the rightward bias was decreased or even nullified by
having patients explore lines from the left endpoint. Their results support
a biased competition account, according to which an attentional orienting
dysfunction due to a lesion of a right parietal-frontal network emphasizes
the right part of the horizontal line, so that it would be overestimated in
comparison to its left counterpart. In this study, we explored another
aspect of left-right competition, involving horizontal and vertical lines.
We asked patients with left neglect to draw a horizontal segment having
the same length of a vertical segment. Horizontal lines had to be drawn

160

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

either on the left or right of the sample vertical line. Results showed that
horizontal lines were drawn as longer when on the left side (as in a
reversed L), as compared to when they had to be drawn on the right side
of the sample (as in a canonical L). This result suggests that the sample
line was overestimated when presented on the right and underestimated
when presented on the left, and thus extends the findings by Urbanski et
al, by showing that even vertical lines may participate to the left-right
competition resulting in biased line estimation in neglect.
F18
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FRONTAL EYE FIELD
SELECTIVITY AND REACTION TIME IN CORRECT AND ERRANT
BEHAVIOR Richard Heitz1,2,3, Jeremiah Cohen1,2,3, Geoff Woodman1,2,3,
Jeffrey Schall1,2,3; 1School of Psychology, 2Vanderbilt Vision Research Center,
3Center for Integrative and Cognitive Neuroscience — Research suggests that
neurons in the frontal eye field (FEF) are part of a frontal network that
integrates sensory evidence and discriminates contextually relevant targets. Using a neuron-antineuron approach, we have studied this using
Target Discrimination Time (TDT): the moment target-related neural
activity becomes significantly larger than distractor-related neural activity. Recent work shows that variance in TDT is related to task difficulty,
providing a mechanism for related delays in behavioral reaction times.
The current work extends these findings in two routes. First, we examined how TDT relates to set size in a T/L visual search task. Second, we
looked at TDT during error trials. Our results provide contrasting support for current theory regarding the nature of FEF. On the one hand,
neuron TDT is delayed as set size increases; in accord with current thinking and extant data, this supports the viewpoint that FEF is directly
involved in target selection and decision processing. Likewise, TDT on
error trials is earlier than TDT on correct trials, mimicking the behavioral
effects. In opposition to this, neural activity for most neurons on error trials tended to select the saccade endpoint rather than the target itself
(Thompson et al., 2005). Evidence for two other neuron types were also
observed: a small proportion of cells continued to select the target on
error trials, and another small proportion initially selected the target,
only to represent the saccade endpoint a short while later.
F19
A SINGLE CLASSIFIER PREDICTS THE DIRECTION OF SPATIAL
ATTENTION,
WORKING
MEMORY,
AND
MOTOR
INTENTIONS Clayton Curtis1, Adam Riggall1; 1New York University,
Psychology & Neural Science — We recently demonstrated that neural
activity in the same frontal and parietal cortical areas persists when
humans 1) maintain a location in working memory, 2) covertly maintain
attention peripherally, and 3) maintain a spatially directed motor intention. We concluded that spatial working memory, attention, and intentions share a common neural mechanism that is implemented in these
areas. To further test these conclusions, here, we use multivoxel pattern
classification of fMRI data to test two hypotheses. First, we can predict
the location of a working memory representation, the direction of covert
attention, and the target of a motor intention based on the multivariate
pattern of delay period activity. Indeed, we find that frontal and parietal
cortex activity can correctly classify whether subjects are remembering,
attending, and planning a movement to the right or left hemifields. Second, we show that the classifiers generalize across tasks. We trained classifiers on one task (e.g., working memory) and tested its predictive
validity on the other tasks (e.g., spatial attention and motor intention).
Remarkably, despite that subjects were performing a different task, we
observe robust cross-task classification. A classifier trained to discriminate the position of a working memory representation can predict the
direction of one’s attention and the goal of one’s motor intentions. These
results suggest that the information contained within these areas during
delay periods is not dependent on working memory, attention, or intentions. Instead, it argues that these areas implement a common mechanism that supports a variety of spatial cognitions.

Poster Session F

F20
SELECTION IN ENUMERATION: NEURAL EVIDENCE OF
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THE SELECTION OF MULTIPLE
ITEMS Trafton Drew1, Jason Fair1, Edward K. Vogel1; 1University of
Oregon — How many objects can be simultaneously selected at once?
While there is an enormous literature devoted to understanding search
for one target amongst distractors, there is a relative paucity of research
on selecting multiple targets. Certainly, there must be an upper limit on
the number of objects than can be simultaneously selected, but it is not
currently clear what this limit is. When asked to judge the number of
items, there is behavioral evidence that people can select between 3 and 4
items in parallel and generally have to count additional items in serial.
Our lab has developed a procedure that allows us generate an electrophysiological index of the number of items that a subject selects. Previously, this index has indicated that individual differences in the initial
selection phase of the multiple object tracking task strongly predict tracking ability (Drew & Vogel, Journal of Neuroscience 2008). In the current
set of studies, we extended this finding by showing that when subjects
are simply asked to count the number of targets, this electrophysiological
index of selection (the N2pc) once again reflects individual differences in
the ability to select multiple items. Furthermore when subjects are asked
to count the number of targets, this index increases from one to three targets and asymptotes between three to five items.
F21
EVIDENCE FOR A HIGH-THRESHOLD CAPACITY LIMIT IN
VISUAL PERCEPTION Edward Ester1, Keisuke Fukuda1, Edward Awh1;
1University of Oregon, Psychology — Recent research has suggested that
capacity in working memory (WM) is best described by a high threshold
model, in which some information is available for a discrete number of
items, while zero information is retained regarding items that exceed this
"slot limit" (e.g., Rouder et al., 2008; Zhang and Luck, 2008). Alternatively, signal detection models suggest that WM is supported by a pool of
resources that can be flexibly allocated across much larger numbers of
items, with declining resolution as the number of stored items increases.
The goal of the present research was to examine which of these models
best describes performance in an encoding-limited procedure that
required memory for only a single item. Subjects in our study were
required to monitor multiple locations in a masked visual display with
the goal of discriminating the orientation of a lone target amongst distractors. Performance in this task was well described by a high-threshold
model, suggesting that subjects could simultaneously monitor a small
number of locations, while encoding no information from others. Moreover, individual capacity estimates from this task were strongly correlated with a separate measure of working memory capacity for the same
kinds of stimuli. These data suggest that both perceptual encoding and
storage in working memory depend upon a common high-threshold system that allows monitoring or storage of a highly-limited, discrete set of
positions or items.
F22
AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY OF THE EFFECT OF
INVOLUNTARY SPATIAL ATTENTION ON RESPONSESELECTION RELATED PROCESSES David Prime1, Pierre Jolicoeur1;
1University of Montreal — There has recently been renewed interest and
controversy regarding the effect of involuntary attention on target processing. In the present study we utilized event-related potentials (ERPs)
to investigate the effect of involuntary attention on response-selection
related processes. In a visual cue-target experiment with a short cue-target stimulus-onset asynchrony (SOA) participants were required to make
speeded responses to frequent Go-targets and to withhold responses
from infrequent NoGo-targets. In addition to the typical effect of involuntary attention on response time, we found that cue validity affected the
latency of the fronto-central ERP peaks related to response-selection and
executive control. The peak latencies of the fronto-central P2, N2, and P3
peaks elicited on NoGo trials were delayed when the target was pre-

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

sented at an uncued location relative to when the target was presented at
a cued location. However, cue-validity did not effect the amplitude of
either the P2 or N2 component. In contrast, Prime and Jolicoeur (in press)
found that the inhibition of return (IOR) effect found at long cue-target
SOAs was associated with a large increase in N2 amplitude for targets
presented at uncued locations relative to targets presented at a cued locations. The present results indicate that involuntary attentional can facilitate the speed of post perceptual processing starting at a latency of
approximately 200 ms. Furthermore, these results combined with the
results of Prime & Jolicoeur (in press) indicate that involuntary attention
and IOR have different effects on post perceptual processes.
F23
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL SHIFTS IN ATTENTION USING VALID
AND INVALID PERIPHERAL CUES Nikki Pratt1,2, Dennis Molfese3;
1Psychological & Brain Sciences, University of Louisville, 2VA Northern
California Health Care System, Martinez, CA, 3Birth Defects Center,
University of Louisville — Electrophysiological responses (P1, N1) were
analyzed to track the neural underpinnings associated with voluntary
and involuntary attention. The task consisted of a modified Posner attention paradigm that used valid and invalid cues to elicit effortful or automatic orientation. The P1 (80 to 120 ms) and N1 (120 to 170 ms) were
analyzed with respect to valid and invalid cues in the two attention orientation conditions. The results indicated that the P1 response was associated with activity in the lingual gyrus and was greater to targets that
appeared in the voluntary attention compared to targets in the involuntary attention condition. This finding extends previous research by
Doallo et al. (2004) that reported peripheral cues in a voluntary attention
task decreases the amplitude of the P1 when valid targets are presented.
On the other hand, the N1 response, located within the inferior parietal
and medial temporal gyrus, was larger to invalid targets compared to
valid targets. This suggests that the N1 reflects attention shifts from the
incorrect cue location to a location where the target is presented. Both
electrophysiological findings indicate that early attention processes are
sensitive to effortful and automatic shifts in attention orientation using
only peripheral cues.
F24
VISUAL VIGILANCE TRAINING ENHANCES HEMISPHERIC
ASYMMETRIES IN GLOBAL AND LOCAL PROCESSING Albert K.
Hoang Duc1, Thomas Van Vleet1,2; 1University of California, Berkeley,
2Veterans Affairs, Martinez — Studies of neurologically impaired patients
have shown right hemisphere (RH) dominance for global processing and
left hemisphere (LH) dominance for local processing. Likewise, studies of
event-related potentials in healthy subjects have revealed right parietal
and left temporal activity with attention shifts to global and local forms,
respectively. In addition to global processing specialization, neuroimaging studies point to the crucial role of RH in vigilance and sustained
attention. Here we show that a short visual vigilance training (VVT) task
significantly enhances hemispheric asymmetry in global/local processing. Healthy subjects are asked to identify the global and local aspects of
compound stimuli, pre- and post-VVT. Training consists of performing a
discrimination task in which subjects withhold response to an infrequent
target, but respond to all non-target scene pictures. In a control experiment, the VVT task is substituted with a change blindness task containing
similar scene pictures. Following VVT, subjects demonstrate dramatic
reduction of local and an increase of global interferences while attending
to global and local forms, respectively. On the other hand, change blindness task does not produce any similar effects. Given evidence supporting hemispheric asymmetries in vigilance, targeting this attention
domain exclusively may have provided more focuses activation of the
RH. Indeed, the detection of low frequency events has been proven to
modulate right neuronal network. Since restoring the balance between
RH and LH is critical to cognitive recovery, our findings pave the way for
developing novel rehabilitation protocols to reduce cognitive disorders
associated with RH lesions, such as unilateral spatial neglect.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

161

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

F25
AN EVENT RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY OF INHIBITION OF
RETURN IN YOUNGER AND OLDER ADULTS Nora
Gayzur1,2,
1,2
1,2
1,2
Stephanie Simon-Dack , Alyson Saville , Linda Langley , Wolfgang TederSalejarvi1,2; 1North Dakota State University, 2Center for Visual Neuroscience,
Psychology — The purpose of this study was to examine age differences in
inhibition of return (IOR) using event related potentials (ERPs). IOR has
been defined as a delayed return of attention to a previously searched
location and is indexed by a slowed response on Posner’s spatial cuing
paradigm to a valid location compared to an invalid location. The time
course of IOR is altered with age, with IOR developing at longer cue-target intervals for older adults as compared to younger adults. In this
experiment, younger (18-35 years) and older adults (55 years and older)
were tested using a single-cue paradigm (cue-target interval: 425ms625ms). Reaction time (RT) analysis revealed that younger adults showed
IOR response patterns, but older adults did not. Consistent with previous
research, younger adults showed a P2 reduction for valid trials, thought
to reflect an inhibition of attention to the searched location. Younger
adults showed a P2 for invalid trials, but older adults did not. P3 differences were found, with older adults having larger P3 amplitudes to
invalid trials, and younger adults having larger P3 amplitudes to the
valid trials. The P3 patterns may reflect age differences in expectations for
valid and invalid targets. Validity differences in the P2 and P3 effects
may reflect attentional processing in two populations showing different
IOR response patterns.

Higher level cognition: Disorders
F26
MINDBLINDNESS IN RELATION TO ONESELF:
NEURAL
RESPONSE TO SELF-REFLECTIVE MENTALIZING IN AUTISM
AND NEUROTYPICAL ADULTS Michael
Lombardo1,
Bhismadev
Chakrabarti1, Ed Bullmore2, Susan Sadek1, Greg Pasco1, Sally Wheelwright1,
John Suckling2, Simon Baron-Cohen1, MRC AIMS Consortium3; 1Autism
Research Centre, University of Cambridge, 2Brain Mapping Unit, University of
Cambridge, 3Institute of Psychiatry, Kings College London; University of
Cambridge; University of Oxford — "Mindblindness" is a term used to characterize the impairments in understanding mental states by individuals
with autism spectrum conditions (ASC). Most research however, has
tested mindblindness in relation to other's minds. More recently, work
has begun to focus on the self-referential cognitive difficulties in ASC.
With fMRI, we assessed adults with and without a diagnosis of ASC for
differences in the neural systems engaged during reflective mentalizing
or physical representations about the self or others. Reflective mentalizing deficits were apparent in mentalizing/simulation circuits consisting
of posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS) and secondary somatosensory cortex (SII). Ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vMPFC) was less active
in ASC during self-reflection. Specific deficits for self-mentalizing were
observed in middle cingulate cortex (MCC). Variability in dorsomedial
prefrontal cortex (dMPFC) differentially predicted the degree of
alexithymia and autistic traits depending on diagnostic status. Neurotypical individuals activated dMPFC more with increasing alexithymia
and autistic traits while individuals with ASC activated dMPFC less with
increasing alexithymia and autistic traits. Thus, mindblindness in ASC
occurs across a distributed neural network implicated across various circuits for social cognition. Understanding the abnormal organization or
interactions between this distributed neural system may shed light on the
mechanisms underlying the social impairments in ASC.
F27
NON-VERBAL AUDITORY COGNITION IN PATIENTS WITH
EPILEPSY BEFORE AND AFTER UNILATERAL ANTERIOR
TEMPORAL LOBECTOMY Aurelie Bidet-Caulet1, Xiaoli Ye2, Patrick
Bouchet1, Marc Guénot3, Catherine Fischer1,2, Olivier Bertrand1; 1INSERM,

162

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

U821, Lyon, France; University Lyon 1, Lyon, France, 2Neurological Hospital,
Functional Neurology and Epileptology, Lyon, France, 3Neurological Hospital,
Neurosurgery, Lyon, France — For patients with pharmaco-resistant temporal epilepsy, unilateral anterior temporal lobectomy (ATL) - i.e. the
surgical resection of the hippocampus, the amygdala, the temporal pole
and the anterior part of the temporal gyri - is an efficient treatment. There
are growing evidence that anterior regions of the temporal lobe are
involved in the integration and short-term memorization of object-related
sound properties. However, non-verbal auditory processing in patients
with temporal epilepsy has raised little attention. To assess non-verbal
auditory cognition in patients with temporal epilepsy both before and
after unilateral ATL, we developed a set of non-verbal auditory tests,
including environmental sounds. Auditory semantic identification,
acoustic and object-related memory, and sound extraction from a sound
mixture were evaluated. We compared the performances of 26 patients
with temporal epilepsy before and/or after ATL to those of 18 healthy
subjects. Epileptic patients before or after ATL showed similar deficits in
pitch retention, and in identification and memorisation of environmental
sounds, whereas not being impaired in basic acoustic processing. Furthermore, the more the resection was encompassing the superior temporal gyrus, the more patients were impaired in pitch retention of pure
tones. It is most likely that the deficits we observed after ATL reflect
removal of already dysfunctioning tissue in the anterior temporal regions
because of the epileptic neuropathological manifestations (epileptic
spikes and/or atrophy). Therefore, in patients with drug-resistant temporal epilepsy, ATL significantly improves seizure control without producing additional auditory deficits.
F28
BRAIN ACTIVITY PRECEDING INHIBITORY ERRORS IN
CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT ATTENTION DEFICIT/
HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER Tess Nelson1, Roma Vasa1,2, Eunice
Awuah1, Stewart Mostofsky1,2; 1Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD,
2Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is characterized by deficits in response inhibition, increased reaction time variability, and decreased neural activity
during response inhibition tasks such as the Go/No-go task. No studies,
however, have examined whether a specific pattern of brain activity precedes inhibitory errors in children with ADHD. Evidence in healthy
adults indicates that increased default mode network activity predicts
errors, which suggests that momentary lapses of attention are related to
subsequent error commission. In this study, event-related fMRI and a
Go/No-go paradigm were used to explore whether this same neural circuit precedes error trials in children with and without ADHD. We examined group differences in brain activity during trials prior to commission
errors compared with trials preceding correct inhibition of response in 13
children with ADHD and 17 typically developing (TD) controls. On trials
prior to errors, TD children demonstrated relatively greater activity in the
precuneus, a central region in the default mode network, compared to
children with ADHD. Children with ADHD, however, demonstrated no
such predictive activity in the precuneus or other regions of the default
mode network. These data suggest that brain activation patterns immediately preceding inhibitory errors in children with ADHD differ from
those in TD children. While TD children activate the precuneus, suggesting that momentary lapses of attention precede errors, the errors in children with ADHD may be mediated by different circuits, such as those
involved in motor response control.
F29
FIRST-EPISODE
SCHIZOPHRENIA
PATIENTS
EXHIBIT
PREFRONTAL GAMMA BAND DEFICITS DURING COGNITIVE
CONTROL Alana Firl1, Michael Minzenberg1, Andrew Watrous2, Jong
Yoon1, Daniel Ragland1, Cameron Carter1; 1University of California-Davis,
Psychiatry, Davis California, 2University of California-Davis Neuroscience
Graduate Group — Schizophrenia is characterized by deficits in cognitive
control. Schizophrenia patients have shown impairment in the gamma

Poster Session F

band (30-80Hz) during cognitive control and perceptual processing tasks.
This study examined differences between a patient group and a control
group in a cognitive control paradigm. The POP task was used to compare a high control condition with a low control condition. Data was
recorded in a shielded room using 128 channel, NSL layout Neuroscan
Quik-caps, at a 1000 Hz sampling rate. Electrode impedances were maintained below 5 kOhms. Data was later imported into EEGLAB, average
referenced, downsampled to 250 Hz, high-pass filtered at 0.5 Hz,
epoched -400 to 1700 ms with 0 ms being cue onset, and artifact rejected.
ICA was used to isolate and remove ocular artifacts, primarily blinks.
After removal of the ocular component, data was again artifact rejected at
a threshold of +/- 50 microvolts. To examine the gamma band from 30-80
Hz, data was analyzed in the time-frequency domain using a complex
Morlet wavelet with a c-value of 6. Results included main effect of group
when comparing differences between the high control condition and the
low control condition, as well as group-by-region-by-condition effects
when electrodes were parsed into clusters according to scalp topography.
Cognitive control related gamma band activity was specifically reduced
across prefrontal sites. These findings suggest that induced gamma band
deficits are present in schizophrenia patients at the first episode and
point to a possible neural mechanism underlying impaired cognitive control in the illness.
F30
PREVAILED COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT PLAYS A SIGNIFICANT
ROLE FOR MENTAL HEALTH FUNCTIONING IN MAJOR
DEPRESSIVE DISORDER - RESULTS FROM A FOLLOW UP
STUDY Guro Årdal1, Åsa Hammar1,2; 1Biological and Medical Psychology,
University of Bergen, Norway, 2Division of Psychiatry, Haukeland University
Hospital, University of Bergen, Norway — Significant evidence suggests
that depression is characterized by cognitive impairment in the acute
phase of illness, and some studies indicate that this impairment persists
despite symptom reduction. Disability in mental health functioning is
another serious feature concerning the disease, and a number of studies
suggests that Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is associated with significant disability and poorer quality of life. However, the knowledge about
the relationship between cognitive impairment and mental health functioning in MDD patients is scant. The aim of this study was to examine
the degree to which cognitive functioning, independent of mood symptoms, is related to mental health functioning in a 6 months follow up. 20
patients diagnosed with recurrent MDD and 20 healthy individually
matched controls were tested at two occasions, at inclusion and after six
months. Inclusion criterions were a Hamilton depression rating scale
score at > 18, and a history of more than 2 episodes of MDD. The test battery consisted of experimental tests measuring attention in a visual search
paradigm. Mental health functioning was measured using the SF-36
health survey. The results show that prolonged cognitive impairment,
independent of mood symptoms, is related to poor mental health functioning in MDD in a six months follow up. In conclusion, these data indicate that prolonged cognitive impairment plays an important role for
mental health functioning in MDD.
F31
DOPAMINE, DECISION MAKING AND RISK IN PARKINSON’S
DISEASE Victoria Singh-Curry1, Nico Bunzeck1, Richard Perry2, Peter
Bain2, Emrah Duzel1, Masud Husain1,2; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience
and Institute of Neurology, University College London, 2Imperial College
London — The role of dopamine in modulating decision making and risky
behaviour was investigated in patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD).
Recent studies implicate dopaminergic medication in pathological risktaking in PD, yet most patients do not develop such symptoms. We
investigated how 28 PD patients responded to novelty and their willingness to take risks, compared to healthy controls. Participants were
assessed on two versions of an oddball task, each containing 3 types of
infrequently occurring stimulus: targets, perceptually salient standards
and novels. In one version of the experiment (task N) subjects were

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

instructed to respond only to targets and novels; while in another version
(task P) responses to targets and perceptually salient standards were
required. Akinetic-rigid PD patients were significantly quicker to
respond on task N compared to task P. By contrast tremor dominant PD
patients and controls performed equally across the two tasks. Faster
responses on task N correlated with greater risk-taking behaviour on the
Iowa Gambling Task for akinetic-rigid patients only. Importantly, there
was an interaction between dose of dopaminergic medication and subgroup of PD. In tremor dominant patients higher L-dopa equivalent
doses were associated with quicker responses on task P - to perceptually
salient, non-novel stimuli. But dopaminergic dose did not correlate with
either performance measure in the akinetic-rigid group. Both patient
groups were matched in terms of motor impairment and cognitive performance. These results suggest dopaminergic modulation might have
differential effects in the two subgroups of PD patients. Moreover, novelty-seeking correlates with risk-taking behaviour but only in akineticrigid PD.
F32
AUTISM SPECTRUM TRAITS IN HEALTHY ADULTS PREDICT
CHANGES IN STRUCTURE AND BOLD RESPONSE IN SUPERIOR
TEMPORAL SULCUS Elisabeth von dem Hagen1, Lauri Nummenmaa1,2,
Rongjun Yu1, Michael Ewbank1, Andrew Calder1; 1MRC Cognition & Brain
Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, 2University of Tampere, Psychology,
Finland — Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are neurodevelopmental
disorders characterized by deficits in social interactions and communication, repetitive behaviours, and restricted interests. It has been suggested
that autism spectrum traits form a continuum which extends across typically developing individuals and individuals with ASD. Baron-Cohen et
al (2001) developed the Autism Quotient (AQ) scale as a measure of the
severity of autism spectrum traits in adults with normal intelligence.
Using the AQ scale, we wanted to determine whether these traits could
predict structural and functional differences in the typical population.
Based on Kennedy et al’s (2006) finding of abnormal deactivation patterns in resting state network regions in ASD during cognitively demanding tasks, we scanned 19 healthy volunteers using a counting stroop task
to determine the effect of autism spectrum traits on resting state deactivation in these individuals. In addition, we performed a VBM analysis of 92
healthy adults to determine whether structural differences were also predicted by individual differences in AQ. Using Kennedy et al’s (2006) task,
we found significant modulation of deactivation as a function of AQ in
posterior STS during task conditions. For the VBM analysis, individuals
with higher AQ showed a significant reduction in white matter volume
in pSTS. These results suggest that autism spectrum characteristics
within the typical population predict differences in structure and BOLD
response. Our findings have important implications for group-based
analyses of typical and ASD populations. References: Baron-Cohen S., et
al. J Aut Dev Dis 2001;31:5-17. Kennedy DP, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci
2006;103:8275-80.
F33
FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF AUDITORY LANGUAGE
PROCESSING IN CHILDREN WITH SPECIFIC LANGUAGE
IMPAIRMENT Jens Brauer1, Beate Sabisch1, Angela D. Friederici1; 1Max
Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences — Children
affected by specific language impairment (SLI) show problems with language processing in language tasks involving phonological, syntactic,
and/or semantic information. Though, they have normal nonverbal intelligence and don’t show overt neurological, physical, or emotional deficit.
We conducted a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiment on auditory sentence comprehension in children with SLI at the age
of 6. Additionally, a group of children, matched for gender, nonverbal IQ,
and handedness, served as controls. Short sentences were presented
auditorily to the children. These sentences were either correct or carried
obvious syntactic or semantic violations. While listening to the material,
children were required to evaluate the correctness of the sentences. First

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

163

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

analyses yielded the following results: Even though both groups demonstrate equivalent behavioral results in response correctness and reaction
times for the acceptability judgment task, functional activation is deviant
in the SLI group in perisylvian language areas. This group shows less
activation in inferior frontal and superior temporal cortices. While in control children functional activation of language processing is left-lateralized according to cluster size of activated regions, there is no hemispheric
language lateralization in SLI children. These preliminary results indicate a pattern of unusual functional processing of auditory language
information at the sentential level in 6-year-old children with SLI. The
observed activation pattern in SLI children converges with data reported
for adults with SLI. They are also compatible with previous data on structural abnormalities in SLI in perisylvian brain regions.
F34
PATTERNS OF NEURAL ACTIVATION IN SOCIAL ANXIETY
DISORDER Emily Dennis1, Paul Hamilton1, Jutta Joormann,2, Michael
Chen1, Ian Gotlib1; 1Stanford University, Mood and Anxiety Disorders
Laboratory, Psychology, 2University of Miami, Psychology — Social Anxiety
Disorder (SAD) is marked by a debilitating fear of social situations that is
thought to be subserved, in part, by cognitive biases toward affectively
negative information. The neural bases of these cognitive biases in SAD
have yet to be systematically explored. Participants in this functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study were women diagnosed with
SAD who had no comorbid Axis-I disorders, and women with no current
or past Axis-I disorders. As they were scanned, participants listened to
self- or other-directed statements that included positive ("you are attractive"), negative ("she is downcast"), and socially-relevant negative ("he is
embarrassed") adjectives. Preliminary results indicate that, in contrast to
the never-disordered participants, SAD participants activate the frontoparietal attention network and the anterior insula in response to negative
self-directed statements. Importantly, healthy participants activated this
same network in response to positive self- and other-directed statements,
whereas SAD individuals showed deactivation in these areas. These
results implicate a distributed neural network in affectively biased information processing in SAD and suggest that attentional biases play a key
role in the maintenance of SAD.
F35
ELUCIDATION OF SLOWED PROCESSING SPEED IN ADHD
Joshua Ewen1, Priya Xavier2, Balaji Lakshmanan1, Jeffrey Moher3, Howard
Egeth3, Martha Denckla2, Mark Mahone2; 1Kennedy Krieger Institute,
Neurology and Developmental Medicine, 2, Kennedy Krieger Institute,
Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 3Johns Hopkins University,
Psychological and Brain Sciences — Children with ADHD have slowed
response latency on most timed tasks, suggesting reduced "processing"
speed. Clinical measures of processing speed, however, do not reveal
which cognitive sub-process(es) (stimulus perception/evaluation vs.
response selection/preparation [RS/P] vs. motor execution) are slowed
in ADHD. The psychological refractory period (PRP) is an effect seen in
dual task interference paradigms. It depends on a cognitive bottleneck in
RS/P and can be used to study slowing specifically in RS/P. The paradigm consists of 2 forced-choice reaction time (RT) tasks presented in
quick succession with variable stimulus-onset asynchrony (SOA) (50, 150,
and 750msec). Elongation of RT to the second task (T2) with shorter SOAs
is thought to represent interference during RS/P. To address our
hypothesis that children with ADHD have slowing in RS, we tested 10
children (6 ADHD, 4 controls) ages 9 to 13. Children with ADHD had
slower T2 RT at all 3 SOA levels. All conditions had a large effect size
(d>0.95), but the effects were not statistically significant, given small N.
ADHD participants showed a greater PRP effect (i.e., difference in T2 RT
between short and long SOA) (d=0.99). The increased PRP effect in
ADHD subjects suggests a delay in RS/P in children with ADHD. This is
consistent with neuroimaging evidence of anomalous development of the
supplementary motor cortex, thought to be responsible for response control. These data do not exclude additional slowing in other sub-processes.

164

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

Future research will use event-related potentials in this same paradigm to
address the latter question.
F36
NEURAL CORRELATES OF VOLITIONAL SACCADE INITIATION
IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Julia Bender1, Christian Kaufmann1, Benedikt
Reuter1, Norbert Kathmann1; 1Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Psychology,
Clinical Psychology — Action control is known to be impaired in Schizophrenia patients. This is reflected in profound deficits in various volitional saccade tasks, but not in visually-guided saccades. Recent models
therefore suggest a deficit in the volitional initiation of action. The
present study aimed to identify the neural correlates of a putative saccade initiation deficit by functional magnetic resonance imaging of volitional and visually-guides saccades in 18 Schizophrenia patients and 18
healthy control subjects. The experimental design allowed the isolation of
saccadic response selection and wilful saccade initiation. Schizophrenia
patients showed altered initiation activity in the frontal eye field, the supplementary eye field and in the intraparietal sulcus, which varied with
the type of saccade initiation (volitional vs. visually-guided). The results
are discussed in the context of theories of a deficit in willed action in
Schizophrenia.
F37
DISSOCIATION OF ERROR MONITORING AND RESPONSE
INHIBITION IN COLLEGE STUDENTS WITH ATTENTIONDEFICIT/HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER Wen-Pin Chang1, William
Gavin2, Patricia Davies2; 1University of Indianapolis, 2Colorado State
University — Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) has been
recognized as a lifelong disorder. Recent studies focused their attention
to examine neurological underpinnings in adults with ADHD and found
that poor cognitive control in ADHD is associated with deficient error
monitoring and response inhibition. However, there remains a paucity of
information regarding both error monitoring and response inhibition in
college students with ADHD. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to
investigate electrophysiological indices of error monitoring and response
inhibition in college students with and without ADHD. We examined 17
control (10 males, 7 females; age= 24.02±3.68; IQ= 117.41±6.35) and 17
ADHD (10 males, 7 females; age= 23.88±3.48; IQ= 116.76±7.22) students
using a visual flanker task and a simple go/no-go task. The results for the
visual flanker task revealed that the ADHD group exhibited a smaller
mean error-related negativity (ERN) amplitude as compared to the control group, t(32) = 2.020, p = .027, but no group difference in the error positivity (Pe) amplitude. Thus, in contrast to control students, ADHD
students displayed less error detection (ERN amplitude) but comparable
response to evaluating errors (Pe). In the go/no-go task, there were no
significant differences between the two groups in the NoGo-N2 and
NoGo-P3 amplitudes. Thus, related to inhibitory control, ADHD students
displayed brain responses to inhibition of prepotent responses similar to
control students even though college students with ADHD displayed
deficits in error monitoring. Thus, brain responses in error monitoring
and response inhibition were dissociated in college students with ADHD.
F38
DEGREE OF LIMB APRAXIA RECOVERY VARIES IN ACUTE AND
CHRONIC STROKE PATIENTS WITHIN PRODUCTION AND
CONCEPTUAL DOMAINS Vessela Stamenova1,2, Eric A. Roy3,4,2,1,
Debbie Hebert5, William McIlroy3,2,1, Sandra E. Black6,2,1; 1Graduate
Department of Rehabilitation Science, University of Toronto, 2Heart and Stroke
Foundation of Ontario Centre for Stroke Recovery, 3University of Waterloo,
Kinesiology, 4University of Waterloo, Psychology, 5, University of Toronto,
Occupational Science and Occupational Therapy, 6University of Toronto,
Medicine (Neurology) — Limb apraxia is a disorder affecting performance
of gestures on verbal command (pantomime), on imitation, and/or in
tool and action recognition. We aimed to examine recovery on tasks
assessing both conceptual and production aspects of limb praxis in left
(n=19), right (n=9) and bilateral (n=1) stroke patients. Patients were
assessed longitudinally (average 3 times) on 3 conceptual (Action identi-

Poster Session F

fication, Action naming and Tool Naming) and 5 production tasks (Pantomime, Pantomime by Picture, Concurrent Imitation, Delayed Imitation
and Object Use). They were grouped as presenting with apraxia (Score<2
SDs of the controls’ mean (n=27)) or not, and as acute (1st assessment
within 3 months post stroke) or chronic (over 3 months post stroke). Hierarchical linear modeling was used to analyze the data because patients
were assessed at different intervals and had variable numbers of followups. Average performance of chronic apraxic patients was higher than
acute apraxic patients on pantomime, pantomime by picture and concurrent imitation. While all tasks, except Action Identification, showed evidence of recovery in both acute and chronic apraxia patients, a faster rate
of recovery among acute patients was observed only in the two pantomime and two imitation tasks. Chronic apraxia patients did not have
lower gains in performance than the acute apraxia patients on Object Use
and the two naming tasks; tasks that are continuously practiced in everyday life. Thus, patients may continue to improve in these tasks even at
chronic stages through the practice they engage in by performing everyday activities.
F39
NORADRENERGIC EFFECTS ON FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
IN AUTISM Ananth Narayanan1,2, Catherine White1, Sanjida Saklayen1,2,
Mary Scatudo1, Amir Abduljalil1, Petra Schmalbrock1, David Beversdorf1,2;
1The Ohio State University, 2University of Missouri — Previous experiments
have demonstrated decreased functional connectivity in subjects diagnosed with ASD when compared to controls, during language tasks.
Therefore, drugs that affect functional connectivity may be beneficial in
ASD. The noradrenergic system is upregulated in stress, which causes a
decrease in the flexibility of access to semantic networks. This impairment in the network flexibility due to stress is reversed by administration
of centrally acting ?-adrenergic antagonists. Propranolol (a central and
peripheral ?-blocker) has also shown benefit for language and social
behavior in ASD. We hypothesized that administration of propranolol
would increase functional connectivity observed during language tasks
in ASD as compared to nadolol (peripheral ?-blocker), administered to
control for effects on peripheral blood flow. Subjects with ASD and age
and IQ-matched controls without neurodevepmental diagnoses were
scanned using a Philips 3T scanner, while instructed to respond to the
pronunciation (phonological) of a word related to a cue word in a blockdesign task. Data was preprocessed and analyzed using SPM5 and the
correlation of time series was calculated and compared between drug
conditions. Administration of propranolol revealed a significant increase
in the functional connectivity between activated brain regions as compared to nadolol. Effects on heart rate and blood pressure were identical
between the two drugs. These results reveal an increase in functional
connectivity upon administration of propranolol in ASD that is not due
to peripheral blood flow effects. This may suggest an anatomical substrate for the effects of noradrenergic agents on tasks involving a network
search within the brain.
F40
IMPROVING
PREFRONTAL
CORTEX
FUNCTION
IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA
THROUGH
FOCUSED
TRAINING
OF
COGNITIVE CONTROL Bethany Edwards1, Deanna Barch1,2,3,4, Todd
Braver1,2,3,4; 1Washington University, Psychology, St. Louis, 2Washington
University, Radiology, St. Louis, 3Washington University, Neuroscience, St.
Louis, 4Washington University, Philosophy, St. Louis — Previous research
has shown that patients with schizophrenia show deficits in cognitive
control functions thought to depend on the lateral prefrontal cortex
(lPFC), as well as interactions with other regions such as anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and posterior parietal cortex (PPC). The current study
explored the effects of instructed strategy training in improving cognitive
control functioning in patients with schizophrenia. Event-related fMRI
was used to test whether effects of such training were associated with
changes in brain activity dynamics during task performance. Patients
with schizophrenia performed the AX-CPT cognitive control task in two-

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

sessions, with the first session occurring pre-training and second immediately following strategy training. The training protocol emphasized
direct encoding of contextual cues and updating response selection goals
in accordance with cue information. A matched group of healthy controls underwent the same protocol but were only scanned in the pretraining session. Compared to controls, patients exhibited the typical
pattern of impaired utilization of contextual information in the pre-training session. However, following training their performance selectively
improved in terms of the use of context. Analyses of brain activity indicated changes in dynamics of trial-related activation within lPFC, ACC
and PPC. Specifically, the strategy training session appeared to have a
"normalizing" effect on patient’s brain activity dynamics to bring them in
closer alignment to the pattern observed in controls. These results suggest that focused strategy training may facilitate cognitive task performance in patients with schizophrenia by changing the dynamics of
activity within critical control-related brain regions.
F41
MODELING LATERALIZATION OF SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE IN
THE ANTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBES Anna
Schapiro1,
James
McClelland1, Stephen Welbourne2, Matthew Lambon Ralph2; 1Stanford
University, 2University of Manchester — A connectionist model of semantic
knowledge is presented that accounts for the performance on semantic
tasks of patients with varying degrees of unilateral damage (due to, for
example, tumor resection or stroke) and bilateral damage (due to semantic dementia) to the anterior temporal lobes. Patients with unilateral damage are able to perform at or close to normal levels on naming and wordto-picture matching tests, whereas patients with bilateral damage show a
steep decline in accuracy with increasing damage. In addition, patients
with bilateral but asymmetrically left-sided damage have more difficulty
with verbal tasks, and patients with bilateral but asymmetrically rightsided damage have more difficulty with visual tasks. The model has
sparse connectivity between the units representing right and left anterior
temporal lobes to encourage independence in the function of the two
sides and uses noise and weight decay in training to induce robust and
distributed representations. Like the patients, the model performs significantly better with unilateral than bilateral damage, providing a possible
explanation for the trends in patient behavior. The model also incorporates decreased connectivity from the left semantic representations to
visual output and from the right semantic representations to verbal output, allowing it to exhibit the dissociation seen in patients with asymmetrically right-sided or left-sided damage. The close fit of the model’s
behavior to the patient data suggests that the representation and processing of semantic information in the brain may be similar to that in the
model.
F42
ABSENCE
OF
CUE
INDUCED
CROSS-FREQUENCY
INTERACTIONS IN CHILDREN DIAGNOSED ATTENTIONDEFICIT/HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER Ali
Mazaheri1,4,
Sharon
Coffey-Corina1,4, Evelijne Hart de Ruijter, Anne Berry, George R. Mangun1,4,
Blythe A. Corbett1,2,3,4; 1Center for Mind and Brain, 2M.I.N.D. Institute,
3Psychiatry, 4University of California (Davis) — Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is characterized by symptoms of inattention,
impulsivity, and hyperactivity. The current pathophysiologic models of
ADHD suggest that symptoms may be related to impaired functional
connectivity within brain networks. In this electroencephalogram (EEG)
study we analyzed cross-frequency amplitude anti-correlations between
distant regions to investigate differences in cue induced functional connectivity in typically developing and ADHD children. EEG was recorded
in 19 children (11 ADHD) while they performed a cross-modal attention
task in which visual cues signaled the modality of an upcoming target.
The power spectra of theta (3-4 Hz) and alpha (7-11 Hz) activity were calculated for the 1 second interval after the cue. Behaviorally, the visual cue
appeared to facilitate stimulus processing for both typically developing
and children with ADHD (p=0.018), although the reaction times were

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

165

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

slower in the latter (p=0.03). The EEG analysis revealed that a visual cue
induced a decrease in occipital alpha activity for typically developing
children but not children with ADHD (p<0.01). This decrease in posterior-alpha activity was anti-correlated with midline theta activity on a
trial-by-trial basis (p<0.028). This anti-correlation was absent in children
with ADHD. We speculate that the presence of this functional connectivity could indicate top-down drive (midline theta) to perceptual areas
(occipital alpha) providing a preparatory state for oncoming stimuli. The
cue induced theta-alpha connectivity could be necessary for efficient regulation of attentional resources. The lack of connectivity indexed through
cross-frequency interactions has the potential to be used as a new locus in
studying ADHD.
F43
THE EFFECTS OF NEUROPLASTICITY-BASED COGNITIVE
TRAINING IN ULTRA-HIGH RISK, RECENT-ONSET, AND ADULT
CHRONIC SCHIZOPHRENIA
Liza Reese3, Melissa Fisher2, Rachel
1
1
Loewy , Ashley Lee , Sophia Vinogradov2; 1The Wright Institute, San Francisco
VA Medical Center, University of California San Francisco, 2San Francisco VA
Medical Center, University of California San Francisco, 3University of
California San Francisco — We examined the effects of a novel neuroplasticity-based cognitive training program that targets the cognitive deficits
in schizophrenia. We compared the response to training, using MATRICS-recommended cognitive measures, of three subject groups (ultrahigh risk for psychosis, recent onset of schizophrenia, and adult chronic
schizophrenia), to a chronic schizophrenia control group who completed
the same number of hours of computer games. The active training condition consists of computerized exercises (developed by Positscience, Inc.)
that drive the user to make progressively more accurate distinctions
about the spectro-temporal fine-structure of auditory stimuli and speech
under conditions of increasing working memory load, and to incorporate
and generalize those improvements in auditory signal salience into realworld language comprehension and working memory rehearsal. After
40 hours of this training, and relative to the computer games control
group (N=26), ultra-high risk subjects (N=10), recent-onset subjects
(N=10), and chronic schizophrenia subjects (N=29), show significant cognitive improvement, as measured by the Global Cognition composite
score (p=.003), with gains on measures of Working Memory, Verbal
Learning and Memory, and Problem Solving. A larger response to training is observed in younger subjects (age<22) compared to adults with
chronic schizophrenia (age>23) (p=.01). These findings suggest that intervening with a restorative cognitive training program at a younger age
provides greater benefit to patients and may be a means of preventing the
cognitive decline associated with chronic schizophrenia.
F44
NEURAL CIRCUITRY OF SPEECH PERCEPTION AND
PRODUCTION: A COMPARISON BETWEEN STUTTERING AND
FLUENT SPEAKERS Helen Chen1, Einar Mencl1, Steven Frost1, Vincent
Gracco1,2; 1Haskins Laboratories, 2McGill University — The purpose of this
study was to investigate the similarities and differences in neural circuitry between stuttering and fluent speakers in visual and auditory perception versus production tasks. A total of 20 subjects, in which 10 were
stuttering speakers and 10 were fluent speakers, participated in the
study. Words were presented auditorally and visually to examine how
presentation modality modulated group differences. In the production
trials, participants were requested to say the word that was presented. Inscanner speech responses were recorded. Using functional and diffusion
imaging, we examined brain structure and function in language and
auditory processing areas. Initial comparison between the two goups
revealed fluency-related differences in regions including inferior frontal
gyrus (IFG), occipital temporal gyrus, superior temporal gyrus(STG),
Angular gyrus(AG) and supramarginal gyrus(SMG) in both perception
and production tasks. Further comparisons showed effects of presentation modality on these regions that differed across speaker groups. These

166

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

results suggest that the two groups differentially activate various language-related processing regions.
F45
ECONOMIC GAMES QUANTIFY DIMINISHED SENSE OF GUILT
IN PATIENTS WITH DAMAGE TO THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX
Ian Krajbich1, Ralph Adolphs1,2, Daniel Tranel2, Natalie Denburg2, Colin
Camerer1; 1Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences, California Institute
of Technology, 2Neurology, The University of Iowa — Damage to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) impairs concern for other people, as
reflected in the dysfunctional real-life social behavior of patients with
such damage, as well as their abnormal performances on tasks ranging
from moral judgment to economic games. Despite these convergent data,
we lack a formal model of how, and to what degree, VMPFC lesions
affect an individual’s social decision-making. Here we provide a quantification of these effects using a formal economic model of choice that
incorporates terms for the disutility of unequal payoffs, with parameters
that index behaviors normally evoked by guilt and envy. Six patients
with focal VMPFC lesions participated in a battery of economic games
that measured concern about payoffs to themselves and to others: dictator, ultimatum, and trust games. We analyzed each task individually, but
also derived estimates of the guilt and envy parameters from aggregate
behavior across all of the tasks. Compared to control subjects, the
patients donated significantly less and were less trustworthy, and overall
our model found a significant insensitivity to guilt. Despite these abnormalities, the patients had normal expectations about what other people
would do, and they also did not simply generate behavior that was more
noisy. Instead, the findings argue for a specific insensitivity to guilt, an
abnormality that we suggest characterizes a key contribution made by
the VMPFC to social behavior.
F46
THE SAME KIND OF SPATIAL DISTORTION EXPLAINS
APPARENTLY DIFFERENT NEGLECT ERRORS IN READING AND
BISECTING WORDS Silvia Savazzi1, Francesca Mancini1; 1University of
Verona — Neglect patients show rightward errors in bisecting horizontal
lines and make errors on the initial letters in reading words. Both these
disorders have been found to be ameliorated by the Oppel-Kundt illusion, thought to simulate the way space is represented in neglect1,2,3.
However, these two studies found an amelioration of neglect with opposite illusory conditions. Here, we investigate the hypothesis that this difference is due to the specific task used (line bisection and word reading).
Four patients with spatial neglect and neglect dyslexia without hemianopia were asked to read words and to bisect words both with letters evenly
and unevenly spaced following the Oppel-Kundt illusion. All the neglect
patients replicated the results by Ricci et al.1 in bisecting words and the
results by Savazzi et al.2,3 in reading words; that is opposite modulations
of neglect errors with the same patients. These data indicate that opposite
results previously found can be reconciled by taking into account the particular requests of the tasks patients are confronted with: a single object to
bisect versus a series of ordered letters within a word. In addition, these
results show that even if the behavioural results are different, the theoretical framework is the same, the space anisometry hypothesis3. References 1. Ricci R, Pia L, Gindri P. Exp. Brain Res. 2004; 154: 226-237. 2.
Savazzi S, Frigo C, Minuto D. Cogn Brain Res 2004; 19: 209-218. 3. Savazzi
S, Posteraro L, Veronesi G, Mancini F. Brain 2007; 130: 2070-2084.
F47
THE SAME KIND OF SPATIAL DISTORTION EXPLAINS
APPARENTLY DIFFERENT NEGLECT ERRORS IN BISECTING
REAL AND NUMERICAL INTERVALS Francesca Mancini1, Silvia
Savazzi1; 1University of Verona — Neglect patients show rightward errors
in bisecting lines and numerical intervals (mental number line). For both
real and numerical intervals, the bisection error increases as a function of
the size of the interval: long lines and large numerical intervals produce
large rightward errors, short lines and numerical intervals produce
medium rightward errors and very short lines and numerical intervals

Poster Session F

produce the crossover effect. The rightward bisection error in bisecting
real lines has been found to be ameliorated by the Oppel-Kundt illusion,
thought to simulate the way space is represented in neglect1,2,3. Here we
tested the hypothesis that physical lines and numerical intervals can be
modulated by the same visual illusion. Neglect patients were requested
to both physically and numerically bisect intervals of different sizes
within evenly or unevenly backgrounds inducing the Oppel-Kundt illusion. We found opposite effects on the real and numerical intervals in
terms of both bisection errors and illusory effects. This in line with what
found for word reading3 and can be explained by taking into account the
particular requests of the tasks: a single object to bisect (a word or a physical interval) versus a series of ordered objects (letters or numbers). These
results can be explained within the same theoretical framework, the space
anisometry hypothesis2. References 1. Ricci R, Pia L, Gindri P. Exp. Brain
Res. 2004; 154: 226-237. 2. Savazzi S, Posteraro L, Veronesi G, Mancini F.
Brain 2007; 130: 2070-2084. 3. Savazzi S, Frigo C, Minuto D. Cogn Brain
Res 2004; 19: 209-218.
F48
MEMORY MONITORING FAILURES IN CONFABULATION:
EVIDENCE FROM THE SEMANTIC ILLUSION PARADIGM Irene
P. Kan1,2, Karen Fossum2, Mieke Verfaellie2; 1Psychology, Villanova
University, 2Memory Disorders Research Center, VA Boston Healthcare
System, Boston University School of Medicine — Confabulation ó the tendency to make statements or perform actions that are based on apparent
distortions of memory ó is a common symptom in patients with ruptured
anterior communicating artery (ACoA) aneurysm. Confabulators are
typically unaware of the falseness of these memories and often uphold
their memories with the greatest conviction. One prominent model characterizes confabulation as a failure in cognitive control and monitoring.
In this study, we used the semantic illusion paradigm to evaluate memory monitoring and to examine whether confabulators are particularly
impaired at suppressing semantically-related, yet incorrect, memory
traces. The semantic illusion paradigm elicits erroneous endorsement of
misleading statements (e.g., "Two animals of each kind were brought
onto the Ark by Moses before the great flood") in neurologically intact
individuals, even though participants are fully aware of the correct
answer (Noah, in the example above). We hypothesized that if confabulators are differentially impaired at suppressing incorrect, but semantically-related, memory traces, they will have particular difficulty in
overcoming semantic illusions, even at lower levels of semantic confusability. Confusability was manipulated by using difficult, easy, or
extremely easy foils (e.g., Moses, Adam, Malcolm X, respectively). Consistent with our hypothesis, we found that confabulators are more susceptible to semantic illusions than both non- confabulating ACoA
patients and healthy controls, but endorsed true statements as often as
the other two groups. Reducing semantic confusability had less impact
on confabulators than on the other groups, consistent with the notion that
confabulators are impaired at evaluating and monitoring the veracity of
retrieved memory traces.
F49
SELF-PACED TIMING TASK SHOWS SENSITIVITY TO SUBTLE
DYSFUNCTION
IN
PRE-DIAGNOSED
HUNTINGTON’S
DISEASE Kelly Rowe1,2, David Moser1,2, Douglas Langbehn1,2, Chiachi
Wang1,2, Kevin Duff1,2, Leigh Beglinger1,2, Sarah Queller1,5, Julie Stout1,4,
Steven Rao1,3, Jane S. Paulsen1,2; 1University of Iowa, 2University of Iowa Roy
and Lucille Carver College of Medicine, 3Medical College of Wisconsin,
4Monash University, Victoria, Australia, 5Indiana University — Cognitive
outcome measures remain unknown for pre-diagnosed Huntington’s disease (pre-HD), though efforts are underway to conduct clinical trials in
these participants. Timing tasks have demonstrated impairment in preHD, even before characteristically disease-affected brain regions show
volume loss. This study compared performance on self-paced finger-tapping between pre-HD and healthy normal participants. Further, the
study evaluated the relationship of task performance with proximity to

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

diagnosis, quantified as the probability of receiving HD diagnosis in the
next five years based on trinucelotide expansion in the HD gene and age.
Participants in two groups (747 preHD : 188 healthy) listened to tones
presented at 550ms intervals, matched that pace by tapping response
keys, and continued tapping at that pace for 31 taps after the tone had
stopped. There were two conditions: dominant hand index finger tapping and alternating-thumbs tapping. Standardized cross-sectional linear
modeling examined the relationships between self-paced tapping precision and age, gender, education, musical experience, typing experience,
and proximity to diagnosis. Proximity to diagnosis was related to selfpaced tapping precision in both conditions (t=-11.14,df=920,p<.0001:t=11.32,df=918,p<.0001), even considering demographic and experience
variables. It was possible to identify weaknesses on the alternating
thumbs condition in individuals far from HD onset (as low as 4.35%
probability of diagnosis over the next five years). In conclusion, the selfpaced tapping paradigm has potential for use as a screening tool or outcome measure in preHD trials because it detects impairment in participants with low probabilities of onset, suggesting it could be used to
gauge therapeutically-mediated improvement or maintenance in function.
F50
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AUDITORY HALLUCINATIONS AND
ABNORMAL FMRI ACTIVITY DURING PERFORMANCE OF A
WORKING MEMORY TASK:
DATA FROM THE FBIRN
CONSORTIUM STUDY Cynthia Wible1, KangUk Lee2, Israel Molina1,
Brian Roach3, Judy Ford3, Daniel Mathalon3, Jessica Turner4, Steven Potkin4,
Daniel OLeary'5, Greg Brown6; 1Harvard Medical School and Brockton VAMC,
Psychiatry, Boston, MA, 2Kangwon National University School of Medicine,
Psychiatry, 3University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), 4University of
California, Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Irvine, CA , 5University of Iowa,
Psychiatry, Iowa City, IA , 6University of California, Psychiatry, San Diego,
CA — Auditory hallucinations of voices are a frequent and prominent
symptom of schizophrenia. The fBIRN consortium study tested schizophrenic and control subjects in similar FMRI procedures at sites around
the country. We analyzed the relationship between levels of FMRI activity and levels of auditory hallucinations during performance of a Sternberg Item Recognition Working Memory Paradigm (SIRP).
We
hypothesized that measures of auditory hallucinations would be correlated with abnormal activity in the temporal and inferior parietal lobe
voice/speech perception and production regions. Subjects were 96
chronic schizophrenics. The functional scans were gradient echo EPI, TR
= 2, TE = 30 ms, 90 deg, 64x64, 22 cm FOV, 27 slices, 4 mm thick/1 mm
gap, oblique axial. The SIRP task was presented using a block design
with four six second runs and subjects encoded numbers and were then
tested in a probe phase. Two different analyses were performed (hallucinators vs. non-hallucinators and a correlation analysis between activation
and symptom levels). Results of both analyses implicated superior temporal and inferior parietal regions. These regions are part of speech and
voice perception and production networks. Voice perception/conversation can also involve the activation of aspects of social cognition and self/
other representation. Over-activation of this social communication system could also contribute to other symptoms of schizophrenia. We will
present the results in the context of a framework implicating these
regions in the generation of most of the symptoms of schizophrenia. Supported by NCRR 1 U24 RR021992.
F51
INVESTIGATING
NEUROMYTHS
OF
SOCIAL
BRAIN
PATHOLOGIES AND CREATIVITY Rachael
Grazioplene1,
Judith
Segall1, Robert Chavez1, Ranee Flores1, Shirley Smith1,3, Alison Marshall1, Rex
Jung1,2,3,4; 1Mind Research Network, University of New Mexico, 2University of
New Mexico, Neurosurgery, 3University of New Mexico, Psychology,
4
University of New Mexico, Neurology — Controversy surrounding the
supposed link between creative ability and the abstract cognitive style is
often seen in psychotic-spectrum disorders, whereas high mathematical

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

167

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

"creative" ability has been linked to the compartmentalized cognitive
style seen in autistic-spectrum disorders. The literature has spoken both
for (Dinn et al. 2002; Nettle & Clegg 2006) and against (Tal & Miller 2007)
a correlation between positive schizotypal symptoms and measures of
creativity; the link between autism and physical/mathematical thinking
has been shown more firmly (e.g.Wheelright & Baron-Cohen 2001, BaronCohen 2002), with Rawlings & Locarnini going so far as to find support
not only for schizotypy-creativity correlation, but also the connection of
autism-spectrum traits to scientific creativity (2008). We hypothesize that
two general types of creativity, wherein abstract creative thinking reflects
more global brain connectivity (schizotypal) while a more mathematical
creative ability exists by way of enhanced local network (autism-type)
connectivity. Gathering data from a nonclinical sample population of
visual artists and high math (>95th %ile on SAT/GRE) engineers, we predict that visual artists will perform better on divergent task measures of
creativity, whereas engineers will perform better on convergent reasoning measures. Preliminary data supports a trend towards increased performance of visual artists on divergent reasoning tasks compared to age,
gender, and FSIQ matched normal controls (Artists = 105.1; Controls =
97.2, p = .07). Collection of high math Engineering subjects is ongoing.
Differences in brain structure (cortical thickness, diffusion tensor imaging) between visual artists and high math engineers will also be presented.
F52
THE EFFECTS OF SMOKING ON NOVELTY PROCESSING: AN
ERP STUDY Sandra Wiebe1, Dennis McChargue1, Leigh Blobaum1,
Stephanie Wulff1, Alex Knezevic1; 1University of Nebraska-Lincoln — Nicotine addiction is associated with novelty-seeking and impulsivity. We
examined smoking-related differences in ERPs to novel stimuli, to shed
light on novelty-related neural processes. A sample of 63 participants (38
smokers, 25 non-smokers) completed a visual oddball task that included
20% targets, 70% standards, and 10% novel trials (non-repeating photographs; Suwazano et al., 2000). EEG was recorded from 128 channels,
averaged by trial type, and then reduced using spatiotemporal PCA
(Spencer et al., 1999). The first spatial component, accounting for 50.8% of
variability in the ERP data, primarily reflected central and right leads. In
the virtual epoch corresponding in time to a medial frontal negativity,
there was a significant main effect of Smoking Status (p < .02) and Trial
Condition (p < .0001) qualified by an interaction between the two (p <
.005). Overall, this component was maximal to novel trials. A larger negative amplitude was observed in non-smokers than smokers for both
novel (p < .02) and standard trials (p < .03), but not for target trials, when
a response was required (p = .13). The third spatial component (8.25% of
variance) reflected activity at parietal leads. In the virtual epoch corresponding to the P300, there was again an interaction between Smoking
Status and Trial Condition (p < .01). P300 amplitude was reduced in
smokers for the novel condition (p < .005) but not other conditions (p >
.65). Blunted novelty-related responses may reflect specific effects of nicotine or relate to personality differences underlying predisposition to
addition.
F53
INCREASED SERUM LEVELS OF THE NMDA RECEPTOR COAGONIST D-SERINE CORRELATE WITH COGNITIVE GAINS
INDUCED
BY
NEUROPLASTICITY-BASED
AUDITORY
TRAINING IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Rogerio
Panizzutti1,2,
Melissa
Fisher3,4, Christine Holland3,4, Sophia Vinogradov3,4; 1W.M. Keck Foundation
Center for Integrative Neurosciences, University of California, San Francisco,
CA, 2Biomedical Sciences Institute, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, 3School of Medicine, Psychiatry, University of California, San
Francisco, CA. , 4Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA — The
cognitive deficits that characterize schizophrenia may be in part related
to hypofunction of glutamate-NMDA receptors due to reduced levels of
the receptor co-agonist D-serine. Serum D-serine levels are decreased in
patients with schizophrenia and increase as their clinical status improves,

168

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

while administration of oral D-serine appears to ameliorate cognitive
symptoms in patients. We previously performed a randomized controlled trial of neuroplasticity-based cognitive training exercises of auditory perceptual and working memory functions in schizophrenia and
showed significant improvement in MATRICS-based cognitive outcome
measures in active training subjects vs. computer games control subjects.
In the present study, we investigated whether the gain in cognitive outcome measures was associated with changes in serum D-serine levels.
We measured D-serine and other amino acids in serum from schizophrenia subjects before and after they performed either 50 hours of computerized cognitive training (N= 21) or 50 hours of computer games (N= 20).
The active training subjects, but not the control subjects, showed significant positive correlations between changes in D-serine levels and gains in
working memory (r= 0.5, p=0.04), verbal learning (r=0.6, p=0.00), and
global cognition (r=0.5, p=0.01). The ratio D-serine / L-serine also
showed highly significant associations with these same measures. No
such associations were observed with glutamate or L-serine levels. Our
data suggest that D-serine may serve as a biomarker for a successful
response to neuroplasticity-based cognitive training in schizophrenia.
These findings may provide some clues as to potential mechanisms of
action for this form of cognitive enhancement.
F54
OBSERVATIONAL LEARNING IN THE REMEDIATION OF AN
ASSOCIATIVE
LEARNING
DEFICIT
SECONDARY
TO
PARKINSON’S DISEASE Winifred Limmer1, Francesco Fera2, Antonio
Daniele3, Pietro Spinelli3, Ahmed Moustafa1, Catherine Myers4, Mark Gluck1;
1Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers University,
Newark, NJ, 2Neuroradiology Unit, University Magna Græcia, Catanzaro,
Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 4Rutgers
University, Psychology, Newark, NJ — Parkinson’s disease (PD) is associated with dopamine depletion in the basal ganglia. Research suggests
that disruption of the dopamine signal impairs associative learning via
error-correcting feedback. In the present study, a computerized concurrent object discrimination task was administered to PD patients and elderly controls. Pairs of objects, which differed in either color or shape,
were presented. Some subjects learned by trial-and-error to find a hidden
smiley face beneath one of the two objects; other subjects learned by
observation. During a test phase, subjects were tested on the trained
pairs, and, during a generalization phase, on novel object pairs that had
the same relevant - but different irrelevant - features as the trained pairs.
Previously, Shohamy et al. (2006) observed that medicated, but not withdrawn PD patients, were impaired relative to controls during the feedback-based learning phase. In the present study, both medicated and
withdrawn PD patients were impaired relative to controls during the
feedback-based training phase and the test phase, the medicated patients
being more impaired than the withdrawn. Medicated and withdrawn PD
patients who learned the discriminations via an observational procedure,
however, exhibited no learning deficit, making the same number of
errors as controls during the test phase. Interpreted in light of functional
neuroimaging studies that suggest that feedback-based and observational learning rely on the integrity of different neural structures, the
present results suggest that the learning deficit observed in PD patients
may be remediated by training via an observational procedure, which
recruits different, putatively intact brain structures.
F55
MECHANISMS
OF
RECOVERY
AFTER
STROKE:
REORGANIZATION OR REGAINING OF FUNCTION? Veena
Nair1, Kirk Brown2, Gregory Kirk1, Vivek Prabhakaran1; 1University of
Wisconsin-Madison, School of Medicine and Public Health, Radiology,
2University of Wisconsin-Madison, School of Medicine and Public Health,
Medical Physics, Medical Scientist Training Program — Neuroimaging studies of stroke have provided conflicting evidence in terms of mechanisms
of recovery after stroke. Prabhakaran et al. (2007) examined the neural
substrates underlying word generation in chronic stroke (at least 6

Poster Session F

months post-stroke) patients. While normal subjects displayed activations in the left-lateralized fronto-temporo-parietal network, stroke
patients showed decreased activation in the cortical regions that were
hypoperfused and increased activation in the homologous regions of the
normal hemisphere suggesting reorganization of structure-function relationship. Other studies of stroke patients with aphasia have observed
reduced activation surrounding the infarct in the left hemisphere language areas at the acute time point (< 2 days post-stroke), and activity in
the hypoperfused hemisphere returning back to normal at the chronic
stage (Saur et al.,2006) suggesting regaining of function by the affected
region. The objective of this study is to investigate mechanisms of recovery after stroke. We will map brain activations in stroke patients who are
in the acute (less than 3 days post-stroke) or chronic stage (>4-6 months
post stroke) using fMRI while patients perform the verbal fluency task in
the scanner. Subjects with left and right strokes, along with normal controls, will be imaged while performing a verbal fluency task. Preliminary
results from 2 acute left stroke patients show decreased activity in taskrelated areas in the affected region, 4 chronic left stroke patients show
increased activity in the homologous contralateral hemisphere. These
results suggest that reorganization is the mechanism that leads to recovery after stroke.
F56
DEVIATIONS IN ALPHA-BAND FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
BETWEEN
BRAIN
REGIONS
IN
PATIENTS
WITH
SCHIZOPHRENIA DURING MAGNETOENCEPAHLOGRAM (MEG)
RECORDINGS AT REST Srikantan Nagarajan1, Leighton Hinkley1,
Adrian Guggisberg1, Anne Findlay1, Kasra Khatibi1, Alison Adcock2, Sophia
Vinogradov3,4; 1University of California, San Francisco, Radiology, 2Duke
University, Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 3University of California, San
Francisco, Psychiatry, 4Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco — Evidence from neuroanatomical and imaging studies suggests that schizophrenia is associated with impairments in anatomical cortical
connectivity and/or aberrant functional coupling between brain regions.
Limited evidence demonstrates aberrant functional connectivity between
areas of the brain whose idling frequency exceeds what can be recorded
by imaging methodologies such as fMRI. Using magnetoencephalography (MEG), we recorded spontaneous cortical activity during a resting
state from 24 patients with schizophrenia and 15 healthy control subjects
using a whole-head 275-channel biomagnetometer (CTF Systems, Vancouver BC) with a sampling rate of 600Hz. A single epoch (60s) of artifact-free data was selected and the sources of oscillating neural activity in
the alpha range (~8-12Hz) were estimated using an adaptive spatial filtering technique (Vrba and Robinson, 2001). Resting-state functional connectivity in the alpha band between brain voxels was computed using
imaginary coherence (IC), a metric that overcomes overestimation biases
arising from volume conduction and crosstalk in MEG data (Guggisberg
et al., 2007). Tomographic reconstructions of the data were spatially normalized to a canonical MNI template and the mean Z-transformed IC values of alpha activity at each voxel were compared between patients and
controls using a non-parametric unpaired t-test. Patients with schizophrenia demonstrated increased alpha band connectivity in the inferior
frontal gyrus (IFG) of the right hemisphere, and decreased alpha band
connectivity in regions of the right superior temporal gyrus, precuneus
and left anterior temporal lobe. These results expand upon the known
patterns of aberrant functional connectivity that underlie schizophrenia.
F57
RECOGNITION OF FACIAL AND PROSODIC EMOTIONAL
EXPRESSION IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Lynette Tippett1, Sharon
Buxton1, Lorraine Macdonald2; 1University of Auckland, Psychology,
2Auckland City Hospital, Neurology — Some research findings suggest Parkinson’s disease (PD) affects recognition of emotional facial expressions
(especially disgust and anger), and reduces sensitivity to prosodic
expressions of anger, disgust and fear, but findings are inconsistent. We
investigated recognition of facial and prosodic emotional expressions in

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

30 medicated-PD participants and 30 age, education and gender-matched
controls. The 108 face stimuli were based on Ekman and Friesen (1976)
faces. Six faces each displaying 6 emotions (happy, sad, angry, disgust,
fear, surprise) were morphed between each emotion and neutral. Three
levels of expression were selected: 100% emotion and morph levels with
70% and 40% identification accuracy by young controls. Participants
identified each facial expression in a multiple-choice format with emotion
labels presented simultaneously. Prosody stimuli comprised 8 trials each
of happy, sad, angry, fear and neutral intonations (Ross, Thompson, &
Yenkosky, 1997) presented simultaneously with 5 multi-choice labels.
Participants listened to a neutral sentence read with different emotional
intonations (20 trials) and monosyllabic repetitions with emotional inflections (20 trials). PD participants had no difficulty identifying expressions
on 100% emotion faces, but were impaired with morphed emotional
expressions with significantly lower scores recognising disgusted, happy,
sad and surprised faces but not anger or fear. PD participants were also
impaired overall on emotion identification by prosody. These data demonstrate that PD induces subtle dysfunction of emotional processing
affecting both facial and prosodic stimuli. Dopaminergic depletion interrupting basal ganglia/frontal-striatal systems is likely to underlie these
findings, with orbitofrontal cortex, sensitive to judging vocal and facial
emotional expressions, also implicated.
F58
FUNCTIONAL-ANATOMIC ABNORMALITIES IN INHIBITION
AND ERROR REGULATION AMONG YOUNG ADULTS WITH
CHILDHOOD-ONSET
ADHD:
AN
FMRI
STUDY
OF
OCULOMOTOR CONTROL Katerina Velanova1, Beatriz Luna1,2,
Tracey Wilson1, Kendal Kingsley1, Elizabeth Gnagy3, William Pelham3,4,5,
Brooke Molina1,2; 1University of Pittsburgh, Psychiatry, 2University of
Pittsburgh, Psychology, 3SUNY Buffalo, Psychology, 4SUNY Buffalo,
Psychiatry, 5SUNY Buffalo, Pediatrics — Attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) is the most common neurodevelopmental disorder of
childhood, conservatively affecting 3-5% of school-aged children in the
US. The disorder is thought to persist into adulthood in 30-70% of
affected children. While extensive research has been conducted to
describe the cognitive profile and neural correlates of childhood ADHD,
relatively little work has been done with young adults. Here we present
data from an ongoing pilot study of young men aged 18-25 years, 9 of
whom, run to date, met DSM-III-R or DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for
ADHD in childhood. All participants have been followed since childhood
as part of the Pittsburgh ADHD Longitudinal Study (AA11873;
DA12414). Comprehensive clinical data were available for each participant. For this research, event-related functional magnetic imaging (fMRI)
was conducted as participants performed the antisaccade taskóan oculomotor test of inhibitory control. Regions of interest were derived from an
independent fMRI study of antisaccade performance in typical young
adults. Timecourses of activity for correctly performed antisaccades, and
for (corrected) errors were estimated within regions, and effects confirmed in whole-brain voxelwise analyses. Notable findings to date
include attenuated activity in supplementary/pre-supplementary motor
area and ventromedial prefrontal cortex during correct performance of
antisaccades, and atypical signaling in anterior cingulate cortex during
error commission. Voxelwise analyses indicate also that ADHD participants recruited additional regions in ventrolateral prefrontal cortex that
were minimally active in typical adults. These data provide preliminary
evidence of continued functional-anatomic anomalies, even among
ADHD adults whose parent-reported daily functioning is relatively
unimpaired.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

169

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

F59
THE STRENGTH OF THE LINKS BETWEEN OBJECTS, ACTIONS,
AND NAMES INFLUENCES ACTION PRODUCTION AND VISUAL
OBJECT IDENTIFICATION IN PATIENTS WITH LEFTHEMISPHERE STROKE Genevieve Desmarais1, Laurel J. Buxbaum2;
1
Mount Allison University, Psychology, 2Moss Rehabilitation Research
Institute — In healthy participants, similarity of novel objects impacts
novel action production, and novel action similarity impacts novel object
naming: actions are confused more often when associated with similar as
compared to distinct objects, and object names are confused more often
when associated with similar as compared to distinct actions. These relationships indicate that neighborhood "distance" may benefit both action
and name retrieval. Left hemisphere stroke has been shown to disrupt
links between actions, objects, and lexical-semantics (names). We therefore investigated this phenomenon using object identification and action
production in 20 left hemisphere stroke patients. Participants were asked
to learn the associations between novel objects, novel actions, and nonword names (for example, a curved object is pulled and is called ’FINT’).
We manipulated the similarity relationships between objects and actions.
On test trials, participants were asked to recall the nonword ’name’ of
each object, and then produce its associated action. Visually similar
objects were mis-named more often than visually distinct objects, a normal pattern. Contrary to previous findings in healthy participants, however, action production did not benefit from object distinctiveness,
suggesting that object-shape neighborhood distance may not facilitate
action retrieval in these patients. Moreover, 62% of all action errors corresponded with the precise incorrect name given the object, suggesting an
effort to rely on object name-action links (rather than on object shapeaction links) to guide action. Results are discussed in terms of a cognitive-neuroanatomic model of object-related action production.
F60
SEMANTICS
VERSUS
GRAMMAR:
EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS DURING AUDITORY LANGUAGE PROCESSING IN
WILLIAMS SYNDROME Inna Fishman1, Anna Yam1,2, Mark Grichanik1,
Ursula Bellugi1, Debra Mills1,3; 1Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
CA, 2University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 3Bangor University, United
Kingdom — The present study examined event-related potentials (ERP)
patterns linked to the processing of semantic vs. grammatical aspects of
language in individuals with Williams Syndrome (WS), autism (ASD)
and typically developing controls (TD). ERPs were recorded as participants listened to a series of sentences, half of which ended with an anomalous last word (e.g. I have five fingers on my moon.) and half with a
congruent last word (e.g., I have five fingers on my hand). ERPs were
averaged according to semantic (i.e., congruous vs. incongruous ending)
and grammatical (i.e., open- vs. closed-class first word) categories. Using
temporal Principal Component Analysis (PCA), a centroparietal N400
and left anterior negativity (N280) were identified. A significant condition-by-group interaction was found for the N400, whereby WS group
had the largest N400 effect in response to incongruent endings, while
ASD group exhibited the smallest N400 effect. In contrast, analysis of
variance of the N280 component yielded no significant difference
between grammatical categories (i.e., open- vs. closed-class words) in the
WS group, unlike the TD and ASD groups. These results suggest that
while individuals with WS show a large ERP effect to semantic anomaly,
their ERP patterns do not show differential processing of the main grammatical classes. These findings (a) support the largely behavioral data
indicating atypical semantic organization of language in WS, (b) provide
evidence that grammatical processing is also unusually organized in WS,
and (c) illustrate qualitatively different processing of language in WS and
ASD, potentially mirroring the fundamental differences between the two
disorders.

170

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

F61
COMPUTERIZED NEUROPLASTICITY-BASED TRAINING OF
COGNITIVE
CONTROL
PROCESSES
IN
CHRONIC
SCHIZOPHRENIA Maryann Bens1,2,3, Melissa Fisher1,2, Alexander
Genevsky1,2, Sophia Vinogradov1,2; 1University of California, Psychiatry, San
Francisco, 2San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 3The Wright
Institute — We previously reported on the effects of a novel neuroplasticity-based cognitive training program that targets auditory perceptual
processes and working memory in schizophrenia. In this study we investigated the effects of an additional computerized training module that
targets cognitive control processes in schizophrenia (developed by PositScience, Inc.). Exercises in the cognitive control module were designed to
improve categorization, prediction, novelty detection and task switching.
The exercises were continuously adaptive in that they first established
the precise parameters within each stimulus set required for an individual subject to maintain 80% correct performance; once that threshold was
determined, task difficulty increased systematically and parametrically
as performance improved. Thirty adult chronic schizophrenia subjects
were stratified by age, education, and symptom severity and randomly
assigned to either 20 hours of the targeted cognitive training condition
(TCT, N=15), or to 20 hours of a computer games control condition (CG,
N=15). Subjects participated in either the TCT or CG condition for one
hour per day, five days per week. Repeated Measures ANOVA reveal
significant group differences on measures of Stroop Inhibition (p = .01),
and visual working memory (WMS-III Spatial Span) at trend level significance (p = .11). These early findings provide evidence of the specificity of
effects and cognitive benefits that individuals with schizophrenia can
achieve through a training program that explicitly incorporates core principles of neuroplasticity-based learning.
F62
FRAGILE X MENTAL RETARDATION-1 GENE MRNA AS A
PREDICTOR FOR AMYGDALA VOLUME IN FRAGILE X
PREMUTATION MEN John Wang1, Kami Koldewyn2,3, David Hessl2,4,
Diana Selmeczy1, Randi Hagerman2,5, Paul Hagerman2,6, Chris Iwahashi6,
Flora Tassone2,6, Andrea Schneider2, Susan Rivera1,2,3; 1University of
California Davis, Center for Mind and Brain, 2University of California Davis
Medical Center, M.I.N.D. Institute, 3University of California Davis,
Psychology, 4University of California Davis Medical Center, Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences , 5University of California Davis Medical Center, Pediatrics,
6
University of California Davis School of Medicine, Biological Chemistry —
Fragile X Mental Retardation-1 Gene (FMR1) premutation carriers (55200 CGG repeats) have been shown to have psychological and possible
late-life neurodegenerative problems. Evidence of volumetric decreases
in limbic structures, increased anxiety, and social cognition deficits suggest possible amygdala dysfunction. Previous studies have shown premutation carriers to have elevated levels of FMR1 mRNA that correlate
with CGG repeat size. Carriers with large repeat sizes may also exhibit
decreased Fragile X Mental Retardation Protein (FMRP). A previously
proposed RNA toxic gain of function model predicts increased cell death
and diminished volume in affected brain regions. We investigated
amygdala volumes in premutation men compared with well-matched
controls and explored the possible molecular correlates of individual volumetric differences. Amygdala volumes were acquired by manual segmentation of participants’ structural MRI images. CGG repeat number
and mRNA levels were ascertained through standard analysis of peripheral blood. FMR1 mRNA levels were found to be negatively correlated
with amygdala volumes in both controls and in premutation carriers with
lower CGG repeat size (<120). CGG repeat number and amygdala volumes were also negatively correlated in this lower CGG group. So,
mRNA levels may predict amygdala size in controls and premutation
carriers with smaller repeat sizes. In premutation carriers with larger
CGG repeat sizes (>120), we suspect that decrements in FMRP levels may
counteract the effect of high FMR1 mRNA levels. Previous studies have
shown full mutation fragile X participants, who lack FMRP, to have

Poster Session F

larger amygdalae. We will present these results with hippocampal volumes, neuropsychiatric data, and protein measures.
F63
CONVERGENT EEG AND FMRI EVIDENCE OF REDUCED
RESPONSE
TO
NEGATIVE
FEEDBACK
IN
COCAINEDEPENDENT INDIVIDUALS Matthew Shane1, Carla Harenski1,
Prashanth Nyalakanti1, Kent Kiehl1,2; 1The Mind Research Network, 2The
University of New Mexico — Our laboratory has become guided by a
model of substance abuse that posits insufficient responsiveness to errorrelated information as underlying the abuser’s chronic, perseverative
drug-taking behavior. Indeed, a growing body of work has demonstrated
that cocaine abusers show behavioral rigidity (Franken et al., 2007) and
attenuated electrophysiology (Hester et al., 2007) after the commission of
errors on a variety of laboratory tasks. The underlying nature of these
abnormalities remains uncertain, however. One possibility suggests that
cocaine abusers’ reduced responsiveness underlies an initial failure to
detect the commission of their errors; alternately, it may be that their
error detection mechanisms remain intact, and that their attenuated
response instead indicates a chronic insensitivity to error-related information. To test these alternate hypotheses, we evaluated the amplitude of
the cocaine abuser’s feedback error-related negativity (fERN) within a
time-estimation task that presented participants with explicit positive
(’+’), negative (’-’) and uninformative (’?’) feedback. Participants were
simply required to estimate how long they believed a one-second duration took; the explicit performance feedback ensured that any deficit
associated with error-detection could not influence participants’ electrophysiology. Results indicated that both nonabusing groups evidenced a
well-formed fERN on ’-’ trials, and that this waveform was absent in the
cocaine abusing group. In contrast, the cocaine abusers showed the highest negative deflection on ’?’ trials. These results suggest that cocaine
abusers display with an underlying insensitivity to error-related information that may contribute to their chronic and repetitive drug-taking
behavior.
F64
CLINICAL EFFECTS IN FMRI ARE INFLUENCED BY ACTIVITY
AND VARIANCE: AN EXAMPLE FROM AN ADHD STUDY
Gregory Burgess1, Marie Banich1, Erik Willcutt1, Luka Ruzic1; 1University of
Colorado, Psychology, Boulder — Studies using fMRI have become influential toward understanding the neural bases of clinical disorders. Typically, fMRI statistics are interpreted only with respect to group
differences in the magnitude of activity. However, fMRI statistics are also
influenced by unexplained variance in the data, and by spatial variability
in the localization of activation. These sources of variability could affect
fMRI statistics, leading researchers to misinterpret results and miss
effects of theoretical interest. We developed simple procedures to identify
brain regions where fMRI statistics are affected by spatial variability or
unexplained variability. We applied those procedures to fMRI data comparing adults with ADHD to controls during the Color-Word Stroop task.
This identified regions involved in executive control and word-reading
where statistics were influenced by large amounts of unexplained variance. Importantly, unexplained variance was related to existing behavioral performance measures excluded from the initial model. Considering
these correlations increased the significance of the group difference statistic, and also demonstrated group differences in the relationship between
brain activity and behavior that would have been missed. Furthermore,
our procedures identified brain regions where significant group differences resulted from greater spatial variability in the ADHD group rather
than an actual difference in activity. In conclusion, we demonstrate the
necessity for researchers to consider unexplained variance and spatial
variability before interpreting clinical group differences, and provide
simple procedures for accomplishing this.

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

Perceptual processes: High-level vision
F65
THE EFFECTS OF DISCRIMINABILITY AND SELECTIVE
ATTENTION ON EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS TO GAZING
EXPRESSIVE FACES Janessa Manning1, Katie Sicking2, Nicole Wicha1,3,
Reiko Graham2; 1University of Texas Health Sciences Center, San Antonio,
2Texas State University, 3University of Texas at San Antonio — Although it
is accepted that gaze and expression information is integrated at some
level of visual processing, the exact nature of the interaction is unknown.
Behavioral evidence suggests that gaze and expression interactions are
maximized when facial expression is difficult to discriminate (Graham &
LaBar, 2007). However, it is uncertain whether this occurs because
decreasing the discriminability of expression slows down expression processing, allowing for gaze and expression interactions (a speed of processing account), or whether the extra information from gaze helps to
resolve expression under conditions of uncertainty (an ambiguity
account). Using a blocked design, the current study examined eventrelated potentials (ERPs) to faces with subtle or intense facial expressions
(fear, anger) with direct and averted gaze while subjects (N = 18) made
either gaze or expression judgments. Behavioral analyses revealed that
subjects were more accurate when the expression discrimination was
easy. Furthermore, reaction times were faster for emotion than gaze judgments, but only when emotion was easily discriminable. ERP analyses
revealed that both selective attention and expression discriminability had
widespread effects on both early and late ERP components. Notably,
gaze and expression interactions were observed in components associated with early visual processing, but only when expression discriminations were difficult - e.g., P1 amplitudes were largest to 55% intensity
angry faces with direct gaze and 55% intensity fearful faces with averted
gaze. These results suggest that information about gaze and expression
can be integrated relatively early in visual processing, supporting an
ambiguity-based account of gaze and expression interactions.
F66
OBJECT CLASSIFICATION IN THE ABSENCE OF VISUAL
AWARENESS AND FIGURE-GROUND SEGREGATION Johannes J.
Fahrenfort1,2, Klaartje Heinen2, Simon van Gaal1, H.Steven Scholte1, Victor
A.F. Lamme1,3; 1University of Amsterdam, Cognitive Neuroscience Group,
Psychology, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
London, UK, 3Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands, part of the Royal Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW) — It is
well known that neurons in the temporal lobe classify objects, such as
faces, and it is generally assumed that the activity of such neurons is necessary for conscious awareness of these objects. However, object categorization may also occur unconsciously, as has been shown by the selective
activation of object selective neurons by masked objects. So what distinguishes conscious from unconscious object recognition? We constructed
schematic images containing objects such as faces and houses while keeping local retinal stimulation between conditions identical. Using a
dichoptic fusion paradigm, we manipulated stimulus visibility such that
objects were either visible or not visible. Confirming earlier results, we
found that both consciously perceived and non-perceived objects result
in category specific BOLD activation, even if they are task irrelevant and
non-attended. Critically however, we show that objects that are consciously seen show a distinct neural signature of figure-ground segregation in early and midlevel visual areas, which is completely absent when
objects are not seen. Although counterintuitive, this implies that consciousness is more intimately related to processes of figure-ground segregation and perceptual organization than to object categorization. We
propose that figure-ground segregation is a prerequisite for visual awareness, and that both phenomena share part of their neural correlate, which
is recurrent processing within visual cortex.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

171

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

F67
DISTINCT BRAIN ACTIVITY ELICITED BY COLOR MODULATED
'UNNATURAL' VISUAL SCENES N. Eiji Nawa1,2, Hiroshi Ando1,2;
1Multimodal Communication Group, NICT Universal Media Research Center,
2Perceptual and Cognitive Dynamics, ATR Cognitive Information Science
Labs., Kyoto, Japan — Several studies have investigated the brain areas
involved in the processing of physical attributes of visual stimuli such as
color, luminance and contrast, but relatively little is known about how
such attributes affect the perception of complex scenes as ’natural’ looking, as opposed to ’unnatural’ or ’artificial’. In a previous study, contrast
curves were manipulated to generate unnatural stimuli that looked like
negative images. BOLD contrasts revealed enhanced activity when viewing contrast modulated unnatural stimuli in a large network encompassing regions in the fusiform gyri, left middle occipital cortex, right inferior
temporal cortex, and the inferior frontal cortex (right inferior frontal
operculum). In this study, using a block-design fMRI paradigm, we
examined whether distinct activity patterns are elicited by natural and
unnatural visual stimuli resulting from the manipulation of colors. Stimuli were pictures portraying various natural sceneries, e.g., country
fields, beaches, and mountains. Colors in the natural looking stimuli were
not altered; however, the stimuli in the unnatural looking set had their
colors "reversed", by inverting the parameters in a color-opponent space
(L*a*b*). During scanning, participants performed a discrimination task
in which they had to judge whether the picture depicted an animal or not.
When viewing color modulated unnatural stimuli, BOLD contrasts
revealed that activity was greater in the right inferior temporal cortex and
the left inferior frontal operculum. The existence of overlapping regions
suggests the involvement of a common network in the high-level perception of visual stimuli as natural or unnatural.
F68
FACIAL
CONFIGURATIONS
AND
FEATURES
INVOLVE
DIFFERENT HEMISPHERES Dario Bombari1, Fred W. Mast1; 1Institute
of Psychology, University of Bern — A wealth of knowledge shows that
faces can be recognized on the basis of configural or featural information
(Leder & Bruce, 1998; Cabeza & Kato, 2000; Lobmaier & Mast, 2007). Features are referred to as detailed information contained in individual facial
parts (e.g., the shape of the mouth or the color of the eyes) whereas configurations concern spatial interrelationships between facial parts (e.g.,
the metric distance between the eyes and the mouth). In the present
study, we analyzed whether featural and configural processing involves
different hemispheres using a divided visual field methodology. In a
same-different matching task, 18 right-handed participants had to match
the identity of a cue face containing either featural (scrambled faces) or
configural (blurred faces) information with an intact test face presented
subsequently in either the left or right visual fields. Unilateral presentation was controlled by monitoring central gaze direction. D prime analysis revealed that the visual field of test face presentation interacted with
the information provided by the cue image (F (1, 17) = 7.43; p < .05), thus
suggesting that featural and configural information is differently processed by the two hemispheres. Specifically, our findings show a left
hemispheric superiority for featural processing and a right hemispheric
superiority for configural processing (Rossion et al., 2000; Maurer et al.,
2007). Our findings contribute to the growing body of evidence showing
that the two hemispheres differ in the way they process global and local
information. This project was funded by the Swiss NSF.
F69
TRAINING FACILITATES OBJECT PERCEPTION IN CUBIST
PAINTINGS Alumit Ishai1, Martin Wiesmann1, Robert Pepperell2;
1Institute of Neuroradiology, University of Zurich, Switzerland, 2Cardiff School
of Art and Design, University of Wales Institute Cardiff, UK — To the naïve
observer, cubist paintings contain "cubes" or "boxes" and in the absence
of a meaningful title, familiar objects are hardly recognizable. We tested
the extent to which a short training session about cubism would facilitate
object perception and subsequent memory of cubist paintings by Picasso,

172

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

Braque and Gris. Subjects, who had no formal art education and were
unfamiliar with cubist paintings, performed an object recognition task
followed by an aesthetic judgment task. Each painting was preceded by a
meaningful title, a false title, or the word "untitled". Three days later,
subjects returned for a surprise recognition memory test, in which paintings from the study phase were mixed with new paintings. Half the subjects received a short lecture about cubism and learned how to identify
familiar objects in the paintings. Relative to the control group, the trained
subjects reported seeing significantly more objects in the paintings, especially in paintings that were preceded by correct titles, and their response
latencies were significantly shorter. No differences were found between
trained and control subjects in terms of aesthetic rating and memory performance. Our data suggest that meaningful titles are necessary for
understanding the content of artwork, and provide empirical evidence
for learning-dependent top-down effects on object recognition.
F70
HOW GENDER AND BODY-MASS-INDEX SHAPE FOOD
DISCRIMINATION Ulrike Toepel1,2, Jean-François Knebel1, Julie Hudry3,
Johannes Le Coutre3, Micah M. Murray1,2,4; 1The Functional Electrical
Neuroimaging Laboratory, Neuropsychology and Neurorehabilitation Service,
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne,
Switzerland, 2Radiology Service, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and
University of Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Nestle Research Center, Vers-chez-lesBlanc, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4EEG Brain Mapping Core, Center for
Biomedical Imaging of Lausanne and Geneva, Switzerland — Men
and
women differ in their susceptibility to eating disorders. Whether perceptual differences in food discrimination are a contributing factor remains
unknown. Here, we investigated the spatiotemporal brain mechanisms
by which normal-weighted men and women discriminate images of
foods from non-foods. Electrical neuroimaging analyses of 160-channel
visual evoked potentials (VEPs) independently tested for topographic
and strength modulations between object categories for each gender. In
women, between-category VEP topographic modulations were observed
within the initial 100ms post-stimulus onset, while in men they first
occurred at 200ms post-stimulus onset. By contrast, between-category
modulations in VEP response strength occurred at ~220ms irrespective of
gender. Further, source estimations significantly correlated with BodyMass-Indices (BMIs) of the participants of either gender. In women, a
higher BMI was found to be predictive of increased activations to food
images in distributed occipito-temporal cortices during two time periods,
i.e. ~100ms and ~220ms. Further, a lower BMI in women was correlated
with stronger responses to food images in prefrontal areas over the earlier post-stimulus epoch only. In men, merely a lower BMI was predictive
of higher neural source strengths over both the early (~100ms) and late
(~220ms) post-stimulus intervals with correlations confined to parietooccipital areas. Our results indicate that both the speed and locus of food
vs. non-food object discrimination is impacted by the gender of the
viewer. Moreover, even in normal-weighted populations, activity within
neural networks for food perception varies as a function of BMI.
F71
PERCEPTUAL AND SPATIAL MECHANISMS IN NEGLECT
DYSLEXIA Lisa S. Arduino1, Marialuisa Martelli2, Roberta Daini3; 1Istituto
di Psicologia, Università di Urbino and ISTC-CNR Roma, 2Dipartimento di
Psicologia, Sapienza Università di Roma and IRCCS Santa Lucia Roma,
3
Dipartimento di Psicologia, Università degli studi Milano-Bicocca — Patients
with neglect dyslexia (ND) tend to misread letters occupying the initial
left-sided letters of single words and nonwords. The most common errors
are substitutions and omissions. The relative proportion of these error
types varies across patients and we hypothesized this is because they are
due to different mechanisms. In particular, we propose that omissions
depend on a spatial mechanism (as unilateral spatial neglect) while substitutions reflect a perceptual one (crowding). Method: Seven righthanded patients were recruited for the study on the basis of the presence
of left unilateral spatial neglect and ND. All patients had suffered an

Poster Session F

ischemic stroke to the right hemisphere. The severity of neglect was calculated for each patient on the basis of their performance on some visualspatial tasks. The experimental task included two lists of written verbal
stimuli, presented in two conditions: standard font spacing and spaced
(center-to-center letter spacing proportional to each letter’s eccentricity).
Patients were requested to read aloud each stimulus and reading errors
were recorded. Results and conclusions: Increasing the distance between
letters increased the number of 'omission' errors. By contrast, in the
patients who presented more 'substitution' errors an increase in letter
separation did not worsen performance but rather improved it, as in the
crowding phenomenon. A correlational analysis showed that the severity of unilateral spatial neglect was related to the presence of omissions
but not substitutions. The results strongly support the view that these
two kind of ND errors depend on different mechanisms, one spatial and
the other perceptual.
F72
CONTEXTUAL PLASTICITY OF HUMAN JUDGMENTS: BEYOND
STANDARD RANDOMIZATION OF TRIALS Alexander N. Sokolov1,
Marina Pavlova2,3; 1Centre for Ophthalmology, Low Vision Clinic and Research
Laboratory, University of Tuebingen Medical School, Tuebingen, Germany,
2Cognitive and Social Developmental Neuroscience Unit, Childrens Hospital,
University of Tuebingen Medical School, Tuebingen, Germany, 3Institute of
Medical Psychology and Behavioral Neurobiology, University of Tuebingen
Medical School, Tuebingen, Germany — In cognitive neuroscience, studies
of stimulus-driven attention, decision making, implicit learning and
memory often vary statistical context for a task by employing differentfrequent stimuli, such as in repetition-priming, mismatch and oddball
paradigms. The overall frequency of occurrence of distinct stimuli is considered the primary modulatory variable for behavioral and brain
responses. Using judgments of visual speed, we challenge this view
showing that standard randomization of different-frequent stimuli for
presentation confounds the effects of overall and outset frequencies of
stimulus occurrence. Participants judged sets of visual speeds that comprised either frequent low or frequent high speeds. In four experiments,
standard and biased randomization of stimuli for presentation made
either frequent or infrequent speeds, respectively, to occur mainly at the
series outset. With standard randomization, judgments of speed assumed
their levels from the very beginning of the series and did not change
across the experiment. By contrast, with biased randomization of stimuli
(i.e., with the on-overall infrequent, either low or high speeds presented
mainly at the series outset), the judgments exhibited a striking gradual
change across the trials. We conclude that biasing the different-frequent
stimuli for presentation reveals a novel kind of contextual plasticity of
judgments that is contingent on the opposite relationship of the overall
and outset frequency of distinct stimuli. The overall- and outset-frequency processing is likely to engage separate neural mechanisms. The
findings have significant implications for neurophysiological, electrophysiological and neuroimaging studies that employ distinct stimuli
blended in varying proportions.
F73
REGULARITY AND TASK EFFECTS IN THE LEFT FUSIFORM
GYRUS DURING CHINESE CHARACTER READING Yi
Guo1,
E.Darcy Burgund1; 1Rice University — The left fusiform gyrus is hypothesized to be selectively involved in visual word processing. Nevertheless,
the particular components of reading to which this area responds is the
subject of much controversy. The purpose of Experiment 1 was to examine the role of the left fusiform gyrus in reading, in the context of a dualroute model. Accordingly, activity in the left fusiform gyrus was measured using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while subjects
performed a phonological task with regular and irregular Chinese characters. Regular characters were those containing elements that provide
phonological information for the whole character, and irregular characters were those without such phonological elements. Results exhibited
greater activity for irregular than regular characters in the left fusiform

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

gyrus, suggesting that this region is involved in the direct route of the
dual-route model. The purpose of Experiment 2 was to determine
whether the left fusiform gyrus responds preferentially to lexical phonological access, semantic access, or orthographic processing. Accordingly,
activity in the left fusiform gyrus was measured using fMRI while subjects performed phonological, semantic, and orthographic tasks with
irregular Chinese characters. A region in the left fusiform gyrus exhibited
greater activity during the orthographic task than during the phonological and semantic tasks, which did not differ, suggesting that this region is
involved in orthographic processing to a greater extent than phonological
or semantic access. In addition, two regions in the right fusiform gyrus
exhibited a similar effect. This right fusiform activity may relate to the
use of pictorial Chinese characters.
F74
NEURAL CORRELATES OF PRIOR STIMULUS AND PRIOR
PERCEPTION DURING VISUAL MOTION SEGREGATION Joel
Snyder1, Olivia Carter2, Amanda Pasinski1; 1University of Nevada, Psychology,
Las Vegas, 2University of Melbourne, Psychology — Two gratings moving in
different directions viewed through an aperture are perceived as a coherent plaid moving in one direction or two segregated gratings moving
past each other. When the angle formed by the motion directions of the
two gratings is larger, observers perceive more segregation. To examine
effects of prior angle, we presented an adaptation plaid with a small,
intermediate, or large angle, followed by a test plaid with an intermediate
angle. Stimuli were flickered on every 200 ms to elicit event-related
potentials (ERPs). When the adaptation plaid had a larger angle, the test
plaid was more often perceived as coherent, similar to suppressive aftereffects. During adaptation, large angle resulted in ERP modulations in
occipital electrodes that peaked 150 ms post-flicker; during tests following large-angle adaptation, ERP modulations in occipital electrodes
peaked at 100 and 230 ms post-flicker. To examine effects of perception
during adaptation on perception during the subsequent test, we analyzed
only those trials in which the adaptation (and test) had an intermediate
alpha. Segregated percepts during adaptation were more likely than not
to be continued during test, similar to perceptual stabilization. During
adaptation, segregated percepts resulted in ERP modulations in occipital
electrodes at 85 and 170 ms post-flicker; during tests that followed segregated percepts, ERP modulations occurred with similar timing as segregation-related modulations during adaptation. These results demonstrate
that encoding the current and prior stimulus engages brain processes
with distinct time courses, whereas encoding the current and prior perception engages brain processes with similar time courses.
F75
EFFECTS OF ORIENTATION AND EXEMPLAR ON OBJECT
PRIMING IN THE FUSIFORM CORTEX Denise Y. Harvey1, E.Darcy
Burgund1; 1Rice University — Behavioral experiments indicate the critical
role of the right hemisphere in specific-orientation and exemplar visual
form processing and the left hemisphere in abstract-orientation and
exemplar visual form processing. However, findings from neuroimaging
studies conflict in their support of these results. While researchers have
found that the right fusiform gyrus (RFG) mediates specific-orientation
and exemplar visual form processing, it remains unclear to what extent
the left fusiform gyrus (LFG) mediates abstract visual form processing.
That is, some neuroimaging studies demonstrate exemplar-abstract priming in the LFG, while another implicates orientation- but not exemplarabstract priming in this region. We investigated this inconsistency by
comparing priming in functional magnetic resonance imaging data
across four different conditions: same-orientation, same-exemplar; different-orientation, same-exemplar; same-orientation, different-exemplar;
and unprimed. In line with previous studies, priming was observed for
same-orientation, same-exemplar objects, but not different-orientation,
same-exemplar objects or same-orientation, different-exemplar objects, in
the RFG. In contrast to some studies, priming was observed for same-orientation, same-exemplar objects and different-orientation, same-exem-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

173

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

plar objects, but not same-orientation, different-exemplar objects, in the
LFG. Thus, we conclude that the RFG stores objects in an orientationand exemplar-specific manner, and the LFG stores objects in an orientation-abstract and exemplar-specific manner.
F76
RECURRENT ACTIVITY IN THE VENTRAL STREAM SUPPORTS
RECOGNITION OF VISUAL OBJECTS Alexander Clarke1, Kirsten
Taylor1,2, Lorraine K Tyler1; 1Centre for Speech, Language and the Brain,
Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, UK, 2Memory Clinic Neuropsychology Center, University Hospital Basel, Switzerland — Visual
object recognition takes place within a hierarchically-organised processing stream in ventral temporal cortex, with feature complexity increasing
from posterior to anterior regions. Activity along the stream is modulated
as a function of the information required to complete different processing
tasks, with anterior regions involved when more fine-grained analyses
are required (Tyler et al, 2004). In the present study we asked how meaningful object representations evolve over time and how the time-course of
activity along the ventral stream is modulated under different processing
conditions, by comparing basic-level naming (e.g. tiger) which requires
more detailed object information than domain-level naming (i.e. living).
We included a baseline of meaningless objects. Visual object processing
involves an initial feedforward sweep along the ventral stream within
100-150ms, which may be sufficient for broad categorical decisions, with
subsequent recurrent processing necessary for finer-grained decisions.
This predicts (a) increases in recurrent activity which (b) includes anterior regions for basic-level compared to domain-level naming or meaningless objects. We recorded MEG signals while subjects named objects at
a basic or domain-level. Sources of cortical activation were estimated
using MNE for a priori ROIs from posterior to anterior sites along the
ventral stream. All conditions displayed early bilateral responses propagating from posterior to anterior sites within 150ms, consistent with
rapid feedforward processing, followed by stronger recurrent activity
between posterior and anterior ROIs during basic-level compared to
domain-level naming. This dynamic pattern suggests that recurrent
activity along the stream may be necessary to form detailed representations of meaningful objects.
F77
ACTION RECOGNITION FROM BODY FORM ANALYSIS Markus
Lappe1, Simone Kuhlmann1, Marc de Lussanet1; 1Psychological Institute II and
Otto Creutzfeldt Center for Cognitive and Behavioral Neuroscience, Westf.
Wilhelms University, Münster, Germany — In point-light biological motion
the combination of the form of the human body and its motion is easily
perceived from very limited visual input. It is debated whether this percept results from the analysis of motion vectors via the dorsal pathway or
from the analysis of the form of the body and its changing over time via
the ventral pathway. We have proposed to use the method of lifetime
limitation of the point-lights to eliminate local motion signals in the stimulus and prohibit the motion vector route. Good performance in walking
discrimination tasks has supported a predominant role of from analysis.
Walking discrimination is a standard procedure for biological motion
studies but arguably limited in scope. In the current study we investigated the perception of limited lifetime point-light stimuli with a broader
set of stimuli, and for the more natural task of action recognition. Participants viewed a set of 33 different action stimuli (e.g. dancing, hopping,
jumping, etc.) that were recorded from human actors. The actions were
presented as point-light stimuli in which each point was shown only for a
single video frame, thereby eliminating local motion signals. Participants
had to name or describe the actions. The results showed that participants
were very good at recognizing these actions (about 90% correct) even
though they could not use motion signals for the recognition. Our findings corroborate the view that action recognition is primarily based on
the analysis of the changes of body form over time.

174

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

F78
INVESTIGATION OF BISTABLE BIOLOGICAL MOTION WITH
"SILHOUETTE SPINNER": THE POWER OF HUMAN INTENTION
AND THE BIOLOGICAL CONSTRAINT Chao-Hsuan Liu1,2, ChiHung Juan1,3, Daisy L. Hung1,3, Ovid J.L. Tzeng1,3,4; 1Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, College of Science, National Central University, Jhongli, Taiwan,
2 College of Science, National Central University, Life Sciences, Jhongli,
Taiwan, 3Laboratories for Cognitive Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taipei,
Taiwan —
Visual competition has been investigated with binocular
rivalry paradigm and other multistable phenomena such as ambiguous
figure reversal and bistable apparent motion (BAM). In this study, we
employed "silhouette spinner" as a biological BAM stimulus, which was
first created by Nobuyuki Kayahara. The silhouette spinner can be perceived either as a clockwise or an anti-clockwise spinner in spite of the
identical physical movement. We examined how subjects’ intention can
alternate their subjective percepts and how it interacts with bottom-up
factors (e.g. fixation positions, frame durations).
Our preliminary
results showed that the changing rate of the percepts was lower in the
passive viewing condition than in the active viewing condition (intentional effects). Furthermore, the intentional effects were significantly
stronger when subjects fixed at the spinner’s foot than at the body. This
pattern of results indicates that human intention can effectively change
their percepts of the bistable stimulus but this intentional effect is possibly constrained by the principle of the biological motion.
F79
TOP-DOWN ACTIVATION OF FUSIFORM CORTEX WITHOUT
SEEING FACES Ruthger Righart1,2, Frédéric Andersson1, Sophie
Schwartz1,3, Eugène Mayer4, Patrik Vuilleumier1,2,3; 1Neurology and Imaging of
Cognition Laboratory, University of Geneva, 2Swiss Center for Affective Sciences,
University of Geneva, 3Geneva Neuroscience Center, University of Geneva,
4Neuropsychology Unit, Neurology, Geneva University Hospital — Face
processing can be modified by bottom-up and top-down processes, but it is
unknown how these processes interact in patients with prosopagnosia.
We investigated a well-documented prosopagnosia patient (P.S.) who
has lesions in the right occipital and left fusiform gyrus, whereas the right
fusiform gyrus is intact and still activated during face processing. P.S.
was instructed to detect the presence of faces or houses in pictures with
different amounts of noise. P.S. showed a normal activation in the FFA
(Fusiform Face Area) to faces with low-noise. However, her FFA activated to the same degree to images containing noise-only when she was
instructed to detect faces (not when instructed to detect houses). These
results reveal that the fusiform cortex is still sensitive to task-demands
and selectively modulated by top-down processes, despite severe face
recognition deficits.
F80
DOES MENTAL ROTATION RECRUIT HUMAN MOTION AREA
MT? A MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN ANALYSIS Giorgio
Ganis1,2,3,
2,4 1
Haline Schendan ; Harvard Medical School, Radiology, Boston, MA, 2MGH/
Athinoula Martinos Center, Charlestown, MA, 3Harvard University,
Psychology, Cambridge, MA, 4Tufts University, Psychology, Medford, MA —
Mental rotation is a process thought to take place when performing spatial transformation tasks that require bringing misoriented (static) visual
images into spatial congruence with one another. The present fMRI study
tested the hypothesis that mental rotation utilizes neural operations also
recruited during motion perception. First, a localizer for human motion
area MT was used in the same subjects performing a mental rotation task
in order to determine whether mental rotation actually recruits human
motion area MT. Second, a multi-voxel pattern analysis was conducted at
the single subject level, in the common region activated by motion perception and by the mental rotation task, to determine whether the pattern
of activation was the same for the two conditions. Mental rotation activated portions of area MT in common with motion perception, both at
the group level and in the majority of individual subjects. However,

Poster Session F

multi-voxel analyses showed distinct patterns of spatial activation in the
two conditions in area MT. These results suggest that both mental rotation and motion perception recruit neural populations that carry out
motion computations in area MT but that the specific operations differ in
the two cases. To explain the different spatial pattern of activation, we
hypothesize that area MT activation elicited by motion stimuli reflects
predominantly bottom-up influences, whereas area MT activation elicited by mental rotation (when actual motion is not present but instead
visualized) reflects primarily top-down influences.
F81
THE RADICAL IS A UNIT IN CHINESE CHARACTER
PERCEPTION:
EVIDENCE
FROM
BEHAVIORAL
AND
PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL
COSTS
DUE
TO
STIMULUS
INVERSION Man-Ying Wang1, Yi-Jhong Han1, Bo-Chen Guo2; 1Soochow
University, Psychology, Taipei, Taiwan, 2National Taiwan University,
Psychology, Taipei, Taiwan — The recognition of Chinese characters is considered to be a process mediated by radicals. Evidence is not as clear on
whether the radical actually constitutes a unit in character perception.
This study examines recognition costs for the inversion of a two-radical
character versus a single-radial character, with faces and objects as control stimuli. The tasks are lexical, face and object decision. RT inversion
cost for two-radical characters is about twice as much as single-radical
characters and faces. Inversion costs are exhibited in the reduction of P3
positivity as in the study of mental rotation (Heil, 2002). The magnitude
of P3 reduction over parietal/temporal electrodes parallels behavioral
effects so that two-radical characters resulted in greater P3 reduction by
inversion than single-radical characters and faces. These findings suggest
that the radial serves as a unit in the perceptual processing of inverted
and, most likely, upright Chinese characters.
F82
DIRECTION-SPECIFIC AFTEREFFECTS ARISE FROM CELLS
TUNED TO DIFFERENT SOCIAL CUE TYPES Rebecca P. Lawson1,
Andrew J. Calder1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge,
United Kingdom — Electrophysiological recording in the anterior superior
temporal sulcus (aSTS) of macaques has demonstrated separate cell populations responsive to different gaze directions, head directions and body
orientations (Perrett et al. 1992). A proportion of these cells responded to
different cues (e.g. heads or bodies) oriented in the same direction (e.g.
facing left). Recent psychophysical studies have found direction-specific
aftereffects in humans following adaptation to a single gaze direction
(Jenkins et al, 2006; Calder et al. 2008); similar effects have also been
found for heads and bodies (Fang & He, 2007; Lawson et al, in press).
However, it is unclear if these effects occur at the level of direction-selective cells tuned to specific classes of social cue (i.e., gaze, head, and body
representations) or putative social attention cells tuned to the same direction irrespective of cue type. We address this by measuring participants’
discrimination of head direction following adaptation to 20&deg; left and
right oriented heads and bodies. A third "non-social" adaptor, directionally oriented chairs, was included to rule out the possibility that any
aftereffects simply reflect recruitment of general 3D object representations. Aftereffects were found for the head adaptor condition only. These
effects transferred across changes in the size and identity of the heads,
indicating that these effects were not the result of adaptation to low-level
properties. Our study provides the first evidence that direction-specific
aftereffects in humans occur as a result of adapting direction-selective
cells tuned to specific classes of social cue.
F84
IS 30 THE NEW 20? BEHAVIORAL EVIDENCE FOR PROTRACTED
DEVELOPMENT OF FACE RECOGNITION Laura Germine1, Bradley
Duchaine2, Ken Nakayama1; 1Harvard University, 2University College
London — Face perception and recognition is important over the entire
life span, from early infancy to old age. There is an implicit assumption in
the literature, however, that perceptual abilities reach their peak at or
before the end of adolescence and so no study has investigated face learn-

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

ing competence beyond early adolescence. We investigated face recognition development using a variant of the Cambridge Face Memory Test
(CFMT), where subjects learn six new faces, followed by stringent tests of
recognition under conditions of varied lighting, pose and image degradation (Duchaine and Nakayama, 2006). From the results of over 47,000
subjects on the web, we found that performance rises steeply postpuberty, and does not peak until just after age 30. In a second experiment, we replicated this pattern of performance for recognition of unfamiliar adult and children’s faces, but found no evidence of a late
performance peak for inverted faces. This indicates that this peak is specific to recognition of upright faces. Finally, in a third experiment, we
found a similar late performance peak for faces, but not for names, with
an intermediate but somewhat late peak for recognition of eyeglasses.
Our data provide the first behavioral evidence for late or delayed maturation of face processing, in particular the learning of new faces. This is
consistent with recent studies showing slower maturation of face-specific
areas in the brain (Golarai et al., 2007). It remains to be determined
whether this late peak arises from increased experience with faces.
F85
SELECTIVITY OF VISUAL WORD FORM AREA IS DEPENDENT
ON ATTENTION AND READING SKILL Li-Wei King1, Dafna Palti1,
Manuel Perea2, Jessica Kim1, Caroline Huang1, John Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 2Universitat de València — An area of left fusiform
cortex, commonly referred to as the visual word form area (VWFA), has
consistently been shown to activate during the processing of written language. However, the question of whether the VWFA differentiates
between strings of differing lexicality and legality is still open. In this
study, we tested whether attention modulates the selectivity of the
VWFA, and whether this selectivity could be influenced by reading skill.
We localized the VWFA in a group of normal reading young adults by
selecting left fusiform clusters for each individual that activated more for
words than for photographs of faces and houses. We then extracted the
activation of these ROIs while participants performed a spatial cueing
task that directed their attention either towards or away from three different types of letter strings (words, pseudowords, and consonant
strings). Participants were divided into two groups based on standardized reading measures. The lower-reading group showed no significant
differences in VWFA response to different stimulus types, regardless of
attentional manipulation. The higher-reading group showed an interaction between attention and string type. Specifically, the better readers
showed higher VWFA activation for words than for consonants strings in
the unattended condition, but not in the attended condition. Thus, selective response of the VWFA toward orthographic regularity is not uniform
across contexts, but varies according to individual reading skill and
attention.
F86
A DISTANCE PRINCIPLE OF ORGANIZATION OF THE VENTRAL
VISUAL STREAM Elinor Amit1, Yaacov Trope1, Galit Yovel2; 1NYU, 2TelAviv University — Perceiving the distance of an object from the self is a
fundamental feature of the visual system. Here we used fMRI to test the
hypothesis that the ventral visual stream represents distance-related
information in discrete cortical regions. In particular, object-related
regions (Lateral Occipital Complex - LOC) are biased towards proximal
stimuli, whereas scene-related regions (Parahipocampal Place Area PPA) are biased towards distant stimuli. Participants were presented
with Ponzo lines, which create an illusion of depth. In one condition, the
stimuli (pictures of objects or houses) appeared in the perceived proximal
position. In the second condition, the stimuli appeared in the perceived
distal position. In addition, we ran a localizer, which included scenes,
objects and scrambled images of objects. We defined for each subject the
PPA (Scenes > Objects, p < 10-4, uncorrected) and the LOC (Objects >
Scrambled Objects, p < 10-4, uncorrected). Consistent with our hypothesis, we found a double dissociation such that object areas showed a
higher response to perceived proximal stimuli than perceived distal stim-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

175

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

uli, whereas scene-related regions showed a higher response to perceived
distal objects than perceived proximal objects. Importantly, this effect
was found for both objects and houses. This outcome suggests the plausibility of a distance principle of organization of the ventral visual stream.
F87
NEURAL RESPONSE TO PHYSICAL SIMILARITY TO THE SELF
DIFFERS DEPENDING ON THE TRUSTWORTHINESS OF THE
1Princeton
OTHER FACE Sara
Verosky1,
Alexander
Todorov1;
University — People have been found to self-enhance across a number of
domains, including self-face recognition. In order to investigate how this
positivity affects the processing of the self-face, we conducted a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study examining whether neural response to physical similarity to the self would differ depending on
the valence of the face the self was morphed with. We morphed models
of participants’ faces with novel faces that were either trustworthy or
untrustworthy in appearance and we asked them to decide whether each
morph looked more like them or more like the other person. Behaviorally, participants were more likely to say the trustworthy as compared to
untrustworthy morphs looked like the self. Bilateral inferotemporal cortex, right middle temporal cortex, and right prefrontal cortex all showed
an interaction between the linear effect of physical similarity to the self
and trustworthiness, responding more strongly as the trustworthy morphs looked more like the self and less strongly as the untrustworthy morphs looked like the self. Increased behavioral discrimination between the
trustworthy and untrustworthy morphs of the self was correlated with
increased activity to the trustworthy as compared to untrustworthy morphs in the right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). These findings indicate that
trustworthy as compared to untrustworthy faces are seen as more similar
to the self and they suggest that the IFG plays a special role in self-representation.
F88
YOU NEED BOTH SIDES OF THE BRAIN TO PROCESS MY
BODY Boris Suchan1, Denise Minnebusch1, Martin Busch2, Dietmar
Schulte3, Dietrich Grönemeyer2, Silja Vocks3; 1Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, Neuropsychology, Ruhr-University, Bochum, Germany,
2University of Witten-Herdecke, Radiology, Germany, 3Ruhr-University,
Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Bochum, Germany — The extrastriate
body area (EBA), a specialised area for body processing is in the focus of
research over the last years. By contrasting human bodies and objects,
reliable activation can be elicited in a bilateral distributed network covering the lateral EBA and also the medial fusiform body areas (FBA). This
organisation is similar to that involved in face processing. We used
dynamic causal modelling to get further insight in the organisation and
interaction of this network. Different models were estimated and compared using Bayesian statistics. The most likely model suggests bilateral
effective connectivity of the EBAs but not FBAs. Detailed results yield
evidence for a hemispheric balanced network without any hemispheric
lateralisation. Each EBA is effectively connected to its associated FBA
unidirectional. Both EBAs show strong effective connectivity with a more
pronounced effect of the right onto the left EBA. These results yield
strong evidence for balanced effective connectivity within the network
involved in body processing. They further suggest parallel networks like
used in face processing.
F89
A RUSH TO JUDGMENT Jonathan Page1, Laura Aldrich1, Brandy
Baczwaski1, Laurie Colson1, Kaley Radermacher1; 1Minnesota State UniversityMankato — Discrimination under time constraints leads to errors in judgment. We looked at this using standard behavioral measures of correct/
incorrect responses and reaction times, and using electrophysiological
measures of P300 and late positive potential (LPP) waveform components of the event-related potential (ERP). Participants viewed a series of
achromatic and colored circles with either vertical (target) or horizontal
(standard) stripes in two timing conditions: fast (ITI 800 ms) and slow
(ITI 1.6 s). We were specifically interested in error processing and focused

176

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

our analyses on misses and false alarms. Differences in behavioral
responses (RTs) and cortical recordings (P300 and LPP) were found in
these conditions and compared. Our results suggest that ’snap’ judgments lead to more visual errors, with correlates in neural processing that
are evident in both P300 and LPP components of ERP waveforms.
F90
PATTERN
ANALYSIS
OF
CATEGORY-SELECTIVE
EXTRASTRIATE CORTICAL ACTIVITY DURING PERCEPTION
AND IMAGERY OF SCENES Matthew Johnson1, Marcia Johnson1,2;
1
Yale University, Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, 2Yale University,
Psychology — Reflective processes such as visual mental imagery and
visual working memory maintenance can modulate activity in categoryselective extrastriate areas of cortex such as the fusiform face area (FFA)
and parahippocampal place area (PPA). While it is thought that this
activity likely represents a re-instantiation of activity patterns experienced during perception and thus carries information relevant to the
identity of the representation in question, relatively few studies have
attempted to decode the information represented by reflectively induced
activity in such areas. In the present study, participants either viewed
(Perceive conditions) or were instructed to form vivid mental images
(Image conditions) of four well-learned scene stimuli while being
scanned with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) at a relatively high resolution (2mm x 2mm x 2.5mm voxels). Scene-selective
areas of posterior visual association cortex were identified with a separate localizer task, and scene-selective voxels were subjected to several
types of pattern analysis to determine whether the spatial pattern of
activity in those areas conveyed information about the task being performed (perception versus imagery) and/or the identity of the specific
stimulus being perceived or imagined. Preliminary analyses indicate
that, even after accounting for overall differences in activation magnitude
between the Perceive and Image conditions, activity patterns in PPA and
other scene-selective regions still differ depending on the task being performed. Thus far, we have not found patterns that distinguish specific
stimuli, but future work will continue to explore the possibility of stimulus-specific activity patterns in category-selective extrastriate cortex during reflective processing.
F91
REORGANIZATION OF ATTENTIONAL NETWORKS WITH
CORTICAL DEAFFERENTATION Keith Main1, Temilade Adelore1,
Erin Kinzel1, Leanne Metcalfe1, Kevin Moloney1, Vijay Palvia1, Zane Blanton1,
Susan Primo2, Julie Jacko3, Eric Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology,
2Emory University, 3University of Minnesota — The visual cortex of the
mammalian brain has a topographic relationship with the retina. This
relationship can be altered through changes in retinal input (i.e. cortical
reorganization). Recent research shows that cortical reorganization
occurs in adult humans with macular degeneration (MD), an eye disease
that results in the loss of central vision. Baker et al. (2005) reported that
activation in the lesion projection zone occurs for MD patients’ when
visual stimuli are presented to their preferred retinal locations (PRL) (i.e.,
the intact retinal area used to fixate in place of the diseased macula) (c.f.,
Schumacher et al., 2008). However, Masuda et al. (2008) showed this finding may be primarily due to attentional feedback, not feed-forward reorganization. Whatever the mechanism, if reorganization does occur, it
may not only affect the primary visual cortex but also areas involved in
the allocation of spatial attention. MD patients often dramatically alter
their oculomotor behavior to accommodate the location of PRLs. Is this
change accompanied by a concomitant alteration in attention networks?
Using fMRI tasks that have reliably demonstrated activation of attentional networks (Corbetta & Shulman, 2002; Mangun et al. 1998), we
show a MD patient with aberrant activity in areas involved in exogenous
but not endogenous allocation of attention. This finding suggests a reorganization of attention networks in MD patients, a change that could inturn influence V1 through top-down feedback.

Poster Session F

F92
PREDICTING DISTRIBUTED PATTERNS OF BRAIN ACTIVITY
DURING COLOR PERCEPTION Steven M. Frankland1, Sharon L.
Thompson-Schill1; 1University of Pennsylvania, Center for Cognitive
Neuroscience — Following recent advances in multi-voxel pattern analyses of fmri data (e.g., Mitchell et al. 2008; Kay et al. 2008), we attempted to
develop a general predictive model of cortical activity during a color perception task. A computational model learned the relationship between
stimulus variance along the axes of different three-dimensional color
spaces and variance in BOLD signal in bi-lateral ventral temporal and
occipital cortices. Once trained, the model successfully predicted a distributed pattern of activity for previously unseen color categories, not just
unseen instances thereof. Moreover, using a spherical searchlight technique (Kriegeskorte et al. 2006), we were able to compare the predictive
accuracies of multi-voxel models trained on different color spaces in local
brain regions previously implicated in color perception. Along with
other recent work, this constitutes an improvement in the attempt to
leverage pattern classification analyses of fmri data to understand neural
representation. For unlike previous approaches in which binary categories are associated with patterns of brain activity (e.g, Haxby et al., 2001),
we can (1) predict a neural signature for entire color categories (e.g., red)
that were not included in the training of the model and (2) compare the
performance of models trained on different stimulus spaces to evaluate
which space descriptions co-vary with neural activity across brain
regions.
F93
VIEW INVARIANCE IN MASKED REPETITION PRIMING EFFECTS
IS A FUNCTION OF PRIME EXPOSURE Marianna Eddy1, Phillip
Holcomb2; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Tufts University — How
objects are represented in the brain has been debated for decades. The
current experiment provides evidence that achieving viewpoint invariance in priming can depend on the amount of feed-forward processing of
the prime. We previously examined event-related potential (ERP) effects
of masked repetition priming when the prime object was rotated
30&deg;, 60&deg;, or 150&deg; from the conventional target view. Early
perceptual processing, as indicated by the N190/P190 effect, showed
invariance to target objects regardless of how much the prime was
rotated. However, invariance in a later, higher level component (N400)
was only achieved for the 30&deg; rotation condition. One explanation
for the lack of invariance on the N400 is not enough time for feed-forward
processing to activate a higher level, presumably viewpoint independent
representation with a 50 ms prime exposure. The current experiment
used the same masked priming paradigm as the previous study, but
increased the prime duration to 90 ms. Intact perceptual priming effects
(N190/P190) were found for all of the rotation conditions. In addition,
N400 effects or trends towards effects were found for all degrees of rotation with increased prime exposure. These results suggest that perceptual
information activated during brief (50 ms) prime exposure is not sufficient to produce higher level benefits in target processing when the prime
is rotated in depth. However, with increased exposure to the prime, presumably a higher level representation of this object is activated that
allows for a benefit in target processing even when the viewpoint of the
prime and target differ.
F94
CATEGORIZATION OF ACCUMULATED SENSORY EVIDENCE: A
FLEXIBLE LINK BETWEEN DECISION AND ACTION Marios
Philiastides1, Paul Sajda2, Hauke Heekeren1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human
Development, Neurocognition of Decision Making Group, 2Columbia
University, Biomedical Engineering — Animal models of perceptual decision-making often include three main processing stages: sensory evidence representation, temporal integration of sensory evidence and
evidence categorization, which is often expressed through a motor
response. Though this hierarchical model is appealing, the boundaries
between the latter two stages, if in fact such discrete stages exist, remain

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

unclear. The problem arises because in monkeys the areas implicated in
integrating the sensory evidence are also the ones that select, and execute
motor responses. In contrast, recent human neuroimaging studies identified decision-related activity independent of the response modality used,
suggesting that humans might have evolved an abstract decision-making
network that allows a flexible link between decision and action. To test
whether there is a separate categorization stage, we designed an object
categorization task using a novel dynamic stimulus to provide accumulating evidence while simultaneously recording EEG data from thirteen
subjects. Using single-trial analysis techniques we identified a late,
response-locked component, which not only correlated with psychophysical performance but was also a good predictor of the content of a subject's choice. Time-course analysis of the period preceding this
component revealed ramp-like activity consistent with evidence accumulation. Source localization places this component in left medial parietal
cortex, a region that was shown to communicate with both areas exhibiting accumulator activity as well as premotor and motor cortices. Taken
together these results suggest that human perceptual decision-making
entails a separate categorization stage, which converts the accumulated
evidence into a categorical decision and provides a flexible link between
decision and action.
F95
SENSITIVITY TO EMOTIONAL VARIANCE IN A TEXTURE OF
FACES Jason Haberman1,2, Pegan Lee1,2, David Whitney1,2; 1UC Davis
Center for Mind and Brain, 2UC Davis, Psychology — Humans are sensitive
to the statistical characteristics of a scene. The visual system efficiently
derives a mean representation across multiple dimensions, including
low-level features such as dot size (Ariely, 2001; Chong & Treisman,
2003), motion (Alvarez & Oliva, 2008), and oriented gratings (Parkes et
al., 2001), as well as high-level features such as faces (Haberman & Whitney, 2007, 2008). We explored whether the visual system represents
another kind of high-level summary statistic - variance. After viewing a
set of 16 emotionally distinct faces for 2 seconds, observers adjusted a
group of test faces to match the variance of the set just displayed. Observers were surprisingly precise in their ability to report emotional variance;
they showed a nonlinear dependence on the degree of set variance that
resembled a dipper function. Specifically, variance sensitivity improved
slightly with increased set variance relative to a homogeneous set of
faces, followed by parametrically decreasing sensitivity as variance continued to increase. Dipper functions have been described for many other
visual domains, including blur (Watt & Morgan, 1983), contrast discrimination (Nachmias & Sansbury, 1974), and even orientation variance
detection in textures (Morgan, Chubb, & Solomon, 2008). To our knowledge, this work is the first of its kind to demonstrate sensitivity to variance in complex objects, and it is interesting to note that the data
resemble the dipper pattern found for low-level visual features. This supports the notion that a specialized mechanism for variance detection
exists that is adapted to assess crowds of faces.
F96
THE
PERCEPTION
OF
IMPOSSIBLE
GESTURES:
MEG
EVIDENCE Diogo Almeida1, David Corina2, David Poeppel1; 1University of
Maryland, College Park, 2University of California, Davis — Visual
objects
and scenes elicit a cascade of responses, the peaks of which have been
argued to index different stages in visual processing and differing neuronal selectivity. Here we test, using MEG, the response properties of a
novel stimulus crafted to test gesture and sign (possible versus anatomically impossible arm/hand configurations) and compare the evoked field
to the well-known cortical signals driven by faces (e.g. M130, M170).
American Sign Language signs were edited to become physically impossible gestures. Participants (n=17, ASL naïve) were asked to judge
whether each stimulus (static presentation) was a physically possible gesture while undergoing MEG. Passive viewing of upright or inverted emotionally neutral faces was used as a control task. MEG data from the same
posterior sources that best capture the M170 for faces show that no effect

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

177

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

of gesture anomaly was observed in the M170. However, anomalous gestures elicited higher amplitudes 600-1200ms post stimulus onset in the
left hemisphere and 400-1000ms post stimulus onset in the right hemisphere. Compared to the control (faces), (i) at 130ms (M130), gestures
elicited higher amplitudes (ii) at 190ms (M170), gestures elicited later and
more attenuated amplitudes and (iii) from 250ms onwards, gestures elicited higher amplitudes (bilaterally, in all cases). We conclude that detection of specific kinds of visual information is structured in early
perceptual processes, but detection of configural anomaly involves both
early (more transient) and later (more extended) perceptual processes.
We are currently collecting data from ASL users to investigate how lexical knowledge interacts with gesture anomaly detection.
F97
NEURAL
CONNECTIVITY
OF
EXPERIENCED
VISUAL
INFORMATION Anthony Herdman1, John Gaspar1; 1Simon Fraser
University, Psychology — We will present our findings on the neural connectivity within a network used for orthographic perception. We applied
phase-coherence analysis methods to magnetoencephalographic data collected during a letter/nonletter judgement task. Phase-locking values
between source waveforms for predefined frequency bands identified the
connectivity amongst brain regions responsible for detecting experienced
(letters) from inexperienced (nonletters) stimuli. Significantly larger
phase-locking to letter than nonletter stimuli occurred in the theta band
(3-8 Hz) amongst visual areas at about 140 ms. However, there was a
stronger theta phase-coherence between right occipital and left inferior
frontal sources around this time for nonletter than letter stimuli. In the
alpha band (8-13 Hz) larger phase coherences occurred in visual cortices
similar to the theta band and likely reflect differences in synchronous
activity of the evoked visual responses. There was generally a greater
alpha desynchronization in visual cortices that occurred around 250 ms
and persisted longer for nonletter than letter stimuli. These results might
indicate that more processing is required for nonletter stimuli in order to
rule out all possible perceptual hypotheses that the nonletter could be a
letter. Our results will be presented in the context that functional connectivity of the visual network is altered by experience with visual stimuli in
order to allow for rapid identification as compared to novel/inexperienced stimuli, such as nonletters.
F98
EVENT-RELATED FMRI OF INTEGRAL AND SEPARABLE
DIMENSIONS IN SIMPLE VISUAL OBJECTS Anthony
Cate1,
Xiaojiang Kang1,2, Timothy Herron1, David Woods1,2,3,4; 1Veterans
Administration Northern California Health Care System, 2UC Davis,
Neurology, 3UC Davis, Center for Neuroscience, 4UC Davis, Center for Mind
and Brain — This study tested the hypothesis that different regions in
both ventral and dorsal extrastriate visual cortex encode information
about the size and shape of simple visual objects. Event-related fMRI
responses were measured to pairs of briefly-presented shapes taken from
a set of 5 simple rectangles that varied parametrically in width and
height. Stimuli were presented in a counterbalanced sequence that
included baseline fixation trials. Trials were binned according to the pattern of dimensional change in the stimulus pair. After participants’ cerebral hemispheres were inflated and normalized to a cortical surface
curvature template using FreeSurfer, analyses distinguished voxels sensitive to changes in the integral object dimensions of aspect ratio and surface area, as well as to changes in width and height. Contrasts were
performed to identify visual regions that showed greater BOLD
responses to changes in aspect ratio (shape) than to changes in area and
vice versa, and regions were characterized in terms of the degree to
which they responded to changes in width and height as integral or separable dimensions. Voxels sensitive to aspect ratio changes were identified in the medial fusiform gyrus, and voxels sensitive to surface area
changes were found in the posterior parahippocampal gyrus. Subregions
of the posterior parietal cortex were also found to be sensitive to both criteria as well. This study shows that the functional specificity of extrastri-

178

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

ate visual areas, including regions that are typically selective for images
of complex objects, can be characterized in terms of basic modes information-processing using simple shapes.
F99
HIGHER-LEVEL VISUAL AREAS ENCODE PERCEIVED OBJECT
POSITION Jason Fischer1, David Whitney1; 1University of California,
Davis; Center for Mind and Brain, Psychology — Beyond early retinotopic
cortex, the human visual system contains a host of higher-level, specialized regions, selectively tuned to stimuli such as motion and optic flow
(MT+), faces (FFA), objects (LOC), and scenes (PPA). While these areas
can be reliably parceled on the basis of stimulus preference, their other
functional properties such as the precision and nature of position coding
are not well understood. Specifically, while retinotopy and center-periphery biases have been reported in some of these areas, it is possible that
additional sources of information such as head and eye position also
influence position coding at higher stages in the visual processing hierarchy. In the present study, we tested the degree to which activity in
higher-level visual areas reflects perceived versus retinal stimulus position. In an fMRI experiment, subjects performed a 5AFC position discrimination task; we dissociated retinal and perceived stimulus position by
analyzing the trials in which subjects misreported the positions of the
stimuli. Using a multivariate pattern analysis to track the coupling of the
BOLD response with parametric stimulus changes, we found that activity
in areas MT+, FFA, PPA, LO, and pFs reflects perceived object position
significantly more precisely than it reflects retinal position. Early visual
areas, on the other hand, preferentially coded the physical positions of
the stimuli. Our results demonstrate that position coding in higher-level
visual areas incorporates extra-retinal information, and more closely
reflects the position in which we perceive an object than the position in
which it falls on the retina.
F100
TEMPORAL-NASAL ASYMMETRY OF THE N170 RESPONSES TO
FACE-LIKE PATTERNS IN THE VISUAL PERIPHERY Przemyslaw
Tomalski1, Gergely Csibra1,2, Mark H. Johnson1; 1Centre for Brain and
Cognitive Development, Birkbeck, University of London, UK, 2Central
European University, Philosophy, Budapest, Hungary — Newborns
and
adults alike show preferential orienting towards upright schematic face
(Config stimulus - white oval with three black dots), an effect suggested
to be mediated by the superior colliculus and the retinotectal visual pathway. We investigated whether the N170, a face-sensitive ERP component
indexing face detection, is modulated by the contrast polarity and orientation of Config stimuli and whether it shows the temporal-nasal hemifield asymmetry. In two experiments participants passively observed
upright or inverted Config stimuli with normal or reversed contrast
polarity, while monitoring the central fixation stimulus. In Experiment 1,
the contrast polarity and orientation of face-like patterns presented in the
fovea were found to interact, modulating the N170 in a face-typical manner. It peaked earlier and was less negative to upright positive polarity
than to inverted or/and negative polarity stimuli. In Experiment 2, the
influences of the retinotectal pathway on this effect were tested by presenting the stimuli monocularly to either the temporal or the nasal visual
field. The temporal/nasal hemifield factor influenced the modulation of
the N170 amplitude by both contrast polarity and orientation. The N170
peaked earlier in response to stimuli presented in the temporal than in
the nasal visual field. Our results are consistent with the existence of a
low-level, subcortical, face-biasing mechanism that facilitates rapid
detection of faces and face-like stimuli. The visual input to the superior
colliculus appears to modulate the activity of cortical face processing
areas, which generate the N170 component.
F101
RELATING
NEURAL
OBJECT
REPRESENTATIONS
TO
PERCEPTUAL
JUDGMENTS
WITH
REPRESENTATIONAL
SIMILARITY ANALYSIS Marieke Mur1,2, Mirjam Meys1,2, Jerzy
Bodurka1,3, Peter Bandettini1,3, Nikolaus Kriegeskorte1; 1Section on Functional

Poster Session F

Imaging Methods, Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, National Institute of
Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 2Cognitive
Neuroscience, Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands, 3Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Facility, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD — Human inferior temporal cortex (hIT) has been shown to
be involved in the representation of visual objects. Recent studies have
begun to investigate the relationship between perceived object similarity
and similarity of response patterns in hIT. These studies often used a
small set of (novel) stimuli from a few a priori defined categories. Here,
we use a stimulus set consisting of 96 object images from a wide range of
object categories including faces, body parts, animals, places, and artificial objects. We compare the neural and perceptual similarity structure of
these 96 object images using representational similarity analysis. We
performed BOLD fMRI measurements at high resolution (voxel size
1.95x1.95x2 mm3). Activity in response to 96 different object photos was
measured in four subjects. hIT was defined at a range of sizes by selecting
the most visually responsive voxels, based on independent data. The
neural similarity structure of hIT response patterns was constructed by
computing the dissimilarity (1-correlation distance) between each pair of
object activity patterns. Subjects were asked to arrange the 96 object
images in 2D to report perceptual similarity. The neural and perceptual
similarity structures were significantly correlated (r =0.46, p<0.0001).
This indicates that objects that are perceived as similar tend to elicit similar response patterns in hIT. In addition, both structures showed a categorical organization, with the main clusters being animate and inanimate
objects. These findings suggest that, for a wide range of real-world
objects, similarity of neural object representations in hIT reflects perceived object similarity.

Monday, March 23, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

sia, on a task that required the detection of gradual changes in color and
brightness of a 5 degree disc, presented on a CRT. The colored disc
changed every 33 ms in chromaticity along one of three different MacAdam ellipses in color space (200 equal steps per revolution), while keeping the luminance constant. The achromatic disc increased and decreased
every 33 ms linearly in luminance between 10 and 55 cd/m2 (in 100
steps). Results for these patients, who showed average or above average
performance on several tasks designed to test low-level color and luminance (contrast) perception, yielded a double dissociation. The brightness
agnosic patient was within normal range for the colored disc but much
slower to detect brightness differences, whereas the color agnosic patient
was within normal range for the achromatic disc, but much slower for the
colored disc (often needing multiple revolutions around the ellipses
before detecting a change). Interestingly, a control patient with achromatopsia was also within normal range on the colored disc. Despite the
general agreement that low-level visual functions must be intact in agnosia, these results suggest that a modality specific impairment in the detection of gradual changes might underlie the phenomenon of visual
agnosia.

F102
VISUAL TRAFFIC JAMS: CROWDING OF TWO-TONE CARS
Amrita Puri1, Faraz Farzin1,2, David Whitney1,2; 1Center for Mind and Brain,
University of California, Davis, 2University of California, Psychology,
Davis — Crowding refers to the increased difficulty in perceiving nonfoveal objects when they are flanked by other objects. This phenomenon
is typically explored using stimuli that can be readily segmented into
parts or features; it is thought that when too closely spaced, interference
between these low-level features contributes to crowding. Recent work
using Mooney faces, two-tone images lacking discernable features, demonstrates that crowding can also occur selectively between higher-level,
holistic representations (Farzin et al., under review). Here, we tested
whether crowding occurs for non-face objects containing little or no lowlevel information that would support part-based recognition. Participants fixated a small square while a two-tone, Mooney-like car photograph briefly flashed at varying eccentricities either with (crowded) or
without (uncrowded) flanker cars, and reported whether the orientation
of the target car was to the right or left. Discrimination accuracy
decreased with increasing eccentricity and with flanker presence, but was
unaffected by flankers at the fovea, consistent with a between-object
crowding account. However, when participants were separately shown
an uncrowded two-tone car of varying size, performance increased with
image size at all non-foveal eccentricities, with the magnitude of the
required scaling factors suggesting an additional contribution of withinobject crowding. The results suggest that crowding occurs both within
and between objects.
F103
VISUAL AGNOSIA, A DEFICIT IN TEMPORAL VISUAL
INFORMATION PROCESSING? Maarten van der Smagt1, Susan te
Pas1, Tanja Nijboer1; 1Experimental Psychology, Helmholtz Institute & Utrecht
University — Visual agnosia is generally defined as the loss of ability to
identify, name and/or recognize objects, faces shapes, colors or even
brightness (i.e. an impairment of detailed visual knowledge), despite
intact (low-level) visual perception and memory functions. Here we
tested two patients, one with color agnosia and one with brightness agno-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

179

Poster Session G
Emotion
G1
UNIVERSAL AND CULTURALLY-SPECIFIC NEURAL BASIS OF
INGROUP BIAS IN EMPATHY Bobby K. Cheon1, Dong-Mi Im2, Tokiko
Harada1, Vani A. Mathur1, Jason Scimeca1, Hyun-Wook Park2, Joan Y. Chiao1,3;
1
Northwestern University, Psychology, 2Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, 3Northwestern Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program — Empathy, the capacity to understand and share the emotional states of others, is
associated with neural response primarily within bilateral insula and anterior cingulate cortex. Both individuals and culture groups vary in the
degree to which they show greater empathy for the suffering of their own
group members. Here we examined the universal and culturally-specific
neural bases of ingroup biases in empathy. Using cross-cultural neuroimaging at 3T, we measured neural activity in native Korean and CauasianAmerican participants while they viewed images of either ingroup or outgroup members in either painful or neutral situations. All participants
showed greater neural activity in cortical midline structures, such as the
medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) and posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), to
ingroup relative to outgroup pain. Additionally, Caucasian-American
participants compared to native Korean participants showed greater right
parahippocampal and bilateral fusiform activity in response to ingroup
pain. By contrast, Korean participants relative to Caucasian-American
participants showed greater MPFC, PCC and left insula response to
ingroup pain relative to outgroup pain. Taken together, these findings
indicate that ingroup biases in empathic reactions share similar neural
substrates across cultures, yet the distress of ingroup members may elicit
distinct cognitive and affective responses between cultures.
G2
NEURAL AND BEHAVIORAL CORRELATES UNDERLYING
EMOTION REGULATION OF RISKY DECISION-MAKING Laura N.
Martin1, Mauricio R. Delgado1; 1Rutgers University — Decisions are often
influenced by one’s emotional state, at times leading to maladaptive
behaviors. The positive emotional state induced by the expectation of winning the lottery, for example, may tempt an individual to spend excessively for a chance at the jackpot. Thus, it is important to understand how
to better control emotional responses to affective stimuli present in society.
It is plausible that effective cognitive control, achieved by antecedent
focused emotion regulation strategies, can diminish the impact of positive
emotions and promote goal-directed behavior. The current study tested
whether the benefits of emotion regulation would extend beyond emotional experience to subsequent decision-making. Participants in the scanner were presented with a picture representing a choice between potential
monetary rewards. While viewing the picture, participants were cued to
respond naturally (Look condition), increase (Excite regulation condition)
or decrease their excitement (Relax regulation condition). In the Excite
and Relax regulation conditions, participants altered their emotions by
imagining exciting (e.g., riding roller coasters) or relaxing (e.g., napping on
the beach) scenes, respectively. After the picture presentation, participants
faced a choice between a gamble (e.g., 50% chance of winning $12) and a
sure thing (e.g., 100% chance of winning $6). Participants gambled less
during the Relax condition (compared to Look or Excite) consistent with
the hypothesis that decreases in positive emotion can promote better decision-making. Moreover, this effect was stronger in female subjects. Future
analysis will focus on the neural basis underlying the successful regulation
of positive emotions probing the role of cortico-basal ganglia circuits.

180

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

G4
NEURAL CORRELATES FOR PROCESSING BIOLOGICAL AND
SOCIAL EMOTIONAL STIMULI Michiko Sakaki1,2,3, Kazuhisa Niki1;
1National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 2Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science, 3University of Southern California — Emotions often promote individual survival or reproduction by directing
behaviors to biologically significant stimuli (e.g., food; dead animals),
while they also contribute to social adaptation by directing behaviors to
socially significant stimuli (e.g., emotional faces) (Britton, et al. 2006). The
present study aimed to examine the neural substrates associated with processing biological and social emotional stimuli. By using photographs and
words, we also addressed whether emotional pictorial materials and verbal materials recruit similar neural substrates or not. In the scanning session, sixteen participants were presented with either a photograph or a
word, both of which were manipulated in terms of stimulus type (biological, social, neutral, and nonsense), and they rated each item for whether
they liked it or not. The results revealed that social emotional pictures and
social emotional words produced activity in similar brain regions, such as
the posterior cingulate, the left superior frontal gyrus, and the bilateral
occipitotemporal gyri. In contrast, biological emotional words produced
activity in different brain regions from biological emotional pictures. In
other words, biological emotional pictures induced activity in the bilateral
thalamus, the midbrain, and the left amygdala, whereas biological emotional words did not produce activity in any of these regions. These
results suggest (a) the involvement of the subcortical regions in processing
biological emotional pictures, (b) the involvement of cortical regions in
processing social emotional materials, and (c) the larger stimulus type
effects (verbal vs. pictorial) for biological emotional stimuli than for social
ones.
G5
ATTENTION ORIENTATION IN ADULTS AND CHILDREN
EXPOSED TO TRAUMA Kara Lindstrom1,2,3, Jennifer Britton1, Karin
Mogg4, Brendan Bradley4, Monique Ernst1, Christina Hoven5, Yair Bar-Haim6,
Daniel Pine1; 1SDAN/NIMH/NIH, 2Clinical Neuroscience/Karolinska Institutet,
3Stockholm Brain Institute, 4Southampton University, Psychology, 5Child
Psychiatric Epidemiology Group, Columbia University, 6Tel Aviv University,
Psychology — After witnessing a traumatic event, people may have a
higher risk of developing an anxiety disorder. Some individuals with anxiety disorders show an abnormal attention orientation to threat; thus, attention biases towards threat may be present in individuals exposed to a
traumatic event. The dot-probe task, an attention orientation paradigm,
was administered to assess attention bias towards or away from an emotional cue (happy or angry face) in parents and children (age 9-15) exposed
to the World Trade Center (WTC) attack on September 11th, 2001 and control subjects. Compared to parents with low exposure to events of September 11th, highly exposed parents show greater attention bias towards
angry faces. When the parent was evacuated from WTC, the evacuated
parents have an increased threat bias compared with non-evacuated parents. The children of evacuated parents show a lack of a happy bias when
compared with children of non-evacuated parents. These findings explore
the effect of witnessing a traumatic event on psychiatric assessment and
attention orientation.
G6
AFFECTIVE CONSEQUENCES OF PRODUCING SEQUENCED
MOTOR RESPONSES Amy Hayes1, Ian Glasscock1; 1Bangor University,
Wales, UK — Past research has shown that when items are more fluently
perceived or acted upon, they are liked more (e.g. Hayes, Paul, Beuger &

Poster Session G

Tipper, 2008; Reber, Winkielman & Schwarz, 1998). Winkielman &
Cacioppo’s (2001) hedonic fluency model proposes that sensitivity to processing fluency influences positive (but not negative) affect, and that the
affect provides information about the environment and may serve as a
reward mechanism for facilitating performance. Here we used a serial
response time task to investigate whether producing sequenced motor
responses evokes positive affect. In each trial a tone or visual target called
for a speeded response from the subject (pressing a button to the tone;
"tagging" the location of the visual target.) In some blocks of trials, the
sequence of responses to the tones and visual targets followed a fixed
sequence; in other blocks the sequence of responses was pseudorandom.
Subjects were not informed about the sequence manipulation. After each
block of trials, subjects rated on a visual scale their positive and negative
affect, and their sense of how effortful the previous block had been.
Sequenced blocks were rated as less effortful, and consistent with the
hedonic fluency model positive affect was elevated following sequenced
blocks but negative affect was not influenced by the sequence manipulation. These results did not interact with a grouping factor that classified
subjects as aware or not aware of the sequence, based on post-experiment
interview. However, additional research is needed to determine how
awareness and affect interact when learning sequenced behaviour.
G7
MEG MEASUREMENT OF FACIAL EMOTION RECOGNITION
ABILITIES IN TEMPORAL LOBE EPILEPSY Maria I. Ventura1, Adeeti
Ullal2, Srikantan S. Nagarajan1, Heidi E. Kirsch3; 1University of California,
San Francisco, Radiology, 2Harvard-MIT Health Sciences and Technology,
3University of California, San Francisco, Neurology — Because
temporal
lobe epilepsy (TLE) may affect the function of structures involved in
social cognition, there is an increasing need to understand social cognitive deficits, such as impaired facial emotion recognition, in TLE. We
investigated this phenomenon using magnetoencephalography (MEG).
Subjects with TLE and controls performed a facial emotion discrimination task (happy vs. sad faces) and a non-emotional discrimination task
(face vs. non-face). We examined the M170 response, suspected to be a
face-selective component of the neural response. Root mean square
(RMS) analysis of the M170 revealed significant intergroup differences:
subjects with left TLE had smaller amplitudes and delayed latencies compared to those with right TLE and to controls in the emotional discrimination task. Subjects with TLE also performed poorly on a validated test
of facial emotion recognition (CATS) compared to normal controls, with
left TLE subjects performing worse than those with right TLE. Exploratory time frequency source localization of brain activity during both
emotion and non-emotion face tasks reveals that the activation pattern
extrastriate visual cortex, including the fusiform face area, does not differ
from that of controls. Neurophysiological and behavioral data show deficits in facial emotion recognition in subjects with TLE which may depend
on laterality of seizure focus. Exploratory analysis of cortical activation,
as indexed by task-evoked frequency changes in MEG data, suggest that
this deficit is not apparent at the level of extrastriate visual cortex and
might instead be due to disruption of downstream processing, e.g. in
temporal structures affected by the subjects’ epilepsy.
G8
BEHAVIORALLY MODIFYING FEAR MEMORY: EXTINCTION
LEARNING DURING RECONSOLIDATION BLOCKS RECOVERY
OF FEAR IN HUMANS Candace M. Raio1, David C. Johnson1, Marie-H.
Monfils2, Daniela Schiller1,2, Joseph E. LeDoux2, Elizabeth A. Phelps1,2; 1New
York University, Psychology, New York, NY, 2Center for Neural Science, New
York University, New York, NY — Evidence suggests that consolidated
memories, once retrieved, enter a time dependent lability period before
re-stabilizing (i.e., reconsolidation). Although non-human animal studies
have successfully altered memories by pharmacologically targeting the
neurobiological mechanisms underlying reconsolidation, these results
are problematic to replicate in humans, due to the invasive nature and
side effects of drug manipulations. A novel drug-free behavioral protocol

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

in rats demonstrated that fear memories were attenuated when extinction
training occurred during reconsolidation. Our aim was to extend these
findings to humans and further examine the specificity of this effect. In
Experiment 1, fear conditioned subjects underwent either standard
extinction or extinction preceded by reactivation of the fear-eliciting cue
10 minutes or 6 hours beforehand. There was no spontaneous recovery
when extinction training occurred within the reconsolidation window (10
minutes post-retrieval). However, extinction outside this window (6
hours post-retrieval), or extinction without retrieval, allowed for spontaneous recovery of fear. In Experiment 2, we aimed to selectively target
one fear memory while leaving another intact. Subjects were fear conditioned to two cues and underwent extinction whereby only one cue was
reminded 10 minutes before extinction. A day later, subjects showed reinstatement of fear only to the cue that was not reminded before extinction.
These data suggest that specific fear memories can be persistently modified when extinction training occurs within the reconsolidation window
of a retrieved fear memory. These findings have significant clinical implications for the treatment of anxiety disorders such as Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder, by targeting the intrusive memories that afflict patients.
G9
EFFECT OF DOPAMINE REGULATING GENES (DAT1 & COMT)
ON LOGICAL REASONING WITH EMOTIONAL CONTENT
Melanie Stollstorff1, Stephanie Bean1, Lindsay Anderson1, Chandan Vaidya1,2;
1Georgetown University, 2Children's National Medical Center — Variation in
dopamine (DA) regulating genes influences performance on cognitive
tasks, such as working memory, and have also been shown to influence
affective processing. Both working memory and affective processing are
important during logical reasoning in real life under emotionally charged
circumstances. How variation in DA modulation influences logical reasoning with emotional and non-emotional content is unknown. We
investigated the effect of the catechol-o-methyltransferase gene (COMT)
and the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) on emotional and non-emotional reasoning in healthy adults. Participants were grouped according
to DAT1 (9/10 or 10/10) and COMT (Met/Met, Met/Val, Val/Val) genotypes. The reasoning task included syllogisms with emotional and nonemotional content. Results indicated that regardless of genotype, accuracy was lower on emotional than non-emotional syllogisms. A task by
DAT1 interaction showed that accuracy was lower in DAT1 9/10 than
10/10 subjects on emotional reasoning but did not differ for non-emotional reasoning. A task by COMT interaction showed that accuracy was
lower in the COMT Met/Met than Val subjects on emotional reasoning
but did not differ for non-emotional reasoning. Thus, inheritance of
DAT1 10-repeat allele and COMT Val allele was beneficial for emotional
reasoning.
G10
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES
OF
MORAL
PROCESSING: AN EVENT RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Carla
L. Harenski1, Alek G. Chakroff1, Matthew S. Shane1, Kent A. Kiehl1,2; 1The
MIND Research Network, Albuquerque, NM, 2University of New Mexico,
Psychology and Neuroscience, Albuquerque, NM — Several theories regarding moral decision making have emphasized the role of fast, automatic
responses to moral stimuli in the decision making process (e.g., Haidt,
2001; Pizarro & Bloom, 2003). Although most studies examining the neural mechanisms of moral processing to date have utilized functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), the superior temporal resolution of other
imaging techniques, such as event-related potentials (ERPs), may help
identify neural markers underlying the early detection of morally salient
information. The goal of the current study was to investigate whether
neural responses to moral stimuli could be differentiated from those to
non-moral stimuli within the first 1000 ms of processing. ERPs were
recorded while fourteen healthy participants viewed 100 unpleasant
social scenes, 50 of which contained moral violations (e.g. an abusive situation), and 50 which did not (e.g. an argument), and 50 neutral pictures
(e.g. a conversation). The task was to identify whether each picture

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

181

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

occurred indoors or outdoors. Moral and non-moral pictures were
matched on emotional arousal. ERPs elicited by moral pictures showed
an increased frontal positivity relative to non-moral and neutral pictures,
peaking within the 220-300 ms time window. The larger frontal positivity may reflect automatic selective attention to intrinsically-relevant
objects within images (Schupp et al., 2004). This suggests that the differentiation between moral and non-moral conditions may represent the
fast, automatic detection of morally salient information within a social
context.
G11
MULTIMODAL INTEGRATION OF EMOTIONAL SIGNALS Raliza
Stoyanova1, Anthony Cox1, Andy Calder1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences
Unit, Cambridge, UK — Although multiple sensory inputs are involved in
the assessment of emotional context, little is known about the nature of
these multimodal interactions. Most research in this area has addressed
the effect of congruency between concurrently presented faces and voices
on emotional categorization of either of these channels. However, it
remains unclear whether these congruency effects are confined to naturalistic pairings of human emotional signals (i.e., faces/voices, bodies/
voices) or extend to other semantically related, emotional pairings. To
address this question, in one experiment, we examined the effect of unattended fear, disgust and neutral vocalizations on the speeded categorization of simultaneously presented fear and disgust-evoking scenes. In
another experiment, we examined the opposite effect. The data revealed
that when participants had to categorize emotional voices, congruent
images facilitated response latency while incongruent images led to
response slowing and poorer accuracy, relative to neutral. By contrast,
fear voices facilitated the speed of categorizing both types of negative
emotional images, with a similar trend for disgust voices. Considered
together, these data indicate that the interaction between semantically
related emotional images and voices is consistent with a categorical
account of emotion such that fear images specifically facilitate the recognition of fear voices and slow the recognition of disgust voices and viceversa for disgust images. However, unlike with more naturalistic, spatially congruent pairs of stimuli such as faces and voices, this effect is not
bi-directional.
G12
BEAUTY IS IN THE EAR OF THE REMEMBERER: THE EFFECTS
OF MEMORY ON MUSIC PREFERENCES Daniel
Meegan1,
Christopher Warren2; 1University of Guelph, 2University of Victoria — As
with many stimuli, melodies tend to be judged more favorably following
previous exposure. Fluency explanations for this ’mere exposure effect’
suggest that it occurs because ’old’ (i.e., perceptually-identical or conceptually-similar to previous stimuli) stimuli are processed with more fluency, and the experience that accompanies this fluency leads to a positive
bias on tasks requiring an affective judgment about the stimuli. Evidence
supporting a causal relationship between fluency and judgment bias is
indirect, however. We report an experiment designed to directly test this
hypothesis by manipulating the degree to which previously exposed
stimuli could be processed fluently. The high fluency condition presented
melodies composed in a familiar key and the low fluency condition presented melodies composed in an unfamiliar key. As predicted by the fluency hypothesis, likability judgments were affected by previous exposure
only for the high fluency condition. At CNS 2008, we reported a parallel
finding in which attractiveness judgments of inverted faces (the low fluency condition) were not affected by exposure. That presentation was
received with questions about whether sufficient experience processing
such disfluent stimuli (e.g., inverted faces or unfamiliar key melodies)
would enable fluent processing and hence normal exposure effects. To
address this question, we provided preliminary listening experience with
music composed in an unfamiliar key. Later, we found that melodies constructed in this no-longer-unfamiliar key were responded to more positively following exposure.

182

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

G13
NEURAL CORRELATES OF REAPPRAISAL SUCCESS DEPEND
ON INTENSITY OF EMOTIONAL RESPONSE Jennifer A. Silvers1,
Jochen Weber1, Tor D. Wager1, Brent L. Hughes1, Matthew L. Davidson1, Kevin
N. Ochsner1; 1Columbia University — The ability to regulate one’s emotions is critical to physical and emotional well-being. One of the most
effective strategies for modulating emotional responses is cognitive reappraisal. While some studies have examined what reappraisal-related
neural activity predicts successful regulation of negative emotion, none
have investigated whether this activity varies according to the intensity
of one’s emotional response. In the present study, we investigated how
the intensity of emotional response may impact what brain regions are
associated with reappraisal success. Twenty-six healthy adults participated in an event-related fMRI paradigm. On each trial, participants were
presented with a negative or neutral picture and were instructed either to
reappraise ("reappraise" trials) or respond naturally ("look" trials) to the
stimulus. At the end of each trial, participants rated their current level of
negative affect. These ratings were used to categorize negative pictures as
eliciting responses with "high" or "low" affective intensity. Reappraise >
look contrasts for high and low negative stimuli were created and correlated with their respective reappraisal success scores, calculated as the
drop in negative affect due to reappraisal (i.e., look-reappraise affect rating difference). For both high and low negative stimuli, reappraisal success was positively correlated with enhanced activity during reappraisal
in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and the perigenual anterior cingulate cortex. However, successful reappraisal of highly negative stimuli
was uniquely correlated with enhanced reappraisal-related activity in the
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex. These findings suggest that reappraisal of
high and low intensity negative stimuli may rely on both overlapping
and distinct regions.
G14
EMOTIONAL PROCESSES IN BORDERLINE PERSONALITY
TRAITS: AN FMRI STUDY Chia-Hsin Chuang1, June Hung1, Rou-Shayn
Chen1, Ying-Zu Huang1, Chin-Song Lu1, Yau-Yau Wai2, Jiun-Jie Wang2;
1Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of
Medicine, Neurology, Taiwan, 2Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Radiology, Taiwan — Previous
neuroimaging studies showed that the emotional gateway in the brain, the
amygdala, is overly active in patients with BPD. However, it remains
unclear whether such dysfunctional emotional processes in the brain
occur exclusively in BPD or not. Specifically, if cerebral emotional processes foster the development of BPD, one may expect to see similar dysregulation in emotional processes even in individuals who have
borderline personality traits (i.e. those meeting less than five out of nine
diagnosis criteria of BPD). To test this hypothesis, we used fMRI to
examine the neural correlates of emotional processes in 6 females with
borderline personality traits and 6 controls. Participants were scanned
while viewing the same set of emotional pictures from the International
Affective Picture System (IAPS) and, in different blocks, making a forcedchoice response regarding arousal (aroused or unaroused) or pleasure
(pleasant or unpleasant). The responses were collected to create an individualized mixed blocked/event-related design. Our results showed
that, for individual with borderline personality traits, appraisal on emotional arousal is associated with lateralized medial frontal activation,
whereas appraisal on pleasure is associated with lateralized amygdala
activation. Our study supports the idea that emotional dysregulation
should be regarded as a fundamental cerebral process underlying both
BPD and borderline personality traits.
G15
NEURAL CORRELATES OF MUSIC-EVOKED NOSTALGIA
Frederick Barrett2, Petr Janata2; 1University of California, Psychology, Davis,
2Center for Mind and Brain, University of California, Davis — Nostalgia is an
emotionally rich experience, characterized by experience of both positive
and negative emotions, and socially-themed autobiographical memories.

Poster Session G

Music is a common and powerful evocateur of both nostalgic and nonnostalgic autobiographical memories. Investigation of music-evoked nostalgia may provide unique insight into the neural basis of emotional
experience during memory recall. In this study, we used popular music
to evoke nostalgic and non-nostalgic autobiographical experiences, and
differentiated activation related to increased nostalgia and activation
related to more general autobiographical memory recall. Thirty 20s samples of popular music were randomly selected and presented to 12 participants (4 M), while blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal was
recorded. Orthogonal parametric regressors, constructed from nostalgia,
happiness, sadness, arousal, song familiarity and autobiographical
salience ratings obtained immediately after each song, were entered into
a general linear model predicting BOLD signal. Individual and grouplevel T-contrasts were calculated for each parametric regressor. Contrasts
at the individual level showed wide variation in the focus and extent of
activations correlated with each parametric regressor. Group-level contrasts showed both increased activation of medial prefrontal cortex
(MPFC) and increased activation of left-lateralized dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (LDLPFC) to be positively correlated with increased strength of
nostalgia. Group-level contrasts also showed increased activation in
LDLPFC to be positively correlated with increased autobiographical
salience. These findings are consistent with literature showing LDLPFC
activation during autobiographical memory recall, and suggest that
MPFC activation is involved in the recall of emotionally rich nostalgic
memories.
G16
EMOTIONAL RESPONSES TO MUSIC AND THE REWARD
SYSTEM: AN INVESTIGATION WITH [11C]RACLOPRIDE PET,
FMRI, AND PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL METHODS Valorie
N.
Salimpoor1,2, Mitchel Benovoy1, Gregory Longo1, Alain Dagher1,2, Jeremy
Cooperstock1, Robert J. Zatorre1,2; 1McGill University, 2Montreal Neurological
Institute — The ability of music to incite intensely positive affective states
has led to the speculation that it may involve the dopamine reward system. Previous neuroimaging studies have been limited to showing only
correlations in blood flow or oxygenation to striatal regions of the brain
during music listening, but a direct connection has not been demonstrated. This study involved an innovative combination of techniques to
assess the direct links between music and the dopamine reward system:
(1) psychophysiological measurements of biosignals (including heart
rate, respiration, skin conductance, blood volume, and body temperature) to characterize intense autonomic nervous system responses, (2)
fMRI to assess blood oxygenation to striatal regions, and (3) PET scanning using [C11]raclopride as a radioligand to measure dopamine binding activity in striatal regions. Self-selected music was used as stimuli to
ensure subjectively pleasurable responses, and the chills phenomenon
was used to characterize intense affective states. Baseline control stimuli
were individually selected for each participant from other participants'
musical selections based on low ratings on pleasure and intensity of
affective states. Thus, each piece of music was used once as control and
once as experimental stimuli. Results demonstrated both blood oxygenation and dopaminergic activity in the striatal regions (nucleus accumbens, caudate, and putamen) of the brain, allowing for conclusive
evidence of dopamine reward system involvement. This study has
important implications for understanding the role of the dopamine
reward system as music is not a biological reward with survival value
(c.f. food) nor does it have an exogenous basis (c.f. drugs).
G17
WHY REGULATION FAILS: ANTICIPATORY PREFRONTAL
CORTEX ACTIVITY PREDICTS INCREASED AMYGDALA
ACTIVITY AND REDUCED REAPPRAISAL SUCCESS Bryan
Denny1, Kevin Ochsner1, Jochen Weber1, Matthew Davidson1, Brent Hughes1,
Tor Wager1; 1Columbia University — We examined how one prepares to
engage in reappraisal, which is an emotion regulation strategy that
involves the cognitive reinterpretation of an emotion-inducing stimulus.

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

In this study, participants completed 3 within-subject conditions: Reappraise a negative image (Reapp Neg), respond naturally to a negative
image (Look Neg), and respond naturally to a neutral image (Look Neutral). Each trial contained a cue period (signifying the condition), an
anticipation period, a stimulus period, and a negative affect rating
period. Participants reported significantly less negative affect in the
Reapp Neg condition relative to the Look Neg condition, and the magnitude of this drop served as our measure of reappraisal success. Amygdala
activity during a contrast of Reapp Neg-Look Neg trials during the stimulus period was shown to be negatively correlated with reappraisal success.
We used novel mediation analyses to determine whether
anticipatory activity predicted reappraisal success via changes in
amygdala activity during stimulus presentation. We found that activity
in the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) during cue and anticipation was
positively correlated with amygdala activity during stimulus presentation. Further, amygdala activity during stimulus presentation mediated
a negative correlation between anticipatory MPFC activity and reappraisal success. This positive relationship between anticipatory MPFC
activity and stimulus-related amygdala activity was itself mediated by
stimulus-related precuneus and brainstem activation. These results suggest that more MPFC activity during reappraisal anticipation is associated with less reappraisal success, in contrast to MPFC activity during
reappraisal itself, which has been associated with greater reappraisal success.
G18
EFFECTS FO FOCAL BRAIN DAMAGE ON SEXUAL BEHAVIOR
Timothy Koscik1, Daniel Tranel1; 1University of Iowa — Sex is a fundamental
aspect of real-world behavior. Sexual behavior can be disrupted by focal
brain injury resulting in serious consequences (e.g., contracting STDs,
unintended offspring). Cases of sexual dysfunction following damage to
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPC) or the insula have been reported
(e.g. Anderson et al., 1999). The present study aims to extend these case
reports by examining a broad range of sexual behaviors in a large sample
of brain-damaged patients. In particular, awareness of sexual feelings
and sex-related, physical violence were assessed. Participants consisted
of men and women with lesions to either of two target regions (VMPC or
insula), and brain-damaged comparisons (BDCs) with damage outside of
these areas. Participants completed a self-report questionnaire designed
to assess prevalence of risky sexual behaviors and sex-related cognition
and attitudes. Questionnaire items included statements using 5-point
Likert-scale format, and a series of standard questions developed by Reitmeijer, et al. (2001). The results so far indicate differential influence of
VMPC or insula damage on sexual behavior and cognition. Participants
with insula damage displayed decreased sexual awareness compared to
BDCs (p=0.01). Compared to BDCs, participants with VMPC damage
displayed a trend toward increased frequency of sex-related, physical
violence, e.g., giving physical pain for pleasure (p=0.05). The present
study, based on a lesion approach, suggests that the insula and ventromedial prefrontal cortex are important for normal sexual behavior and cognition.
G19
BELIEFS, GUILT, AND THE BRAIN: NEURAL MECHANISMS
UNDERLYING SOCIAL COOPERATIVE BEHAVIOR Luke Chang1,
Alec Smith2, Martin Dufwenberg2, Alan Sanfey1; 1University of Arizona,
Psychology, 2University of Arizona, Economics — Researchers across many
disciplines have been intrigued by why people cooperate with a partner
when they can better serve their own interests by acting selfishly. One
possible mechanism underlying this phenomenon may be the influence
of guilt on decision-making. Guilt has been formally defined as the
extent to which a person believes they have let a partner down, modulated by an individual sensitivity parameter. Understanding the neural
systems underlying this phenomenon has important implications for elucidating the broader impact of the interaction between cognition and
emotion on decision-making. We employed a model of guilt aversion

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

183

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

developed within the context of Psychological Game Theory to predict
the amount of guilt experienced by the participants within a social interaction. Seventeen participants were scanned using fMRI while they
played a modified single-shot Trust Game. Participants’ decisions and
beliefs were entered into the model to produce a quantitative measure of
guilt on a trial-by-trial basis. These values were then used as parametric
regressors in a full-brain-analysis to predict regions of the brain associated with the experience of guilt. Consistent with our predictions, we
observed a network of regions associated with processing negative emotions that included the amygdala, insula, and hippocampus. These
results suggest that belief dependent states are processed by neural
regions that have been previously associated with more basic emotions.
More importantly, this study demonstrates that high-level questions
about the role of emotions in decision-making can be addressed using the
interdisciplinary Neuroeconomic framework by integrating psychological game theory and model-based fMRI.
G20
MOOD-DRIVEN DECISION BIASES IN THE ULTIMATUM GAME
Katia Harle1, Alan Sanfey1; 1University of Arizona, Psychology — This study
investigated the neural processes associated with emotional biasing of
economic decision-making, specifically the effect of induced negative
emotions. We used fMRI to monitor brain function in people engaged in
a classic social economic task, the Ultimatum Game, which involves
accepting or rejecting monetary offers from human and non-human
(computer) partners. This research expands on a previous behavioral
study, which showed that priming participants with negative emotions
with underlying withdrawal motivational tendencies (i.e. sadness and
disgust) result in higher rejection rates. Thus, negative avoidant emotions
may play a particularly important role in modulating economic decisions
of a social nature. To explore the neural basis of decision biases following
such mood induction, we first used short video clips to induce either sadness or a neutral emotional state. The impact of additional modulating
factors such as the degree of unfairness of the offer and type of interaction (i.e. human vs. computer partner) was also analyzed. Behaviorally,
participants who first experienced sadness rejected more unfair offers
than those in the neutral condition, replicating our previous findings.
Preliminary fMRI analyses revealed that receiving unfair offers while in a
sad mood elicited activity in brain areas related to negative emotions
(insula) and cognitive conflict (anterior cingulate cortex). In contrast,
receiving unfair offers while in a neutral mood elicited activity in brain
areas related to reward anticipation (nucleus accumbens). These findings
suggest a potential priming of neural regions involved in decision-related
affective processing (e.g. insula) by more complex and socially-relevant
emotions, such as sadness.
G21
MEASURING SOCIAL COGNITION AND THEORY OF MIND
ACROSS DISEASED POPULATIONS USING FMRI Nyaz
Didehbani1, Tandra Toon1, Michelle McClelland1, Michelle Kandalaft1,2,
Cassandra Adams1,2, Sandra Chapman1, Daniel Krawczyk1,2; 1University of
Texas at Dallas Center for BrainHealth, 2University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center — Social cognition is the ability to regulate your own emotions, recognize others’ thoughts, and anticipate other’s feelings. It also
includes knowing social rules and responding appropriately. One key
aspect of social cognition is theory of mind which includes a person’s
ability to associate mental states and feelings to oneself and others. Preliminary data suggests differing regions of brain activity among those
with social deficits compared to healthy controls. Research has shown
that participants with Schizophrenia and Asperger’s syndrome are prone
to difficulties with social cognition. In our study, we recruited healthy
controls, participants with Schizophrenia, and Asperger’s Syndrome. We
used a theory of mind task in fMRI, whereby participants watched a
series of short animations of moving shapes and were asked to make
judgments about whether the shapes were friendly or not (theory of mind
condition) or the same weight (control condition). The imaging results

184

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

showed three areas of activation particularly the superior medial prefrontal cortex. These areas of activation differed between our healthy controls
and our participants with Schizophrenia and Asperger’s Syndrome, suggesting differences in social processing. Neurocognitive tests in addition
to behavioral intervention data will also be discussed in relation to the
imaging results.
G22
DISCRIMINATING FLEETING FACIAL EXPRESSIONS USING
FEATURAL AND CONFIGURAL INFORMATION Timothy Sweeny1,
Marcia Grabowecky1,2, Ken A. Paller1,2, Satoru Suzuki1,2; 1Northwestern
University, Psychology, 2Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program — Humans
are impressively adept at discriminating fleeting emotional expressions.
We investigated how the type and duration of expression influenced discrimination accuracy. Observers viewed two facial expressions, one neutral and the other emotional (fearful, angry, or happy), in a two-interval
forced-choice task with stimulus duration varied across trials (10, 20, 30,
40, or 50 ms). All faces were masked by a face with a surprised expression. On each trial, observers attempted to select the face with the emotional expression, and to report the expression. Discrimination against
neutral was above chance at all durations, and more accurate for happy
than for angry or fearful expressions. Emotional expressions that displayed teeth yielded the highest accuracy. To evaluate discrimination
among emotional expressions, we calculated d’ using ’hits’ and ’false
alarms’ specific to each expression pair. Discrimination between angry
and happy expressions was better than discrimination between fearful
and happy expressions, and both pairs were discriminated well above
chance even when presented for only 20 ms. In contrast, discrimination
between fearful and angry expressions was near chance at all durations.
With inverted faces, only discrimination between angry and happy
expressions was impaired, which suggests a contribution of configural
processing in this discrimination. Together, these results demonstrate
that surprisingly brief presentations are sufficient for discriminating
emotional expressions from neutral expressions. However, discriminating emotional expressions is difficult and depends on information from
individual features and from their configurations.
G23
MENTALIZING OR MAXIMIZING: AN FMRI STUDY ON
PROPOSER BEHAVIOR IN THE ULTIMATUM AND DICTATOR
GAMES Mascha van 't Wout1, Alan Sanfey1; 1Neural Decision Sciences
Laboratory, Psychology, University of Arizona, Tucson AZ — Examining
behavior in interactive scenarios such as the Ultimatum Game (UG) and
Dictator Game (DG) can provide useful insights into the nature of social
decision-making. In this study, we examined brain activity in proposers
as they made offers to both non-anonymous and anonymous partners in
both of these games. In the UG, generous proposer decisions can be based
on either social utility motives (wanting fairness) or from the anticipation
that low offers could be rejected, leaving both players with nothing. In
contrast, generous decisions made in the DG are usually thought to
reflect only social utility motives. Using fMRI we tested whether generous UG proposers who exhibit brain activity patterns related to reward
maximization, as opposed to social motivations, would in turn be less
generous in the DG. Sixteen participants played the UG and DG while
dividing either $10 or $40 with both non-anonymous and anonymous
partners. Behaviorally, participants gave more money to partners in a UG
as compared to a DG and more money to non-anonymous rather than
anonymous partners. fMRI analyses showed activation of social network
areas (amygdala, orbitofrontal and medioprefrontal cortex) in response
to non-anonymous partners as compared to anonymous ones. We further
observed activity in the rostral cingulate and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (BA 8/9) for the interaction between task (UG/DG) and amount of
money offered. This confirms our hypothesis that participants in the UG
with brain activity patterns indicating "mentalizing" (medial prefrontal
cortex) are also more generous in the DG.

Poster Session G

G24
TEMPORAL UNPREDICTABILITY INCREASES AMYGDALA
ACTIVATION AND DECREASES TRUST Andrew S Fox1,2, Romana
Snozzi4, Frédéric Schneider4,5, Richard J Davidson1,2,3, Tania Singer4, Ernst
Fehr4,5; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, Psychology, 2University of
Wisconsin-Madison - Waisman Laborotory for Brain Imaging and Behavior,
3University of Wisconsin-Madison, Psychiatry, 4University of Zürich, Center
for the Study of Social and Neural Systems, 5University of Zürich, Institute for
Empirical Research in Economics — Trust is ubiquitous in human society
and is critical for interpersonal interaction. Recent work investigating the
biological bases of trust has implicated evolutionarily old brain structures, such as the amygdala, in judgments of trustworthiness and the
decision to trust an anonymous individual. In our study we examined the
effect of experimentally induced amygdala activation on trust behavior in
a simple economic game, called the Trust Game. In the Trust Game, we
gave participants 10 Monetary Units (MU’s; paid in Swiss Franc’s) and
offered them the opportunity to invest any number of MU’s in an anonymous individual designated as the trustee. For each MU invested by the
participant, the trustee received 3 MU’s that they could distribute
between themselves and the participant as they saw fit. If the participant
believes the trustee to be trustworthy they will maximize their gains by
investing all of their MU’s, whereas if the participant believes the trustee
to be untrustworthy they retain the most MU’s by investing nothing. In
our experiment, while participants (n=55) were making this decision we
exposed them to unpredictably spaced auditory stimuli, which are
known to activate the amygdala. Additionally, approximately half the
subjects (n=28) underwent fMRI while making these decisions. Results
demonstrated that altering the temporal predictability of an auditory
stimulus both increased amygdala activation and decreased investment
amounts in the Trust Game, as predicted. These data suggest that taskirrelevant manipulation of amygdala activity influences the decision to
trust.
G25
LETTING GO OF SADNESS: MINDFUL DETACHMENT IN
EMOTION REGULATION Norman Farb1, Adam Anderson1, Zindel
Segal2; 1University of Toronto, Psychology, 2Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, Psychiatry, University of Toronto — Effectively regulating negative
emotion is important for mental health. Indeed, extant research suggests
that emotional reactivity to stressors predicts negative health outcomes.
Mindfulness training (MT) has been shown to reduce the risk of depressive relapse and improve chronic mood, but little is known about its
mechanisms of action. Using fMRI, the authors have developed a model
of mindful emotion regulation linking: i) neural and subjective changes in
emotional reactivity associated with MT, ii) neural evidence of attentional
processes subserving MT-related changes in reactivity, and iii) how such
changes promote positive mental health outcomes. Evidence from three
fMRI studies will be presented to support a model of MT promoting
reduced emotional reactivity to dysphoric challenge. Study 1 presents the
association between mindfulness training (MT) and neural markers of
emotion reactivity, in which MT was not associated with altered subjective experience of sadness following dysphoric challenge, but was associated with reduced neural reactivity. Study 2 links MT-related changes in
interoceptive processing with altered neural recruitment in attentional
suppression and maintenance tasks, implicating enhanced connectivity
of suppression networks with interoceptive cortical networks following
MT. The idea of reduced reactivity will be further explored in Study 3,
which investigates neural indices of emotional reactivity that predict
relapse into depression. Taken together, the studies suggest that neural
changes associated with mindfulness training may facilitate a reduction
in emotional reactivity through enhanced attentional control. A comparison of the neural signatures predicting depressive relapse and areas associated with mindfulness training will be discussed.

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

G26
DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF FEARFUL AND ANGRY FACIAL
EXPRESSIONS ON LEARNING F. Caroline Davis1, Leah Somerville1,
Lisa Shin2, Paul Whalen1; 1Dartmouth College, 2Tufts University — Research
suggests that the amygdala is sensitive to both the valence and information value conveyed by facial expressions. For example, the human
amygdala is more responsive to facial expressions of fear than anger,
even though both expressions communicate negative valence. In nonhuman animals, amygdala responses to stimuli predicting negative
events are enhanced when those stimuli have uncertain predictive value.
We have proposed that the human amygdala is more responsive to fearful faces because of their inherently uncertain nature: angry faces
embody a direct threat and call for focused attention, whereas fearful
faces offer less information about the source of threat and therefore call
for diffuse attention. This hypothesis predicts that angry faces should
lead the viewer to learn more about the faces themselves, while fearful
faces should lead the viewer to learn more about the context. We tested
this hypothesis by measuring the effects of fearful and angry facial
expressions on memory. In study 1, participants viewed fearful, angry,
or neutral faces alternating with neutral words. Results show that when
compared to neutral face blocks, fearful faces augmented memory for
words, whereas angry faces impaired memory for words. In study 2,
participants viewed blocks of fearful or angry faces alternating with neutral words. Results show that subjects remembered more words from the
fearful face condition and more faces from the angry face condition.
These data support the idea that although they communicate a similar
message in terms of negativity, fearful and angry facial expressions call
for different kinds of learning.
G27
AMYGDALA-CINGULATE
CONNECTIVITY
DURING
REGULATION OF EMOTION PREDICT TREATMENT RESPONSE
IN MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER Aaron S. Heller1, Tom Johnstone2,
Ned H. Kalin1, Richard J. Davidson1; 1University of Wisconsin, Madison,
2
University of Reading — Theoretical work in Major Depressive Disorder
(MDD) suggests that the inability to adaptively regulate negative emotion is a core etiological process underlying the development of MDD.
However, few studies to date have investigated the neural substrates of
emotion regulation (ER) in depression, and none to our knowledge have
assessed group differences in within-subject connectivity. Studies investigating the neural substrates of ER in healthy control participants implicate the amygdala and pre-frontal cortex (PFC) as nodes in a healthy ER
network, and this network has been shown to be abnormal when
depressed patients attempt to regulate emotion. Other neuroimaging
studies comparing controls to depressed patients at rest have further suggested abnormalities in the Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC) in depression, with pretreatment activity in this region predicting improvement in
depressive symptoms when given antidepressant medication. Accordingly, we performed a functional connectivity analysis of Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) data when subjects performed an
ER task to investigate whether amygdalar-PFC interaction is abnormal in
depression and whether those regions showing abnormal functional connectivity are also predictive of antidepressant treatment response.
Indeed, when reappraising negative affect elicited by emotional slides,
depressed patients showed a decrease in amygdala-perigenual ACC
(periACC) connectivity. Within the depressed group, degree of
amygdala-periACC connectivity during reappraisal further predicted
treatment response to Venlafaxine eight weeks post-scan as assessed by
the Hamilton-Depression Inventory. These results point to a disordered
amygdala-periACC network underlying the ER deficits in depression,
and further suggest that the integrity of this network is critical to support
symptom remission.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

185

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

G28
THE AFTERMATH OF AFFECTIVE STIMULI: EVIDENCE FROM
FMRI RECORDED INSULA AND AMYGDALA ACTIVITY IN
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER Desmond J. Oathes1, Daniel M.
McFarlin1, Tammi R.A. Kral1, Michael J. Jenson1, Issidoros Sarinopoulos2, Jack
B. Nitschke1; 1Waisman Laboratory for Brain Imaging and Research, University
of Wisconsin-Madison, Psychiatry and Psychology, 2Michigan State University,
Psychology — Problematic cognitions in affective disorders are thought to
result from the combination of aversive events and an internal focus of
attention. Behavioral evidence and a prominent theoretical model of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD; Borkovec et al., 2004) suggest that individuals with GAD engage in avoidance strategies to mitigate the
emotional impact of aversive events. In the present study, we examined
blood oxygen level dependent signal changes in an event-related functional MRI paradigm during which participants viewed emotional pictures and provided affective ratings after each picture. Half of the ratings
required participants to rate the emotional impact of the pictures on
themselves (self-ratings). The other half asked participants to rate the
valence (pleasantness or unpleasantness) of the picture (picture-ratings).
GAD subjects showed less amygdala and insula activity than controls
while rating their emotional responses to affective pictures. Self-ratings
and negative ratings were especially likely to evince a pattern of hypoactivity in the amygdala and insula for GAD subjects. These data support
Borkovec’s avoidance model of GAD. Implications for understanding the
neurobiology, environmental triggers, and subjective experience of emotional distress in clinical anxiety will be discussed.
G29
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN EMOTIONAL AWARENESS
MODERATE THE EFFECTS OF AFFECTIVE STIMULI ON
WORKING MEMORY PERFORMANCE Joseph U. Kim1, Michael S.
Cohen1, Colin G. DeYoung2, Adam E. Green1, Todd S. Braver3, Jeremy R.
Gray1; 1Yale University, 2University of Minnesota, 3Washington
University — Previous work has shown that inducing particular emotional states can facilitate performance on verbal and visuospatial working memory tasks by selectively influencing lateral PFC activity (Gray,
Braver, and Raichle, 2002). We examined whether individual differences
in trait emotional awareness moderate these emotion-cognition interactions. The 20-item Toronto Alexithymia scale (TAS-20; Bagby et al., 1994),
designed to measure difficulty identifying and describing one’s own
emotional states, was administered to college students and community
members. 99 participants were scanned while performing a 3-back task
using blocks of words and faces; prior to each 3-back run, subjects
watched short videos intended to induce mild emotional states (pleasant/approach related, unpleasant/withdrawal related, or neutral). Those
who scored high on facets of alexithymia (low emotional awareness)
showed emotion-related enhancement of working memory (WM) performance, such that approach states led to improved verbal WM performance and withdrawal states led to improved face WM performance.
This was not observed in subjects with lower alexithymia scores. In addition, lower levels of emotional awareness (higher alexithymia scores) correlated with lower brain volume in the right temporoparietal junction/
superior temporal sulcus (TPJ/STS) region (uncorrected p< .0005) when
controlling for gender, age, and gender by alexithymia interaction. Activity in TPJ has been associated with identifying emotional states in oneself
and others, among other functions. This region may be involved in emotion-cognition interactions.
G30
RECALL OF EMOTIONAL STIMULI IS PRECEDED BY NEURAL
REACTIVATION OF EMOTIONAL CONTEXT: AN FMRI STUDY
Katherine Vytal1, Jennifer Wilson1, Stephen LaConte2, Stephan Hamann1;
1
Emory University, Psychology, 2Baylor College of Medicine — Tulving and
other theorists have proposed that recalling events critically involves
reactivating neural representations that were originally active during the
event. Recent FMRI and human single-unit electrode recording studies

186

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

have supported this view, demonstrating medial temporal activity that
precedes individual freely recalled items and reinstates neural patterns
characteristic of recalled stimulus categories such as face, object, or location. Because emotion is a highly salient stimulus attribute, we reasoned
that reinstatement of emotional activity would immediately precede
spontaneous free recall of emotional stimuli, reflecting reinstatement of
emotional attributes and context, and further, that this activity would
predict whether the subsequently recalled item would be emotionally
arousing or neutral. Eleven subjects were scanned at 3 Tesla, first while
they encoded negative emotional (phone-KILLER), positive emotional
(trumpet-ECSTASY) and neutral paired associates (table-ACTOR), and
later while they freely recalled items by speaking into a pneumatic microphone. Analysis of the two-TR period before the onset of each recalled
item indicated significantly increased memory and emotion-related
medial temporal activity, including the hippocampus and amygdala,
prior to recall of positive and negative emotional words, compared to
neutral words. Activity in another emotion-related region, the insula,
also preceded emotional but not neutral recall. These results are consistent with reactivation views of free recall, suggesting that emotionrelated brain activity is reinstated prior to spontaneous free recall of emotional but not neutral stimuli. This reinstated information likely guides
further retrieval processes as a specific item is ultimately selected for
recall. Further multivariate analyses will examine reinstatement of distributed patterns of emotion-related activity and activity during overt
cued-recall.
G31
COMPASSION FOR PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL PAIN ARE
ASSOCIATED WITH OPPOSITE HEART RATE RESPONSES
Xiao-Fei Yang1,2, Mary Helen Immordino-Yang1,3, Savio W. H. Wong1; 1Brain
and Creativity Institute, University of Southern California, 2Neuroscience
Graduate Program, University of Southern California, 3Rossier School of
Education, University of Southern California — Do compassion for physical
and social pain share similar physiological response patterns? Here, we
report the results of heart rate analyses from a psychophysiological
study. Eight Chinese participants were exposed to a series of narratives
based on episodes from real people’s lives, designed to induce either
compassion for physical pain (CPP), compassion for social/psychological
pain (CSP), or engagement without strong emotion (Control). Participants learned the content of the narratives and discussed their feelings
about each stimulus individually with an experimenter before psychophysiological recording, to ensure that each participant’s response to
each stimulus corresponded to the established emotional category. During psychophysiological recording, participants saw 5-second reminder
videos about each narrative, followed by 13 seconds of dark screen and 2
seconds of fixation. Participants were asked to become as emotional as
possible about each narrative, and to rate the intensity of their emotion
on a scale from 1 to 4. Instantaneous heart rate was derived from ECG
recording; heart rate during fixation served as baseline. CPP elicited
acceleration in heart rate, while CSP elicited deceleration in heart rate relative to baseline. Heart rate during control stories stayed constant. Further, degree of acceleration/ deceleration correlated positively with
participants’ subjective rating of emotion intensity. Overall, our results
show opposite heart rate responses to compassion for physical and social
pain, suggesting differential modulation of the autonomic system for
these social emotions.
G32
EMOTIONS COME AND GO: NEURAL ACTIVITY TO ONSETS
AND OFFSETS OF HAPPY AND ANGRY FACIAL EXPRESSIONS
Andreas Mühlberger1, Matthias Wieser1, Monika Frey1, Antje Gerdes1, Paul
Pauli1, Felix Breuer2, Peter Weyers1; 1University of Würzburg, Psychology,
2
Magnetic Resonance Bavaria (MRB) — Pictures of facial expressions of
emotion have been shown to elicit emotional reactions and neural activation in different neural structures related to emotional processing (e.g.,
amygdala). However, in daily live emotional expressions are in constant

Poster Session G

dynamical change, and first results show enhanced processing of dynamically presented emotional expressions. Additionally, the development of
a facial emotional expression (onset) might be processed differentially
from the offset of the same expression. For example, an offset of a happy
expression might be a sign of danger, while an offset of an anger expression might be a sign to relax. Therefore, we presented short video clips of
the onset or offset of happy and angry facial expressions while measuring
brain activity by fMRI in a block design. Emotional facial expressions
were generated using Poser 5 software. Twenty-two participants (12 men
and 10 women) were investigated. In line with our assumptions first
analyses indicated enhanced neural activity in the Amgydala during the
presentation of angry onset as well as happy offset, whereas other structures like hippocampus and fusiform face area were more sensitive to
angry offset and happy onset. These results show that the emotional significance of dynamical changes is analyzed in its temporal context. Further research is necessary to elude the emotional processing of dynamical
facial expressions in detail.
G33
EMPATHY AND
SIMULATION OF THE PHYSIOLOGICAL
RESPONSE TO PLEASANT AND UNPLEASANT THERMAL
SENSATIONS Adrienne Moore1, Mary Wright2, Megan Luetje1, Martin
Paulus3; 1U C San Diego, Cognitive Science, 2U C San Diego, Division of
Biological Sciences, 3U C San Diego, Psychiatry — The goal of this study
was to test the hypothesis that empathy for the physical discomfort of
others involves a simulation of the other's autonomic response to the discomfort. Pairs of female participants were recruited to observe one
another inserting the left hand into ice water (a cold pressor task), tepid
water, and warm water for short intervals. VAS ratings of pleasantness,
unpleasantness and pain resulting from the hand immersion were collected from all participants, with reference to their own sensations, and
with reference to how they imagine the other person to feel. Heart rates
were collected from one participant per pair, both during experience of
and observation of the hand immersion in water baths of comfortable
and uncomfortable temperatures. We found that trait empathy measured by the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI) was significantly correlated with VAS rating of the unpleasantness of the other’s ice water
immersion (r=.45, p < .05). Further, the IRI subscale Empathic Concern
was significantly correlated with a bradycardic heart rate response to
observing another’s cold discomfort (r=.766, p < .01), while a bradycardic
response to observing both pleasant and unpleasant temperature sensations was significantly correlated with the Perspective Taking subscale of
the IRI (r=.623, p=.03). This study links specific ANS mediated physiological changes in response to observed pleasant and unpleasant sensation with aspects of empathy, and motivates future work to identify the
neural substrates involved.
G34
MINDFULNESS-INDUCED CHANGES IN THE EXPERIENCES OF
PAIN AND NEGATIVE EMOTION: AN FMRI STUDY Peter MendeSiedlecki1, Hedy Kober1, Jason Buhle1, Brent Hughes2, Ethan Kross3, Tor
Wager1, Kevin Ochsner1; 1Columbia University, 2University of Texas, Austin,
3University of Michigan, Ann Arbor — In recent years, emotion regulation
has become a burgeoning area of research. Concurrently, acceptancebased meditation practices have sparked both lay and scientific interest.
Though the two disciplines may share functional goals, understanding of
the behavioral efficacy and neural substrates of acceptance as an emotion-regulation strategy is lacking. This study used fMRI to examine the
use of acceptance-based mindfulness strategies to regulate responses to
both physically and emotionally aversive stimuli. Sixteen healthy subjects were scanned while viewing neutral and aversive images and while
experiencing warm or painful heat. While experiencing these stimuli,
participants were instructed to either (a) react emotionally to the stimuli
and to allow themselves to feel angry or hurt (react) or (b) accept the sensations they experienced and to recognize that these feelings would pass
(accept). Subjective ratings indicated that participants displayed statisti-

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

cally significant drops in negative affect when maintaining an accepting
mindset rather than a reactive mindset. Compared to warm heat, painful
heat activated a widespread network known as the pain matrix (encompassing the insula, the anterior cingulate cortex, the thalamus, and the
brainstem), while aversive images (compared to neutral images) activated the dorsal amygdala, the anterior cingulate, and regions within the
brainstem. Critically, the cognitive strategy of acceptance modulated activations in the insula and dorsal amygdala during the presentation of
aversive heat and aversive images, respectively.
G35
AN EEG STUDY OF REAPPRAISAL AND SUPPRESSION
STRATEGIES FOR EMOTION REGULATION Aliya
Tolegenova1,
2
1
Gerald Matthews , Satybaldy M. Jakupov , Almira Kustubayeva1; 1Kazakh
National University, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 2University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati — Objective: Gross (1998) has developed experimental techniques for investigating different emotion regulation strategies. However, the neuropsychological bases for regulation remain unclear. In
addition, there may be gender differences in emotion regulation. Hence,
the aim of the present study was to investigate EEG rhythm differences
during emotion regulation tasks in males and females. Subjects and
methods: Subjects were 150 students (75 female, 75 male). Subjects were
randomly allocated to one of three groups: control (C: no instructions),
reappraisal instruction (R) or suppression instruction (S). A film was
used to induce fear according to instructions of Gross and Levenson
(1995). EEG was recorded by using an electroencephalograph "NeuronSpectrum-1" monopolarly from symmetrical frontal, central, parietal, and
occipital lobes with the indifferent joint ears electrodes. Spectral Power
Density of EEG rhythms in 10 bands (2-45 Hz) was analyzed. Results:
Gender differences were found in several bands, including alpha-4
(females showed higher power), theta-2 (males showed higher power)
and gamma (females showed higher power in F2 and F4). The strongest
effect of emotion regulation was found in the theta-1 band. At the majority of sites, reappraisal increased theta-1 power. In addition, effects of
emotion regulation on alpha-1 and alpha-2 differed in males and females.
Conclusion: Data add to understanding of emotion-regulation by demonstrating that experimental manipulations of regulation strategy influence
EEG. However, there were gender differences in EEG during viewing of
the fear-inducing film, and some evidence was found for differential
effects of emotion regulation on alpha in males and females.

Linguistic processes: Other
G36
THE UNDERLYING NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF PROSODY
COMPREHENSION:
EVIDENCE
FROM
A
FUNCTIONAL
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING STUDY Isabelle Deschamps1,2,
Inbal Itzhak1,2, Shari Baum1,2, Vincent Gracco1,2,3; 1McGill University, Faculty
of Medicine, School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Montreal,
Canada, 2Centre for Research on Language, Mind and Brain, McGill
University, Montreal, Canada, 3Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, CT — The
present study examined the cortical networks involved in the comprehension of prosody using functional magnetic resonance imaging. Judgments about the illocutionary force (intent) of a sentence were dissociated
from purely acoustic judgments associated with the changes in fundamental frequency (Fo) distinguishing a statement from a question. The
same sentence with different word-final intonation contours was used in
two different judgment tasks. Two endpoint stimuli and two ambiguous
stimuli were presented in a slow event-related paradigm. Twelve subjects
identified either the direction of the contour (rising/falling) or made a
declarative/interrogative (question/statement) judgment. The results
from the whole brain analyses as well as the ROI analyses demonstrate
that while similar networks were engaged in both tasks, greater activation accompanied question/statement judgements compared to rising/

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

187

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

falling judgments. The common cortical areas of activation for the two
tasks included the medial frontal gyrus, the middle frontal gyrus on the
right hemisphere, bilateral regions on the superior temporal and anterior
cingulate gyri, the superior parietal lobe on the right hemisphere, and a
bilateral area on the anterior insula. Common subcortical activation
included the bilateral thalamus, putamen, and the cerebellum. A number
of right hemisphere cortical and left hemisphere subcortical areas differentiated the two conditions. In general, ambiguous stimuli yielded
increased activation mainly in frontal regions. The results address current
theories of the neural bases of prosodic processing, and suggest that the
attribution of illocutionary force invokes a broader, but largely overlapping, network relative to F0 contour judgments.
G37
THE INTERACTION BETWEEN PROSODY AND SYNTAX IN THE
PROCESSING OF SUBJECT- AND OBJECT-CONTROL VERBS
Sara Bögels1, Herbert Schriefers1, Wietske Vonk2,3, Dorothee J. Chwilla1, Roel
Kerkhofs3; 1Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, 2Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics,
Nijmegen, 3Center for Language Studies, Radboud University Nijmegen — We
investigated processing differences between subject- and object-control
verbs in locally ambiguous Dutch sentences, which are disambiguated by
an intransitive or transitive verb, e.g., The man promised(subject-control)
/ advised(object-control) the woman to sleep(intransitive) / support(transitive) (Dutch word-order). Linguistic literature shows that control verbs determine the understood subject of the later infinitive verb in
the sentence, but their processing has not been studied before. We investigated whether a prosodic break (PB) after the control-verb leads to a
preference for a transitive disambiguation. An off-line auditory fragment-completion experiment revealed predominantly intransitive completions after object-control verbs, but more transitive completions after
subject-control verbs. A PB indeed shifted the preference to more transitive completions in both cases. An on-line ERP-study showed that after
subject-control verbs, the intransitive as compared to the transitive disambiguating verb elicited an N400 effect, both with and without a PB.
This result suggests, as the off-line results, that the default preference for
subject-control verbs goes in the same direction as the effect of the PB.
After object-control verbs, however, this ’intransitive N400 effect’ only
appeared when a PB was present. This shows that no clear default syntactic analysis of the sentence exists for object-control verbs, in contrast with
the off-line results. Moreover, a PB can affect and change the syntactic
analysis listeners pursue. Thus, this study reveals a dissociation between
processing ofsubject- and object-control verbs. Furthermore, a different
pattern of results was found for on- and off-line experiments: care is warranted in generalizing from off-line to on-line results.
G38
ARE TABOO ERRORS DETECTED BEFORE THEY ARE
PRONOUNCED? AN ERP STUDY Els Severens1, Ine Janssens1, Robert
Hartsuiker1; 1Ghent University, Experimental Psychology — It
has
been
thought that we monitor speech internally for errors and filter errors out
before they are pronounced. There is only one study that provides direct
evidence for covertly correcting speech errors. Motley, Camden, and
Baars (1982) used the SLIP-task to elicit speech errors that differed in
social acceptability. In this task some target word pairs are overtly named
(e.g., tool kits), while the phonological make up of preceding bias word
pairs (e.g., could tin) promotes speech errors. Either taboo errors (e.g.,
cool tits) or neutral errors (e.g., cool tarts) were elicited. There were fewer
taboo than neutral errors. Additionally, the Galvanic Skin Response
(GSR) was measured. The GSR was larger in the taboo condition; this was
interpreted as demonstrating that taboo words were generated but corrected internally. However, the GSR is not a reliable measure of cognitive
processes. In the present study we therefore wanted to replicate these
results with a more reliable measure. The electro-encephalogram was
measured while participants carried out a SLIP-task, which elicited taboo
or neutral errors in Dutch. In the taboo condition there was a more negative going wave around 600 ms after the target word pairs. Previously, a

188

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

similar negativity has been described to conflict. We suggest that in our
study, this conflict results from the taboo error that is detected and corrected internally. In the control condition this conflict is smaller because
the error is socially acceptable. These findings provide support for an
internal monitor that checks internal speech for errors.
G39
HOW CHILDREN HANDLE DIALOG INFORMATION: AN ERP
INVESTIGATION OF FOCUS PROCESSING Ann
Pannekamp1,
2
1
1
Ulrike Toepel , Elke van der Meer ; Humboldt University of Berlin, Cognitive
Psychology, Germany, 2Neuropsychology and Neurorehabilitation Service,
University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Switzerland — Language
acquisition is a complex task that involves not only the comprehension of
single words and sentences but also the identification and integration of
context information. An important step during this process is learning to
interpret pragmatic information foci and their prosodic realization in discourse. So far, little is known about the time course in which children
acquire these abilities. However, previous studies report that the development continues into adolescence. Using event related potentials
(ERPs) we investigated the perception of spoken dialogs in the presence
vs. absence of adequate prosodic cues for focus identification in three age
groups (5, 8 and 12 years) and an adult control group. In adults, the processing of information foci was accompanied by focus-related positivegoing shifts (FPS) irrespective of prosodic adequacy. However, missing
prosodic markings on information foci additionally elicited N400 patterns. In the 12-year-olds, brain responses appeared to be similar as in
adults. The 8-year-olds revealed an FPS only when the information focus
was adequately prosodically realized. When the accent was missing the
8-year-olds simply showed an N400-like mismatch reaction. In the 5year-olds, no FPS responses due to focus perception were evoked. Yet,
the missing accentuation resulted in a mismatch reaction at single electrodes. The findings indicate late developmental changes in dialog interpretation, that is, the abilities to identify and understand relevant
discourse information increase with age and become more and more
independent of prosodic accentuation.
G40
BEFORE AND AFTER: AN ERP STUDY OF THE NEUROCOGNITIVE CHANGES ASSOCIATED WITH LATE SECOND
LANGUAGE LEARNING Erin White1,2, Fred Genesee1,2, Karsten
Steinhauer2,3; 1McGill University, Psychology, 2Centre for Research on
Language, Mind, and Brain, 3School of Communication Sciences & Disorders,
McGill University — Currently, very little is known about the neuro-cognitive changes that accompany second language (L2) learning. Longitudinal work with English-speaking adults learning French suggests that
foreign language learning can lead to functional changes in brain activity
even in late L2 learners who have received limited classroom-based
instruction (Osterhout et al., 2006). However, it is unclear whether such
changes are possible for all aspects of learning, such as L2 morphology
that cannot be directly transferred from one’s first language. We present
pre-post ERP data of Korean- and Chinese- speaking adults both at the
beginning and end of a 9-week intensive intermediate level English
course. Participants read correct sentences and those containing a violation of English grammar (i.e. verb-subject agreement or tense). Learning
led to changes in the ERP signal at both orthographic and morpho-syntactic levels of sentence processing. By the end of the course the students
exhibited a P600 effect that was not present in the first testing session,
suggesting they were beginning to develop morpho-syntactic processing
resembling that of native-speakers. Moreover, this P600 development
reflected changes in participants’ accuracy during the experiment across
the two testing sessions. Additionally, in the Korean speakers, the P200
amplitude elicited in response to content words decreased, suggesting
that for these participants orthographic processing had became less
effortful. These results suggest that L2 learning at the behavioural level is
associated with processing changes at the neuro-cognitive level and that
even among late L2 learners, as proficiency improves brain processing
begins to resemble that of native speakers.

Poster Session G

G41
ADAPTATION TO PHONOLOGICALLY SIMILAR WORDS IN
BILATERAL SUPERIOR TEMPORAL SULCI Kenneth Vaden1, Gregory
Hickok1; 1University of California at Irvine, Cognitive Sciences — The goal of
the present study was to functionally identify cortical regions supporting
phonological-level processes in speech recognition. Most neuroimaging
speech experiments use subtraction methodologies, often contrasting
speech listening against non-speech baselines. Such contrasts may
weaken activity in regions that respond non-selectively to speech, and
typically ignore significant linguistic distinctions, making it unclear how
to linguistically characterize observed activity. A better alternative is to
manipulate specific linguistic representations to highlight specific speech
processes. We used an fMRI-adaptation experiment to detect repetitioninhibition of response to repetitive phonological content in spoken
wordlists, measured by phonological similarity among words. Speech
performance is degraded in perception, production, and memory when
words share phonemes with other words in close temporal proximity. A
related phenomenon is neural adaptation, which occurs when a neural
substrate is inhibited by repeated exposure to stimulus dimensions that it
processes. Seventeen participants listened to recordings of CVC
wordlists: phonologically dissimilar words, phonologically similar
words, or a single word repeating. Short lag priming between list items
was sufficient to reveal activity differences consistent with our prediction
of repetition-inhibition. Words sharing greater numbers of phonemes
had significantly reduced activity relative to words with no phonemes in
common, bilaterally in middle Superior Temporal Sulci (STS). The activity pattern observed in STS demonstrated sensitivity to phonemic content
in speech, further neuroimaging evidence for STS in phonological processing that corroborates observations of pure word deafness resulting in
cases of bilateral STS damage.
G42
SIGN MEMORY AND LEXICAL ACCESS: EVIDENCE FROM
AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE Michael
Grosvald1,2,
Christian
Lachaud1, David Corina1,2,3; 1Center for Mind and Brain, University of
California at Davis, 2University of California, Linguistics, Davis, 3University of
California, Psychology, Davis — In our efforts to develop a theory of sign
language recognition, we explore how the processing of sign language
forms diverges from that of non-linguistic actions. This study used a 1back paradigm to investigate memory and lexical access in 31 deaf signers and 18 hearing non-signers. Participants watched a series of video
clips, each showing an American Sign Language sign or a non-linguistic
grooming gesture, and needed to decide during each clip whether the
action shown was the same action seen in the preceding clip. We manipulated sequential co-occurrences of particular image pairs to examine
effects of prior exposure on memory judgments across stimulus class
(signs versus gestures) and viewpoint (Upright, Side, or Inverted). We
hypothesized that memory would be aided, and response times shortened, in contexts where lexical representations of the shown actions were
available to subjects (i.e. for signers responding to signs). As expected,
deaf subjects were faster and more accurate than hearing subjects. However, a surprising group difference emerged when comparing response
times to Upright-view signs and gestures preceded by the same actions in
various orientations: deaf subjects’ responses to Upright-view actions
were significantly slower when preceded by Side-views than by Uprightviews; hearing subjects showed no such effect. These effects were more
pronounced for gestures than signs. Our interpretation of this outcome is
that lexical access was performed automatically by deaf subjects although
not required for this task. We explore the implications of these findings in
relation to theories of expertise in visual perceptual processing and memory.

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

G43
ERP EVIDENCE FOR ’STRESS DEAFNESS’ IN LATE PROFICIENT
FRENCH-GERMAN BILINGUALS Maren Schmidt-Kassow1, Sonja A.
Kotz1; 1MPI CBS, Leipzig, Germany — French and German ERP data have
shown that metric violations (i.e., incorrectly stressed words) in a sentence elicit a P600 component that is comparable to the P600 evoked by
syntactic violations (Magne et al., 2007; Schmidt-Kassow & Kotz, in
press). There is also recent evidence that French speakers are impaired in
discriminating between two stimuli that vary in stress position (Dupoux
et al., 2008). Therefore, French speakers have been labelled as ’stress
deaf’. In the current study, we investigated whether late proficient
French-German bilinguals can perceive metric violations in metrically
regular German sentences. All of the participants were highly proficient
learners of German, i.e., they were able to stress all words in sentence on
the intended syllable in a production task. In contrast to German native
speakers, French-German bilinguals failed to show a P600 component in
response to the metric violations although attention had been directed to
the metric pattern of the sentences. Thus, the current data corroborate
the hypothesis that French speakers are stress deaf even if they reached a
highly proficient level of German.
G44
NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF IRONY COMPREHENSION: A
FUNCTIONAL MRI STUDY Midori Shibata1, Akira Toyomura1, Hiroaki
Itoh1, Jun-ichi Abe1; 1Hokkaido University, Psychology — Irony is one of the
pragmatic statements that conveys the opposite meaning to its literal
meaning. Comprehension of irony may be required to infer the intentions, beliefs, and feelings of the speaker who expresses the opposite
meaning. In this study, we investigated the neural substrate involved in
the comprehension of irony using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Twelve participants read the short scenario which
consisted of five sentences. The first four sentences explained the situation of protagonists. The fifth one had a connotation of either ironical, literal, or unconnected meanings. The participants had to press a button for
"yes" or "no" regarding to whether the final sentence expressed the ironical meanings or not. In the ironical sentence condition, the bilateral inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), inferior parietal lobule (IPL), superior frontal
gyrus (SFG), medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), the left superior temporal
gyrus (STG) and parahippocampal gyrus were activated. In the literal
sentence condition, the bilateral IFG, SFG, MPFC, middle frontal gyrus,
IPL, and the left STG were activated. We analyzed differential contrast in
the ironical sentence condition versus the literal sentence condition. This
contrast revealed higher activation in the MPFC, the left STG, and the left
parahippocampal gyrus. The involvement of MPFC in mentalizing processes has been reported (Frith and Frith, 2003). Our results suggest that
the comprehension of irony is strongly related to mentalizing processes.
G45
LEXICAL PROCESSING IN DIGLOSSIC CODE SWITCHING
BETWEEN MODERN STANDARD ARABIC AND PALESTINIAN
COLLOQUIAL
ARABIC:
AN
EVENT-RELATED
BRAIN
POTENTIAL STUDY OF ARABIC NATIVE SPEAKERS Reem
Khamis-Dakwar1, Karen Froud2, Sami Boudelaa3; 1Adelphi University,
2
Teachers College, Columbia University, 3Cambridge University, UK —
Diglossia is a phenomenon whereby social functions are distributed
between formal and colloquial language varieties. We used EEG to to
investigate MMN responses of native speakers of colloquial and standard
Arabic (a diglossic language) to switching between language varieties,
while controlling for semantic, acoustic-phonetic, and phonological variables. 16 participants were presented with four real-word conditions: 1)
PCA words with different meanings (PCA ?a? (right) - ?ad (border); 2)
PCA and MSA words with the same meanings (PCA ?a?, MSA ?aq
(right); 3) switching between dialects and between meanings (PCA ?a?MSA ?a? (prompt)); and 4) switching across languages (PCA fi:l (elephant): English feel). Real-word conditions were matched by
pseudoword conditions utilizing identical phonetic contrasts. High-den-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

189

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

sity EEG recordings were simultaneously acquired. MMN was derived
from EEG recordings by averaging and montaging to a subset of frontocentral sensors, and subtracting averaged responses to standard stimuli
from averaged deviant responses within each condition. MMN amplitude revealed a lexicality effect. Increased MMN amplitude was associated with colloquial-standard switches, compared to within-dialect
conditions, even when the lexical semantics were held constant. This
result indicates that the switch between dialects has neurophsysiological
consquences over and above those related to a simple phonemic category
change. Our results show that appropriately constrained use of single
words in pre-attentional auditory processing paradigms can provide evidence of graded neurophysiological responses reflecting linguistic distinctions between diglossic langauge varieties. Such studies can elucidate
questions about the neural representation of diglossia.
G46
CONTRIBUTIONS OF LEFT INFERIOR FRONTAL GYRUS SUBREGIONS IN READING DIFFERENTIATED BY REGION-OFINTEREST ANALYSIS Priya Kalra1, Taeko Wydell2; 1Harvard Graduate
School of Education, 2Brunel University — The Dual-Route Cascade model
of reading (Coltheart et al. 2001) postulates a grapheme-phoneme conversion route for pseudowords and infrequent words of regular orthography, and a lexical search route for frequent and irregular words. Two
areas within the left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG-pars opercularis and
LIFG-pars triangularis) analogous to Brodmann's areas 44 and 45 respectively have been put forward as candidates for the neural correlates of
each route . However, whole-brain analyses have not demonstrated reliable double dissociations in activation between the two areas, in contrast
to the predictions of the DRC model. Although both areas are predicted
to be recruited in a variety of reading conditions, their contributions are
predicted to differ. Our aim was to demonstrate this difference using
region-of-interest (rather than whole-brain) analysis. Six healthy righthanded native English speaking volunteers aged 21-28 (3 female, 3 male)
were scanned in a Siemens 3T scanner while performing a Homophone
Decision Task (judging whether two stimuli would be pronounced the
same way) across four conditions (regular word, irregular word,
pseudoword and pseudohomophone). Data was analysed using SPM5
and MARSBAR. Although both regions-of-interest were recruited in all
conditions, their percent BOLD signal change across conditions suggested complementary contributions within the DRC model. We interpret these results as support for the DRC model and as support for
construing Brodmann’s areas 44 and 45 as possible neural correlates of
different routes within the model.
G47
READING THE MINDS OF OTHERS: DISENTANGLING THE
GENDER-SPECIFIC MECHANISMS Heather J. Ferguson1, Richard
Breheny1, Anthony J. Sanford2, Christoph Scheepers2; 1Research Department of
Linguistics, University College London, UK, 2University of Glasgow,
Psychology and CCNi, UK — The ability to understand and predict other
peoples’ behaviour by attributing independent mental states to them is
commonly referred to as theory of mind (ToM). Over the past 50 years a
great deal of work has investigated ToM, focusing largely on developmental issues, impairments of this ability (e.g. autism and schizophrenia)
and also on locating a neurological basis for ToM reasoning. However,
this research has traditionally relied on response-based measures and
thus very little is known about the on-line processes that are activated
when comprehenders use ToM. Moreover, investigations using ToM
tasks have initiated theories of a gender bias in cognition, based on evidence that females are superior to males on off-line tests of social judgment and measures of empathy, while males excel in practical
’systemising’ skills, such as mathematical reasoning and spatial tasks. In
three experiments, we used the visual-world paradigm to disentangle the
on-line predictions that males and females generate during false belief
(Exp. 1) and deception (Exps. 2 & 3) story comprehension tasks. Overall,
our results demonstrate that comprehenders can immediately modify

190

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

expectations based on their own knowledge about reality to direct their
visual attention to appropriate referents according that character’s perspective. However, the direct comparison of males and females suggests
the existence of gender-specific cognitive strategies, where females consistently make ’person-relevant’ predictions from the earliest opportunity, but males show delayed or no equivalent anticipation. We compare
these findings across the specific language tasks involved and initiate discussions of possible explanations for the processing bias.
G48
THE EFFECT OF MOOD ON ANTICIPATION IN LANGUAGE
COMPREHENSION: AN ERP STUDY Dieuwke de Goede1, Petra van
Alphen1, Emma Mulder2, Yvonne Blokland3, José Kerstholt4, Jos van Berkum1,5;
1
Max Planck Institue for Psycholinguistics, 2University of Amsterdam,
3Utrecht University, 4TNO Soesterberg, 5Donders Institute, Centre for
Cognitive Neuroimaging — Several aspects of cognition, such as memory
retrieval, problem-solving and decision-making, have been found to be
sensitive to a person's mood. The evidence suggests that people in a
happy mood are more inclined to use heuristic, top-down processing
strategies than people in a sad mood. Here we investigate whether mood
also affects the use of heuristics to anticipate upcoming language. In constructions like David praised Linda because..., verbs like praise bias readers to expect more information about the person who is praised (in this
case, Linda). The bias is so strong that pronouns disconfirming the expectation (he in David praised Linda because he...), actually elicit a morphosyntactic P600 effect, indicating that such pronouns are briefly taken to be
structurally problematic. We reasoned that if people process information
more heuristically when being in a happy mood than when being in a sad
mood, this should modulate the size of this expectation-based P600 effect.
In a two-session EEG experiment, we used short film clips to manipulate
the mood of participants who read short stories in which verb-based
expectations were confirmed or disconfirmed with a gender-marked pronoun. When readers were in a happy mood, bias-inconsistent pronouns
elicited a clear P600 effect, but when the same readers were in a sad
mood, no such effect was observed. This supports the idea that a happy
mood increases the use of heuristics. Moreover, it reveals that languagerelevant ERP effects can come and go as a function of general mood state.
G49
EXPLORING
LANGUAGE
SWITCHING
WITH
LEXICAL
DECISION AND EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS Kaitlyn
Litcofsky1, Katherine J. Midgley1,2, Phillip J. Holcomb1, Jonathan Grainger2;
1
Tufts University, Medford, MA, 2LPC-CNRS, Université de Provence,
Marseille, France — Whether in production or comprehension, bilinguals
can freely switch between their two languages. What are the underlying
neural mechanisms and processing costs associated with these language
switches? We investigated this by presenting common, single-word noncognates in English and French to 26 native English speakers proficient in
French in a lexical decision task. Items were either "switch" items, for
which the language differed from the previously presented language
(POMME - BEACH) or they were "non-switch" items, in which case the
language remained the same (FIGHT - DRINK). Event-related potentials
were recorded from 32 scalp electrodes to each item. Our most salient
result was a clear, widespread language effect showing larger negativities in L1 relative to L2 in the N400 epoch, an effect previously reported
by this lab. Additionally, the N400 component showed a tendency to
index language switching in both L1 and L2, each having a different scalp
distribution. Interestingly, we found effects on the late positive component reflecting switch effects that were robust in L1, but nonexistent in
L2. Finally, the RT data showed an asymmetric switch effect such that L1
items incurred greater switch costs than did L2 items, replicating the
findings found in the literature and prior work from this lab. These
results appear to be consistent with theories postulating a greater inhibition of the dominant L1 during L2 processing followed by a need for
greater reactivation of L1 after a switch. Our findings will be discussed
within the framework of current models of bilingual language control.

Poster Session G

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

G50
THE ROLE OF PHONOLOGICAL COMPLEXITY IN THE PAST
TENSE DEBATE Tomasina Oh1, Keith Tan1, Philina Ng1, Berne Yeh2,
Steven Graham3; 1National University of Singapore, English Language &
Literature, 2National University Hospital, Singapore, 3National University of
Singapore, Psychology — For decades the English past tense has been the
battleground for proponents of a dual (rules-and-memory) system versus
those of a single (associative) system. For the former, the regular-irregular verb distinction reflects the rule-based nature of language (walkwalked) and its memorized aspects (run-ran) respectively. Previous
imaging studies show differential activation for each type of verb, taken
by some as further evidence for a dual model. Others believe that activation associated with regular past tense is actually due to higher phonological processing rather than rule application. Indeed, by matching
regular and irregular verbs for phonological complexity, Desai et al.
(2006) showed activation related to regular verbs (specifically left superior temporal gyrus/STG) disappeared. The current study extended this
idea by also manipulating levels of complexity. Using a 2x3 design (regular vs. irregular x high, mid, low phonological complexity) twenty participants generated past tense verbs during fMRI. Two main findings
emerged: (i) matching for phonological complexity did not remove all
activation for regular verbs, suggesting a genuine difference between regular and irregular verbs over and above differences in complexity. Areas
associated with irregular generation were similar to those found by Desai
et al. We propose that our areas (including left middle frontal gyrus,
right caudate, left thalamus and right cingulate) reflected a greater effort
to suppress the automatic "-ed" rule. (ii) Relative to low complexity, high
complexity verbs did not activate left STG, nor any traditional phonological processing areas. Together these results suggest that evidence is
insufficient to reject a dual model.

G52
TITRATION OF STIMULUS DURATION: A METHOD FOR
ACQUIRING DYNAMIC INFORMATION WITH FMRI W.
Einar
Mencl1, Stephen Frost1, Shin-Yi Fang2, Nicole Landi3, Helen Chen1, Kenneth
Pugh1,2,4, Jay Rueckl1,2; 1Haskins Laboratories, 2University of Connecticut,
3
University of Minnesota, 4Yale University — While fMRI is renowned for
its spatial precision, interpreting temporal differences in activation is
problematic due to the nature and variability of the hemodynamic
response. We have explored an experimental technique for inferring the
temporal sequence of activations along the cortical pathway for printed
single-word identification. In Experiment 1 (N = 15), we presented word
and nonword stimuli for varied durations prior to backward masking
(33, 66, or 200 msec). Under the simplest assumptions, brief stimuli
should only activate early nonlinguistic visual areas, whereas stimuli
available for longer durations should be able to progress into successive
stages of the reading network. Results were relatively consistent with this
assumption: for words, 33 msec presentations produced restricted activations primarily in left striate/extrastriate areas; 66 msec durations elicited
activation in these areas, plus the superior parietal cortex and BA 44/45;
200 msec durations produced activations at these areas, and enhanced
activations in the posterior extrastriate and occipitotemporal zones. In
Experiment 2 (N = 16), we presented words only, but at a more thorough
set of presentation durations (17 to 200 msec). Initial analyses suggest
that the response in many areas is not strictly linear across presentation
duration. Ongoing analyses are targeted to clarify the nature of these
nonlinear responses. We accept that the direct interpretation of these
results as indicating simple stage-by-stage processing depends upon the
unrealistic assumption that the reading network is a sequential, nonreentrant system. However, the technique and these data provide a starting point for investigating its nonlinear properties.

G51
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATION
OF
INTERACTIONS OF PROSODY AND SEMANTICS IN CROSSMODAL PHRASAL INTERPRETATIONS Shani H. Abada1,2, Shari R.
Baum1,2, John E. Drury1,2, Karsten Steinhauer1,2; 1School of Communication
Sciences & Disorders, McGill University, 2Centre for Research on Language,
Mind and Brain, McGill University — Previous
electrophysiological
research shows that the processing of prosodic boundaries in sentences
elicits a Closure Positive Shift (CPS) in young adults. It is unclear whether
boundaries in simple phrases elicit this component, and to what extent
prosodic processing is influenced by concurrent visual input. To probe
the interactions of the brain systems subserving the processing of prosodic and semantic information in simple phrases, subjects performed a
cross-modal picture/phrase matching task while listening to phrases of
conjoined nouns, (e.g., "[bike and dog] and [cup]", "[bike] and [dog and
cup]") whose groupings were signaled by prosodic breaks. These spoken
phrases either did or did not match concurrently presented pictures of
three objects, presented in a horizontal row with a vertical bar marking
the relevant (mis)matching groupings. Two further conditions included
pure semantic word/picture mismatches (always on the 2nd word/
object pair), and a double violation involving both a semantic and a prosodic mismatch. Behavioral and ERP results revealed that incongruous
visual contexts modified responses, supporting an influence of visual
context on prosodic processing not previously known. A positive component is elicited time-locked to pauses. Its amplitude is larger in prosodic
mismatches and its morphology is modulated by the boundary location.
Behavioral data revealed increased accuracy in semantic compared to
prosodic mismatches, although ERP data revealed that both aspects are
crucial, as evidenced by an N400 sensitive to prosody as well as semantics. Results address the electrophysiological correlates of prosody, as
well as the interaction between, and relative weighting of, semantic and
prosodic information.

G53
THE ROLE OF THE DORSAL PATHWAY IN CHINESE WORD
READING Danling Peng1, Ruifang Guo1, Yuan Deng2, Yanhui Yang3,
Guosheng Ding1; 1State Key Lab of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning,
Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China, 2Institute of Psychology, Chinese
Academy of Science, Beijing, China, 3MRI Center of Xuan Wu Hospital,
Beijing, China — Previous studies on word reading demonstrate that
word reading is related to two systems: the anterior reading system and
the posterior reading system. The latter include the ventral pathway and
the dorsal pathway. Many studies have proved that the ventral stream is
responsible for visual word recognition, while for the dorsal pathway,
some researchers consider that it is involved in the analysis of the phonology or the integration of morpheme and phoneme. However, there
are less known about the relationship between the dorsal pathway and
orthography. In our study, we investigated the role of the dorsal pathway
in orthographic processing of Chinese characters. We presented to undergraduate students two types of characters with normal characters and
shifted characters (i.e. positions of radicals in character were counterchanged). Participants were asked to judge whether stimulus presented
was a real Chinese character regardless of position of radicals. We found
that both of these two types of characters activated the dorsal pathway.
ROI analysis indicated that there was significant main effect of type in the
precuneus gyrus (BA7) of the left hemisphere. The shifted characters had
stronger activation than the normal characters. According to these
results, we propose that the dorsal pathway maybe involved in radical
position encoding in orthographic processing of Chinese characters.
G54
PATHWAY
FOR
SCRIPTS
SPATIAL
ANALYSIS-THE
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT SCRIPTS Yafeng
Sun1,
Danling
Peng1, Guosheng Ding1, Yuan Deng2, Yanhui Yang3; 1State Key Lab of
Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing,
China, 2Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China,
3
MRI Center of Xuan Wu Hospital, Beijing, China — Nowadays researchers
have paid more attention to how the dorsal pathway functions while peo-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

191

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

ple read scripts. They have found that role of the Parietal Lobe (PL) or the
Superior Temporal Gyrus (STG) differs for different scripts. However,
most previous studies only focused on one script but did not make a
direct comparison between different scripts. The aim of this research was
to compare the role of the dorsal pathway in processing very different
scripts such as Chinese and English. Fourteen undergraduate students
participated in this study and all of them have passed the CET-6. We presented to participants both Chinese characters and polysyllabic English
words with three formats. One was normal and the other two were
degraded (i.e., the number of blank spaces between radicals or syllables
was changed: 0, 0.75 & 1.5 spaces). It was found that the STG was activated by only English while the PL activated by both. The activation patterns were also inferenced by the formats of the scripts. The results
demonstrate that the activations of the dorsal pathway are modulated by
both the characteristics of scripts and the requirement of space analyses.
G55
OLDER ADULTS’ PROCESSING OF PROSODY IN SPOKEN
ENGLISH GARDEN-PATH SENTENCES: A DISSOCIATION
BETWEEN ONLINE ERP DATA AND OFFLINE BEHAVIORAL
DATA Efrat Pauker1,2, Shani Abada1,2, Inbal Itzhak1,2, Shari Baum1,2,
Karsten Steinhauer1,2; 1School of Communication Sciences and Disorders,
McGill University, Montreal, Canada, 2Centre for Research on Language, Mind
and Brain, Montreal, Canada — Previous ERP investigations provided evidence for the immediate use of prosodic information in the comprehension of temporary syntactic ambiguities in garden path sentences (Pauker
et al., 2006; Steinhauer et al., 1999). However, few ERP studies to date
have examined the ability of older adults to process syntax-related prosody online. The present auditory study used ERPs to determine whether
older adults (65-80 years) make use of prosody in resolving early and late
closure (EC/LC) ambiguities, and directly compares the data to those of
young adults (18-30 years). Participants made offline acceptability judgments on two types of sentences (EC/LC) which were either well-formed
or contained prosody-syntax mismatches that varied in severity. Behaviorally, both groups identified prosody-syntax mismatches to some
extent, but older subjects accepted mismatches significantly more often
(70%) than younger participants (40%). Older adults also failed to discriminate between the two types of prosodic mismatches, while younger
adults showed significantly lower acceptance of the more severe mismatch. ERP results demonstrate CPS components and garden-path
effects (P600 and N400/P600) in both groups; however, older adults displayed a more posteriorly distributed CPS and more anterior P600 components than young subjects. The ERP data suggest that older adults
processed and integrated prosodic information in real-time. However,
behavioral offline data did not capture these online effects. Age-related
differences (a) in neurocognitive processing mechanisms as reflected by
distinct ERP scalp distributions, and/or (b) in the subsequent offline
evaluation of initial processing difficulties, may contribute to this dissociation between online and offline data.
G56
THE EFFECT OF WORD REGULARITY AND FREQUENCY ON
NAMING BEHAVIOUR AND FMRI BOLD ACTIVATION Jacqueline
Cummine1, Carrie Esopenko1, Gordon Sarty1, Ron Borowsky1; 1University of
Saskatchewan, Psychology — Background: It has been suggested that the
Frequency (high frequency, HF and low frequency, LF) X Regularity (regular words, REGs and exception words, EXCs) interaction on naming RT
occurs because the whole-word and sub-word reading systems produce a
competing phonological code for LF-EXCs (i.e., increased phonemic processing and preparation of motor response). It has also been shown that
tasks involving phonemic processing activate regions in the right middle
temporal gyri (rMTG; Glasser & Rilling, 2008), and tasks involving preparation of motor responses activate regions in the supplementary motor
association cortex (SMA; Richter et al., 1997). Purpose: We explored the
effect of regularity and frequency, both behaviourally (i.e., naming RT),
and functionally (i.e., fMRI) and the extent to which activation is found in

192

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

these regions. Method: Participants (N=63 in the behavioural experiment and N=10 in the functional experiment) named words blocked by
regularity and frequency. Naming RTs were collected and fMRI activation maps that separate unique versus shared regions of activation were
created. Results: Behaviourally, the standard regularity x frequency
interaction was significant. That is, EXCs were named significantly
slower than REGs, and LF-EXCs were named significant slower than all
other stimuli. Functionally, we found more activation for EXCs in the
SMA (i.e., increased preparatory response), and exclusive activation for
LF-EXCs in the rMTG (i.e., increased phonemic processing). Conclusion:
Using a blocked design, we replicate the standard Regularity X Frequency interaction in naming, and provide evidence for the role of rMTG
in phonemic processing and SMA in preparing a motor response.
G57
THE INITIAL LANGUAGE EXPERIENCE SHAPES BOTH HUMAN
BRAIN FUNCTION AND ANATOMY: EVIDENCES FROM THE
CONGENITALLY PROFOUNDLY DEAF Yanyan
Li1,
Guosheng
Ding1, Danling Peng1, Liping Wu2, Ping Hu2, Yating Lv1, Yufeng Zang1,
Chunyun Guo3; 1State Key Lab of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing
Normal University, Beijing, P. R. China, 2Special Education College of Beijing
Union University, Beijing, P. R. China, 3Special Education School of Dagang
District, Tianjin, P. R. China — Language experience plays an important
role in shaping both the function and the anatomy of human brain. The
current study explored how the initial language experience impacts the
development of brain function and anatomy with comparing two groups
of congenitally profoundly deaf and one group of hearing people. One
deaf group born of deaf parents (deaf native signers) acquired language
experience (Chinese sign language) earlier than the other deaf group
born of hearing parents (deaf nonnative signers). The BOLD fMRI activation were examined when the participants tried to understand Chinese
Sign Language or spoken language in 3T-fMRI scanner. The effect of the
initial language experience was revealed by the comparison between two
deaf groups, while the effect of language modality revealed by the deaf
group (sign language) and hear group (spoken language). The results
showed that the left classical language areas were active in both sign language and spoken language comprehension. The recruitment of different
parts of this network is modulated by both the age of acquisition and language modality. In addition, we also found that the gray matter density is
modulated by age of first language acquisition. These essential findings
provide strong evidence that the initial language experience contributes
to the development of both brain function and anatomy.
G58
EARLY AUDITORY CORTICAL REGIONS DISCRIMINATE
INTELLIGIBLE FROM UNINTELLIGIBLE SPEECH Kayoko Okada1,
Jon Venezia1, William Matchin1, Kourosh Saberi1, John T. Serences2, Gregory
Hickok1; 1University of California, Irvine, Cognitive Sciences, 2University of
California, San Diego, Psychology — Previous neuroimaging work that
uses standard subtraction methodologies has shown that selective
responses to intelligible versus unintelligible speech are found in regions
of the superior temporal sulcus whereas early auditory areas in Heschl’s
gyrus and immediately surrounding regions in the supratemporal plane
do not discriminate between intelligible and unintelligible acoustic control stimuli. The present study investigated this issue using multivariate
pattern classification analyses. In a block-design fMRI experiment, we
presented subjects with two intelligible speech conditions, clear speech
(sentences) and noise-vocoded speech, as well as two unintelligible
speech conditions, spectrally rotated speech and spectrally rotated noisevocoded speech. Standard subtractive analyses replicated previous
results showing bilateral anterior and posterior STS activity for intelligible compared to unintelligible conditions whereas early auditory areas in
the supratemporal plane showed no difference. Using pattern classification analysis, however, we found that despite the lack of amplitude differences, early auditory regions nonetheless yielded reliably different
spatial activation patterns to intelligible versus unintelligible speech in

Poster Session G

both hemispheres. This result calls into question previous conclusions
based on typical subtraction methodologies and suggests that regions
that are not speech selective in terms of the voxel cluster-level amplitude
of the physiological response may contain a finer-grained organization
that processes speech differently from non-speech acoustic signals.

Linguistic Processes: Other
G59
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATION
OF
NULL
ARGUMENTS: OMITTED STIMULUS POTENTIALS Sophie
G.
Tate1, Hiroko Nakano1; 1Saint Mary's College of California, Psychology — The
current study investigated electrophysiological processes of null arguments in English speakers. A null argument refers to a dropped subject or
object argument in a sentence. A null argument structure is not grammatical in English, but it is in some languages such as Spanish (subject drop)
or Japanese (subject and/or object drop). In this study, English monolinguals listened to paired sentences: a context sentence, e.g., "Oh, the bottom of the door is dented"; a follow-up test sentence, which contained an
overt object argument (Pronoun or Lexical) or null argument (Null), e.g.,
"Did you kick it?", "Did you kick the door?", or "Did you kick ø?, respectively. ERPs measured at the onset of the null argument showed early
positive deflection, which prolonged for several hundred milliseconds
(Omitted Stimulus Potentials). The amplitude of the positivity for the
Null condition was larger than those for the both Pronoun and Lexical
conditions. The OSP observed with this linguistic material shares some
similarities and dissimilarities (e.g., latency and prolongation) with the
OSPs elicited by randomly omitted flashes of light or tones in series of
presentation as well as with the general P300 and the P600. The OSP
observed in this study may eflect a detection of perceptual deviation as
well as syntactic processes of an argument structure. The nature of the
OSP component is discussed.

Linguistic processes: Other
G60
PATHS, MANNERS, AND OBJECTS Alexander Kranjec1,2, Eileen
Cardillo1,2, Anjan Chatterjee1,2; 1Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania,
Neurology, 2The Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, the University of
Pennsylvania — Languages segregate information about an object's trajectory (PATH) and an object's intrinsic motion (MANNER) into different
parts of speech (e.g. prepositional phrases and verbs in English). Previous
work using fMRI (Wu, Morganti & Chatterjee, 2007) found dissociable
neural networks mediating the representation of an object's path versus
its manner of motion, suggesting a further parsing of the where motion
processing streamóinto dorsal areas for path and ventral areas for manner. These results support the hypothesis that neural segregation of
motion processing parallels the structuring of events by language. There
are reasons for thinking that these two kinds of motion processing rely on
distinct reference frames. For example, compared to path, manner entails
motion intrinsic to an object’s general form, generating the further
hypothesis that processing manner attributes is more closely linked to
object processing. To test this, we extended the one-back task from Wu et
al. to include multiple agents. In a blocked design, participants attended
to changes in either the form of the agent, its path, or its manner. Participants found path changes equally salient regardless of whether they cooccurred with manner or agent changes. In contrast, participants had
greater difficulty detecting a change in manner performed by a different
agent. Results support a neural model of motion processing in which
manner more than path of motion is linked to the identification of objects.

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

G61
EFFECTS OF MULTIPLE REPETITIONS ON THE FUNCTIONAL
NEUROBIOLOGY OF READING Karen Aicher1,2, Jay Rueckl1,2, W.
Einar Mencl1, Stephen Frost1, Shin-Yi Fang1,2, Kenneth Pugh1,3; 1Haskins
Laboratories, 2University of Connecticut, 3Yale University School of
Medicine — Increased familiarity with words and nonwords has been
associated with changes in cortical activation patterns. Whether the activation increases or decreases in response to a learning task has been
hypothesized to be related to the extent to which the particular item has
been overlearned at the time of measurement. We examined the response
of twenty typical readers to different repetition conditions on a
pseudoword oral reading task using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI). During a pre-scanning training session, participants
were asked to read monosyllabic, pronounceable pseudowords into a
microphone. Pseudowords were presented once, twice, four times, or
eight times during that session. Participants then completed a similar oral
reading task in the scanner with the repeated items from the out-of-scanner training session, as well as novel pseudowords. Repetition related
changes in activation were noted in left hemisphere areas strongly associated with reading functions. Specifically, more repetition led to increased
activation in the middle temporal gyrus, which has been hypothesized to
be part of a ventral reading system which may be semantically tuned.
Increased activation was also noted in the supramarginal gyrus, which
has been considered to be part of a dorsal reading system, and has been
associated with phonological analysis. Nonmonotonic changes were
noted as a function of repetition in some areas, including the inferior
frontal gyrus, an area that has been postulated to be part of an anterior
circuit which may be involved with phonological memory and recoding.
Implications for normal and impaired readers are discussed.
G62
PERCEIVING CATEGORY, AFFECT AND GENDER IN THE SAME
SET OF WORDS: AN MEG STUDY USING VISUAL-AUDITORY
PRIMING TASK Yang Zhang1, Toshiaki Imada2,3, Masaki Kawakatsu3,
Keita Tanaka3, Atsushi Aoyama3, Sharon Miller1, Iku Nemoto3; 1University of
Minnesota, Speech-Language-Hearing Sciences, 2Institute for Learning and
Brain Sciences, University of Washington, 3Research Center for Advanced
Technologies, Tokyo Denki University — Human speech contains not only
the structure of a language but also important information about the
speaker’s identity and emotional affect. This study employed whole-head
magnetoencephalography (MEG) to examine Japanese adults’ perception
of category, affect and gender for a set of English words. Seven subjects
participated in the visual-auditory priming task. The visual stimuli that
were presented 500 ms prior to auditory stimuli consisted of static pictures of letters ("L" or "R") for Category Condition, happy or sad cartoons
for Affect Condition, and male or female cartoons for Gender Condition.
The digitally edited auditory stimuli used the same set of words recorded
from native English speakers (one male and one female) producing the
words "right" and "light", intended to convey either happy or sad mood.
Subjects were required to respond whether the auditory word was congruent with the preceding visual prime or not. The experiment started
with a familiarization phase, which was immediately followed by the test
phase. At least 80 trials were averaged for congruent and incongruent
responses in each condition. As expected, behavioral results in both accuracy and reaction times revealed an increasing order of difficulty from
gender to affect to category perception across the subjects. Minimum
Current Estimate analysis of the MEG data indicated different patterns of
hemispheric and regional involvement for the three conditions when the
congruent responses were subtracted from the incongruent responses.
Taken together, the results support the plurality of neural representations
of speech at the cortical level and their dependency on selective attention.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

193

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

G63
NEURAL CORRELATES OF LANGUAGE LEARNING IN
EXCEPTIONAL
CIRCUMSTANCES:
AN
EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL STUDY Nils Skotara1,2, Monique Kügow1,2, Uta Salden1,
Barbara Hänel-Faulhaber3, Brigitte Röder2; 1Research Centre 538:
Multilingualism, University of Hamburg, 2Biological Psychology and
Neuropsychology, University of Hamburg, 3Educational sciences, Section II:
Perception & Communication, University of Hamburg — Most studies investigating sensitive or critical periods for language acquisition compare
native speakers and second language (L2) learners. A possible sensitive
or critical period for the acquisition of a first language (L1) can only be
investigated in people grown up in exceptional circumstances, for example in deaf people born to hearing parents unable to use a natural language with their child. The present study compared (1) native signers of
German Sign Language (DGS) who had learned written German as an L2,
(2) late signers who had learned both, DGS as an L1 and written German
(as an L2) after school enrolment, and (3) hearing L2-learners of German.
Written German sentences were presented while the EEG was recorded.
In half of the sentences a semantic (implausible object) or a syntactic violation (verb agreement violation) was embedded. Participants had to
decide whether or not the sentence was correct. The behavioural data
revealed a better performance for hearing L2-learners and native signers
than for late signers. A subgroup of late signers performed similarly as
the native signers. In all groups, semantic violations elicited an N400 followed by a late positivity and syntactic violations elicited a P600. After
syntactic violations a left lateral negativity was observed in hearing L2learners. By contrast, a bilateral negativity was observed for the native
and late signers. These data suggest that language deprivation affects the
cerebral organization of language processing.
G64
MULTIPLE PHONOLOGICAL REPRESENTATIONS BECOME
ACTIVE WHEN READING JAPANESE KANJI: CASCADING
ACTIVATION AFTER ALL? Rinus Verdonschot1,2, Katsuo Tamaoka3,
Clemens Poppe4, Niels Schiller1,2; 1Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition,
2Leiden University Centre for Linguistics, 3Graduate School of Language
Education, Reitaku University, 4Centre for Japanese and Korean Studies, Leiden
University — An unresolved issue in psycholinguistics is whether activation spreading is limited to selected instead of 'merely' activated lemmas.
For instance, Levelt et al. (1991) found that a to-be-named target lemma
(e.g. sheep) spreads activation to the word-form level but not to categorically or associatively related lemmas (like goat or wool), supporting discrete processing. Peterson and Savoy (1998), however, reported evidence
for phonological activation of (near-) synonyms like couch and sofa, providing evidence for cascading processing. These latter results were attributed by discrete models to be special cases of processing. We employed a
masked priming paradigm using Japanese kanji which are more commonly synonymous. Many kanji symbols are 'synonymous' in the sense
that they have multiple readings though the meaning does not necessarily change (unlike homographs). For instance, the symbol for water, ?,
can be read as /mizu/ or /sui/ and instances of both readings can easily
be found, e.g. ?? (/kai-sui/; seawater) or ?? (/ama-mizu/; rainwater).
Therefore, this symbol has two possible readings, but its meaning water
does not change. Using katakana transcriptions (phonetic script) of these
possible pronunciations we were able to show that multiple katakana targets could successfully be primed by the same kanji prime. These findings provide further evidence for cascaded processing in lexical access.
G65
RESPONSES TO TWO TYPES OF BEHAVIORALLY RELEVANT
VARIABILITY IN SPEECH IN A PASSIVE FMRI PARADIGM Jason
D. Zevin1, Jianfeng Yang1, Jeremy I. Skipper1, Bruce D. McCandliss1; 1Sackler
Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Cornell Medical College — In
order to explore the networks that underlie perception of different
aspects of speech, we conducted a passive listening experiment designed
to elicit change detection responses due to two different types of change -

194

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

- change between speakers and change between phonetic categories -- relative to a repeat condition in which both speaker and phonetic category
were held constant, but other acoustic parameters varied naturally (intonation, duration, voice quality, etc.). Contrasts comparing both change
conditions to the repeat baseline revealed a common network engaged by
behaviorally-relevant acoustic changes both with respect to voice and
phonetic category, whereas contrasts between the two change conditions
revealed independent networks specific to each type of change.Exploratory analyses of correlations among regions in the broader change network and how these are modulated by condition will complement the
simple contrasts and provide greater detail about how the functional
anatomy for speech perception flexibly reorganizes in the face of changes
in the predictability of different stimulus attributes.
G66
RELATIVE CONTRIBUTION OF PHONOLOGICAL SKILLS AND
MEMORY IN READING: THE CASE OF PROFOUNDLY DEAF
INDIVIDUALS Elizabeth A. Hirshorn1, Matthew W.G. Dye1, Peter C.
Hauser2, Daphne Bavelier1; 1Brain and Cognitive Sciences & Center for
Language Sciences, University of Rochester, 2National Technical Institute for
the Deaf, Research and Teacher Education, Rochester Institute of Technology —
In hearing people, one of the best predictors of reading fluency is phonological awareness, which depends heavily on access to sound. With littleor-no access to the sounds of spoken language, deaf individuals may
need to rely on different routes to literacy. This work evaluates the cognitive processes through which profoundly deaf individuals achieve such
literacy. We developed new deaf-friendly assessments for factors known
to predict reading skills in hearing individuals. These include picturebased phonological tasks and tests of memory (serial and free recall).
Factors hypothesized to predict reading in deaf individuals, such as
speech-reading and sign language fluency, were also examined. Results
confirmed the strong relationship between phonological skills and reading in hearing individuals. In contrast, memory measures, especially free
recall, were the best predictors of reading skills in deaf individuals. Interestingly, speech-reading was a good predictor of reading in hearing but
not in the deaf. Brain imaging during single word and sentence processing by deaf readers revealed similar neural networks to those previously
described in the literature. Interestingly, phonological skills correlated
strongly with activation in single word processing areas, whereas free
recall correlated strongly with activation in sentence level processing
areas. Deaf readers, therefore, seem to differentially weigh phonological
and memory strategies as a function of task demands during reading.
Since reading is typically used in the service of text comprehension, this
work highlights the importance of memory skills in reading fluency in
deaf individuals.
G67
BOTH
BEHAVIORAL
AND
NEURAL
INDICES
OF
PHONOLOGICAL ABILITY PREDICT READING FLUENCY IN
SKILLED ADULTS: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF PASSAGE
READING Allison Zumberge1, Frank Manis1,2, Zhong-Lin Lu1,2;
1
Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Southern California,
2University of Southern California, Psychology — Studies of reading development and disability have identified phonological ability as a major
contributor to reading fluency in children. The relationship seems to hold
across a wide range of adult, skilled readers, as well, but its neural basis
has yet to be identified. Additionally, reading tasks used in functional
MRI studies of phonological ability generally employ single-word stimuli, a design with many benefits but little ecological validity. The present
study investigated the relationship between reading fluency and fMRI
activity within the phonological processing network using a self-paced
passage reading task. First, we identified regions of interest for phonological processing with fMRI, using adults’ performance on a phonological lexical decision task involving judgments about whether a
pseudohomophone or pseudoword sounded like a real word. This task
activated a network of brain regions that only partially overlapped with

Poster Session G

the network activated by the passage-reading task, which additionally
recruited middle and polar temporal regions. In order to examine the
predictive power of phonological ability on reading fluency, both behavioral and neural indices of phonological processing were correlated with
behavioral scores on an oral passage reading task. While neural activity
in anterior and posterior IFG during the passage-reading task was positively correlated with overall reading fluency, posterior IFG contributed
to the accuracy component of fluency while anterior IFG and occipitotemporal region contributed to the rate component. The results reveal
that somewhat different phonological and orthographic processing
regions in the brain contribute to accuracy and rate components of oral
reading skill.
G68
ASYMMETRIC PHONOLOGICAL PREDICTIONS IN SPEECH
PERCEPTION: MEG EVIDENCE So-One Hwang1, Philip Monahan1,
William Idsardi1,2; 1University of Maryland, Linguistics, 2Neuroscience and
Cognitive Science Program, University of Maryland — Do phonological processes influence speech perception symmetrically? In this study, we
examine a pervasive cross-linguistic generalization: coda obstruent clusters must agree in voicing. That is, in many languages (including English)
word-final phonetic sequences such as [dz] and [ts] are acceptable
whereas *[ds] and *[tz] are not. This grammatical constraint implies symmetric processing difficulties with heterogeneous clusters, e.g. *[tz], *[ds].
However, Lombardi (1991) proposes instead that only [+voice] is lexically represented, default [-voice] being underspecified, implying asymmetric processing of heterogeneous clusters. Using MEG, we examine the
time course of the prediction of the upcoming signal comparing symmetric and asymmetric predictions. Given that early auditory processes are
observable by 100ms and lexical effects by 300ms, we expect to find differences within this time-window. Four types of clusters were created by
splicing or cross-splicing VCC tokens: vd-s [uds, ubs, ugs], vd-z [udz,
ubz, ugz], vl-s [uts, ups, uks] and vl-z [utz, upz, ukz]. Participants (n=13)
passively listened to randomly presented stimuli during MEG recording
(160-channel; KIT, Japan). Because of the complexity of the stimuli, we
analyzed RMS difference waveforms to cluster types with the same fricative. In the time window 100-300ms, we find significant differences
between the MEG response to vd-s as compared to vl-s (p<0.05). This
finding suggests that only marked features induce predictions about the
upcoming speech signal, and these effects are present in early cortical
responses. Such findings are consistent with phonological underspecification theories, e.g. Lombardi (1991) and Obleser, Lahiri and Eulitz
(2004).
G69
EFFECTIVE
FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY
OF
PHONOLOGICAL AND SEMANTIC PROCESSING DURING
WORD READING Cheryl M. Capek1,2, Simandeep Poonian1, Joseph T.
Devlin1,2; 1Cognitive, Perceptual and Brain Sciences, University College
London, UK, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London,
UK — Numerous lesion and neuroimaging studies of language processing have shown that reading reliably engages left hemisphere regions
including the ventral occipito-temporal cortex (vOTC), temporo-parietal
regions and the inferior frontal cortex (IFC). In addition, neuroimaging
and neurostimulation studies have found evidence of functionally distinct subdivisions within the left IFC, with phonological processing preferentially involving more posterior regions (i.e., pars opercularis) and
semantic processing preferentially involving more anterior regions (i.e.,
pars orbitalis/triangularis). Identifying the manner by which these brain
regions are engaged in phonological and semantic processing offers valuable insight into how a distributed brain network mediates successful
reading. In the present study, we used functional magnetic resonance
imaging to identify the functional neural organization of word reading in
monolingual speakers of British English as they read blocks of word
pairs, alternating with a fixation baseline. For each word pair, participants performed either a phonological (rhyme) or semantic (category)

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

judgment task. Participants displaying activation in four left hemisphere
regions of interest (ROIs), namely vOTC, supramarginal gyrus, pars
opercularis and pars orbitalis/triangularis were included in the effective
functional connectivity (dynamic causal modeling; DCM) analysis
(n=23). Bayes Factors (BFs) were employed to assess different DCM models of fronto-parietal-vOTC connectivity. The results showed strong bidirectional, intrinsic connections between the four ROIs, with the strongest
connections from the vOTC to the parietal and frontal ROIs. The results
provide evidence of both bottom-up and top-down processing in the
brain network mediating reading.
G70
STATISTICAL CUES TO PHONETIC CATEGORY STRUCTURE
Emily Myers1, Sheila Blumstein1; 1Brown University, Cognitive and Linguistic
Sciences — Recent research suggests that the statistical distribution of
speech sounds plays a role in shaping sensitivities to acoustic-phonetic
space and ultimately in forming the sound categories of one’s native language. These studies have shown that participants familiarized with
stimuli from a non-native phonetic continuum show greater sensitivity to
the endpoints of the continuum when they hear tokens sampled from a
bimodal distribution than when they hear tokens sampled from a unimodal distribution. What is less clear are the neural mechanisms which
mediate these effects. In the current study, functional magnetic resonance
imaging was used to monitor activation patterns in participants who had
been familiarized with tokens from a bimodal or unimodal distribution
taken from a non-native continuum. Neural sensitivity to phonetic differences was measured using a short-interval habituation paradigm, in
which four repeated phonetic tokens were followed by either a different
token from the continuum (Change trials) or a fifth repeated token
(Repeat trials). Behavioral sensitivity was also measured after scanning
using a discrimination task. Both groups showed neural sensitivity to the
endpoints of the novel continuum, as indicated by greater activation for
Change trials than Repeat trials. However, the Bimodal group showed
the greatest response in the left supramarginal gyrus and posterior superior temporal gyrus, whereas the Unimodal group showed the greatest
response in the posterior and anterior left superior temporal sulcus.
These results suggest that activation in the supramarginal gyrus reflects
the emergence of phonetic category representations, whereas activation
in temporal areas reflects earlier stages of acoustic processing.
G71
THE ROLE OF AWARENESS IN SEMANTIC AND SYNTACTIC
PROCESSING: AN ERP ATTENTIONAL BLINK STUDY Laura
Batterink1, Christina Karns1, Yoshiko Yamada1, Eric Pakulak1, Helen Neville1;
1University of Oregon — The role that automatic and controlled processes
play in semantic and syntactic processing is not well understood. In
semantic priming studies, there is a lingering debate about whether the
N400, an ERP component elicited by unexpected linguistic stimuli,
reflects an automatic or controlled, post-lexical process. Syntactic priming, specifically word category priming, has been even less well characterized. We used an attentional blink (AB) paradigm, which can be used
to manipulate the role of awareness in the processing of target words, to
assess automaticity in semantic and syntactic processing. We compared
ERP responses to targets occurring within the AB period to targets occurring outside the AB period, and compared ERPs to correctly-reported
versus missed targets. In the semantic block, primes and targets were
either semantically related or unrelated, and in the syntactic block,
primes and targets formed either syntactically congruent or incongruent
phrases. In the semantic block, targets occurring both within and outside
the AB period elicited an N400. However, N400 amplitude was significantly reduced during the AB period, and missed targets did not elicit an
N400. In the syntactic block, a late negative syntactic congruency effect
was elicited by targets occurring outside the AB period while targets
occurring within the AB period showed no effect of congruency. Semantic results support the argument that the N400 is primarily an index of a
controlled, post-lexical process. Syntactic findings suggest that the brain

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

195

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

response to some syntactic violations depends on awareness and availability of attentional resources.
G72
INVESTIGATING THE DEFICIT IN PHONOLOGIC ALEXIA: AN
EYE-TRACKING STUDY Tamar D. Gefen1, Elizabeth H. Lacey1,2, Sarah
Ferguson Snider1, Susan Nitzberg Lott1, David P. Roeltgen1, Rhonda B.
Friedman1; 1Georgetown University Medical Center, Center for Aphasia
Research and Rehabilitation, 2Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience,
Georgetown University — Phonologic alexia (PhA) is an acquired disorder
characterized by impaired reading of pseudowords relative to real words
and, often, a greater difficulty reading functors (e.g., "it", "for") than concrete nouns. We hypothesize that the deficit is due to insufficient activation of phonological codes, causing impairment in reading words with
low semantic value, especially when these words are surrounded by
words with higher semantic value, as in text. This would predict that
reading functors surrounded by words with high semantic value would
be more difficult than reading functors surrounded by words with little,
or no, semantic value. We investigated our hypothesis by testing functor
reading in a chronic PhA patient, TJN, using an eye-tracking technique.
Three sets of 40 functors were matched for frequency, number of syllables
and number of letters. Functors were embedded in three-word phrases,
surrounded by either two highly concrete words (CON), two abstract
words (ABS), or two non-pronounceable letter strings (LS). TJN was
asked to read aloud only the functor. Dwell times (DT) and number of
fixations were evaluated. Results revealed longer DT on functor words in
the CON condition (821 ms) than in the ABS (630 ms) or LS condition (598
ms); number of fixations on the functor displayed the same pattern. In
contrast, DT on surrounding words (non-functors) or letter strings did
not vary significantly across conditions. These results are consistent with
our hypothesis that surrounding words with high semantic value interfere with the reading of functors in patients with PhA.
G73
DOMAIN-SPECIFIC OR SHARED MECHANISMS OF PROSODIC
PHRASING IN SPEECH AND MUSIC? NEW EVIDENCE FROM
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Karsten Steinhauer1,2, Stefanie Nickels3,
Conrad Duncan2, Kanwar Anit Singh Saini1,2; 1Centre for Research on Language,
Mind, & Brain, McGill University, 2School of Communication Sciences &
Disorders, McGill University, 3Saarland University, Psychology — Prosodic
information (the intonation and rhythm of speech and music) has a major
impact on how listeners parse and interpret the auditory signal. Prosody
guides syntactic sentence analysis, supports language acquisition, and
underlies our cognitive organization of melodies (Lerdahl and Jackendoff, 1983). Whether the neurocognitive mechanisms underlying prosodic
phrasing are shared between language and music is controversial. In
speech, prosodic boundaries reliably elicit a positive-going ERP component with short latencies (0-300ms) timelocked to PRE-boundary words:
the Closure_Positive_Shift (CPS; Steinhauer et al., 1999). A CPS-like ERP
pattern was also reported for musical boundaries, however much later
(around 500ms following POST-boundary tones) and only for highly
trained musicians (Neuhaus et al., 2006), while non-musicians displayed
negativities. This contrasts strongly to the speech-CPS, which has been
found for hummed sentences, and even in pre-linguistic infants (e.g.,
Pannekamp et al., 2006). Our ERP study employed a speech/music-continuum to localize the transition from music-like to speech-like boundary
effects in 16 non-musicians. All stimuli were derived from sentences with
boundaries that elicited a CPS in a previous study and ranged from (i) the
original speech signals to (ii) computer-generated "hummed" versions
and (iii) sine waves preserving the pitch contour to (iv) corresponding
melodies played with either piano or horn timbre. Data revealed CPS
components at boundaries across conditions, however with varying
latencies. This finding demonstrates that musical phrasing can elicit a
CPS even in non-musicians, compatible with common mechanisms in
speech and language. Factors contributing to latency effects and differences among studies will be discussed.

196

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

G74
MORPHOMETRIC AND FUNCTIONAL NEUROANATOMY OF
RAPID NAMING, PHONOLOGICAL PROCESSING AND WORD
IDENTIFICATION IN CHILDREN WITH A WIDE RANGE OF
READING ABILITY: IMPLICATIONS FOR THE DOUBLE-DEFICIT
HYPOTHESIS OF DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA
Jessica
M.
Black1, Masanori Nagamine1, Allan L. Reiss1, John D. E. Gabrieli2, Fumiko
Hoeft1; 1Center for Interdisciplinary Brain Sciences Research, Stanford
University School of Medicine, 2Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and
Technology (HST) and Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology — The double-deficit hypothesis (DD) posits that naming
speed is an independent core deficit in addition to the phonological processing deficits seen in individuals with developmental dyslexia. According to this theory, individuals with a ’double-deficit’ have more severe
deficits in reading than those with single deficits or without any deficits.
It is not yet clear, however, how these deficits are related to each other
and to reading. Examination of the neural substrates of these processes
may have substantial implications not only in understanding the DD, but
also for the identification and treatment of reading disabilities. We therefore examined the relationship between morphometric and functional
neuroanatomy and these skills. Participants were 62 children (age 13.5 +
2.6) representing a wide range of reading skills from severely impaired
(meeting the criteria for dyslexia) to superior. A standard battery of neuropsychological assessment was given including rapid naming of letter
and number (RAN) and real word identification (ID). In addition, we collected high-resolution MRI data to examine regional gray matter volume
and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data during a real
word rhyme judgment task to examine phonological processing. Voxelbased morphometry (VBM) analyses identified overlapping regions that
showed significant positive correlations with regional volume and RAN
as well as ID in the left supramarginal, posterior superior temporal, precentral and inferior frontal gyri. Regions involving the cerebellum
showed negative correlation. These regions also showed significant associations with fMRI activation during phonological processing. These
findings suggest that these regions maybe critical in the DD.
G75
RETHINKING THE P600/P300 DEBATE: EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL ADDITIVITY AS AN INDEX OF OVERLAP IN
NEUROCOGNITIVE RESOURCES Geoff Valentine1, Lee Osterhout1;
1
University of Washington, Psychology — Many claims have been made
about the domain specificity of the neural mechanisms subserving syntactic processing using evidence from event-related potentials (ERPs).
Violations of linguistic syntactic expectancy elicit the P600 component of
the ERP waveform while a wide range of violations of expectancy across
many domains elicit a P300b. Although superficially similar (both are
late positivities), these components are additive which has lead some to
conclude that, by definition, they are driven by at least partially distinct
neurocognitive processes. We carried out two studies in which we
recorded ERPs from 64 channels on the scalp while subjects read English
sentences. In the first experiment a 2x2 design was employed in which
the critical word was either consistent with or violated expectation in
syntax and/or capitalization. In the second experiment we again used a
2x2 design in which the critical word could violate expectation in capitalization and/or text color. If the assumption of the independence of the
electrophysiological sources of the P600 and the P300b components is
correct, then additivity should only be present in the syntax/capitalization and not the capitalization/color conditions. The presence of substantial additivity in both experiments suggests that a binary division of
the late positive complex into the P600 and P300b is artificial, and, moreover, that the amount of additivity between two conditions can be used
as an index of the amount of neurocognitive resources they share.

Poster Session G

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

G76
STRUCTURAL AND PRAGMATIC LANGUAGE PROFILES OF
MALES AND FEMALES WITH AN EXTRA X CHROMOSOME
Nancy Raitano Lee1, Gregory Wallace1,2, Liv Clasen1, Jonathan Blumenthal1,
Rhoshel Lenroot1, Jay Giedd1; 1Child Psychiatry Branch/NIMH/National
Institutes of Health, 2Laboratory of Brain and Cognition/NIMH/National
Institutes of Health — The presence of an additional X chromosome characterizes Klinefelter (XXY) and Trisomy X (XXX) syndromes. Intelligence
tends to be in the low average to average range for these disorders; however, language deficits are often reported. The nature of these deficits,
and in particular, the presence of pragmatic (i.e., social) language impairment, has not been thoroughly investigated. This study utilized the Children’s Communication Checklist - 2, a parent-report measure of
structural and pragmatic language skills with eight scales divided into
two domains (Structural language= Speech, Syntax, Semantics, Coherence; Pragmatic language= Initiation, Scripted Language, Context, Nonverbal Communication) to compare the language profiles of 17 XXY
males (age: 12.09±2.94) and 21 XXX females (age: 9.06±2.32). Overall,
both groups scored below the normative mean of 100 for the measure
(Composite score means for XXY= 89.41±10.53 and XXX = 85.48±19.11;
p’s<.05). On the individual structural language scales, the XXY group
scored below the normative mean on two scales, Semantics and Coherence (this latter scale measures the ability to communicate the content of
one’s thoughts clearly), while the XXX group scored significantly below
the normative mean on all four scales (all p’s <.05 with Bonferroni correction). For the pragmatic language scales, both groups scored below the
normative mean on the Context scale (a scale that assesses abstract, nonliteral language, flexibility, and humor; p<.05 with Bonferroni correction). These results will be discussed in relation to the larger XXY and
XXX neurobehavioral phenotypes.

G78
AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY OF THE EFFECTS OF
READING SKILL ON WORD AND PSEUDOWORD PROCESSING
IN ADULTS Maya Misra1, Beth Friedman2, Joyce Tam1, Kristen Mettley1,
Bridgid Zvirblis1; 1The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA,
2
University of Pittsburgh, PA — Previous studies have shown that, even
among typical adults, variations in language abilities may be associated
with differing patterns of neural responses to linguistic stimuli measured
with event-related potentials (ERPs). The current study focused on the
effects of reading skill on ERPs, with a specific interest in evaluating evidence for sensitivity to phonology among adult readers. Prior research
has suggested that while phonology is activated automatically during
reading, phonological effects may vary with skill level, even among practiced adult readers. The current study was designed to further evaluate
evidence that different reading strategies may be employed by proficient
readers of English. Participants completed a detailed reading history
questionnaire and were assessed with a battery of standardized tests
designed to measure orthographic and phonological processing as well
as connected text reading and comprehension. Participants then returned
to the lab at a later date to complete a semantic monitoring task including
word and pseudoword stimuli which varied systematically in their
orthographic and phonological properties while 32 channels of ERPs
were recorded. Preliminary results suggest that there was significant
variability in performance on tests of phonological memory, spelling, and
connected text reading fluency and comprehension among these skilled
readers. Furthermore, the amplitude of the N400 component of the ERP
waveform was sensitive to subtle variations in reading skill, particularly
as indexed by the behavioral measures of connected text reading and
comprehension. Results will be discussed in terms of models of skilled
reading.

G77
INFLUENCES
ON
LANGUAGE-RELATED
LEARNING
MECHANISMS: AN FMRI STUDY OF WORD SEGMENTATION IN
CHILDREN Kristin McNealy1, Larissa Borofsky1, John Mazziotta1, Mirella
Dapretto1; 1UCLA Brain Mapping Center — Significant
progress
has
recently been made in delineating the functional representation of language in the developing brain. However, we still know relatively little
about the neural basis of the actual process of language learning, and
even less about how the neural correlates of language learning might be
related to individual differences in linguistic skills and experiential factors. In the present study, we began to address these issues by relating
several behavioral measures collected in a large sample of ten-year-old
children (n=78) to brain activity associated with a critical aspect of language learning (i.e., word segmentation, the detection of word boundaries in a novel stream of continuous speech). Using fMRI to examine online word segmentation, we previously demonstrated that children and
adults exhibit learning-related signal increases over time in bilateral
superior temporal gyri (STG) and left inferior parietal lobule (IPL). Here,
we found that children’s literacy skills were positively related to signal
increases in bilateral STG; in contrast, both children’s reading ability and
verbal IQ were negatively correlated with signal increases in IPL. Interestingly, the degree of fluency in a second language was also positively
correlated with signal increases in bilateral STG, suggesting that these
regions play an important role in supporting successful language-related
statistical learning. These findings begin to elucidate the complex relationship between linguistic experience and language learning and have
implications for current theories of the neural basis of language acquisition. Support Contributed by: National Science Foundation, UCLA
Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center, UCLA-FPR Center for Culture, Brain, and Development

G79
PRIMING METHODS IN APHASIA: REVISITING SLOW LEXICAL
ACCESS Josee Poirier1, Tracy Love2,3, Lewis Shapiro2; 1SDSU/UCSD Joint
Docotral Program in Language & Communicative Disorders, 2San Diego State
University, 3University of California, San Diego — A slowdown in lexical
processing has been implicated in sentence comprehension deficits in
aphasia. Support for such protracted processing comes from the use of
Cross-Modal Priming (CMP). Sentences are presented aurally, while participants are required to make a decision on a visual probe that occurs at
strategic points during the unfolding of the sentence. Faster RTs to associatively related probes compared to unrelated probes reflect priming of
the target lexical item. Left anterior-lesioned aphasics, unlike unimpaired
controls, do not show associative priming (AP) in the immediate vicinity
of the target lexical item; instead, AP is only observed ’downstream’
(Love et al., 2008). In fact, in List Priming Paradigm studies where lexical
decisions are made to individual words that occur one after the other,
aphasic individuals reveal AP only at Stimuli-Onset-Asynchronies of
>1500ms (Henik et al, 1993; Prather et al.,1997). We hypothesized that the
delayed activation patterns in sentences observed with CMP may be due
to the long SOA required to elicit AP effects. In a CMP sentence comprehension study, we probed for an overt noun at its offset, using either
associatively related probes (e.g., nurse–doctor), or identity probes (IP;
e.g., nurse–nurse). Eight left anterior-lesioned aphasics completed the
study. We computed related-to-control RT ratios, where a ratio <1 indicates priming. Identity priming was observed (mean:0.949, t(7)=-2.726,
p=0.01,one-tailed) but associative priming was not (mean:1.000,
t(7)=0.253, p>0.05,one-tailed). We discuss this distinction between CMPAP and CMP-IP in terms of hypothesized lexical and syntactic deficits in
aphasia.
G80
AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF REPEATED NAME AND DEFINITE
REFERENCE IN DISCOURSE Amit Almor1,2, Veena Nair3, Jeremy
May1, Timothy Boiteau2; 1University of South Carolina, Psychology,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

197

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

2

University of South Carolina Linguistics Program, 3University of Wisconsin
Madison, Radiology — Repeated reference is an important part of coherent
discourse but very little is known about the brain basis of processing
repeated reference in discourse. A recent functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) study (Almor, Smith, Bonilha, Rorden, & Fridriksson,
2008) found that reading a repeated proper name reference (e.g., Joe) to a
salient discourse referent leads to increased activation in temporal
regions and intra-parietal sulcus (IPS) in comparison to reading a pronoun reference (e.g., he). This was interpreted as indicating the involvement of spatial brain circuits (IPS) in the management and manipulation
of representations of discourse referents (temporal regions). Here we
report two fMRI experiments that further evaluated this hypothesis. The
first experiment tested whether the salience of referents in the context of
the discourse affects these activations. In support of the original hypothesis, we found that the referent salience affected activation in parietal
regions. The second experiment tested whether similar activations occur
for definite description references (e.g., the man) to salient and non
salient referents. Although we found that referent salience also affects the
activation associated with repeated definite references, the activation was
in different regions than for repeated names. Activations associated with
repeated definite description references did not occur in any parietal
regions but instead included several frontal areas as well as the left and
right caudate. These findings thus suggest that the processing of linguistic reference in discourse involve multiple circuits and mechanisms that
are associated with the use of different referential forms.

G81
THE BRAIN USES CO-SPEECH GESTURES TO SET THE
CONTEXT FOR SPEECH UNDERSTANDING Jeremy Skipper1, Ran
Liu1, Bruce McCandliss1, Jason Zevin1; 1Sackler Institute for Developmental
Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University — Does the brain
use the wealth of contextual information that accompanies speech during
real-world communication? Or is this information treated as noise, secondary to the process of linguistic interpretation? We collected fMRI data
while participants watched a television game show. We used a combination of analysis techniques including independent component, peak-andvalley (based on extensive stimulus annotation), and directional functional connectivity (i.e., Granger causality) analysis to discover meaningful patterns in data resulting from a natural stimulus. Peak-and-valley
analyses of the independent component time series identified different
networks of interest (NOIs) with high selectivity for stimulus periods
containing speech, co-speech gesture, and non-communicative hand and
arm movements respectively. The speech selective NOI was comprised of
primarily bilateral anterior superior temporal and ventral premotor cortex. The co-speech gesture selective NOI comprised bilateral SMA, dorsal
premotor, insula, and parietal areas. The non-communicative hand and
arm movement NOI comprised bilateral occipital and parietal areas.
Functional connectivity analysis showed that the co-speech gesture NOI
drove the speech NOI. This was not the case for the non-communicative
hand and arm movement NOI. These results suggest that the motor system is involved in extracting meaningful information from co-speech gesture that later influences areas sensitive to verbal content. This supports a
model of communication in which the brain actively makes use of context
to predict forthcoming sensory information to constrain linguistic interpretation. At least some forms of context, therefore, are not secondary but
integral to achieving understanding in natural settings.
G82
AN FMRI INVESTIGATION ON PAST TENSE PROCESSING OF
NATIVE AND NONNATIVE ENGLISH SPEAKERS So-Hee
Kim1;
1
The University of Texas at Austin — The goal of this study was to determine whether native (L1) and nonnative (L2) speakers of English use the
same brain regions when they generate regular and irregular past tense
verb forms. By using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), the study compared the neural responses of 16 Korean speakers of English (16 males, age range 19-35, mean age ± SD = 25.12 ±5.12)

198

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

with the neural responses of 16 native English speakers (1 female, age
range 19-35, mean age ± SD = 25.87 ±5.00) as both types of speakers internally generated the morphologies of regular and irregular past tense verb
forms in English. According to the neuroimaging data, both types of language speakers, at least to some degree, activated the same respective
brain regions when they processed regular and irregular past tense verb
morphological inflections. Specifically, in both L1 and L2 speakers, under
non-contrast imaging analysis conditions, regular past tense generation
involved left-hemispheric lateralization patterns, whereas irregular past
tense generation elicited widespread bilateral brain responses. Thus, no
notable imaging contrasts were found between L1 and L2 speakers when
they generated regular and irregular past tense verbs, respectively. The
study concluded that past tense morphological processing involved neural regions common to both native and nonnative English speakers.
G83
COMPREHENSION OF M-SEQUENCE MODULATED SPEECH
SOUND: ACTIVATION IN THE RIGHT INFERIOR FRONTAL
GYRUS AND THE LEFT INFERIOR PARIETAL LOBE AS
REVEALED BY FMRI Hiroshige Takeichi1,2,3,4, Sachiko Koyama5,4, Atsushi
Terao6, Fumiya Takeuchi7,4, Yuko Toyosawa4,8, Harumitsu Murohashi8,4; 1BSI,
RIKEN, 2RNC, RIKEN, 3IML, University of Tokyo, 4RISTEX, JST, 5RIES,
Hokkaido University, 6School of Social Informatics, Aoyama Gakuin University,
7Faculty of Health Sciences, Hokkaido University, 8Faculty of Education,
Hokkaido University — We have developed a new technique for a oneminute assessment of speech comprehension using degraded speech
sound by m-sequence modulation and electroencephalograms (EEG)
analyzed by circular-cross-correlation function and independent component analysis (Takeichi et al., 2007). As a result, a correlation peak was
observed in an independent component correlation function with 400 ms
delay. This peak was dependent on whether the modulated speech
sound was comprehensible to the subjects. Here we report the results of
an fMRI experiment on twenty three right handed Japanese speakers to
examine brain areas related to verbal comprehension of the modulated
speech sound. A question here was whether the neural system deals with
the modulated speech either by increasing the activity of the areas for
routine speech processing, or by recruiting additional areas. Activations
were observed as follows: the left temporal cortex and a posterior cingulate retrosplenial area in a contrast between the non-modulated forward
and reverse speech stimuli; the right inferior frontal gyrus (RIFG) in a
contrast between the modulated forward and reverse speech stimuli; and
the left inferior parietal lobe (LIPL) in a contrast between the modulated
and non-modulated speech stimuli. RIFG and LIPL might have been
recruited additionally for contextual processing in comprehension of the
speech modulated by m-sequence. Estimated scalp projection of the component correlation function suggested posterior and leftward bias thus a
signal source in LIPL.
G84
NEURAL CORRELATES OF DIFFERENCES IN PHONEMEPRODUCTION LOAD IN SCHIZOPHRENIC AND HEALTHY
SUBJECTS Alexander Herman1, Leighton Hinkley1, Mary Vertinsky1,
Sophia Vinogradov1, Srikantan Nagarajan1; 1University of California, San
Francisco — Schizophrenics exhibit significant executive function deficits,
as assessed by a variety of methods, including digit recall, word recall
and higher level tests. Furthermore, working memory deficits in schizophrenics have been linked to language comprehension deficits. The brain
regions implicated in working memory dysfunction in past studies reflect
the functional anatomy of healthy working memory: fMRI studies have
shown, for instance, decreased activity in dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex
and hippocampus, amongst other areas, even controlling for task performance. MEG and EEG studies also suggest altered activity within the
superior temporal plane and diminished inter-hemispheric synchronization. We will present results from a study of the cortical oscillations associated with speech preparation in schizophrenics and controls. Subjects
performed a verbal working memory task in which they heard a pre-

Poster Session G

recorded two or four phoneme sequence and were instructed to repeat
the phoneme sequence, while magnetoencephalographic neural
responses were recorded. Schizophrenic subjects exhibited a large variance in the number of correct responses compared to healthy subjects.
For this particular analysis, only correct trials were analyzed. Source
localization and time-frequency analysis was performed using CTF and
NUTMEG software packages. Response-locked differences in activation
were computed between the four and two phoneme task for schizophrenic subjects and control subjects separately, and group statistical
analyses were performed on contrasts between the conditions. Our
results reveal a network of brain regions associated with a load-effect in
phoneme-production preparation including the superior temporal gyrus,
mouth pre-motor and and dorsolateral prefrontal cortical areas. Furthermore, we show that schizophrenic subjects devoted more cognitive
resources in this network to increased phoneme-load than did healthy
subjects, suggesting less efficient processing in speech preparation in
schizophrenic subjects.

Perceptual processes: Other
G85
AN FMRI ANALYSIS OF STIMULUS SPECIFIC AND STIMULUSINVARIANT ACTIVATION IN PERCEPTUAL LEARNING Matthew
Mundy1, Kim Graham1, Paul Downing2, Rob Honey3, Dominic Dwyer3;
1
Wales Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Cardiff University, 2Wales Institute
of Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Bangor, 3School of Psychology, Cardiff
University — Unsupervised exposure to a pair of highly similar stimuli
can improve subsequent discrimination between them. This is true with
many types of stimuli e.g., pictures of faces, random chequerboards, dots
and visual scenes (e.g. Mundy et al., 2007). Of particular importance, the
schedule of exposure modulates this effect. Alternating two similar stimuli (e.g. AX, BX, AX, BX) during exposure produces larger improvements
in discrimination than an equivalent amount of blocked presentation of
the two stimuli (e.g. AX, AX... BX, BX...). This schedule effect is the same
regardless of the nature of the stimuli used, which implies that the cognitive mechanism for perceptual learning is similar in all cases. However,
an earlier imaging study we performed suggested that different neural
mechanisms may be recruited in tasks using different types of stimuli
(Mundy et al., 2008; see also Graham et al., 2006). In the current eventrelated fMRI study participants were given intermixed and blocked exposure to confusable face-pair, scene-pair and dot-pair stimuli and subsequently were asked to perform same/different judgements as an index of
perceptual learning. Areas of cortex recruited during perceptual learning
were identified by contrasting activation associated with discrimination
following intermixed presentation with that following blocked presentation. Stimulus-invariant activation was seen in early visual cortex; the
exact visual regions involved were pinpointed using a retinotopic mapping technique. Stimulus-selective activation was seen in the parahippocampal place area (scenes), fusiform face area, and perirhinal cortex
(faces).
G86
BEHAVIORAL AND ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF
GRADUAL BODY INVERSION Denise Minnebusch1, Philipp Keune2,
Boris Suchan1, Irene Daum1; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
Neuropsychology, Ruhr-University of Bochum, Germany, 2Institute of
Psychology, Clinical Psychology, University of Tübingen, Germany — It is a
matter of debate, whether the perception of human body forms, like the
perception of human faces, is based on configural processing mechanisms. Evidence for configural face processing is the face inversion effect:
Faces presented upside down are more difficult to recognize than
uprightly presented stimuli and this behavioral face inversion effect correlates with an electrophysiological inversion effect. Body postures produce inversion effects similar to those found for faces both on behavioral

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

and electrophysiological level. In a previous study, the inversion effect
was inversed for human bodies presented without heads, with better recognition performance for inverted relative to upright bodies. Comparable
findings were obtained on the electrophysiological level. However, the
relationship between electrophysiological and behavioral inversion
effects remains unclear. The present study aimed to investigate the development of behavioral and electrophysiological body inversion effects
depending upon the degree of divergence from the 0? (360?) toward the
180? positions. Additionally, body stimuli were presented with heads
(masked face) and without heads, in order to obtain a more detailed
description of the effect of the presence of a head at different degrees of
display. For human bodies presented with heads, there was a quadratic
relationship between the angles of rotation and the behavioural performance as well as the electrophysiological effect. For human bodies presented without heads the results are inconsistent. The results indicate
that for body forms presented with heads, different processing mechanisms appear to be involved than for body form presented without
heads.
G87
CORTICAL MEG RESPONSE TO VISUAL SOCIAL INTERACTION:
HOW GENDER MATTERS Marina Pavlova1,2, Michele Guerreschi1,3,
Werner Lutzenberger2, Ingeborg Krägeloh-Mann1; 1Children's Hospital,
University of Tübingen Medical School, Tübingen, Germany, 2MEG-Center,
Institute of Medical Psychology and Behavioral Neurobiology, Tübingen.
Germany, 3University of Padova, General Psychology, Padova, Italy — The
ability of humans to predict and explain other people's actions is of
immense value for adaptive behavior and non-verbal communication.
Gender differences are often evident in the comprehension of social signals, but the underlying neurobiological basis for these differences is
unclear. Combining visual psychophysics with magnetoencephalography (MEG), in healthy adult participants, we assessed gender effects in
the induced oscillatory neuromagnetic response to visual social interaction through movement. A robust difference in the induced gamma
response was found between females and males over the left prefrontal
cortex, a region which has been implicated in perceptual decision making. The induced gamma response peaked earlier in females than in
males. Contrary to popular wisdom, the outcome of this study indicates
that gender effects are not evident in the network engaged in processing
of visual social interaction, but in the regions engaged in perceptual decision making. We assume that differences in brain processing may not
only elicit but also prevent behavioral differences, for example, impulsive
perceptual decisions, if they are maladaptive.
G88
MOVEMENT-SELECTIVITY OF THE MIRROR SYSTEM DURING
IMITATIVE AND COMPLEMENTARY ACTION CONTEXTS
Brenda Ocampo1, Ada Kritikos1, Ross Cunnington1,2; 1School of Psychology,
University of Queensland, 2Queensland Brain Institute, University of
Queensland — Viewing actions performed by others activates neural circuits typically involved in the motor planning and execution of those
very same actions. Some have suggested that this ’mirror system’ is
intrinsically involved in imitation, by matching perceived actions directly
onto the corresponding motor representations of the observer. Recent
evidence has shown, however, that the mirror system is active during the
observation and preparation of complementary, non-identical actions
(Newman-Norlund et al., 2007). This implies that the mirror system
might activate internal motor representations that are dynamically
(rather than directly) related to the actions that we observe. We do not
know, however, whether the activations found within the mirror system
during preparation of complementary actions were due to stimulusresponse associations rather than an internal motor mapping of perceived actions. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we
examined the BOLD signal in the inferior frontal gyrus and bilateral inferior parietal lobes while participants observed and executed objectdirected actions (whole hand and precision grips towards a wine glass) in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

199

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

both imitative and complementary contexts. Importantly, in a control
condition, participants responded to symbolic cues (upwards and downwards pointing arrows) in both action contexts. The degree of frontoparietal activation (particularly in IFG) for the complementary condition
that was specific to hand actions (and could therefore be attributed to the
movement-selective mirror system) rather than more general response
selection demands that were constant for both the hand and arrow conditions, will be discussed.
G90
LINE
LENGTH,
VELOCITY,
AND
ACCELERATION
INTERACTIONS IN LINE BISECTION Marc
Hurwitz1,
James
Danckert1; 1University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada — When
asked to bisect a line, right-handed people typically bisect lines to the left
of centre - referred to as pseudo-neglect. Analyses of line bisections show
that one of the strongest influences on performance is the scan direction
participants take prior to making their judgment. Several theories to
explain this phenomenon have been postulated including hemispheric
specialization, allocation of visual attention, and endpoint weightings.
However, it is also possible that there are space-time interactions
involved in line bisection. Because experiments have used a ’free’ scanning paradigm, i.e., participants are asked to scan in a certain direction
and then bisect the line, it does not control for velocity or acceleration of
the smooth pursuit eye movements being made. To control for these factors, we ran a number of line bisection experiments using a touch screen
computer and eye tracking to record responses. Participants were first
shown a line, followed by a marker that moved across the line at different
acceleration and speed levels, and were then asked to quickly and accurately bisect the line by pointing to it. Independent manipulanda
included line length, placement on screen, direction of scan, velocity and
acceleration of the marker. Results replicated a number previous findings
including an influence of line length and scan direction on bisection.
While acceleration itself had no influence on line bisection, line length
influenced the perception of the speed of the marker suggesting an influence of acceleration on perception but not action.
G91
ARTISTIC PRODUCTION FOLLOWING LEFT BRAIN DAMAGE
Page Widick1, William B. Smith II1, Rebecca Sternschein1, Bianca Bromberger1,
Anjan Chatterjee1; 1The University of Pennsylvania, Neurology and the Center
for Cognitive Neuroscience — Neuropsychological investigations of art
production offer critical insight into the neural bases of aesthetics. However, progress in the field is hampered by inadequate measurement
instruments. We designed The Assessment of Art Attributes (AAA) to
quantify descriptive artwork attributes. The AAA assesses 6 formal-perceptual (color temperature, saturation, stroke, balance, depth, complexity) and 6 content-conceptual attributes (accuracy, animation, abstraction,
fantasy, symbolism, emotionality) of art. Target slides consisted of 24
lesser-known paintings by well-known artists. Sixty artistically naïve
young normal subjects judged each of the randomly presented paintings
on each attribute on a 5-point Likert scale. Significant consistency in
attribute judgment supported the use of the AAA. Thirty artistically
naive subjects were then shown paintings from two artists with left hemisphere stroke, Zlattu Boyadzhiev and Katherine Sherwood, half of which
were painted before their strokes and half of which were painted afterward. For each artist and each attribute paired t-tests were used to test
the hypothesis that an attribute had changed following brain damage.
After their stroke, both artists’ paintings were judged as significantly
more vibrant, loose, flat, and distorted (p<0.004). These painting were
also judged as more abstract, fantastical and symbolic. These observations suggest that the artists may be drawing on a looser perceptual and
semantic organizational structure mediated by their intact right hemisphere when producing art.

200

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

G92
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN MEMORY FUNCTION PREDICT
TIME
PRODUCTION
ACCURACY
AND
VARIABILITY
INDEPENDENT OF AGE Brian C. Rakitin1; 1Cognitive Neuroscience
Divsion, Taub Institute, Columbia University — How does aging affect
interval timing, and to what extent is the timing of intervals in the supersecond range related to verbal episodic memory and other mental functions? In order to address these questions interval time production data
were collected from thirty-two aging participants and thirty-two young
participants. The repeated measures, factorial design crossed two tasks,
single interval production (SIP) and repetitive tapping, and three target
intervals - 0.55, 1.55, and 2.55 s for half the participants and 1.0, 3.0, and
5.0 s for the other half. Compared to young participants, aging participants had greater scalar and non-scalar intra-individual variability. The
age difference was largest in SIP, which has greater memory and attention demands than tapping. Verbal memory-test scores were the best
neuropsychological predictors of a number of timing performance variables, and the strength of this prediction varied by task (greater for SIP
than tapping) but not by age group. These results suggest aging most
affects temporal attention and memory, and that there is a relation
between temporal and verbal memory function in both young and aging
participants.
G93
BEHAVIORAL AND ERP RESULTS SUGGEST PUTATIVE ALARM
PHEROMONES ENHANCE THREAT PERCEPTION IN HUMANS
Denis Rubin1, Greg Hajcak2, Lilianne Mujica-Parodi1; 1Stony Brook
University, Biomedical Engineering, 2Stony Brook University, Psychology —
Mammals are known to possess alarm pheromones, which rapidly transmit warning of danger to others of the same species, via shared physiological and emotional stress response. Our previous fMRI research
showed, for the first time, that humans activate the excitatory components of the limbic system (amygdala, hypothalamus), in response to fear,
but not exercise, sweat. Our current study builds directly upon this work
to examine how putative alarm pheromones affect behavior. Axillary
sweat samples were collected from 32 Donor Subjects (50% female) during their first-time tandem skydive (stress condition) and, for the same
Donor Subjects, while running on a treadmill (control condition). Pooled
samples were used as olfactory stimuli, which were then presented via
an olfactometer to an unrelated group of 8 Detector Subjects, all males.
While inhaling stress or exercise sweat (counter-balanced for order) subjects were asked to rate male faces of varying emotional valence, ranging
from neutral to angry, in order to assess perception of aggressiveness
using psychometric curves. We also collected ERP data for subject
responses, analyzing data for late-positive potentials, a neural marker for
salience. Differences in slope between the fitted psychometric curves
suggests that discrimination between threat and non-threat sharpened
when subjects inhaled the putative alarm pheromone (F=5.9, p=0.045).
Likewise, the late-positive potential component of the ERP was increased
for the stress sweat condition (F = 26, p = 0.004). Our preliminary results
suggest that humans, like other mammals, may possess alarm pheromones, which have behavioral implications for threat assessment.
G94
AGING REDUCES NEURAL SELECTIVITY AND INCREASES FACE
ADAPTATION Joshua Goh1, Atsunobu Suzuki1, Denise Park2; 1Beckman
Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Center for Brain Health,
University of Texas at Dallas — Age-related ventral-visual activity is characterized by reduced selectivity between categories of visual stimuli such
as faces and houses that typically elicit highly specialized responses in
the fusiform and parahippocampal brain regions respectively of young
adults (Park et al., 2004). This study demonstrates that older adults’ less
selective neural response (dedifferentiation) to faces is due to a coarser
neural representation than that of young adults for individual faces. In
this event-related fMRI adaptation study, 20 young and 20 older participants made same-different judgments to serially presented face-pairs that

Poster Session G

were either identical (repetition of the same face), moderately different
(second face was morphed with 40% of prior face), or completely different (faces from two individuals). In the fusiform regions, older adults
showed greatest adaptation during the exact-repetition condition and
intermediate adaptation during the moderately-different condition relative to the completely-different condition. Young adults showed a similar
pattern of adaptation, but with reduced adaptation magnitudes. This
suggests that older adults’ fusiform area was not able to represent facial
differences at the same level of sensitivity as young adults. Individual
subjects’ adaptation magnitudes positively correlated with behavioral
face discrimination thresholds for morphed faces (r = .38). Greater agerelated adaptation during the exact-repetition condition suggests older
adults’ fusiform face region is particularly sensitive to similarity, whereas
young adults have a neural response that is more sensitive to facial differences. The data provide strong evidence for an age-related decrease in
representational contrast in the fusiform area that is linked to behavioral
differences during perceptual discrimination.

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

Some required participants to keep track of either linear or rotational
motion, and others required taking into account both types of motion.
MCI patients performed many of these tasks less accurately than young
neurologically-intact adults, even though the patients showed little or no
impairment in visually perceiving object locations and remembering
them over a brief period of time. The findings to date suggest that MCI
patients have selective deficits in path integration, and indicate that deficient path integration may play a role in the navigation problems commonly seen in AD-related disorders. On-going work will compare these
results with tests of patients with mild AD and non-demented elderly
control participants.

G95
NEUROIMAGING OF TEMPORAL PROCESSING: RESULTS OF A
VOXEL-WISE META-ANALYSIS Martin Wiener1, Peter Turkeltaub2, H.
Branch Coslett2; 1University of Pennsylvania, Psychology, 2University of
Pennsylvania, Neurology — The past decade has witnessed an explosion of
neuroimaging studies investigating the neural correlates of time perception. Unfortunately, little concordance exists among these studies for
which neural regions are necessary. We addressed this important issue
by conducting a comprehensive, voxel-wise meta-analysis, using the
Activation Likelihood Estimation (ALE) algorithm, which models each
stereotactic coordinate as a 3D Gaussian distribution, then tests the likelihood of activation across all voxels in the brain (Turkeltaub et al. 2002).
We included 463 sets of activation foci across 51 experiments, constituting the majority of neuroimaging studies explicitly investigating temporal processing.
Only results from control-task subtractions were
employed. Additionally, we divided the data set along two dimensions:
whether the durations tested were subsecond or suprasecond, and
whether the duration was dependent on a motor response or not; these
data sets were then analyzed by a series of subtraction analyses (Laird et
al. 2005). The results of the total meta-analysis revealed a bi-hemispheric
network of cortical and sub-cortical structures, including the cerebellum,
thalamus, basal ganglia and supplementary motor area, as well as several
right-hemispheric cortical structures. The results of the subtraction analyses further revealed a much smaller number of structures depending on
the task constraints. These results will be discussed in the context of contemporary neural theories of timing and constitutes the first quantitative
neuroimaging meta-analysis of temporal processing.

G97
EVENT RELATED POTENTIAL AND EEG MU FREQUENCY
ANALYSIS OF EMOTIONAL FACE PROCESSING: PRE AND POST
20 WEEKS OF NEUROFEEDBACK TRAINING IN CHILDREN
TYPICALLY DEVELOPING AND WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM
DISORDERS Oriana R. Aragon1,3, Jia-Min Bai1, Jaime A. Pineda1,2;
1University of California, San Diego, Cognitive Science, 2University of
California, San Diego, Neuroscience, 3California State University, San Marcos,
Psychology — The significance of emotional face processing in understanding nonverbal cues in our everyday social interactions has
prompted researchers to look for specific neural correlates involved in
this fundamental ability. Research has shown deficits for those with ASD
in the perception of faces, emotional content displayed in facial expressions, and reduced activation in hallmark face processing brain regions.
Research suggests that these differences may indicate deficits in mirror
neuron system (MNS) engagement as evidenced by a lack of activation in
inferior frontal gyrus during imitation tasks and the lack of mu suppression, an index of MNS activity, during observed actions. Two recent electrophysiological (EEG) studies done in our laboratory focused on the mu
rhythm, an oscillation over the sensorimotor cortex believed to reflect
downstream modulation from premotor mirror neurons during the
observation of biological motion. Data showed that operant conditioning
of mu rhythms via neurofeedback training (NFT) normalizes mu suppression during observed actions. The current study assessed mu suppression and the N170, P280 and N400 ERP components, pre and post 20
weeks of NFT. Matched ASD and typically developed (TD) participants
underwent a 1-back paradigm with static emotional faces (anger, disgust,
happy) and buildings for control. Pre-assessment data show differences
in ERP components between ASD and TD groups. Furthermore, ERP differences in the TD group when comparing faces and buildings were
diminished in the ASD group. Post training ERP and mu data is in analysis. The findings to date provide further evidence of impaired facial processing in individuals with ASD.

G96
NAVIGATING ACROSS THE LIFESPAN: PATH INTEGRATION
DEFICITS IN PATIENTS WITH MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT
Naohide Yamamoto1, John W. Philbeck1, Paul Fedio2, Samuel J. Potolicchio3,
Anthony J. Caputy3, Mateja de Leonni Stanonik3, Carly E. Kontra1; 1George
Washington University, 2Catholic University of America, 3George Washington
University Medical Center — Impaired navigation is prevalent among
patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD). It appears even in patients with
mild cognitive impairment (MCI), a disorder sometimes interpreted as an
early stage of AD. Currently, a common interpretation of this navigation
impairment is that AD/MCI patients tend to get lost easily because they
cannot remember correct routes or appropriate landmarks. In other
words, the navigation impairment is largely attributed to their memory
problems. However, given that successful navigation requires not only
good spatial memory but also intact perception of 3-D space and selfmotion, it is important to examine whether these patients have deficits in
perceptual processes as well. The present study addressed this issue by
testing MCI patients' abilities to determine their current position in space
by monitoring internally-generated self-motion signals, a process known
as path integration. We employed a variety of path integration tasks:

G98
EFFECTS OF PSILOCYBIN ON NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF
VISUAL GESTALT PROCESSING B.
Rael
Cahn1,2,3,4,
Michael
Kometer3,4, Mark Geyer1, John Polich2, Franz Vollenweider3,4; 1UCSD,
Psychiatry, 2The Scripps Research Institute, 3University of Zurich, Psychiatry,
4
Heffter Research Center Zurich — Psilocybin is a naturally-occurring hallucinogen and potent serotonin agonist previously shown to depend on
5HT-2a agonism to produce much of its psychological effects. A Kanizsa
stimulus visual paradigm was presented to healthy volunteers during
placebo, low-dose, and high-dose psilocybin conditions to elicit eventrelated brain potentials (ERPs) in the different brain states, followed by
the administration of a standardized questionnaire to assess induced
altered state of consciousness. The stimuli consisted of Kanizsa and nonKanizsa stimuli at equal probability with stimulus categorization
response required. Psilocybin caused a more focal V1-distributed
increased P1 amplitude as well as signficantly decreased N170 and P300
ampiltudes. LORETA analysis indicated that N170 amplitude was significantly enhanced in V1/V2 and right lateral occipital cortex for
Kanizsa vs. non-Kanizsa stimuli in placebo condition, but not different in
psilocybin conditions. These findings suggest that psilocybin induces a

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

201

Monday, March 23, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

brain state wherein there is increased early processing of visual stimuli
and strongly decreased processing at the stimulus-categorization (N170)
and attentional engagement (P300) stages. Theoretical implications
related to induced altered state of consciousness are discussed.
G99
SELF PERCEPTION IN HANDWRITING - AN ERP STUDY Reiko
Sawada1, Hirokazu Doi2, Nobuo Masataka1; 1Primate Research Institute, Kyoto
University, 2Nagaski University — Self perception is a fundamental capability for social cognition, and one of most noticeable phenomena. There
is no doubt that humans can identify the products of their past action,
such as handwritten characters and voices. When we open the old diary,
we can recognize our handwriting easily and immediately. Why we can
identify self handwriting? By several recent studies, self processing is
unique and distinct from other types of semantic processing. However,
the neural mechanism underling self perception of handwriting has not
been clearly elucidated. We investigated neural correlates for the process
of the self information in handwriting. We measured event-related potentials (ERPs) during the observation of self and other handwriting under
known and unknown character conditions. When analyzing the peak
amplitudes of P1, N170 and P250, larger N170 and smaller P250 were
recorded for self handwriting only at the right hemisphere than other
handwriting. In addition, larger N170 was recorded for known characters
at both hemispheres, smaller P250 was recorded only at left hemisphere
than unknown characters. We found the self information is processed in
different way from characters' familiarity after 300 ms stimulus onset. As
previous studies, our results shows that perception of self information in
handwriting is correlated with neural activity in the right hemisphere
and the information for characters were processed in left hemisphere.
G100
THE PREDICTION OF OCCLUDED ACTIONS DEPENDS ON
PREMOTOR CORTEX FUNCTIONS Waltraud Stadler1, Ricarda I.
Schubotz2, Anne Springer1, Wolfgang Prinz1; 1Max Planck Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute
for Neurological Research, Cologne, Germany — Lateral and medial portions of the premotor cortex seem to play a core role in action simulation.
As a consequence, activation in these areas should increase with the
length of the simulated action sequence. To investigate this supposition,
an fMRI study was designed in which participants watched short movies
showing everyday actions that were repeatedly occluded. In order to
vary the length of the simulated action, occluder duration varied between
one and three seconds. The same stimuli were used in three different conditions. In the PREDICTION condition, participants were asked to indicate whether actions continued with coherent timing after occlusions. In
contrast, the FREEZING condition required to hold visual action information in memory during occlusion. In a non-action related condition,
occlusions were just counted (COUNTING). In premotor regions of interest (dorsal premotor cortex, PMd, and pre-supplementary motor area,
pre-SMA), activation was significantly higher in the PREDICTION condition as compared to the other two conditions. Moreover, pre-SMA
responded to increasing occluder duration with sustained activation in
PREDICTION but not when action dynamics were not task-relevant
(COUNTING condition). Premotor activation being particularly high
during the prediction of dynamic action information replicates earlier
findings from our laboratory. Sustained pre-SMA activation with longer
occlusions is in line with the involvement of this area in the organisation
of motor sequences and with its role during internal action guidance. The
present results underline the relevance of the premotor cortex in driving
action simulation.
G101
INCREASED COHERENCE IN PARIETAL CORTICES OF TIMESPACE SYNESTHETES: A HIGH-DENSITY EEG STUDY Ursina
Teuscher1,2,3, David Ruhl2,3, David Brang1, David Stone2, Seana Coulson1,
Vilayanur S. Ramachandran1, Claudia Tesche2; 1University of California, San

202

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

Diego (UCSD), 2University of New Mexico, Albuquerque (UNM), 3Mind
Research Network, Albuquerque (MRN) — Synesthesia is a condition in
which stimuli presented in one modality consistently and involuntarily
evoke sensations in another, unrelated modality. For example, sound
may be experienced as flavored or numbers as colored. An often-overlooked form of this condition is time-space synesthesia, in which elements of temporal sequences are perceived as being at discrete locations
in space. The most common manifestation of this is for a synesthete to
perceive the months of the year in a particular shape in their visual field.
To investigate the basis of time-space synesthesia, we collected 128-channel EEG data from five synesthetes and five individually-matched controls in a modified Posner spatial-cuing paradigm. Centrally-presented
month terms were tailored to direct synesthetes' attention to either the
left or right side of the screen depending on the shape of their perceived
calendar (e.g., if a synesthete perceives January on the right, we used 'January' to direct their attention rightward). Subjects were then required to
identify a target in either the attended or unattended area. Since a large
number of neuroimaging studies have implicated the posterior parietal
cortex in the perception of both spatial patterns and temporal sequences,
we hypothesized that, regardless of behavioral performance, synesthetes
would exhibit increased EEG coherence in parietal areas. We report here
preliminary results finding altered patterns of parietal coherence in timespace synesthetes. Such coherence differences indicate more synchronous
activation within areas of the parietal cortex in synesthetes when processing time units as spatial cues. Implications for neural models of synesthetic experience are discussed.
G102
A BEHAVIORAL METHOD FOR STUDYING MIRROR NEURON
ACTIVITY:
REPETITIVE
ACTION
AFFECTS
VISUAL
PERCEPTION Arthur Glenberg1,2, Gabriel Lopez-Mobilia1, Michael
McBeath1, Michael Toma1, Marc Sato3, Luigi Cattaneo4; 1Arizona State
University, 2University of Wisconsin, 3GIPSA-LAB - UMR CNRS 5216,
University of Grenoble, 4Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, University of
Trento — Mirror neurons may underlie the ability to make sensorimotor
predictions when observing action, and thus they may contribute to
"reading" intentions of other animals and facilitating social interaction.
Neurophysiological and brain imaging studies have shown that observation of both biological and non-biological movements activates a frontoparietal netwok of motor regions which forms the core of the human mirror-neuron system (MNS). However, these results are intrinsically correlational, and whether mirror neurons contribute to action understanding
remains debated. We have developed a behavioral method based on useinduced plasticity to study mirror neurons. Participants engage in a
repetitive motor task such as moving beans from one location to another.
This activity adapts neural systems used in the control of the action. Participants then engage in a second task. We know that the second task
uses the same neural systems adapted in the motor task when the second
task is affected by the direction of bean movement. We report the data
from experiments in which the second task is the measure of bias to see
ambiguous motion in one direction or another. The direction of bean
movement (toward or away from the participant) influences the bias such
that previous action toward the participant increases the bias to see
ambiguous movement in the away direction. Similar results have been
found when the second task is a language task. These results suggest
that a MNS is being tapped, and they provide method for studying the
causal contribution of MNS to cognitive and social processes.

Poster Session H
Methodological Issues: Electrophysiology
H1
AFFECTIVE
SEMANTIC
PRIMING
AS
PUTATIVE
ENDOPHENOTYPE OF PSYCHOSIS: AN EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL STUDY Stefanie Pfeifer1, Niels Schiller2, Jim van Os1,3, Wim
Riedel4, Lydia Krabbendam1; 1South Limburg Mental Health Research and
Teaching Network, EURON, Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, Maastricht
University, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Faculty of Social Sciences and
Cognitive Psychology Unit, Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition (LIBC),
Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Division of Psychological Medicine,
Institute of Psychiatry, London, UK, 4Maastricht University, Neuropsychology
and Psychopharmacology, The Netherlands — Background: Evidence is accumulating that semantic networks are abnormal in patients with psychosis.
The effect of emotionality on the semantic network is less well understood.
The aim of the present study was to investigate with Event-Related potentials whether the N400 of patients is abnormal when presented with positive and negative affective words and whether the affective semantic
priming effect can be seen as putative endophenotype. Method: Thirteen
patients with non-affective psychosis, 14 siblings and 16 controls participated in an affective lexical decision task with three conditions (positively,
negatively and unrelated) and two stimulus onset asynchronies (SOAs),
250ms and 500ms. Results: For SOA250, controls showed no difference
between the three conditions in N400 amplitude. Patients showed a
decrease in N400 amplitude in the unrelated condition compared to the
affective conditions, and an earlier onset of the N400 in the positive condition. Siblings showed no difference between the three conditions in N400
amplitude, but the positive condition showed the earliest onset, followed
by the negative and the unrelated condition. For SOA500, controls
showed an increased N400 amplitude for the unrelated condition compared to the affective conditions. An increased N400 amplitude for the
unrelated condition was also found in patients, as well as an N400 priming
effect for both affective conditions, which was strongest for the positive
words. This priming effect was also seen in siblings. Conclusion: Patients
with psychosis and siblings showed an increased sensitivity to words with
affective valence. Affective semantic priming abnormalities can be considered an endophenotypic marker of psychosis.
H2
CROSS-DOMAIN EFFECTS OF LANGUAGE AND MUSIC
EXPERIENCE ON THE REPRESENTATION OF PITCH IN THE
HUMAN AUDITORY BRAINSTEM Gavin M. Bidelman1, Jackson T.
Gandour1, Ananthanarayan Krishnan1; 1Purdue University, Speech Language
Hearing Sciences, West Lafayette, IN — Neural encoding of pitch in the
auditory brainstem is known to be shaped by long-term experience with
language or music, implying that early sensory processing is subject to
experience-dependent neural plasticity. In language, pitch patterns consist of sequences of continuous, curvilinear contours; in music, pitch patterns consist of relatively discrete, stair-stepped sequences of notes. The
aim of this study was to determine the influence of domain specific experience (language vs. music) on the encoding of pitch in the brainstem. Brainstem frequency following responses (FFRs) were recorded from native
Chinese, English amateur musicians, and English non-musicians in
response to iterated rippled noise homologues of a musical interval (major
third; M3) and a lexical tone (Mandarin tone 2; T2). Pitch strength (?50ms
sections) and tracking accuracy (whole contour) were computed from the
FFRs using autocorrelation algorithms. The Chinese and musicians
showed higher pitch tracking accuracy than the non-musicians regardless

of domain. Relative to non-musicians, musicians showed more robust
pitch strength across all sections whereas Chinese did so only in those sections containing the most rapid changes in pitch. Musicians, moreover,
exhibited greater pitch strength than Chinese in one section containing an
instantaneous change in pitch (onset of the second note, M3) and two sections within T2 corresponding to notes along the diatonic musical scale.
We conclude that despite mutual benefits of their divergent pitch experience, cross-domain enhancement of pitch representation from music to
language is greater than the reverse in the brainstem.
H3
STIMULUS-DRIVEN OSCILLATORY RESPONSES TO NUMERICAL
CHANGES: A NOVEL FREQUENCY-TAGGING EEG PARADIGM
Melissa Libertus1,2, Elizabeth Brannon1,2, Marty Woldorff1,2,3; 1Duke
University, Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, 2Duke University, Psychology &
Neuroscience, 3Duke University, Psychiatry — Frequency-tagging
paradigms have been successfully used in previous research to investigate neural indices of conscious perception and attentional modulation. Here we
employ this technique to investigate neural tuning to non-verbal numerical information in the absence of a task. Twelve adults passively viewed
rapid streams of multiple-element images that flickered at a frequency of
12.5 or 25 Hz. Every 400 ms across a period of 2400 ms, a new flickering
image of stimulus elements was presented that contained the same number of elements. After 2400 ms, the number of elements changed by a 1:3,
1:2, or 2:3 ratio (e.g., from 8 to 24 elements). Extraction of the power at the
flicker frequency using a Fast-Fourier transformation showed an increase
in power over repeated presentation of the same numerosity across the
2400-ms periods over posterior scalp sites (adaptation effect) for both the
12.5 and 25 Hz stimulation frequencies. Furthermore, the power change at
these locations over the first 400 ms after a change in numerosity was
smallest following a 2:3 ratio change and largest following a 1:3 ratio
change (ratio effect). Thus, the adaptation and ratio effects together suggest a driven oscillatory stabilization of the neural network encoding
numerosity and a destabilization pattern following a numerosity switch
that follows Weber’s Law, i.e. following the ratio rather than the absolute
difference in a numerosity change determines the power at the stimulation
frequency. Future research will be aimed at applying this method to studies with human infants.
H4
ENHANCING DOMINANT MODES IN EVENT-RELATED BRAIN
POTENTIALS BY MEANS OF THE SYMBOLIC RESONANCE
ANALYSIS Peter beim Graben1, Heiner Drenhaus2, Stefan Frisch3,4; 1School
of Psychology and Clinical Language Sciences, University of Reading, UK,
2
Institute of Linguistics, University of Potsdam, Germany, 3Day-Care Clinic of
Cognitive Neurology, University of Leipzig, Germany, 4Max-Planck Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — We present the
symbolic resonance analysis (SRA) as a viable method for addressing the
problem of enhancing a weakly dominant mode in a mixture of evoked
responses obtained from a nonlinear dynamical system. We demonstrate
this using results from a numerical simulation with Duffing oscillators in
different domains of their parameter space, and by analyzing event-related
brain potentials (ERPs) from a language processing experiment in German
as a representative application. In this paradigm, the averaged ERPs
exhibit an N400 followed by a sentence final negativity. Contemporary
sentence processing models predict a late positivity (P600) as well. We
show that the SRA is able to unveil the P600 evoked by the critical stimuli
as a weakly dominant mode from the covering sentence final negativity.
Reference: beim Graben, P., Drenhaus, H., Brehm, E., Rhode, B., Saddy, D.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

203

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

& Frisch, S. (2007). Enhancing dominant modes in nonstationary time
series by means of the symbolic resonance analysis. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, 17, 043106.
H5
INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN MEG Avniel
Ghuman1, Jonathan McDaniel1, Alex Martin1; 1Laboratory of Brain and
Cognition, NIMH — Determining functional connectivity is critical for
understanding the dynamics of the normal and disordered brain. Recent
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies demonstrate that
measuring correlations between brain regions in intrinsic activity can be
used to reveal specific neural networks. This approach holds great promise for studying networks in both the healthy and impaired brain because
it allows functional connectivity to be assessed without concern for the
influence of task-related modulations on intrinsic patterns of functional
connectivity. Because of its superior temporal resolution, examining resting state connectivity with magnetoencephalograpy (MEG) or electroencephalography (EEG) should further enhance our knowledge of neural
circuitry. However, traditional MEG/EEG analysis methods are not well
suited for resting state data. Moreover, there is a lack of consensus as to
the best method for examining connectivity in resting state MEG/EEG
data. To address this problem, we adapted wavelet-based methods for
determining functional connectivity and assessed the performance of
these methods using physiologically plausible synthetic data. We found
that the relative performance of the methods varied with the proportion
of coherent activity and the duration of coherent bursts. These results
suggest that our ability to reveal functional connectivity using resting
state electrophysiological data will depend on the use of multiple measures. We apply these methods to resting state data collected in MEG
and examine their ability to identify functional networks in the brain.
H6
ANALYSIS OF SPEECH AND SLEEP EEG IN CHILDREN WITH
NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS Vladimír Komárek1, Lenka
Neuschlová1, Zbynek Hrncir1, Jana Tuková2; 1Charles University Hospital
Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Czech Technical University, Prague, Circuit
Theory, Czech republic — Purpose: To determine role of epileptiform
activity in our samples of children with neurodevelopmental disorders
and to evaluate sensitivity of computerized methods of speech and
EEG analysis. Method: Subjects - 37 children aged 39 - 112 months with
developmental language disorder ( DLD group) and 27 children (mean
age 7,1 years) with pervasive developmental disorder (PDD
group)underwent overnight sleep video-EEG monitoring. The control
group was 20 mentally non-retarded deaf children with cochlear implantation (mean age 8,4 years). Psychological evaluation : Standford-Binet
Intelligence scale-4th Revision, Gessel Developmental Schedules. Speech
analysis : vowel classification by a supevised Self-Organizing Maps
(SSOM). EEG evaluation: 31 linear and non-linear (CER) analysis. Statistics: multiple regression analysis, Wilcoxon test, Mann- Whitney test,
Spearman and Pearson correlations. Results: Our study confirmed
higher incidence of epileptiform discharges (12/37) in DLD group.
Computerized speech analysis differentiated dysphatic and healthy children. The Spearman correlation was most sensitive tool for correlation
between computerized speech analysis (SSOM) and slow sleep EEG signal in DLD group. We also found a significant decrease in EEG coupling and information drive in the PDD group in comparison with
control. This result support the hypothesis of underconnectivity in children with PDD. Conclusion: Correlation of computerized speech and
EEG analysis can be in future suitable tool for assesing degree of neurodevelopmental impairment as well as of possible therapeutical effect.
H7
ALPHA NEUROFEEDBACK TRAINING AND ITS IMPLICATIONS
FOR STUDIES OF COGNITIVE CREATIVITY Henk
Haarmann1,
1
1
1
Timothy George , Alexei Smaliy , Kristin Grunewald , Jared Novick1;
1University of Maryland College Park — We report a method for increasing
alpha brain waves through Electroencephalography neurofeedback train-

204

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

ing (NT), intended for subsequent research on cognitive creativity.
Increased alpha power over right posterior cortex is associated with
greater originality in divergent thinking (Grabner et al., 2007) and overcoming impasses during insight problem solving (Jung-Beeman et al.,
2004; sensor location PO8). NT aimed at increasing alpha power has successfully demonstrated a causal connection between alpha activity and
cognitive function, particularly mental rotation (Hanslmayr et al., 2005).
This finding creates the prospect of using alpha NT to also test a hypothetical causal connection between alpha activity and cognitive creativity.
To identify an alpha NT protocol appropriate for such a study, thirteen
college students participated in three sessions of alpha NT. The neurofeedback information was derived from a sensor placed over right lateral
parietal-occipital scalp (PO8) and displayed as a moving bar whose
height corresponded to degree of alpha activity. Participants’ task
involved increasing the height of this bar by adopting a calm and alert
state during nine 2.5-minute NT segments interleaved with four 1-minute
baseline segments. The alpha NT resulted in a statistically reliable withinsession increase in alpha and theta (but not beta) activity and a betweensession increase in alpha activity. There was also a within-session reduction in state anxiety. Thus, alpha NT is a reliable method for increasing
alpha activity in regions associated with cognitive creativity. Implications for the use of this method to understand and improve performance
on cognitive creativity tests will be discussed.
H8
SPACE-TIME-FREQUENCY ANALYSIS OF EEG DATA IN
SEMANTIC MEMORY Thomas Ferree1, Matthew Brier2, John Hart2,3,
Michael Kraut4; 1University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas,
Radiology, 2Center for Brain Health, School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
University of Texas at Dallas, 3University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, Neurology, 4Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Radiology, Baltimore, Maryland — Time-frequency analysis is a valuable
tool for studying event-related oscillations during cognitive tasks. In a
complete experiment, however, the numerical results span space, time,
frequency, task conditions, and subjects. The goal of this study was to
develop a method for combining statistical testing with data reduction.
For data reduction, we used principal component analysis (PCA) applied
sequentially to spectral, spatial, and temporal dimensions. We contrasted
two methods for combining statistical testing with PCA. The first
method, used widely to analyze event-related potentials, places data
reduction prior to statistical testing. The second method, which was
developed in this study, places statistical testing prior to data reduction.
The results of both methods were compared in a semantic memory task,
in which twenty-five subjects decided whether word pairs elicited recall
of a third object. Sixty-two channel EEG data were analyzed with shortwindow Fourier transform. In numerous tests of stability and validity,
we found that the second method, which we call STAT-PCA, performed
vastly better. We also found that the principal components returned by
STAT-PCA agreed well with the group-averaged data, confirming that
this multistep analysis method reveals the most prominent features in the
data. Finally, STAT-PCA permits the detection of activity that is not only
different between conditions, but also common to both conditions, for the
most complete yet parsimonious view of the data. It is concluded that
STAT-PCA is well suited for analyzing event-related oscillations during
cognitive tasks, and its foundations imply that it should generalize well
beyond this particular task.
H9
NEUROELECTRIC ASSESSMENT OF BINGE DRINKING: GENDER
AND TASK EFFECTS Kelly Courtney1, John Polich2; 1San Diego State
University, 2The Scripps Research Institute — Young adult university students were assessed with a battery of electroencephalographic (EEG) and
event-related brain potential (ERP) tasks to assay the effects of "binge
drinking" amount in non-binge drinking controls, low-binge drinkers (5/
4 drinks/occasion, NIAAA definition), and high-binge (?10 drinks/occasion) drinkers (n=8/group x 3 binge categories x 2 genders). Resting EEG

Poster Session H

mean frequency was greater in non- and low-bingers compared to highbinger subjects, with the largest group difference in the alpha band (8-12
Hz). A mental head rotation task found high-bingers produced smaller
P300 amplitudes for both easy and hard conditions than non- and lowbinge subjects, especially in females. A polygon shape matching task
yielded a group by condition by gender interaction, such that female
high-bingers exhibited smaller P300 amplitudes than the non- and lowbingers in the match condition but similar amplitudes in the mismatch
condition. Male high-bingers exhibited similar patterns to the male lowand non-bingers. A memory scanning task generated a group by gender
interaction, with female non-bingers exhibited significantly higher amplitude than the female non- and low-bingers. Males exhibited a diminished
group difference. A Stroop ERP task produced similar outcomes for the
congruent and incongruent stimuli. No binge group effects were
obtained for the distracter or target stimulus in a visual three-stimulus
oddball task. The findings suggest that high-binge drinking is associated
with subsequent neuroelectric changes relative to non- and low-binge
drinking, especially in female bingers.
H10
LOOKING FORWARDS AND BACKWARDS: STIMULUS AND
RESPONSE LOCKING WITH EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS
DURING OVERT LANGUAGE PRODUCTION Trevor
Blackford1,
1
1
1,2
Krysta Chauncey , Phillip J. Holcomb , Gina R. Kuperberg ; 1Tufts
University, Medford MA, 2Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown,
MA — An overwhelming majority of event related potential (ERP) studies have focused on brain responses to external stimuli such as pictures or
tones. ERP studies appear in stark contrast to the majority of psychological studies that examine overt behavioral responses. This difference is
due to the nature of the electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings ERPs are
derived from. EEG recordings are very sensitive to electrical signals produced by muscle activity during behavioral response initiation, which
obscure the electrical signals produced by the cognitive activity of interest. These drawbacks have discouraged the study of ERPs evoked by initiation of behavioral responses. In the current study we examined EEG
data collected during an overt language production task through ERPs
derived separately by stimulus-locking forward and response-locking
backwards. Participants were shown pictures of objects in a cross modal
priming task and were asked to name the object upon presentation. Production ERPs were created by time-locking to the onset of the participants' articulation. Although large articulation related artifacts were
present following the analysis window, we did observe a reliable effect
prior to articulation. Differences were seen according to the relationship
of the prime to the target. This finding suggests that time-locking to articulation is a viable method of investigating language processing. Furthermore, the results provide converging evidence with the stimulus locked
ERPs which showed an modulation of the N400 component associated
with object understanding to the relationship of the prime and the target.

Methodological Issues: Neuroimaging
H11
NEUROCHEMISTRY OF HUMAN COGNITION Rajendra
Badgaiyan1,2,3; 1Division of Nuclear Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, 2Harvard Medical School, Boston, 3Shriners Hospital, Boston — Neuroimaging study of human cognition is focused primarily on localization
of the brain areas involved in the processing of cognitive components.
There is therefore, little or no information concerning neurochemical
changes associated with the processing. We explored the possibility of
detecting and mapping neurochemical changes during task performance
using a dynamic molecular imaging technique. Since the technique
exploits the competition between a neurotransmitter and its ligand for
receptor occupancy, by dynamically measuring the concentration of a
radiolabeled dopamine ligand (11C-raclopride or 18F-fallypride) during

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

a control and a task condition, we have been able to detect and map
changes in dopaminergic activity during performance of a number of
cognitive and behavioral tasks. The data acquired in these experiments
indicate that in some tasks dopamine is released in the areas that are activated in fMRI experiments. These tasks include emotional memory
(amygdala, medial temporal lobe, prefrontal cortex), implicit motor
memory (right caudate, bilateral putamen), explicit motor memory (bilateral caudate and putamen) and response inhibition (right caudate). In a
cued-recall task (word stem completion) however, we observed significant dopamine release in the striatum, even though most fMRI experiments have not reported striatal activation. Because fMRI findings are not
consistent with the observation of impaired task performance in patients
with striatal lesions, it was unclear whether the striatum is involved in
the processing of explicit memory. These findings suggest that molecular
imaging can be used to resolve controversies in cognitive concepts and to
investigate an unexplored aspect (neurochemistry) of human cognitive
control.
H12
CONSISTENCY
AND
VARIABILITY
IN
FUNCTIONAL
LOCALISERS Joseph T. Devlin1,2, Keith J. Duncan1,2, Chotiga
Pattamalidok1,3, Iris Knierim1,4; 1Cognitive, Perceptual and Brain Sciences,
UCL, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, UCL, 3Fonds de la Recherche
Scientifique-FNRS & Université Libre de Bruxelles, 4Université Pierre et Marie
Curie, Ecole Normale Supérieure — A critical assumption underlying the
use of functional localiser scans is that the voxels identified as the functional region-of-interest (fROI) are essentially the same as those activated
by the main experimental manipulation. Intra-subject variability in the
location of the fROI violates this assumption, reducing the sensitivity of
the analysis and biasing the results. Here we investigated consistency
and variability in fROIs in a set of 45 volunteers. They performed two
functional localiser scans to identify word- and object-sensitive regions of
ventral and lateral occipito-temporal cortex, respectively. In the main
analyses, fROIs were defined as the category-selective voxels in each
region and consistency was measured as the spatial overlap between
scans. Consistency was greatest when minimally selective thresholds
were used to defined "active" voxels (p < 0.05 uncorrected), revealing that
approximately 65% of the voxels were commonly activated by both
scans. In contrast, highly selective thresholds (p < 10-4 to 10-6) yielded
the lowest consistency values with less than 25% of the voxels active in
both scans. In other words, intra-subject variability was surprisingly
high with between one third and three quarters of the voxels in a given
fROI not corresponding to those activated in the main task. This level of
variability stands in striking contrast to the consistency seen in retinotopically defined areas and has important implications for designing
robust but efficient functional localiser scans.
H13
IN-VIVO ANATOMICAL DISSECTION OF A CASE OF RIGHTSIDED NEGLECT AFTER LEFT HEMISPHERE DAMAGE Monica
Toba1,2, Michel Thiebaut de Schotten1,3,4, Francesca Ciaraffa1,2,6, Marianne
Blanchard5, Catherine Loeper-Jeny5, Paolo Bartolomeo1,2; 1Inserm Unit 610,
Neuropsychology of the focal cerebral lesions, GH Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris,
France, 2UPMC - Paris VI, Paris, France, 3Natbrainlab, Section of Brain
Maturation, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, UK,
4Centre for Neuroimaging Sciences, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College
London, London, UK, 5Hôpital National de Saint-Maurice, Saint-Maurice,
France, 6Dipartimento di Neuroscienze - Istituto di Neuropsicologia Università Cattolica Sacro Cuore (UCSC) - Policlinico A.Gemelli-Roma,
Italy — Spatial neglect usually affects left-sided objects after right hemisphere damage. The anatomical correlates are debated, with recent evidence suggesting an important role for fronto-parietal disconnection in
the right hemisphere. Here we describe the less usual occurrence of a
patient with neglect for right-sided objects after left hemisphere damage.
The patient presented 2 focal strokes in the left hemisphere, affecting
respectively the left occipital lobe and the region extending from the post-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

205

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Poster Session H

central gyrus to the temporal-parietal junction. After the second stroke,
the patient presented with fluent aphasia, agraphia, working memory
impairment and mild right-sided neglect (bells cancellation, 4 omissions
on the right, 1 on the left; Ogden figure, 1 omission on the right; line
bisection, leftward deviation by 13.5%). DTI-tractography demonstrated
disconnections in the fronto-parietal and temporo-parietal regions, concerning principally the left superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF) and the
U-shaped fibers linking the superior and inferior frontal gyri. The corpus
callosum was disconnected at the level of each lesion. In vivo white matter dissection in this patient with right-sided neglect suggests a role for
left SLF disconnection, which complements analogous evidence for right
SLF disconnection in left neglect.

VAMCA’s functionality in three ways. First, we permit the inclusion of
data from normalized 3D functional activation images (e.g., from published illustrations) using semi-automated image capture, normalization
and projection onto the cortical surface. We also add the capability of
mapping stereotaxic coordinates with standard errors and/or volumes
(mapped as 3D ellipsoids). Second, we describe improved procedures for
mapping an individual subject’s activations to VAMCA’s normalized
cortical surface by using brains in the database with similar cortical anatomy. Third, a new distance metric, the "least axon distance", is described.
This new metric provides a functionally relevant alternative to the stereotaxic 3D and spherical 2D distance metrics currently used in VAMCA’s
statistical tests.

H14
GROUP ANALYSIS OF WORD-PSEUDOWORD EFFECTS IN
MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY VIA SENSOR- AND SOURCELEVEL STATISTICAL PARAMETRIC MAPPING Jason R Taylor1,
Richard N Henson1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit — Population
inference from Magnetoencephalographic (MEG) data is complicated by
MEG's sensitivity to neuroanatomical variability between individuals
and to differences in head position relative to the sensors. Further, existing approaches rarely compensate for multiple comparisons over space
and time. In the present study, these problems were overcome by (i) virtually transforming all subjects' heads to a common location, (ii) applying
random field theory to statistical parametric maps (SPMs), and (iii) constraining distributed source dipoles to a canonical cortical mesh, inversenormalised to each subject's native space. Nineteen right-handed English
adults saw words (W) and pronounceable pseudowords (PW; 480 each;
duration 300 ms; presented sequentially at fixation) and indicated
whether each was a word or nonsense word (button-press; hand counterbalanced). Whole-head MEG was acquired with 306 sensors (Elekta Neuromag). Neuromag's MaxFilter utility was used to apply signal-space
separation to remove noise, for head-movement compensation, and for
head-position transformation. Blink artefacts were removed using independent component analysis (EEGLAB). All further processing was done
with SPM/Matlab. 3D SPMs on sensor data (2D topography x time)
revealed significant W/PW differences from 300-400ms and 525-675ms,
with topographies suggesting dipolar sources in bilateral temporal
(left>right) and parietal regions. For each subject, source localisation was
performed on epochs (-300 to 1000 ms; several approaches were evaluated). Source estimates were converted to image volumes for each condition in time-windows identified by sensor SPMs, smoothed (12-mm
Gaussian kernel), and normalised. Group SPMs revealed activity
(pseudowords>words) in perisylvian language regions; activity showing
the opposite pattern (words>pseudowords) was localised to right parietal cortex.

H16
CEREBRAL CORTICAL COMPLEXITY MEASURES IN NORMAL
AGING AND ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE Richard
King1,2,
Kristen
Kennedy2, Karen Rodrigue2, Naftali Raz3, Denise Park2; 1University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, 2University of Texas at Dallas Center for
BrainHealth, 3Wayne State University — Fractal dimension is a compact
metric for shape complexity. The human cerebral cortex acquires fractal
properties (i.e. shape invariance over a limited range of spatial scales)
secondary to folding. Changes in cortical shape due to normal aging or
neurodegenerative disease may differentially affect the value of fractal
dimension. Quantification of these effects may help to identify neurodegenerative processes. Design/Methods: High-contrast (MP-RAGE) magnetic resonance images were acquired from two sources: 1) Crosssectional images from 230 healthy adults ranging in age from 20 to 80. 2)
Control and moderate AD images (N=50) from the Alzheimer’s Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. Three-dimensional tessellated
polygon models of the cortical ribbon were generated from the MR
images using FreeSurfer. Fractal dimension was computed using custom
software. Results: For the healthy adults, values for each age grouping
were as follows: 20-39: 2.59; 40-49: 2.58; 50-59: 2.57; 60-69: 2.58. Within the
ADNI control subject dataset, the values were as follows: 60-70: 2.59; 7080: 2.60; 80-90 2.60. Trends with aging were not significant. Moderate AD
patients had a significantly lower fractal dimension than age-matched
controls (2.599 vs. 2.575; p<0.05).
Conclusions: 3D Bi-hemispheric
fractal dimension values are less sensitive to structural effects associated
with aging, but do detect more severe changes associated with moderate
Alzheimer’s disease. Local measures or non-biased atlas generation
methods may improve sensitivity. Fractal dimension of the cortex may
serve as a biomarker for identifying neurodegenerative disease.

H15
AN IMPROVED TOOLBOX FOR THE VISUALIZATION AND
META-ANALYSIS OF FUNCTIONAL ACTIVATIONS ON THE
CORTICAL SURFACE Timothy Herron1, Xiaojian Kang2,3, David
Woods1,2,3,4; 1US Veterans Affairs, Neurology, Research, Martinez, CA,
2University of California Davis, Neurology, Davis, CA, 3Center for
Neuroscience, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, 4Center for Mind and
Brain, University of California Davis, Davis, CA — The recently introduced
MatLab toolbox VAMCA (Visualization And Meta-analysis on Cortical
Anatomy) provides surface-based visualization of mean cortical functional activations using data published as stereotaxic 3D coordinates
[Herron et al, CNS 2008; Herron et al, SfN 2008]. VAMCA uses a database
of cortices from 72 healthy subjects to locate activations on a standardized cortical surface by extending the technique of multi-fiducial mapping [van Essen, Neuroimage, 28:635, 2005]. Non-parametric statistical
tests are provided for determining (a) whether two groups of foci have
distinct cortical locations; (b) the extent of overlap of the two groups’ foci;
and (c) whether two groups of foci are differentially concentrated in any
anatomically defined regions of interest (ROI). Here, we extend

206

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

H17
MULTIMODAL
NEUROIMAGING
OF
EARLY
WORD
KNOWLEDGE IN HUMAN INFANTS: A NOVEL MEG-MRI
APPROACH REVEALS A N400M-LIKE MEG RESPONSE Katie
Travis1, Jeff Elman2, Matt Leonard2, Tim Brown1,3, Megan Curran2, Eric
Halgren4; 1University of California, Neuroscience, San Diego, 2University of
California, Cognitive Science, San Diego, 3University of California, Psychiatry,
San Diego, 4University of California, Radiology, San Diego — Due to the difficulties of imaging infants, the neural bases of normal language development remain obscure. In adults, good spatiotemporal accuracy in
localizing brain activation during word processing has been achieved by
combining magnetoencephalography (MEG) with magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI). In the present study, we apply this method to infants (1215 months). Functional measures of brain activity are obtained with MEG
when an infant is engaged in a language task. Anatomical information is
acquired with MRI while the infant is asleep. Sources of brain activity are
estimated with anatomically constrained MEG (aMEG). We demonstrate
that it is feasible to use aMEG to measure and localize brain activity
related to semantic word knowledge in infants. Semantic word knowledge was assessed as infants viewed pictures and listened to words that
were either paired congruently or incongruently. To observe differences
related to semantic and not perceptual processes, picture and word stimuli were balanced across conditions. Preliminary event-related analyses

Poster Session H

reveal a differential response to the incongruent condition at approximately 420ms following word onset. The timing of the observed response
is consistent with adult MEG (Halgren et al., 2002) and infant EEG
(Friedrich and Friederici, 2005) studies employing similar semantic tasks.
To our knowledge, we present some of the first evidence of a N400m-like
response in younger (<14 months) infants. Future analyses will integrate
MEG-MRI to address the spatiotemporal dynamics of the observed
response. Results are considered in the context of applying aMEG as a
tool for studying the neural dynamics of early language processes.
H18
DISTINGUISHING EVENTS DURING FREE RECALL WITH FMRI
Ilke Öztekin1, Nicole M. Long1, David Badre1; 1Brown University — Free
recall has been a central paradigm in behavioral memory research and
has provided core data for computational models of memory. Unfortunately, to date, the neural mechanisms that support recall have not been
fully investigated due to technical challenges associated with probing
individual recall events using neuroimaging methods. Of particular concern is the extent to which the latencies and uncontrolled lags associated
with recall events can confer sufficient design efficiency. In order to
investigate the feasibility of testing free recall with fMRI, we used both
theoretically (Rohrer & Wixted, 1994) and empirically derived free recall
latency distributions to generate simulated fMRI data sets and assessed
design efficiency (Dale, 1999; Friston et al., 1999) across a range of parameters that describe free recall performance and fMRI designs. Results
specify the design and performance parameters that can provide comparable efficiency between free recall designs and more traditional jittered
event-related designs. These findings suggest that assessing BOLD
response during free recall using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) is possible, under certain conditions, and can serve as a powerful
tool in understanding the neural basis of memory search and overt
retrieval.
H19
A BETTER APPROACH TO IDENTIFYING FUNCTIONAL
REGIONS OF INTEREST: USING RIDGE LOGISTIC REGRESSION
FOR VOXEL SELECTION Joonkoo Park1, Ji Zhu2, Thad Polk1; 1University
of Michigan, Psychology, 2University of Michigan, Statistics, — Multivariate
pattern analysis techniques are powerful methods for using neuroimaging to read the mind, that is, determining the perceptual or cognitive state
associated with a specific pattern of brain activation. These techniques
are typically employed to classify activation patterns over a predetermined region of interest (or potentially the whole brain). Here, we show
how a multivariate approach (ridge logistic regression) can be used to
identify voxels whose collective activity best discriminates among different experimental conditions. We demonstrate that this approach is superior to the conventional univariate approach to identifying functional
regions of interest (ROIs), both in a simulated dataset and in a real fMRI
dataset involving the visual processing of faces, houses, chairs, and
pseudowords. In particular, mind reading is more accurate when based
on activity from an ROI identified using this multivariate approach compared with ROIs identified using the conventional univariate approach.
H20
THE IMPACT OF EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN ON THE DETECTION
OF INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY IN FMRI Craig
Bennett1,
Scott
1
1
1
Guerin , Michael Miller ; University of California, Psychology, Santa
Barbara — Experimental design in functional neuroimaging is a compromise between several competing goals. Statistical power, hemodynamic
response estimation, counterbalancing, and stimulus constraints all influence design layout. In this study we sought to examine how these compromises impact the estimation of individual hemodynamic variability
across two types of memory tasks. The experiment was a 2x3 design with
principal factors of task type (episodic word recognition and n-back
working memory) and stimulus presentation strategy (block, msequence, and genetic optimization). Participants completed 12 functional imaging runs to yield 100 stimulus presentations per condition.

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

We used multiple methods to quantify individual variability in the data.
First was cross-correlation of the whole-brain t-statistic maps from each
participant. This analysis yielded a normalized global measure of similarity between subjects. We also calculated a voxelwise measure of variance from the t-statistic maps. This allowed for the direct comparison of
regional variability between levels of each factor. Event-related designs
(m-sequence, genetic optimization) generated greater between-subject
variability in the t-statistic maps. This was observed in the cross-correlation data as a lower average correlation between volumes. This effect
was also observed in the voxelwise variance data as greater average variability within each super-threshold cluster of voxels. The pattern of
results was similar across both episodic and working memory tasks.
Together, this evidence supports the idea that event-related experimental
designs are best for the detection of individual hemodynamic variability
in memory. [Supported by the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies
through grant DAAD19-03-D-0004 from the U.S. Army Research Office]
H21
VISUAL CORTEX IN YOUNGER AND OLDER ADULTS: A
COMPARISON OF ACTIVATION FROM DIFFERENT BASELINE
STATES Joanna Hutchison1,2, Hanzhang Lu3, G. Andrew Hillis1, Traci
Sandoval1, Bart Rypma1,2; 1University of Texas at Dallas-BrainHealth, Brain
and Behavioral Sciences, 2University of Texas Southwestern Medical CenterPsychiatry, 3University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center-Advanced
Imaging Research Center — When comparing functional magnetic resonance (fMRI) signals across different population groups, differences in
baseline activation levels can cause misinterpretation of results if one
uses typical statistical analyses that assume equivalent baseline activation
levels. The present study was conducted to determine whether or not
older and younger persons differ in baseline activation levels in visual
cortex, based upon the observation that several studies have documented
differential cortical activation in older individuals compared to younger
individuals (for overviews, see Cook et al., 2007; and Rajah & D’Esposito,
2005); differing baseline activation levels in older versus younger persons
could account for this apparent difference in activation levels between
the groups during task activity. We tested this hypothesis by presenting
three types of stimuli to younger and older subjects (cf. Pasley et al.,
2007): a foveal annular sinusoidal grating (resulting in a negative baseline), a parafoveal annular sinusoidal grating (resulting in a resting baseline), and a combined stimulus in which the negative (i.e., foveallypresented) stimulus was presented earlier in onset than the positive (i.e.,
parafoveally-presented) stimulus such that a negative baseline state was
achieved prior to the initiation of the positive stimulus. Preliminary
blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) response amplitude data indicate
different cortical activation levels in older compared to younger persons,
suggesting that older persons have an altered resting baseline. Such
results suggest the need to adopt data analysis and interpretation methods that account for population differences in baseline activation levels.
H22
COMBINING STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL MEASURES OF
NEURAL
CONNECTIVITY
USING
WHITE
MATTER
ANISOTROPY AND CONSTRAINED PRINCIPAL COMPONENT
ANALYSIS Liang Wang1,2, Paul Metzak1,2, Jennifer Whitman1,2, Todd
Woodward1,2; 1University of British Columbia, Psychiatry, Vancouver, Canada,
2BC Mental Health and Addictions Research Institute, Vancouver, Canada — The
purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between white
matter tracts and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) networks involved in source memory. FMRI and diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI) data for 15 healthy subjects were acquired on a 3Tesla scanner.
Fractional anisotropy (FA) of white matter tracts in the whole brain was
estimated using FSL software, and tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS)
were computed to align FA images from multiple subjects for voxelwise
statistical analysis. Using constrained principal component analysis
(cPCA) with a finite impulse response (FIR) basis set, three components
were extracted, and rotated using promax rotation. The subject-specific

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

207

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

structure matrix for each component was used as an index of functional
connectivity (FC), and was correlated with FA values for each voxel in
the FA skeleton. The first functional component involved bilateral cerebellum and parahippocampus, typically associated with motor and memory networks. The second involved the primary visual cortex and parietal
areas, typically associated with visual attention. The third involved the
dorsal anterior cingulated and parieto-temporal cortex, typically associated with executive and decision-making processes. Using cluster mass
correction for multiple comparisons, significant correlations between FA
values and the indices of functional connectivity were detected in inferior
longitudinal tracts for all functional components, and for the superior
longitudinal tracts for the third component. This suggests that during a
source memory task, all functional systems are supported by inferior longitudinal tracts, but executive and decision making systems are additionally supported by superior longitudinal tracts.
H23
THE NEUROIMAGING INFORMATICS TOOLS AND RESOURCES
1University
CLEARINGHOUSE (NITRC) David
Kennedy1;
of
Massachusetts Medical Center — We report on the use of a new neuroimaging informatics knowledge environment for MRI entitled: Neuroimaging
Informatics Tools and Resources Clearinghouse (NITRC). Initiated in
October 2006 through the NIH Blueprint for Neuroscience Research (1,2),
NITRC’s mission is to create a user-friendly knowledge environment for
the functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and associated structural analysis community. Through the identification of existing tools
and resources valuable to this community, NITRC’s goal is to develop a
knowledge environment to enhance, adopt, distribute, and contribute to
the evolution of neuroimaging tools and resources. Located on the web
at www.nitrc.org, this site promotes tools and resources, vocabularies,
and databases, thereby extending the impact of previously funded, neuroimaging informatics contributions to a broader community. It is anticipated that this will give fMRI researchers greater and more efficient
access to the tools and resources they need, better categorize and organize existing tools and resources, facilitate interactions between researchers and developers, promote better use through enhanced documentation
and tutorialsóall while keeping the set of resources up-to-date with the
most recent resource upgrades and updates. In Summary, NITRC, a new
neuroimaging knowledge environment, is now online. We encourage the
fMRI community to try it out and provide feedback on its design, tools,
resources, and content. NITRC is a knowledge environment for the fMRI
community where tools and resources are presented in a coherent and
synergistic environment for the advancement of MRI-based neuroscience
research.

Methodological Issues: Other
H25
ASYNCHRONY OF BOLD SIGNAL ACROSS BRAIN REGIONS
Xu Cui1, Allan Reiss1; 1Stanford University — The hemodynamic response
of neural activation as measured by fMRI has different characteristics
across different brain regions. Here we studied the temporal aspect of
BOLD signal; that is, the asynchrony (lead-lag) of BOLD signal across different brain regions, in a large dataset of about 200 subjects crossing 5 different fMRI experiments. We found that (1) the middle part of the brain
(motor cortex) usually leads anterior and the posterior regions (prefrontal
and occipital cortex); (2) this pattern of temporal activation is generally
task independent; (3) inter-subject variance is large; (4) intra-subject variance - the variance of a single subject at different times - is very small if
the two time points are close (e.g., within a few hours) but can be larger
when the two times are distant (e.g., 1 year). The cause of this newly
detected temporal pattern is unknown; though it likely reflects the asynchrony of vascular events rather than conduction of electrical signals.
Our result shows that it is important to consider individual variance dur-

208

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

ing fMRI data analysis, and that a standard hemodynamic function may
not fit some brain regions as well as others when considered across a
population sample. The correlation of this temporal activation pattern
with age, gender and psychiatric disease is currently being investigated;
our results may provide a new signature of developmental or mental
states. Future work, including investigation of hemodynamic response
using near infrared spectroscopy imaging, is required to reveal the mechanism underlying the pattern we have detected.
H27
TMS STIMULATION INTENSITY IN COGNITIVE CONTROL
TASKS: THE ADEQUACY OF THE MOTOR THRESHOLD
Franziska M. Korb1,2, Jakob A. Kaminski1,3, Derek V. M. Ott1, Arno
Villringer1,3; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive & Brain Sciences,
Leipzig, 2University Clinic, Cologne, 3University Clinic, Leipzig — Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) has become an important experimental
tool for exploring brain functional neuroanatomy. However, the use of
TMS in the investigation of higher level cognition (e.g. cognitive control)
is complicated by the difficulty in determining the appropriate stimulation intensity needed to influence cortical regions supporting such functions. Typically, TMS studies use the motor threshold (MT) to determine
stimulation intensities, even if the employed tasks place no particular
demands on the motor system. Here, we evaluated the adequacy of MT
as reference in determining individual stimulation intensities in the study
of non-motor, higher-level cognition. To this end, systematically varying
stimulation intensities of repetitive TMS were applied to an individually
localized region of the posterior middle frontal gyrus (pMFG) involved in
working memory immediately prior to performance of an n-back task.
We propose that MT-sensitivity of non-motor cortical regions such as the
pMFG should result in similar between-subjects behavioral effects. If that
is not the case, behavioral effects should rather correlate with absolute
stimulation intensities. Results indicated that task-related behavioral
effects were dependent on stimulation intensity variation. Thus, an
empirical determination of the appropriate stimulation intensity may be
necessary for valid employment of TMS in the study of non-motor processes.
H28
HOW DOES RTMS WORK? EVALUATING DISRUPTION VS.
BIASING MECHANISMS Jeffrey S. Johnson1, Massihullah Hamidi3,4,
Bradley R. Postle1,2, Giulio Tononi2; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Psychology, 2University of Wisconsin-Madison, Psychiatry, 3University of
Wisconsin-Madison Neuroscience Training Program, 4University of WisconsinMadison Medical Scientist Training Program — Although transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) has become a valuable tool in cognitive neuroscience, the mechanisms by which it affects brain function remain
unclear. One commonly held view holds that repetitive (r)TMS influences
behavior by producing transient "virtual lesions" in targeted tissue.
Although consistent with reports of rTMS-induced declines in performance, this "disruption" assumption is difficult to reconcile with
instances of rTMS-induced improvements in performance. One such case
is that 10 Hz rTMS applied to the superior parietal lobule can improve
performance on a spatial (but not object) delayed-recognition task. A replication with simultaneous EEG found that 10 Hz rTMS affects alphaband power at parietal electrodes, with individual differences in these
effects (rTMS increasing vs. decreasing alpha-band power) predicting
whether rTMS impairs or improves behavioral performance (Hamidi et
al., CNS 2007). But did 10-Hz rTMS produce these effects by imposing an
(exogenous) oscillatory rhythm (i.e., by disrupting) or by biasing endogenous task-related oscillations? In the present study, three subjects from
Hamidi et al. (CNS 2007) participated in a second experiment in which
delay-period rTMS was replaced with 10 Hz visual flicker. We reasoned
that 10 Hz flicker would produce widespread entrainment of neural
activity to the flicker frequency, and comparison of these EEG results
with those from the rTMS study would shed light on whether the latter
also reflected (disruptive) entrainment to an exogenous stimulus. Results

Poster Session H

indicated that the effects of 10 Hz rTMS are qualitatively different from
those of visual flicker, and thus favor a biasing account of rTMS.
H29
SOURCE LOCALIZATION FOR
COGNITIVE
NETWORK
DETERMINATION USING DUAL INDEPENDENT COMPONENT
ANALYSIS OF HUMAN EEG AND FMRI DATA Kevin
Brown1,
1
1
1 1
Stephanie Ortigue , Scott Grafton , Jean Carlson ; University of California,
Santa Barbara — Understanding the brain as a complex system requires
integration of fine spatial and fast temporal information processing
linked to cognitive operations. We present novel source localization
algorithms for cognitive network determination that combine data from
human EEG and FMRI studies acquired at separate sessions. Our methods make heavy use of independent component analysis (ICA) in order
to (i) separate task-related activity from nontask-related activity and artifacts and (ii) reduce the size and complexity of the source determination
inverse problem. Our methods match EEG and FMRI information simultaneously, either by fitting both EEG and FMRI dynamics or by regularizing the underdetermined EEG inverse problem using information about
areas of activity obtained from ICA decomposition of FMRI. We focus
particular attention on solution robustness as a function of choices made
during inversion: the amount of head model detail, the relative weighting
of the two imaging modalities, and the form of the model used to calculate the expected blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) response.
We also investigate source localization efficacy as experimental design
parameters are varied. We demonstrate the efficacy of our algorithms
using human rapid event-related evoked visual response data. An
important conclusion of this work is the link between source localization
and experimental design; the appropriate algorithm for solving the EEG
inverse problem will be dependent on the goals of the study and the
details of its design.

Neuroanatomy
H30
FUNCTIONAL TOPOGRAPHY OF THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM:
Eve
Valera1,2,
Jeremy
AN FMRI STUDY Catherine
Stoodley1,2,
Schmahmann1,2; 1Massachusetts General Hospital / Harvard Medical School,
2
Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging — The role of the cerebellum in motor control is well-established, but there is increasing interest in the non-motor role(s) of the cerebellum. Studies in patients indicate
that motor control is somatotopically organized in the cerebellar anterior
lobe; and clinical data also demonstrate that patients with damage to the
cerebellar posterior lobe can experience a variety of non-motor symptoms, including difficulties in language, spatial and executive functions,
and affective processing (the Cerebellar Cognitive Affective Syndrome).
Tract tracing studies in animals show that cerebro-cerebellar and spinocerebellar connections map to different regions of the cerebellum, providing anatomical support for our hypothesis that there are functional subdivisions of the cerebellum: the anterior lobe processes sensorimotor
information; the posterior midline is involved in affective processing; and
lateral hemisphere regions of the posterior lobe are engaged with information related to cognitive tasks. Additionally, we have predicted that
the right cerebellar hemisphere is preferentially active during language
tasks, and the left cerebellar hemisphere during spatial processing. This
functional topography has yet to be shown experimentally in the cerebellum of healthy controls. We therefore used 3T functional MRI to investigate the patterns of cerebellar activity in healthy adult males (n=5; mean
age 26.4 years) during motor (finger tapping), language (verb-for-noun
generation), spatial (mental rotation), working memory (n-back) and
affective tasks (viewing images from the International Affective Picture
Scale). The data will be analyzed to investigate group activation patterns
as well as within-subject topography. These findings may provide new
insights into the functional topography of the human cerebellum.

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

H31
EFFECTS OF AGING ON MAXIMIZING GAINS AND MINIMIZING
LOSSES IN A CHOICE TASK Darrell Worthy1, Jennifer Pacheco1, Bo
Zhu1, David Schnyer1, W. Todd Maddox1; 1University of Texas at Austin —
Previous research suggests that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the
basal ganglia are especially susceptible to the effects of aging (Raz, 2000).
These areas have also been implicated in reward processing and representation (Schultz, 2000). We hypothesized that elderly participants’ ability to maximize gains and minimize losses will be attenuated. To test this
we had healthy elderly participants (61 - 81 years old) and matched controls perform two decision-making tasks where they drew from one of
four decks of cards on each trial and received points for each draw. In the
Gains task they gained points on each draw and attempted to maximize
points earned. In the Losses task they lost points with each draw and
attempted to minimize losses. As predicted, gains maximization and loss
minimization was attenuated in the elderly, with a larger attenuation for
losses than for gains. Model-based analyses using a simple reinforcement learning model indicated that elderly participants were unable to
adequately exploit the option with the highest expected value compared
to younger participants. When attempting to minimize losses elderly
participants showed a tendency to give less weight to recent information
than younger participants. These results suggest that age-related cognitive decline may negatively affect one’s ability to choose from alternative
options in order to maximize reward and minimize losses.
H32
ATYPICAL READING/LATERALITY PROFILE ASSOCIATED
WITH REVERSED PLANUM TEMPORALE ASYMMETRY Christine
Chiarello1, Suzanne Welcome1, Christiana Leonard2; 1University of California,
Riverside, 2University of Florida, Gainesville — Reading skill varies substantially among college students. We are investigating the neuroanatomical
correlates of this variation. Two hundred students performed reading
assessments and seven divided visual field (DVF) tests of word processing, and received structural MRI scans. A cluster analysis of the reading
and DVF data classified 183 individuals into one of four groups differing
in their reading skill and the strength of their VF asymmetries. Here we
focus on the 17 individuals whose performance profiles could not be classified (i.e., outliers). Although they did not form their own cluster based
on the variables used in the cluster analysis, they shared some characteristics that differed from those in the four groups. They obtained high
scores for IQ and Passage Comprehension, but not Word Identification.
Their responses were slower (but not less accurate) in the DVF tasks.
Their VF asymmetries were highly variable across tasks and persons.
These individuals were also more likely than those in the four clusters to
have very consistent hand preferences. Remarkably, 41% of these outliers
showed reversed (e.g., rightward) asymmetry of the planum temporale
(compared to 19% in the rest of the sample). Thus, individuals with atypical profiles of reading and VF lateralization also evidenced atypical
asymmetry in a language-relevant region. Within a population of normal
readers, reversed planar asymmetry is not associated with poor reading
skill, and hence may not be a predictor of dyslexia. However, this structural feature may be associated with an unusual reading/asymmetry
profile.
H33
A COMPARISON OF CORTICAL ANATOMY BETWEEN
COLLEGE STUDENTS WITH DIFFERENT READING SKILLS
Suzanne Welcome1, Christine Chiarello1, Paul Thompson2, Elizabeth Sowell2;
1
University of California, Riverside, 2University of California, Los Angeles —
Resilient readers are characterized by poor phonological processing skills
in the absence of a deficit in reading comprehension. Such individuals
may rely on alternate neural mechanisms to support skilled reading. We
compared the cortical anatomy of resilient readers to that of poor readers
(with impaired phonological processing and comprehension) and proficient readers (with no deficits in reading). We used cortical pattern
matching algorithms to obtain measurements of radial expansion and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

209

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

gray matter thickness (in millimeters) from structural MRI data. Compared to proficient readers, both resilient and poor readers show less leftward asymmetry of gray matter thickness in the temporo-parietal region,
a region thought to support print-to-sound conversion. Resilient readers
show greater gray matter asymmetry in medial frontal and medial posterior regions than either poor or proficient readers. It is possible that
medial morphology relates to compensatory processing in resilient readers. Poor, but not resilient readers, show a reduction in radial expansion
in the frontal region. This suggests that frontal anatomy may relate to
text comprehension ability rather than phonological processing skill. The
results of this study indicate that resilient readers may represent a separate population of readers, distinguishable from poor and proficient
readers by their cortical anatomy. Additionally, phonological and comprehension skills may be associated with different aspects of brain morphology.
H34
MICROSTRUCTURAL BRAIN ALTERATIONS AND WORKING
MEMORY IN PSYCHOSIS: RELATIONSHIP WITH GENETIC
LIABILITY Petra Habets1, Jim van Os1,2, Rainer Goebel3,4, Machteld
Marcelis1; 1South Limburg Mental Health Research and Teaching Network,
EURON, Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, Maastricht University, Maastricht,
The Netherlands, 2Division of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry,
De Crespigny Park, London, UK, 3Maastricht University, Cognitive
Neuroscience, The Netherlands, 4F.C. Donders Centre for Cognitive
Neuroimaging, Nijmegen, The Netherlands — Background: Working memory (WM) deficits in schizophrenia seem to reflect dysfunction of cortical
regions such as the anterior cingulate gyrus, the prefrontal and parietal
cortex. Cortical thickness measurements can be used to identify small
cytoarchitectural alterations. We hypothesized that alterations in cortical
thickness in the above mentioned brain regions are associated with
changes in WM performance, which was tested in patients and their siblings. Methods: T1-weighted MRI scans were acquired on a 3 Tesla scanner from 92 patients with schizophrenia and 100 non-psychotic siblings.
BrainVoyager QX was used to measure cortical thickness in 77 regions of
interest, using the Laplace method. With multilevel random regression,
the association between cortical thickness and performance on the Auditory Verbal Learning task was examined within patients and siblings,
adjusted for potential confounders. Results: In the patients, decreased
cortical thickness in the anterior cingulate and left superior temporal
gyrus was associated with impaired WM. In the siblings, decreased cortical thickness in Broca’s area and the right inferior frontal sulcus was associated with impaired WM. In addition, there were some negative
associations, mainly in parietal (patients) and temporal (relatives)
regions. Conclusions: Psychotic patients and their siblings showed positive and negative associations between cortical thickness and WM, in
brain regions previously identified as components of a distributed WM
network, although the involved cortical regions differed between the
groups. These differential relationships could indicate distinct WM neurocircuitry problems in patients and relatives and possibly explain the
differences in WM performance between these groups.
H35
MORPHOLOGICAL STUDY ON THE CORRELATION BETWEEN
IQ AND CREATIVITY Judith Segall1, Ranee Flores1, Shirley Smith3,1,
Jeremy Bockholt1, Robert Chavez1, Alison Marshall1, Rachael Grazioplene1, Rex
Jung1,2,3,4; 1Mind Research Network, 2University of New Mexico,
Neurosurgery, 3University of New Mexico, Psychology, 4University of New
Mexico, Neurology — Numerous psychometric studies have noted an
association between measures of creativity and intelligence up to an IQ of
120, but not thereafter (Sternberg, 1999). We sought to determine the
morphological relationship between creativity and cortical thickness in a
cohort of healthy subjects, who were grouped between those with a Full
Scale Intelligence Quotiont (FSIQ) of ?120 and those >120. We obtained
T1 images and creativity measures (Miller & Tal, 2007) in a cohort of 37
neurologically and psychiatrically normal subjects (FSIQ ? 120 – 8 females

210

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

and 11 males; FSIQ ?121 – 8 females 10 males ) ranging in age from 18 to
29. Five independent judges rated creative products of each subject, with
high inter-rater reliability (?= 0.89), from which a "Creativity IQ" (CIQ)
was calculated. T1 images were analyzed using FreeSurfer to obtain cortical measurements, which were then used in the general linear model to
correlate cortical thickness to CIQ controlling for gender and FSIQ. We
found that CIQ was significantly related (p < .0001) to decreased cortical
thickness, bilaterally, in the superior parietal gyrus for subjects with a
FSIQ ?120, increased left parsorbitalis thickness, and increased right caudal anterior cingulate thickness. For subjects with FSIQ ?121 there was a
stronger correlation between the FSIQ and thickness than between CIQ
and thickness. The results support the notion that creativity and cortical
thickness are correlated up to an IQ of 120, but that FSIQ predominates in
terms of cortical thickness correlates at FSIQ >120.
H36
GREY MATTER DENSITY AS ENDOPHENOTYPE FOR ADHD
AND AUTISM Hilde Geurts1,2, Steven Scholte1; 1University of Amsterdam,
Psychonomics, Psychology, 2Leo Kanner Huis, Autism Team Amsterdam —
Background: ADHD and autism are well known overlapping neurodevelopmental disorders of which the etiology is not fully understood. One
way to unravel the relationship between the associated behavioral symptoms and the neurobiological underpinnings is to study endophenotypes.
A potential endophenotype are structural differences in grey matter.
Identification of overlapping and disease-specific brain abnormalities
might help to explain similarities and differences in the neurocognitive
profiles of ADHD and autism. The assumption is that also in the normal
population this link between brain characteristics and disorder characteristics can be made. Method: Structural MRI (method voxel based morphometry) was obtained from 96 healthy adults who filled out ADHD
and autism questionnaires. Results: Characteristics of both disorders are
associated with grey matter density in the frontal cortex, while only
ADHD characteristics are related to grey matter density in the striatum
and only autism characteristics with the middle temporal gyrus. Not only
are these the know brain areas related to these disorders, but also the
direction of the correlations were as expected. Hence, the results showed
that the association between questionnaire scores and the patterns of grey
matter density are in line with findings in patients with ADHD and
autism. Conclusion: This study shows that structural differences in grey
matter indeed are a potential endophenotype for neurodevelopmental
disorders such as ADHD and autism.
H37
SEX, HAND PREFERENCE AND BRAIN ASYMMETRY Christiana
M. Leonard1, Stephen D. Towler1, Suzanne Welcome2, Christine Chiarello2;
1
University of Florida, 2University of California, Riverside — It is commonly
believed that women and individuals with mixed hand preference have
less strongly lateralized brains than men with consistent hand preference.
We were able to test this idea in a sample of 200 normal young adults
with volumetric MRI scans. Individuals were classified as consistent if
they performed all actions on the 5 point Bryden scale with the same
hand. Perisylvian measures (planum temporale, planum parietale and
Heschl’s gyrus) and medial frontal measures (cingulate and paracingulate gray matter) were entered into a discriminant analysis in order to
classify hemispheres as either right or left. Contrary to our prediction,
these measures were more successful in classifying the hemispheres of
mixed handed women (n = 41, F (5,76) = 21.74) than consistent handed
women (n = 59, F (5,112) = 9.88), mixed handed men (n = 56, F (5,106) =
9.61), or consistent handed men (n = 44, F (5,82) = 8.88). (All F’s were significant, p < .0001.) In mixed handed women, all five measures contributed significantly (p < .01). In consistent handed women and mixed
handed men all measures with the exception of the paracingulate contributed significantly. In consistent handed men, neither of the medial frontal
measures contributed significantly to successful hemisphere classification. These findings remained unchanged when left handers (n = 26)
were excluded. The relationship between sex, hand preference and brain

Poster Session H

asymmetry continues to resist simple conceptualizations. This research
was supported by NIH grant DC006957 to CC.
H38
FUNCTIONAL AND STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY OF THE
HUMAN INTRAPARIETAL SULCUS AND ANGULAR GYRUS
Lucina Uddin1, Kaustubh Supekar1, Hitha Amin1, Daniel Nguyen1, Michael
Greicius1, Vinod Menon1; 1Stanford University School of Medicine, Psychiatry
and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford, CA — The caudal inferior parietal lobe
(IPL) of the human brain is a heterogeneous region involved in a wide
array of cognitive functions ranging from spatial attention to language
and mathematical cognition. We examined functional and structural connectivity of distinct subregions within the IPL using resting state fMRI
and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) in order to better understand its functional architecture and relationship to associated neural networks. We
used probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps to divide the caudal IPL into
five regions of interest (ROIs) per hemisphere: the anterior and posterior
angular gyrus (PGa, PGp), and three subregions within the intraparietal
sulcus (hIP2, hIP1, and hIP3). Resting state functional connectivity results
indicated differential coupling between the ROIs, with each ROI being
functionally coupled to distinct networks. The PGa was linked to the
basal ganglia and ventral premotor areas, while the PGp showed connectivity with ventromedial prefrontal cortex, precuneus, posterior cingulate, and hippocampal cortices. The anterior-most IPS ROI, hIP2, was
linked with ventral premotor and insular cortex, while the posterior-most
IPS ROI, hIP3, showed connectivity with the striate and extrastriate
visual cortex. Deterministic tractography revealed structural connectivity
between many, but not all, of the functionally connected regions. Our
findings provide new evidence for functional heterogeneity of the IPL in
relation to its cytoarchitectonically-defined subdivisions and offer a novel
framework for interpreting the growing body of functional neuroimaging
literature reporting activations in the IPL.
H39
GENETIC MARKER OF PRO-INFLAMMATORY RESPONSE IS
ASSOCIATED WITH AGE-DEPENDENT REDUCTION IN WHITE
MATTER INTEGRITY Kristen Kennedy1, Naftali Raz2; 1Center for
BrainHealth, University of Texas at Dallas, Dallas, TX, 2Institute of
Gerontology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI — Reduced white matter
microstructural integrity is found in normal aging throughout the brain.
The mechanisms of this age reduction are poorly understood, but may be
partly under genetic control. The purpose of the current study was to
investigate the influence of a genetic marker of inflammation, interleukin-1 beta G allele, on regional white matter integrity (fractional anisotropy, FA and apparent diffusion coefficient, ADC) as assessed by
Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) in a sample of 41 normal, healthy adults
(44-81 years old). We found that carriers of the G allele displayed lesser
integrity in the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum and in prefrontal and occipital white matter than IL-1? A homozygotes, and the effect of
the marker became stronger with advancing age. These preliminary data
suggest that persons who are genetically predisposed to stronger proinflammatory response may acquire greater white matter damage with
age than individuals without this predisposition. It is these individuals
who may most benefit from anti-inflammatory intervention. Supported
in part by grant R37 AG-11230 from NIH.

Memory: Other
H40
HUMAN LONG-TERM ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY CAPACITY Joel
L. Voss1,2; 1Northwestern University, Psychology, 2The Beckman Institute,
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign — Long-term memory depends on
the retention of associative information, such as the relationship between
a friend’s face and his name, a home and its neighborhood, and a mint
and its odor. Many have considered memory’s overall capacity, but rele-

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

vant data are scant. Some previous experiments on humans have
assessed memory capacity by testing retention for thousands of visual
impressions, and have concluded that there are virtually no constraints
on how much information can be successfully retained. However, no previous studies of capacity have investigated associative memory processing that is essential to long-term memory. I studied long-term associative
memory with 58,560 memory trials for picture-response associations during approximately one year of testing. Estimated capacity was on the
order of several thousand associations, and this and other indicators of
memory function were remarkably similar to those obtained for baboons
(Papio papio) under comparable circumstances. These findings suggest
conservation of long-term memory mechanisms and effectiveness in
humans relative to nonhuman primates, despite at least 20 million years
of divergent evolution and vastly different behavioral and cognitive repertoires. Furthermore, in contrast to the limitless capacity estimates
derived from studies on the retention of visual impressions in humans,
the current findings indicate more profound limitations for the associative processes that support our ability to remember the past.
H41
SUBJECTIVE LIKELIHOOD OF IMAGINED FUTURE EVENTS
INFLUENCES ACTIVITY IN THE MENTAL TIME TRAVEL
NETWORK Julia A. Weiler1,2,3, Boris Suchan1, Irene Daum1,2; 1Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, Neuropsychology, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany,
2International Graduate School of Neuroscience, Ruhr-University Bochum,
Germany, 3Ruhr-University Research School, Bochum, Germany — Humans
possess the remarkable ability to vividly imagine past events as well as
potential future scenarios, an ability termed mental time travel. For past
events, a clear distinction can be made into events that did happen (true
memories) and those that did not happen (false memories). However, no
such distinction is possible for future events at the time of imagination.
Nevertheless, we have a sense of the likelihood of occurrence of future
events and this might influence brain activity. We conducted a functional
magnetic resonance imaging study in which 16 healthy human subjects
had to vividly envision potential personal future events for the upcoming
Christmas holiday. After Christmas had passed, subjects had to judge for
each of the previously imagined future events, whether it actually took
place during Christmas or not (termed "true" and "false" future events in
analogy to the memory literature). A comparison of the activation patterns for true and false future events revealed significant differences.
True future events elicited higher activation in the left middle frontal
gyrus, right inferior frontal gyrus, right precuneus, and left middle temporal gyrus, while the reverse contrast mainly activated the right anterior
cingulate. In line with our expectations, subjects rated those events that
were later classified as true as more probable than those that were later
defined as false. These results show that distinct brain regions are modulated by this judgment of the likelihood of future events.
H42
ERPS REVEAL THE ROLE OF REMINDING IN THE SPACING
EFFECT IN MEMORY Laura Matzen1, Kara Federmeier2, Aaron
Benjamin2; 1Sandia National Laboratories, 2University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign — The spacing effect, where participants have better memory
for repeated items that are spaced far apart in a study list than for repetitions that are massed together, is a robust finding in the memory literature. One explanation for this effect is that the second presentation of an
item reminds the participants of the first, reactivating the original memory trace and giving them practice with retrieving the item. At long lags,
more effort is required to reactivate the memory trace, leading to a bigger
benefit to later memory performance. In the present experiment, we used
event-related potentials (ERPs) to test this explanation for the spacing
effect. Participants studied words that were presented once or repeated
at a lag of 2 or 10. At short lags, repeated words had a reduced N400 and
a large LPC, indicating both priming and explicit processing. At long
lags, there was no reduction in the N400 for repeated words but the large
LPC remained. Critically, the ERPs elicited at study were backsorted

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

211

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

based on subsequent memory for the words. We found that the amplitude of the LPC for the repetitions was predictive of subsequent memory,
and that the Dm effect for repeated items appeared only for the second
presentation of the word, not for the first. Both of these findings support
the hypothesis that the spacing effect is caused by explicit reminding during study.
H43
NEURAL MARKERS OF INHIBITION IN EPISODIC MEMORY
Maria Wimber1,2, Karl-Heinz Baeuml2, Zara Bergstroem1, Gerasimos
Markopoulos1, Hans-Jochen Heinze1, Alan Richardson-Klavehn1; 1University of
Magdeburg, Neurology and Stereotactic Neurosurgery, 2University of
Regensburg, Experimental Psychology — Retrieving particular episodes
from memory strengthens the retrieved information, but at the same time
also weakens related, non-retrieved information, causing so called
retrieval-induced forgetting of the non-retrieved episodes. Such forgetting is thought to be the consequence of inhibitory control processes that
reduce interference from concurrently active memory traces, thereby
supporting retrieval of the relevant information. We studied the neural
correlates of retrieval-induced forgetting using event-related functional
magnetic resonance imaging during the final cued recall. Across participants, forgetting showed a strong positive correlation with neural activity in the left inferior prefrontal cortex (BA 47) and the left lateral
temporal cortex (BA 22), regions associated with the retrieval of weakly
represented memories. By contrast, retrieval-induced strengthening was
correlated with activation increases in medial (BA 7) and lateral (BA 40)
parietal areas, possibly reflecting the increased episodic strength of previously retrieved memories. Our findings demonstrate that retrievalinduced facilitation and forgetting involve distinct neural processes, and
provide the first direct evidence for a possible functional-anatomical
marker of inhibition in human episodic memory.
H44
THE PROSPECTIVE BRAIN: HOW FUTURE ACTIONS BREED
INTRUSIVE COGNITIONS AND INTERFERE WITH CURRENT
TASKS Meredith Lanska1, Taylor Rigby1, Timothy Gerrits1, Ezequiel
Morsella1,2; 1San Francisco State University, Psychology, 2University
California, Neurology, San Francisco — Based on neuropsychological evidence that simulating future events depends on neural machinery that is
also used for remembering past events, it has been proposed that the
function of episodic memory is to simulate potential future actions
(Schacter & Addis, 2007). Together with research revealing the futurelooking tendency of perception, memory, cognitive control, language,
and action-production, this has led to the view of the 'prospective brain'
(Schacter, Addis, & Buckner, 2007). To add to this literature, we propose
that intrusive cognitions, too, reflect the prospective nature of the brain.
These cognitions can occur when one is trying to clear one's mind before
going to sleep, only to have thoughts about future tasks perturb consciousness. We hypothesize that these cognitions are triggered automatically by future tasks that may benefit from forethought. Accordingly,
during a meditation-like exercise requiring one to clear the mind of
excess thought and focus on just one thing (breathing), participants (n =
149) reported more intrusive cognitions about a future task that could
benefit from forethought than when they anticipated no future task or
anticipated a task that, though of comparable difficulty and content,
could not benefit from forethought, F(2, 146) = 4.974, p < .01. We also
examined how merely knowing that one must perform a future task
interferes with a current task requiring cognitive control. Together, these
findings have implications for understanding basic mechanisms in psychopathological conditions such as rumination and obsessive-compulsive
disorder. More generally, they illuminate under-explored aspects of the
prospective brain.

212

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

H45
ENHANCED BY EXPERIENCE: SUPERIOR SOURCE MEMORY
FOR FAMILIAR OVER NOVEL SCENES IS ASSOCIATED WITH
POSTERIOR HIPPOCAMPAL ACTIVATION AT ENCODING
Jordan Poppenk1,2, Morris Moscovitch1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman
Research Institute — Memory formation is associated with activation of
the anterior hippocampus at encoding, although most studies reporting
this effect have used only novel materials. These materials, according to
the novelty-encoding hypothesis, are better encoded than familiar ones.
We tested this hypothesis behaviorally while exploring whether novel
and familiar materials were associated with different neural predictors of
subsequent memory. We scanned participants using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) while they studied novel and familiarized
scenes under two sets of instructions. In a subsequent source memory
task, participants determined which instructions had been associated
with each scene. Responses on the memory test were used to back-sort
fMRI encoding trials into remembered and forgotten categories, which
were compared to identify brain regions that predicted memory. This
contrast was performed separately for novel and familiarized scenes.
There were two major findings: first, by eliminating confounding effects
of source confusion which plague studies on novelty effects, we showed
that source memory associated with familiariarized scenes was in fact
better than memory associated with novel ones. Second, memory for both
scene types was predicted by a common network in occipital and parietal
cortices but by unique loci in the hippocampus: the right anterior hippocampus predicted memory for novel scenes only, whereas posterior hippocampii predicted memory for familiarized scenes only. We conclude,
contrary to the novelty- encoding hypothesis, that memory is superior for
familiar than for novel items, and that this superiority is associated with
activation of the posterior hippocampus during encoding.
H47
DISSOCIATING THE ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES
OF RECOLLECTION AND FAMILIARITY IN OLDER AND
YOUNGER ADULTS Tracy H. Wang1, Marianne de Chastelaine1, Brian
Minton1, Michael D. Rugg1; 1Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and
Memory and Neurobiology & Behavior, UC Irvine, Irvine, CA —
Previous
aging studies investigating the contributions of recollection and familiarity to recognition memory have shown that recollection declines more
markedly with age than does familiarity. There is considerable evidence
that recollection and familiarity have distinct event-related potential
(ERP) correlates. The aim of the present study was to determine to what
extent ERP correlates of recollection and familiarity differ between older
and younger adults, focusing on the question whether the seeming resistance of familiarity to aging is mirrored in its neural correlate. Twentyfour older adults (63-77 yrs) and 16 young adults (18-29 yrs) participated
in a recognition memory study employing a modified R/K procedure in
which subjects rated the confidence of their familiarity-based recognition
decisions. The older adult group was split into two subgroups based on
estimates of mean familiarity strength (n=12 each). This allowed us to
equate estimates of familiarity-driven recognition between the young
subjects and the high-strength subgroup of older adults. Strikingly, the
putative ERP correlate of familiarity - the ’mid-frontal old/new effect’ was evident in the young subjects only, and was undetectable in both
older sub-groups. By contrast, the putative ERP correlate of recollection the left parietal effect - was evident in all three groups. The absence of the
mid-frontal old/new effect in our older subjects raises the possibility that
familiarity-based recognition depends upon qualitatively different memory signals in older and young adults.
H48
THE RECOLLECTION OF TO-BE-REMEMBERED AND TO-BEFORGOTTEN
ITEMS
IN
ITEM-METHOD
DIRECTED
FORGETTING Liang-Tien Hsieh1, Daisy Hung1,2, Ovid Tzeng1,2, Shihkuen Cheng1; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central

Poster Session H

University, Taiwan, 2Institute of Neuroscience, Laboratory for
Neuropsychology, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan — The recollection processes associated with the retrieval of To-Be-Remembered (TBR)
and To-Be-Forgotten (TBF) items in item-method directed forgetting
were examined by using a two-step source judgment task. At study, each
study word was accompanied with either a "Remember" or a "Forget"
instruction directing the subjects to remember or to forget the accompanied study word respectively. At test, both TBR and TBF items intermixed with unstudied new words were presented and the subjects
performed an initial old/new judgment to identify both TBR and TBF
items and then determined their source information (i.e., being accompanied with a "Remember" or a "Forget" instruction at study). The recollection of TBR and TBF items were examined by the correct source
identifications. Results from the initial old/new identification revealed
that the hit rate to TBR items was higher than the hit rate to TBF items,
showing the directed forgetting effect. However, no difference was found
in the percentage of correct source judgments between TBR-Hits and
TBF-Hits, suggesting that the percentage of recollected items among
TBR-Hits was similar to the percentage of recollected items among TBFHits. Despite of such similarity, however, it is likely that the recollected
TBR items may differ from the recollected TBF items in terms of the contextual richness of the recollected information. Such speculation gained
support from another ERP study showing that the parietal old/new
effect ? which is an electrophysiological signature of the recollection process ? was more pronounced for TBR-Hits than for TBF-Hits in the time
window of 400-900 ms.
H49
PERFORMANCE
ON
A
STRIATAL
LEARNING
TASK
DISTINGUISHES ADDICTED FROM CASUAL CIGARETTE
SMOKERS Lesley Fellows1, Tal Ben-Simhon1, Alain Dagher1, Michael
Frank2; 1McGill University, 2University of Arizona — Addiction is characterized by a loss of control over drug use, a process that is thought to be
mediated by drug-related dopamine effects in the striatum. Cigarettes are
highly addictive for most people, but about 8% of those who smoke cigarettes retain control over their smoking behavior. We aimed to determine
if individual differences in striatal learning help explain why these socalled ’tobacco chippers’ are resistant to the development of full-fledged
addiction despite repeated exposure to cigarettes. We compared performance of demographically-matched addicted smokers (N=30) and
tobacco chippers (N=27) on a probabilistic reinforcement learning task
that has been shown to be sensitive to differences in dopamine neurotransmission. Participants were tested twice, once after overnight abstinence, and once while smoking at their usual rates. Overall learning did
not differ between the two groups, or across conditions. However, the
basis of that learning was significantly different: ’Go’ learning from positive feedback was relatively better in chippers, while ’no go’ learning
from negative feedback was relatively better in addicted smokers when
they were tested while smoking as usual. This suggests that chippers may
be in a relatively hyperdopaminergic state compared to smokers while
smoking at their usual rate, a claim supported by neuro-computational
modeling. These data are consistent with the hypothesis that druginduced dopamine release is blunted in the addicted state, and are the
first demonstration of neurobehavioral differences in smokers who differ
in their resistance to addiction.
H50
IDENTIFICATION OF A NOVEL ROLE OF PROTEIN INHIBITOR
OF ACTIVATED SIGNAL TRANSDUCER AND ACTIVATOR OF
TRANSCRIPTION 1 IN FACILITATING SPATIAL MEMORY
FORMATION IN RATS Eminy Lee1; 1Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan — It is well known that long-term memory formation requires de novo RNA and protein synthesis. By using
PCR differential display, we have previously identified the serum- and
glucocorticoid-inducible kinase gene whose expression level is much
higher in the dorsal hippocampus of fast-learning rats than slow-learning

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

rats from the Morris water maze learning task. Recently, we have identified another cDNA fragment that also showed a significantly higher
expression level in the fast-learning rats. After cloning and sequencing of
this cDNA fragment, it shows 100% sequence homology to the 3'-end
region of the rat protein inhibitor of activated STAT1 (pias1) gene. To
confirm that pias1 expression is associated with spatial learning, naïve
rats were either subjected to water maze training (n=6) or assigned to the
non-trained group with the platform and visual cues been removed
(n=6). The dorsal hippocampus was dissected out at the end of training
and subjected to protein measure by western blot. Results revealed that
water maze training significantly increased PIAS1 protein level in the
hippocampus. In further examination of the role of PIAS1 in spatial memory formation, we have found that transfection of the wild-type PIAS1
plasmid to rat hippocampus facilitated, whereas transfection of PIAS1
siRNA impaired spatial memory performance (n=8 each group). PIAS1
was well known to play an important role in the immune system, but the
present results suggest that PIAS1 also plays an important role in spatial
memory formation.
H51
SLEEP-DEPENDENT EXTRACTION & CONSOLIDATION OF
EPISODIC MEMORY DETAILS Els van der Helm1, Ninad Gujar1,
Caitlin Watts1, Matthew P. Walker1; 1Sleep and Neuroimaging Laboratory,
Psychology, and Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California,
Berkeley — Although the benefit of sleep on procedural-skill consolidation is well established, the role of sleep in declarative memory processing remains incomplete. Using a nap paradigm, here we investigated the
impact of wake and sleep on the offline consolidation of ITEM versus
CONTEXT memory. Participants (n=27) studied two lists of words at
12noon, which were each associated with a different set of contextual
cues. Post-learning, subjects were assigned to either a Nap group (n=13),
obtaining a 90min sleep opportunity, or a No-Nap group (n=14) which
remained awake. Six hours post-learning (6PM) subjects performed a recognition test. For each recognition trial, subjects made two possible
responses indicating 1) whether the item was old or new (ITEM-memory), and 2) if old, which study list the item came from (CONTEXT-memory). No offline difference in ITEM-memory was found between the two
groups. In contrast, a significant consolidation benefit for CONTEXTmemory occurred following sleep in the Nap group (p=0.04). Furthermore, within the Nap group, the extent of CONTEXT-memory retention
was positively correlated with the amount of stage-2 NREM sleep
(r=0.57, p=0.04). Most interestingly, CONTEXT-memory not only correlated with Stage-2 NREM, but a specific electrophysiological signature of
NREM-sleep spindles, especially in prefrontal regions (r=0.72, p<0.01).
The findings clarify the role of sleep in declarative memory processing,
indicating that sleep preferentially benefits more hippocampal-dependent aspects of episodic representations (contextual details). Moreover,
sleep does not appear to represent a passive time of minimal interference,
but a proactive state modulating episodic memory by way of specific
electrophysiological oscillations.
H52
ANTICIPATORY ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF
VOLUNTARY MEMORY CONTROL Simon Hanslmayr1, Bernhard
Pastötter1, Karl-Heinz Bäuml1; 1Regensburg University — For the proper
functioning of our memory system voluntary control processes are
needed. In everyday life, voluntary suppression of episodic memories is
important to keep our memory free from e.g. outdated information (the
old address of a friend) or emotionally straining events (traumatic experiences). In the laboratory, such voluntary suppression can be studied
using the Think/No-Think paradigm, in which previously learned item
associations are suppressed several times, inducing later forgetting of the
information. The present study investigated whether anticipatory mechanisms mediate such voluntary forgetting. Doing so, the subjects received
a cue whether to prepare to think or not to think of a previously studied
face-word association. This Think/No-Think cue appeared prior to a

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

213

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

memory cue (face) which pointed to a previously studied word. Examining event-related potentials (ERP) we identified an early anticipatory process which was related to the Think/No-Think cue, and a later process
which was related to the memory cue. Both ERP effects were due to a
decreased positivity over anterior and temporal electrode sites, and both
effects predicted later forgetting. In addition, the memory-cue-related
ERP effect could be predicted by the anticipatory ERP effect. The results
demonstrate the existence of anticipatory voluntary memory control processes mediating the forgetting of unwanted memories. We suggest that
the effects reflect the action of top-down driven control processes which
down-regulate the activity in memory-relevant brain areas already prior
to the presentation of a memory cue.
H53
NEURAL INDICES OF CONTENT-DEPENDENT RETRIEVAL
PROCESSING Damian Cruse1, Edward Wilding1; 1CUBRIC, School of
Psychology, Cardiff University, UK — Functional
magnetic
resonance
imaging (fMRI) studies of episodic retrieval have demonstrated patterns
of neural activity that depend upon the kinds of information which are
retrieved. The poor temporal resolution of fMRI data, however, makes it
difficult to determine whether these activations reflect a) recollection of
different kinds of information or b) subsequent processing resulting from
recollection. The high temporal resolution of ERPs allows investigation of
the timing of content-specific retrieval processing, and toward this end
participants studied one of two lists of words. Half studied an equal
number of words shown in pink or yellow. The remainder studied an
equal number of words spoken by a male or female voice. At test, all participants made old/new judgments followed by a source (pink/yellow or
male/female) and confidence (high/low) judgment. The ERPs associated
with high confidence correct source judgments strongly suggest qualitative differences in neural activity depending upon whether colour or
voice information was retrieved. Furthermore, the 800-1100 ms post-stimulus time course of these differences is important, because it follows a
common lateralised posterior positivity (the left-parietal ERP old/new
effect) which is a content-independent index of recollection. As a result,
the content-dependent ERP signature identified here likely reflects processes that are engaged differentially as a consequence of recollection. In
combination with previous ERP findings in which these classes of
retrieval processes either overlapped with or preceded the left-parietal
ERP old/new effect, these data points emphasise that these kinds of
retrieval processing operations operate at multiple loci during memory
retrieval and assessment.
H54
ERP OLD/NEW EFFECTS ELICITED BY FACES THAT ATTRACT
HIGH OR LOW CONFIDENCE MEMORY JUDGMENTS Yee-Ying
Yick1, Edward Wilding1; 1CUBRIC, School of Psychology, Cardiff University,
UK — Event-related potential (ERP) studies of memory retrieval where
faces have been used as stimuli have revealed inconsistent and sometimes contradictory results, notably regarding whether ERPs index two
fundamental memory processes - recollection and familiarity. We investigated the sensitivity of ERPs to these processes using faces as stimuli and
a different retrieval task to those employed previously. In two experiments, participants made old/new memory judgments to faces and rated
their confidence (high/low) in their decisions. In keeping with one
account of the natures of recollection and familiarity, ERP signatures of
recollection were assumed to be indexed by old/new effects that were
evident for high confidence old judgments only. ERP signatures of familiarity were assumed to be indexed by effects that co-varied with recognition confidence for old and for new test faces. The two experiments
differed at encoding only, and old/new discrimination was superior in
the second experiment, due primarily to a larger proportion of high confidence old judgments. There were ERP old/new effects associated with
high confidence old judgments in both experiments, but in neither were
there robust old/new effects associated with low confidence correct judgments to old faces. These data points provide little support for the view

214

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

that ERPs index familiarity associated with faces, although an alternative
interpretation is that the null result reflects the limited degree to which
familiarity is a useful basis for distinguishing between old and new stimuli in these kinds of tasks.
H55
REPETITION PRIMING IN MUSIC: AN ERP STUDY Sean
Hutchins1,2, Caroline Palmer3, Karsten Steinhauer4,5; 1International Laboratory
for Brain, Music, and Sound Research, Université de Montréal, 2Université de
Montréal, Psychology, 3McGill University, Psychology, 4School of
Communication Sciences & Disorders, McGill University, 5Centre for Research
on Language, Mind, & Brain, McGill University — Repetition is very common in the musical domain. Previous experiments have demonstrated
that repetition of musical tones is associated with faster production times
and decreased error rates for those tones (Hutchins & Palmer, 2008).
These effects are similar to repetition priming effects in language. In
addition, event-related potential studies have shown that repetition
priming elicits a postivity that reduces the N400 amplitude (Kutas & Van
Petten, 1994). This study examines whether repetition of musical tones
has an effect on EEGs. Trained musicians heard short sequences of computer-generated music and made delayed judgments as to whether the
timbre of the final tone was different from that of the first four tones. This
final tone (target) was either a pitch repetition of a previous melodic tone
(prime), or was previously unheard. Primes were either adjacent to the
target tones, or were separated by two intervening tones. Melodic tonality was also controlled for. ERPs were collected across 64 scalp sites for
the 1000 ms immediately following the final tone. Repetition yielded both
a late posterior positivity and a small early frontal negativity. In addition,
strong differences were found between neural responses to same and different timbre tones. These results show a distinct neurological effect of
repetition, and provide evidence that repetition priming in music may be
similar to priming in the language domain.
H56
THE
BRIGHTEST
CANDLE:
COGNITIVE
AND
PHARMACOLOGICAL
ADVANTAGES
FOR
YOUNG
E4
CARRIERS Natalie Marchant1, Sarah King1, Naji Tabet2, Jennifer Rusted1;
1University of Sussex, 2Institue of Postgraduate Medicine, Brighton and Sussex
Medical School — The presence of the apolipoprotein (APOE) e4 allele
increases the risk of developing Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) later in life.
Little is known however, about the cognitive consequences of possessing
this allele in earlier years, nor about its interaction with the cholinergic
system (which is compromised in AD). The current study administered 1
mg of the cholinergic agonist nicotine via nasal spray to healthy nonsmoking young adults (aged 18-30) with either e3/e3 or e4+ (at least one
e4 allele) genotype. They were matched on age, sex and IQ, in a placebo
controlled, double blind 2 (drug: placebo, nicotine) x 2 (genotype: e3/e3,
e4+) between subjects design. Cognitive functioning was investigated
with a test of prospective memory (PM). PM, which requires the interruption of an ongoing activity to retrieve and act upon a previously-formed
intention, incorporates both memory and attentional components, is
impaired in early AD patients and is facilitated by nicotine. Sustained
attention, verbal fluency and episodic recall were also measured. Paradoxically, e4+ participants outperformed e3 participants on all placebo
measures of cognitive performance. In addition, this genotype advantage
was potentiated by nicotine on all measures of PM performance. These
results confirm the suggestion that the e4 allele confers a cognitive
advantage in younger adulthood before producing detrimental consequences in later life. Moreover, these results are the first to demonstrate
that young adults carrying an e4 allele show an enhanced response to nicotinic receptor stimulation.
H57
RETRIEVAL INFLUENCES ON THE ENCODING OF NEW
MATERIAL Stacey Danckert1, Colin MacLeod1, Myra Fernandes1; 1The
University of Waterloo — Based on a procedural account of memory,
retrieval involves concurrent encoding of new information (Kolers &

Poster Session H

Roediger, 1984). Yet, few studies have considered how new information
is processed during retrieval. In the context of a recognition memory test,
Jacoby and colleagues (2005) showed that when new wordsóthe foils on
the recognition testówere presented among 'old' words that had been
deeply encoded during prior study, they were subsequently better recognized than were foils presented among ’old’ words that had been shallowly encoded. In Experiment 1 of the current study, we replicated this
"memory-for-foils" effect. In Experiment 2, we showed that the effect was
not simply a consequence of strength differences created during encoding. In Experiment 3, we contrasted pictorial to non-pictorial imagery and
demonstrated that the effect is robust enough to occur under a different
encoding state. In Experiment 4, we examined the quality of memory for
foils, demonstrating that the effect was based primarily on recollection
and not on familiarity. Overall, we provide support for the source-constrained retrieval hypothesis of Jacoby et al. (2005): During attempts at
recognition, subjects may re-enter the initial encoding state, which in turn
influences encoding of new items. In a broader sense, we show that new
information can be significantly influenced by how surrounding items
are encoded and retrieved. Future studies will use functional neuroimaging to provide a deeper understanding of the neural processes underlying the memory-for-foils effect.
H58
NEURAL AND BEHAVIORAL MARKERS OF INCORPORATING
RECOMMENDATIONS INTO RECOGNITION JUDGMENTS Akira
OConnor'1, Ian Dobbins1; 1Washington University, Psychology, St. Louis —
Outside the laboratory individuals often make use of extra-mnemonic
information when evaluating their own memories. Although the neural
systems that directly support episodic retrieval are heavily studied, those
enabling observers to incorporate extra-mnemonic information into
memory assessments are unknown. Using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) we investigated this inferential skill, specifically examining the ability of observers to optimally incorporate
external recommendations into recognition judgments. Participants
underwent recognition memory scans in which a previously validated
computer recommendations ("likely old" or "unlikely old") preceded each
recognition probe item, and they were free to use or ignore each recommendation when rating each subsequently appearing memory probe.
Behavioral measures suggested considerable individual variability in the
ability or willingness to effectively incorporate the recommendations into
memory judgments, and fMRI data suggested this ability relies upon prefrontal cortex (PFC). Whereas dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC)
regions were sensitive to the validity of the recommendation, anterior
PFC regions were sensitive to the direction of recommendation. These
findings suggest dissociable roles across regions that are often jointly
implicated during episodic recognition research.
H59
THE EFFECT OF SLEEP AND TASK-RELATED COGNITION ON
EGOCENTRIC
AND
ALLOCENTRIC
SPATIAL
MEMORY
PERFORMANCE Erin Wamsley2,1, Joseph Benavides1, Robert Stickgold2,1;
1
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 2Harvard Medical School —
Several
studies now demonstrate that post-training sleep is beneficial for the
retention of hippocampus-dependent memory following encoding.
However, the most fundamental role of the sleeping brain may not be to
"enhance" memory performance, but to facilitate the systems-level reorganization of memory traces across time. Here, we examined the effects
of post-training NREM sleep on qualitative aspects of spatial memory.
Participants (n=39) were trained on a 3D-style virtual maze task at
12:30pm. Following training, subjects either immediately lay down to
begin a 1.5 hr nap opportunity (n=18), or else remained awake (n=21). At
retest (5:30pm), participants completed recognition tests from an Egocentric Perspective (1st person view) and Allocentric Perspective (overhead
map view), regarding critical decision points in the maze. Each participant was also classified as having an egocentric or allocentric spatial representation preference, using the "Tunnel Task" of Gramann et al (JEP,
2005). Rather than exerting a particular effect on egocentric vs. allocen-

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

tric test performance, sleep was selectively beneficial for the test format
which matched participants’ spatial representation preference (sleep x
preference interaction: p=.04). Furthermore, the overall effect of sleep on
maze completion times was dependent on whether participants reported
mentation (thoughts, feelings, dreams) related to the maze task between
learning and retest (sleep enhanced performance only when related cognition was reported: p=.006). These observations suggest that the process
of sleep-dependent memory consolidation is contingent upon the specific
manner in which a task in encoded, and is correlated with task-related
cognition during the retention interval.
H60
EMOTION AIDS ATTENTIONAL PROCESSES IN BINDING
SOURCE AND ITEM INFORMATION IN OLDER ADULTS: A
BRAIN FMRI STUDY Amanda Kutz1, Paul Newhouse1, Julie Dumas1;
1University of Vermont, Psychiatry — This study examined the effect of
emotion on source memory, item memory, and related brain activation in
older and younger adults. Source memory has been consistently found to
decline with age, while the effect of aging on memory for emotional stimuli has been inconsistent. Emotional information has also been shown to
interrupt binding processes between source and item information.
Importantly, binding processes are also thought to be impaired in aging.
Using event-related fMRI, 12 younger (ages 18-30) and 12 older adults
(ages 60 and older) viewed emotional (positive and negative) and neutral
words during an incidental encoding task. Each word appeared in a
frame that was either red or blue. Recognition memory was tested after
the scanning session and measures of subsequent memory were used to
examine brain regions activated during encoding for words that were
correctly recognized. Age differences in memory were only found for
source memory for neutral items. No age differences were found for
source memory for emotional words or any of the item memory measures. The activation data showed that older adults had greater activation in right frontal regions for both item and source memory when
encoding emotional information. When examining source memory for
negative information, older adults also had greater activation in right
parahippocampal regions compared to younger adults. These data
showed that emotional information did not impair item and source binding for older adults. Compensatory activation of right frontal regions
may aid in attentional processing of emotional information for older
adults.
H61
SUPPRESSING UNWANTED VISUAL MEMORIES BY EXECUTIVE
CONTROL Ean Huddleston1, Emily Peterson2, Michael Anderson1;
1University of St. Andrews, 2University of Oregon — Recent neuroimaging
work using the Think/No-Think (TNT) paradigm has shown that when
people suppress retrieval of unwanted memories, hippocampal activation is reduced. It remains unclear, however, whether retrieval suppression also modulates regions of neocortex supporting the representation of
the memory itself. To examine this issue, we developed a modified TNT
paradigm wherein people attempt to suppress the retrieval of faces and
scenes. Faces and scenes are ideal stimuli in that the cortical bases for
processing these types of stimuli are well documented, providing specific
brain regions in which to search for evidence of neocortical suppressionóthe fusiform face area for faces, and parahippocampal place area for
scenes. Here we report a behavioral experiment using these stimuli.
During the learning phase, participants studied word-picture pairs.
Then, during the Think/No-Think phase, participants were shown the
cue words for numerous word-picture pairs. For some words, participants were instructed to think of the associated picture, and for other
words, participants were instructed to not think of the associated picture.
Results showed impaired memory for those pictures participants tried to
suppress, compared to pictures from baseline pairs, extending retrieval
suppression effects to memories of faces and scenes. This paradigm validates a procedure that can be used to target neocortical contributions to
retrieval suppression using fMRI.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

215

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Poster Session H

H62
FUNCTION AND ACTION KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATIONS IN
LEFT MIDDLE TEMPORAL GYRUS Michael
Souza1,2,
Espen
2,3
2
2
Helskog , Pedro Paz-Alonso , Carter Wendelken , Silvia Bunge1,2; 1UC
Berkeley, Psychology, 2Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, UC Berkeley,
3
University of Oslo, Psychology, Norway — Accessing and utilizing actionrelevant knowledge about manipulable objects is an important aspect of
human behavior. Left posterior middle temporal gyrus (pMTG) activation is frequently observed in neuroimaging studies employing manipulable objects (Johnson-Frey, 2004; Lewis, 2006). However, it is unclear
whether left pMTG represents knowledge regarding how objects can be
used, or whether this region more generally represents knowledge about
actions and functions associated with a stimulus. To address this question, we conducted an initial functional MRI study specifically designed
to test the hypothesis that left pMTG represents functional semantics for
manipulable objects (N=13). We asked participants to view manipulable
objects and to (1) consider the object’s primary use (Function), (2)
rehearse the most prominent color in the object (Repeat), (3) imagine
using the object (Imagery), or (4) mentally rotate the object (Rotate). Activation in left pMTG was solely driven by the Function condition, consistent with a role in functional semantics. However, it could be argued that
differences in difficulty between conditions drove this effect. To address
this possibility, participants in Experiment 2 are asked to consider (1) the
object’s primary use (Function), (2) how one’s body moves when using
the object (Action), or (3) the physical properties of the object (Appearance). We predict that left pMTG activation will again be driven by Function, even though participants report that Function is less difficult than
Appearance. Thus far, our data suggest that action-relevant knowledge is
housed in the posterior temporal lobes, just anterior to area V5, which
processes biological motion.

H64
THE GENERATION OF PICTURES CAN BENEFIT BOTH ITEM
AND SOURCE MEMORY Zachary Rosner1,2, Kaiping Peng1,2, Arthur
Shimamura1; 1University of California, Psychology, Berkeley, 2Peking
University, Psychology, China — Previous research has demonstrated that
generating responses such as rhymes, antonyms, or semantic associates
to stimuli during encoding facilitates memory for items as compared to
passively reading the same information (Slamecka & Graf, 1978). However, this generation effect has been found to impair memory for source
information such as stimuli color or font (Mulligan, Lozito & Rosner,
2006). Still, generation effects on less object-oriented features of source
memory remain controversial, as Marsh (2006) manipulated procedural
aspects to find both positive and null generation effects for location memory. Two contrasting accounts for the positive and negative effects of generation on item and source memory are item-context tradeoff, which
argues that active generation forces one to attend to a target item at the
expense of forming contextual associations, and transfer-appropriate processing, which claims that item recognition benefits from more conceptual processing during generation, while source memory benefits from
more perceptual processing during passive learning. In this study, a picture fragment completion task was used in a series of three experiments
in which source was manipulated for object color, object location, and
background color. While generation improved item recognition universally, it improved object color memory, had no effect on object location
memory, and slightly (non-significantly) impaired background color
memory. These findings suggest that impaired source memory is not a
necessary consequence of enhanced item memory, which directly disputes the item-context tradeoff account. Rather, picture fragment completion likely increases conceptual processing and differentially affects
perceptual processing of distinct aspects of an item’s features.

H63
HOW SLOW CAN YOU GO? UNIQUE FMRI CORRELATIONS
WITH EEG ACTIVITY BELOW 0.1 HZ DURING SLEEP Dante
Picchioni1, Silvina Horovitz2, Masaki Fukunaga2, Walter Carr3, Thomas
Balkin1, Jeff Duyn2, Allen Braun2; 1Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,
2National Institutes of Health, 3Naval Medical Research Center — Activity in
slow EEG bands during sleep is associated with the restorative aspects of
sleep. There is a growing interest in activity below 0.1 Hz, which may
mediate these restorative effects and the putative cortical plasticity associated with sleep-dependent learning. Assessing the fMRI correlates of
the fluctuations in spectral power in this EEG band can provide information on the neural correlates of these restorative processes. We sought to
determine the unique fMRI correlates of activity in the 0.05-0.099 band, as
differentiated from activity in the 0.66-0.99 and 1.0-3.9 bands. Each band
was modeled separately and the three sets of correlations were subjected
to a conjunction analysis. The relative uniqueness of each band was
assessed by comparing the percentage of voxels in the conjunction category where there was a significant correlation for the band in question
and a non-significant correlation for the other two bands. The category
for the 0.05-0.099 band contained the largest percentage. The significant
positive correlations for unique activity in the 0.05-0.099 band were
mostly in sub-cortical areas (medial thalamus, hypothalamus, hippocampus) while negative correlations were mostly in neocortical areas that
represent the default-mode network. These data suggest that EEG activity below 0.1 Hz plays the most prominent role in sleep-dependent processes compared to other slow bands. Correlations in the thalamus could
be related to the generation of this activity. Correlations in the hippocampus and neocortical areas (including nodes in the default-mode network)
could reflect interactions between these brain systems that subserves a
process of selective cortical plasticity.

H65
EFFECTS OF MULTIPLE SOURCE CHARACTERISTICS ON WORD
AND SPEAKER RECOGNITION: AN ERP STUDY Sandra
Campeanu1,2, Claude Alain1,2, Fergus Craik1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute,
Baycrest Centre, Toronto, Canada, 2University of Toronto, Psychology, St.
George Campus, Canada — Context reinstatement has been shown to facilitate word and source recognition. In an auditory ERP experiment, participants performed both recognition tasks with words spoken in four
voices. Two voice parameters varied between speakers, with the possibility that none, one or two of these parameters was congruent between
study and test. Results indicate that reinstating the study voice at test
facilitates both word and speaker memory, compared with no benefit
when only one voice parameter is similar. This implies that voices are
encoded as acoustic patterns rather than as the sum of their vocal
attributes. ERPs revealed, in addition to three expected memory-related
modulations, a pre-recollection positivity associated with this reinstatement benefit in both tests. This positivity, likely reflecting acoustic recognition, occurred at 400ms over parietal regions in the word test and
started as early as 120ms and 175ms over right frontal and right temporal
areas, respectively, in the speaker test.

216

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

H66
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SUCCESSFUL MEMORY ENCODING
ARE INFLUENCED BY SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITIES OF FUTURE
RECOGNITION:
EVIDENCE
FROM
EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS Ida-Maria Skavhaug1, Edward L. Wilding2, David I.
Donaldson1; 1University of Stirling, 2Cardiff University — The neural correlates of successful memory encoding differ depending on the nature of
the task performed at study (Otten and Rugg, 2001). We investigated the
influence of Judgments of Learning (JOLs - subjective judgments of the
likelihood of remembering studied material on a later test) on the neural
correlates of successful memory encoding using Event-Related Potentials
(ERPs). In Experiment One, participants saw word pairs and made a JOL
for each pair. In Experiment Two, participants completed the same task,
but were instructed to simply press a button to initiate the next trial,

Poster Session H

rather than to make a JOL. In both experiments memory for the pairs was
assessed on subsequent old/new recognition memory tasks. Discrimination was higher in Experiment One than in Experiment Two. Moreover,
there were different ERP correlates of successful encoding in the two
experiments: Experiment One produced a relatively early (550-1000ms)
onsetting ERP effect with a focus at parietal electrodes, whereas the
effects in Experiment Two onset later and lasted longer (1000-2000ms)
with a focus at frontal electrodes. One explanation for the changing pattern of memory encoding ERP effects is that it reflects nothing more than
poorer discrimination in Experiment Two. This is unlikely, however,
because the differences across task remain for a subset of participants for
whom discrimination is comparable in the two experiments. The ERP
findings therefore provide evidence for the existence of JOL-specific neural correlates of subsequent memory.
H67
EXAMINING RECOGNITION MEMORY PROCESSES USING A
SLOW-REVEAL PARADIGM: A RESPONSE-LOCKED EVENTRELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Catherine A. MacLeod1, Mark E.
Wheeler2, David I. Donaldson1; 1University of Stirling, 2University of
Pittsburgh — Dual-process models propose that two independent
retrieval processes support recognition memory; familiarity and recollection. Using stimulus-locked averaging, Event-Related Potential (ERP)
studies of recognition memory have identified a set of old/new effects,
including putative correlates of familiarity (the 300-500msec mid-frontal
effect) and recollection (the 500-800msec left-parietal effect). ERPs reveal
a close temporal relationship between these effects, with the potential for
overlap between the termination of activity associated with familiarity
and the onset of that associated with recollection. Moreover, despite
extensive investigation, relatively little is known about their causal role in
making recognition decisions. In an attempt to investigate the functional
significance of the ERP effects we examined old/new effects using
response-locked averaging during a recognition memory test for pictures
- considering neural activity leading up to the recognition response. Furthermore, to reduce the temporal proximity between retrieval processes
(and hence allow for better differentiation between them) we introduced
a slow-reveal paradigm, whereby stimuli were gradually uncovered at
test over a 5 second period. The response-locked ERPs showed an old/
new effect in the 400msec preceding the response; this effect was maximal over fronto-central electrodes and resembles the traditional stimuluslocked activity associated with familiarity. Intriguingly, despite good
behavioural performance and the use of pictures as stimuli, ERP activity
typically associated with recollection was not apparent; suggesting perhaps that the slow-reveal paradigm encourages retrieval based solely on
familiarity. Regardless, the results highlight the utility of response-locking procedures, and suggest a contributory role for the mid-frontal old/
new effect in making recognition memory decisions.
H68
DIRECTED FORGETTING OF NEGATIVE AND NEUTRAL
PICTURES - AN EEG STUDY Anne Hauswald1, Johanna Kissler1;
1
University of Konstanz — People are able to intentionally segregate and
differentially rehearse or inhibit elements in episodic memory, resulting
in reduced retrieval of irrelevant elements. So far, it is largely unclear,
whether this ability extends to emotional memories. The present study
investigated behavioral and electrophysiological mechanisms of intentional forgetting of neutral and negatively arousing complex pictures
using the item method variant of directed forgetting. Event-related
potentials (ERPs) were recorded as participants viewed series of neutral
and negative complex colored pictures, each followed by a cue designating the previous picture as ’to-be-remembered’ or ’to-be-forgotten’.
Results from a subsequent forced choice recognition memory task using
the ’remember-know’ procedure indicated that directed forgetting
occurred for neutral, but not for negative pictures. Moreover, both
directed forgetting and emotion affected the recollection, but not the
familiarity component of recognition memory. ERPs revealed three dis-

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

tinct effects: First, a parietal positivity between 450 and 700 ms after picture on-set was more pronounced for negative than for neutral pictures.
Second, regardless of the content of the preceding picture ’remember’,
but not ’forget’ cues were associated with a larger parietal positivity
between 400 and 500 ms after cue on-set. Third, an enhanced frontal positivity between 450 and 700 ms after cue on-set appeared selectively for
’forget’ cues following neutral pictures. The results indicate that negative
pictures are exempt from directed forgetting and suggest that processes
of selective rehearsal (parietal positivities) as well as additional frontal
mechanisms, possibly indicative of inhibitory processes contribute to successful directed forgetting of neutral pictures.
H69
A RIGHT HEMISPHERE ADVANTAGE IN FACE PROCESSING
MODULATES HEMISPHERIC ASYMMETRIES IN FACE PRIMING:
BEHAVIOURAL AND FMRI EVIDENCE Elias Mouchlianitis1, Rik
Henson1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit — Our previous studies
on repetition priming of faces (Mouchlianitis & Henson, EPS January
2008) found larger left-hemisphere (LH) effects, when primes were central and probes lateralised. Contrary, Bourne & Hole (2006, Experiment 1)
presented lateralised primes and central probes and found a right-hemisphere (RH) priming advantage. We postulated that RH encoding is critical for inducing facilitation in repetition priming, but when probes are
lateralised LH priming is larger due to lower baselines in the RH, that
suppress priming. Experiment 1 used long lag familiar face priming with
two sessions, one with lateralised probes, and one with central probes.
Results showed that the prime/probe location indeed modulates priming
effects, with more LH priming for lateralised probes, and RH priming for
central probes. In Experiments 2 and 3 we used short-lag priming with
both primes and probes being lateralised, and sessions with 120ms and
80ms to control for baseline differences. Results showed that reliable
priming was only found in the RH-prime/LH-probe condition, for both
presentation times. In Experiment 4, fMRI was used with a similar paradigm, with the inclusion of houses as control stimuli. Results showed a
main effect of the right FFA, which, however, did not interact with neither priming or visual field (possibly due to low temporal resolution of
fMRI). . These results indicate that there is a RH advantage in early face
processing stages that possibly modulates hemispheric differences in face
priming.
H70
NEUROPLASTICITY-BASED COGNITIVE TRAINING IMPROVES
SELF-REFERENTIAL
PROCESSING
IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA
PATIENTS: BEHAVIORAL AND FMRI ASSESSMENTS Karuna
Subramaniam1, Tracy Luks1, Stephanie Aldebot1, Adelaide Hearst1, Arul
Thangavel1, Melissa Fisher1, Coleman Garrett1, Gregory V. Simpson1,
Srikantan Nagarajan1, Sophia Vinogradov1; 1UCSF — Prior research indicates that schizophrenia patients are impaired at identifying themselves
as the source of self-generated information and show decreased activation within the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (dMPFC) compared to
healthy controls (HCs) during this task. Here, we investigate whether
this deficit is amenable to a behavioral intervention. Twenty-four patients
and 12 HCs underwent an fMRI self-referential source-memory task at
baseline. Twelve patients were then randomly assigned to 16 weeks of
computerized targeted cognitive training (TCT) focusing on auditory and
visual processing, affect recognition, and mentalizing tasks, while the
remaining 12 patients played computer games (CGs). All subjects
repeated the fMRI task after 16 weeks. In this task, before scanning, subjects are presented with semantically constrained sentences where the
final word is either experimenter-supplied or left blank for subjects to fill
in themselves. During scanning, subjects are presented with these words,
and decide whether they were experimenter-presented or self-generated.
BOLD fMRI was measured on a 3T-GE scanner. Whole-brain analyses
focused on regions showing greater activation for correctly remembered
self-generated versus externally-presented items (self-referential effect).
At baseline, HCs showed dMPFC activity, while patients showed bilat-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

217

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

eral frontal deactivation. After behavioral intervention, compared to
baseline, CGs showed increased activation in bilateral occipital gyri,
while TCTs showed increased activation in dMPFC. These fMRI results
indicate a possible "restorative" effect of training in schizophrenia
patients, not observed in control group patients, whereby behavioral and
neural activation patterns during self-referential processing are "normalized."
H71
SLEEP AND STIMULUS REWARD VALUE BENEFIT VISUAL
DECLARATIVE MEMORY Matthew Tucker1, Robert Stickgold1,2; 1Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 2Harvard University — Research examining the benefits of sleep for declarative memory performance has never
addressed the influence of motivational factors on this relationship. The
current study (N=173 Harvard undergraduate students) examined differences in performance on a visual paired associates task (picture pairs)
after 12hr and 24hr intervals, and when performance was rewarded ($1
for every correct answer at retest) or unrewarded (flat fee for participation). All groups performed similarly on a cued recall test at training,
recalling 21.9 picture pairs out of 30. Following a 12hr interval, wake subjects that were unrewarded performed the worst, while sleep subjects
that were rewarded performed the best, actually recalling more picture
pairs than at training. The overall benefit of reward was significant (main
effect, p=.01), while the effect of sleep was profound (main effect,
p<.000001). Interestingly, at the 24hr time point performance in all
groups converged such that there were no between-groups differences in
performance. The effect of sleep (p<.01), but not reward (p=.16),
remained significant, indicating that sleep, regardless of when it occurs
over a 24hr interval, benefits performance compared to equivalent intervals filled with wakefulness. The magnitude of the effect of sleep on
visual declarative memory observed in this study appears to be more
pronounced than in studies that have used more traditional verbal memory tasks (word pairs).
H72
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN PROCESSING SPEED AND
RESTING STATE NEURAL ACTIVITY Rajasekhar
Byrapureddy1,3,
Michel Motes1,2,3, Bart Rypma1,2,3; 1School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
University of Texas at Dallas, 2University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Psychiatry, 3Center for Brain Health, University of Texas at Dallas —
Individual differences in processing speed appears to account for individual differences in cognitive task performance. Previous work from our
lab suggests relationships between regional connectivity and processing
speed. Baseline resting-state brain activity has been suggested to explain
activation decreases in certain brain areas during cognitive task performance but relationships between resting-state activity and cognitive performance are not well understood. In this study, we assessed
relationships between individual differences in processing speed and
resting state activity. Subjects performed a computerized Digit-Symbol
Substitution Test (DSST) and a resting task with eyes closed during fMRI
scanning. Subjects were divided into faster and slower performers based
on reaction times obtained on the DSST task. Preliminary results indicate
differences in resting state correlation maps and Granger connectivity
maps, and between faster and slower performers.

Perceptual processes: Low-level vision
H73
LONGITUDINAL EVALUATION OF VISION FUNCTION IN
CHILDREN WITH CORTICAL VISUAL IMPAIRMENT Tonya
Watson1, Deborah Orel-Bixler1, Gunilla Haegerstrom-Portnoy1; 1University of
California, Berkeley — PURPOSE: Cortical visual impairment (CVI) is
bilateral visual impairment caused by damage to the posterior visual
pathway (optic radiations, visual cortex, or both). Current literature
reports great variability in the prognosis of CVI. The purpose of this

218

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

study was to evaluate change in vision function in patients with CVI
using a quantitative assessment method. METHODS: Visual acuity and
contrast sensitivity was assessed using the sweep VEP. 39 children participated in the visual acuity assessment and 34 of the 39 children participated in the contrast threshold assessment. At the time of the first VEP,
the children ranged in age from 1 to 16 years (mean: 5.0 years). The time
between measures ranged from 0.6 to 13.7 years (mean: 6.5 years).
RESULTS: 49% of the children studied showed significant improvement
of visual acuity. The average improvement was 0.43 log unit (20/205 to
20/76) in those who improved. The initial visual acuity was worse in
those who improved compared to those who did not improve (p<0.001).
47% of the children studied showed significant improvement of contrast
threshold. In those who improved, the average amount of improvement
was 0.57 log unit (10% to 2.6% Michelson). The initial contrast threshold
was significantly worse in those who improved (p=0.001). Also, the
change in contrast threshold was related to age of the child (p=0.017).
CONCLUSIONS: Significant improvement in vision can occur over time
in some children with CVI. Further investigation is warranted to better
understand the prognosis for visual recovery in children with CVI.
H74
VISUAL GIST OF NATURAL SCENES DERIVED FROM IMAGE
STATISTICS PARAMETERS H.Steven Scholte1, Sennay Ghebreab2,
Arnold Smeulders2, Victor Lamme1; 1University of Amsterdam, Psychology,
2Intelligent Systems Lab, University of Amsterdam — Natural images are
highly structured in their spatial configuration. In the past it has been
shown that the contrast distribution of natural images is almost always
adequately described by a Weibull type distribution (Geuseboek &
Smeulders, 2003) in which 2 free parameters are fitted. We have recently
shown that these parameters explain up to 50% of the variance in the
early ERP and these parameters correlate 0.84 and 0.93 with the modeled
output of X and Y cells of the LGN (Scholte et al., submitted). Here we
will present BOLD-MRI data that show that beta and gamma also explain
single trial activity in the occipital and temporal cortex and the parietal
cortex respectively. Also, the beta and gamma parameters seem to order
the natural images along the dimensions of the number of objects that are
present in the scene and depth organization of the scene. We will test this
hypothesis by estimating beta and gamma for artificial stimuli with a predetermined number of objects and depth organization, and by evaluating
brain responses to such stimuli. Our results indicate that the summary
statistics of the Weibull distribution (beta and gamma) may be used by
the brain to efficiently and very rapidly extract information about the
visual gist of natural scenes.
H75
THE EARLY VISUAL SYSTEM SELECTIVELY POOLS FROM
SCALE-TUNED NEURONS TO IDENTIFY DISTINCTIVE EDGES
AT ALL NATURAL SCALES Sennay Ghebreab1, Steven Scholte2, Victor
Lamme2, Arnold Smeulders1; 1University of Amsterdam, Informatics Institute,
2University of Amsterdam, Psychology — Natural images contain edges
over a broad range of spatial scales. It has been shown that the power
spectra of natural images fall with increasing spatial frequency and that
visual neurons are well matched to this property: visual neurons have
roughly equal power in any given frequency bandwidth (Field, 1997). We
hypothesized that if the visual system evolved to process edges at multiple spatial scales with equal probability, then it must be using a scale
pooling mechanism reflecting this. We tested two well-known scale
pooling mechanisms: the neuron with strongest response determines the
post synaptic response (Riesenhuber & Poggio, 1999), and the smallest
neuron with reliable response defines post-synaptics (Elder & Zucker,
1998). Here, we show that only minimum reliable scale selection leads to
constant power over spatial scales. In addition, we show that the distribution of edges at minimum reliable scales has Weibull properties
strongly correlating with early brain activity: the two Weibull distribution parameters, beta and gamma, explain 67% and 58% respectively of
the variation in ERP. In contrast, beta and gamma estimations from dis-

Poster Session H

tributions of maximum edge responses explain 64% and only 41%
respectively. In other work we have shown that beta and gamma correlate 93% and 84% with modeled output of small X and large Y cells of the
LGN (Scholte et al., submitted). These results taken together suggest that
the early visual system uses a mechanism like minimum reliable scale
selection to process all distinctive image structures, from fine (beta) to
course (gamma) scale.
H76
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF LOW LEVEL
VISUAL PERCEPTION IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS
Hwan Cui Koh1, Elizabeth Milne1, Olivier Pascalis1; 1University of Sheffield,
UK — Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) have shown
greater sensitivity for orientation of ’simple’ stimuli, but poorer sensitivity for orientation of more ’complex’ stimuli, than typically developing
(TD) individuals (Bertone et al, 2005). According to the authors of this
work, ’simple’ stimuli are processed pre-dominantly in primary visual
cortex, whereas perception of more ’complex’ stimuli requires engagement of extra-striate cortex. This study investigates electrophysiological
correlates of perceiving visual stimuli of varying complexity. EEG was
recorded from 11 ASD children/adolescents (mean age=130months,
mean FSIQ=107) and 11 TD children/adolescents (mean age=133months,
mean FSIQ=109), while they passively viewed ’simple’ stimuli i.e. parallel 1st order gratings, and more ’complex’ stimuli i.e. parallel 2nd order,
and hyperbolic 1st and 2nd order gratings. ERP analysis focused on P100,
a positive peak occurring 100-200ms post stimulus-onset. P100 amplitudes were larger in the ASD group than in the TD group (F(1,20)=6.536,
p=0.019). ICA analysis investigated gamma power (35-40Hz). One cluster
of components showed gamma power to peak sooner (before 114ms post
stimulus-onset) in the ASD group, than in the TD group (F(4,148)=10.8,
p<0.001). A second cluster showed gamma power was higher to ’simple’
gratings than ’complex’ gratings in the ASD group, but not in the TD
group (F(1,21)=9.1, p=0.007). Furthermore, gamma power was higher in
the ASD group than TD group for parallel 1st order gratings
(t(df=21)=2.10, p=0.048), but lower for parallel 2nd order gratings
(t(df=21)=2.63, p=0.016). Results from this cluster provide electrophysiological support for differential processing of 1st and 2nd order gratings in
individuals with ASD.
H77
PEELING PLAIDS APART: CONTEXT COUNTERACTS CROSSORIENTATION CONTRAST MASKING Elliot
Freeman1,
Preeti
Verghese2; 1Brunel University, Uxbridge, UK, 2Smith Kettlewell Eye Research
Institute, San Francisco — Contrast discrimination for an image is usually
harder if another is superimposed on top. We asked whether such contrast masking may be enhanced or relieved depending on cues respectively promoting integration of both images as a single pattern, versus
segmentation into two independent patterns. We measured contrast discrimination thresholds for a foveal grating masked by a superimposed
orthogonally-oriented grating. For drifting gratings, contrast discrimination thresholds were sharply elevated for equal-diameter components,
but doubling mask diameter returned thresholds to baseline levels. Both
such masking and ’unmasking’ effects were much weaker for static stimuli. Our results are consistent with common-fate motion reinforcing perception of a single coherent plaid pattern, while the extended surround
helps to identify each component independently, thus peeling the plaid
apart again. These results challenge current models of early vision, suggesting that higher-level surface organization influences contrast encoding, determining whether the contrast of a probed grating may be
recovered independently from that of its mask.
H78
INTERMEDIATE LEVELS OF UNCOORDINATED GAMMA-BAND
ACTIVITY FACILITATE BEHAVIORAL REPONSES TO SIMPLE
VISUAL STIMULI Lauren Emberson1,2, Keiichi Kitajo3, Lawrence Ward4;
1Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical School of
Cornell University, 2Cornell University, Psychology, 3Lab for Dynamics of

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Emergent Intelligence, RIKEN Brain Sciences Institute, 4University of British
Columbia, Psychology — Activity in the brain is ongoing and dynamic. In
most experimental paradigms, neural activity can be characterized in two
ways: the large-scale coordinated response to a stimulus presented in isolation and the relatively ’quiet’, uncoordinated activity in-between. As a
field, we almost exclusively study the former by relating levels and patterns of coordinated post-stimulus activity to behavior. By contrast, the
current study relates uncoordinated activity in gamma-band in EEG
recordings prior to stimulus onset to the resulting behavioral response.
We examined pre-stimulus gamma-band activity (30-to-50Hz) for two
reasons: first, pre-stimulus gamma is truly uncoordinated activity having
no spectral peaks (coordinated neural activity at a particular frequency)
and incoherent phase. Second, previous research provides evidence that
differences in reaction time in the current task are related to post-stimulus gamma-band activity. Thus, we relate the effect of uncoordinated
activity present at stimulus onset and the coordinated activity evoked in
the same frequency band after stimulus presentation. After determining
each participant’s threshold for detecting a change of luminance, experimental stimuli (presented just above threshold) were held constant. The
task was carefully designed to prevent anticipation effects by thwarting
temporal prediction of the stimulus. Even though, participants were
unable to predict stimulus onset, we find that power in the gamma-band
for one second prior to stimulus presentation significantly and non-linearly predicts to reaction time. Thus, we assert that an intermediate
amount of pre-stimulus gamma-band activity facilitates the coordinated
responses evoked by stimulus onset. These results provide evidence that
ongoing uncoordinated activity is behaviorally-relevant.
H79
INTERACTION EFFECTS OF HUE AND SPATIAL FREQUENCY
ON PERCEIVED EQUILUMINANCE Alissa Winkler1, Charles Chubb1,
Charles E. Wright1; 1University of California, Irvine, Cognitive Sciences —
INTRO: We document dramatic, between-observer differences in the
interaction effects of hue and spatial frequency (SF) on equiluminance
settings derived from the minimum motion method. METHOD: We estimate equiluminant settings separately for a saturated red and green to a
fixed neutral gray within annular square-wave grating stimulus. Estimations for each color condition are also made in 5 "low-SF" and 10 "highSF" cycles/deg. visual angle displays. RESULTS: Observers fall on a continuum between two extreme data patterns: in one extreme, when the
stimulus is low-SF, a green needs to be made much lower in photometric
luminance (L) to be perceived as equiluminant to gray than when the
stimulus is high-SF (LLow-LHigh=-diff). In the other extreme, the reverse
pattern holds: the equiluminant green settings for low-SF stimuli have
higher L than for high-SF stimuli (LLow-LHigh=+diff). Most strikingly,
whichever pattern an observer produces for green, is likely to reverse for
red: e.g., an observer producing a -diff for green tends to produce a +diff
for red, though the magnitudes are similar. A slight high-SF bias makes
observers toward the distribution’s center produce two small +diffs. The
results for all observers (N=20) fall on a linear locus between these
extremes (r=-.9, p<.0001). CONCLUSION: We speculate that the interaction between hue and spatial frequency may reflect an observer’s l:m
cone ratio. The variation across observers may then reflect difference in
this ratio. If this speculation is confirmed, the tests we have developed
could provide a simple, psychophysical method of estimating l:m cone
ratios.
H80
SPATIAL ATTENTION LIMITS THE SPEED OF BINOCULAR
RIVALRY Chris Paffen1, Ignace Hooge1; 1Experimental Psychology &
Helmholtz Institute, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands — When
the eyes are presented with images containing interocular conflict, an
observer typically reports perceiving only one of the images at a time.
This phenomenon is called binocular rivalry. During binocular rivalry,
the percept continuously alternates between each of the images. Paffen
and Alais (2006) recently showed that drawing away attention from rival

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

219

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

images by means of a secondary task reduced the number of alternations
reported. Their finding suggests that the number of alternations is highest when attention is fully available for reporting them. Based on this, we
hypothesized that increasing the number of rival targets does not
increase the number of alternations. If attention plays no role in tracking
alternations of multiple targets, increasing the number targets will
increase the number of alternations. A display contained 1, 2 or 3 rival
targets. Targets were placed in a circular arrangement around the fixation
point, and consisted of Gabors with orthogonal orientations for the two
eyes. Observers were instructed to press a button whenever a perceptual
alternation was perceived. The number of alternations reported increased
only slightly with increasing number of rival targets. Control experiments ruled out the possibility that an inability to report alternations
occurring at high frequency was responsible for the small increase in the
number of alternations. The results suggest that attention plays an important role in the speed at which alternations occur. When spatial attention
needs to be distributed over multiple targets, fewer alternations per target occur.
H81
LEFT VERSUS RIGHT VISUAL FIELD ASYMMETRY IN TEXTURE
DENSITY JUDGMENTS Jennifer Corbett1, Jason Fischer1, Thomas Harp1,
David Whitney1; 1Center for Mind and Brain & Psychology at UC Davis —
Performance in a texture discrimination task is impaired in central versus
parafoveal areas, due to the increased resolution of foveal vision (a Central Performance Drop, CPD; Kehrer, 1987). Here we examined whether
texture discrimination is subject to performance asymmetries not attributable to such differences in resolution. Specifically, we investigated
whether texture discrimination differs between the left and right visual
fields, both of which contain information from each. Observers determined the number of dots in a texture display presented in the upper
right, upper left, lower right, or lower left quadrant of the visual field.
Judgments of texture density were superior in the left versus right visual
field, but similar across the upper and lower visual fields. This asymmetry suggests that each hemisphere may contribute independently to the
perception of texture.

Perceptual processes: Multisensory
processing
H82
VIEW-INDEPENDENCE
OF
VISUO-HAPTIC
OBJECT
REPRESENTATIONS Simon Lacey1, Marisa Pappas1, Alexandra Kreps1,
Kevin Lee1, K. Sathian1,2,3,4; 1Emory University School of Medicine, Neurology,
Atlanta, GA, 2Emory University School of Medicine, Rehabilitation Medicine,
Atlanta, GA, 3Emory University School of Medicine, Psychology, Atlanta, GA,
4Rehabilitation R&D Center of Excellence, Atlanta VAMC, Decatur, GA —
We previously showed that cross-modal recognition of unfamiliar objects
is view-independent, in contrast to view-dependence within-modally, in
both vision and haptics. Does the view-independent, bisensory representation underlying cross-modal recognition arise from integration of
unisensory, view-dependent representations or intermediate, unisensory
but view-independent representations? Two psychophysical experiments
sought to distinguish between these alternative models. In both experiments, participants began from baseline, within-modal, view-dependence for object recognition in both vision and haptics. The first
experiment induced within-modal view-dependence by perceptual learning, which was completely and symmetrically transferred cross-modally:
visual view-independence acquired through visual learning also resulted
in haptic view-independence and vice versa. In the second experiment,
both visual and haptic view-dependence were transformed to view-independence by either haptic-visual or visual-haptic cross-modal learning.
We conclude that cross-modal view-independence fits with a model in
which unisensory view-dependent representations are directly integrated

220

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

into a bisensory, view-independent representation, rather than being
gated by unisensory, view-independent representations.
H83
AUDIOVISUAL INTEGRATION ENHANCES ILLUSORY FILLINGIN OF SPEECH Antoine J. Shahin1, Lee M. Miller1,2; 1University of
California, Center for Mind and Brain, Davis, California, 2University of
California, Neurobiology, Physiology and Behavior, Davis, California — Phonemic restoration occurs when speech is perceived to be continuous
through noisy interruptions, even when the speech signal is artificially
removed from the interrupted epochs. This temporal filling-in illusion
helps maintain robust comprehension in adverse environments and illustrates how contextual knowledge through the auditory modality (e.g.
acoustic, lexical) can improve perception. This study investigated how
audio-visual speech affects phonemic restoration. We hypothesized that
audiovisual integration of speech should improve phonemic restoration,
allowing the perceived continuity to span longer temporal gaps. Subjects
listened to tri-syllabic words with a portion of each word replaced by
white noise while watching lip-movement that was either congruent,
temporally reversed (incongruent), or static. For each word, subjects
judged whether the utterance sounded continuous or interrupted, where
a "continuous" response indicated an illusory percept. Results showed
that illusory filling-in of longer white noise durations (longer missing
segments) occurred when the mouth movement was congruent with the
spoken word compared to the other conditions, with no differences
occurring between the static and incongruent conditions. Thus, phonemic restoration is enhanced when applying prior knowledge through
multisensory integration.
H84
WHEN PHOTISMS HELP AND WHEN THEY HURT - THE
IMPACT OF COLOUR INCONGRUENCY ON OBJECT
SUBSTITUTION
MASKING
IN
GRAPHEME-COLOUR
SYNAESTHETES Jutta Peterburs1, Michelle Jarick2, Mike Dixon2; 1RuhrUniversity Bochum, Germany, Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
Neuropsychology, 2University of Waterloo, Psychology, Ontario, Canada —
Grapheme-colour synaesthesia is a fascinating condition whereby black
graphemes elicit colour experiences. Research has shown that synaesthetic colours (photisms) can directly influence the perception of externally presented digits and enhance a synaesthete's performance on visual
masking tasks. Currently, research is lacking experiments that show both
superior and inferior performance of synaesthetes relative to control participants in order to rule out motivational factors and experimenter
expectation as possible explanations for performance differences between
these groups. We tested four grapheme-colour synaesthetes (projectors)
and 21 non-synaesthetic control participants with an object substitution
masking paradigm involving achromatic (black), congruently and incongruently coloured target digits (with respect to a given synaesthete's photisms) to show such a double-dissociation. While control participants
exhibited object substitution across all conditions, this effect was alleviated for synaesthetes for achromatic targets, indicating that the synaesthetes benefitted from their photisms. On trials with incongruently
coloured targets, however, the synaesthetes' performances were reduced
(relative to performance on the achromatic condition), suggesting that
their photisms provided a source of interference. Hence, motivational
factors and experimenter expectation cannot account for performance differences observed between control participants and synaesthetes. The
results furthermore indicate that externally perceived colour might be
able to activate digit-related information, corroborating recent findings of
bidirectionality of grapheme-colour synaethesia in some projector synaesthetes.

Poster Session H

H85
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF AUDIO-VISUAL
INTEGRATION
OF
SPOKEN
WORDS
IN
TYPICAL
DEVELOPMENT AND AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER Odette
Megnin1, Atlanta Flitton1, Catherine Jones1, Michelle de Haan1, Tony
Charman1, Torsten Baldeweg1; 1UCL Institute of Child Health — The present
study examines electrophysiological (ERP) correlates of audio-visual
(AV) integration of spoken words in 19 typically developing adolescents
and 14 adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). There are a
number of reasons why we might expect to see differences in an autistic
population, including (but not limited to) findings of atypical unimodal
auditory processing (e.g. Bomba & Pang, 2004), atypical unimodal visual
processing, particularly with regards to face processing (e.g. McPartland
et al, 2004), and multi-sensory processing differences (e.g. Bebko et al,
2006; Magnée et al, 2008). In a previous ERP study examining AV integration of speech in typical adults we found a speeding up and attenuation of the auditory N1 component and a shorter latency and increased
amplitude auditory P2 component with AV speech stimuli and these
effects were specific to an AV condition with informative or predictive lip
movements. An additional novel finding of that study was that the N1
attenuation correlated with an earlier increased fronto-polar negativity
(FPN) raising the possibility of a top-down modulation effect. Preliminary results of the present study suggest that in both autism and typical
development, participants fall into subgroups with only approximately
half showing the adult pattern of audio-visual integration. Amongst
those showing the FPN and N1 attenuation effects, there are also differences between the autism and typically developing adolescents, suggesting that AV integration may change across development and also that the
process may be different in ASD.
H86
INDUCED AND EVOKED SEX DIFFERENCES IN EEG MEASURES
OF A PERCEPTION/ACTION MATCHING SYSTEM Jonathan Silas1,
Joe Levy1, Maria Nielsen1, Lance Slade1, Amanda Holmes1,2; 1Roehampton
University, 2Birkbeck College — Recent EEG research is said to support the
involvement of a perception/action matching system (P/AMS) in social
cognition. Induced decreases in ’mu’ power, during performance and
observation, index activation of a P/AMS system (Cochin et al., 1999).
Evoked event related potentials (ERPs) indexing motor activity have also
been demonstrated during the observation of movement, linking ERPs to
a P/AMS (Kilner et al., 2008; van Schie et al., 2008). To date, only modulation of induced activity has been studied in relating a P/AMS to social
cognition (Bernier et al., 2007; Oberman, et al., 2005). We recorded 128channel EEG from male and female participants while they observed and
performed simple movements. Participants also completed several questionnaires pertaining to aspects of social cognition, such as empathy and
systemising traits (IRI, EQ, SQ-R). Females showed stronger mu attenuation during observation (but not performance) of an action, and males
showed increased mean amplitude in motor-related ERPs for both performance and observation of an action. However, neither induced nor
evoked activity was associated with social cognition psychometrics. Our
results suggest that both evoked and induced components of the EEG are
modulated by sex differences in a P/AMS. These results suggest that
there may be two dissociable processes underlying a P/AMS. Furthermore, we argue that during the observation of simple movements, sociocognition does not modulate a P/AMS.
H87
THE SPREAD OF ATTENTION ACROSS MODALITIES AS A
FUNCTION OF AUDIO-VISUAL TEMPORAL ASYNCHRONY
Sarah E. Donohue1, Maria A. Pavlova1, Kenneth C. Roberts1, Tineke Grent-'tJong1, Marty G. Woldorff1; 1Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke
University — A fundamental task in daily life is the accurate perception
and integration of information from multiple modalities. This can be
done in a robust and reliable manner by using cues from space and time,
with stimuli more proximal in space and/or time more likely to be inte-

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

grated. Further, it has been shown that attention to stimuli in one modality (vision) can spread to irrelevant but synchronous stimuli in another
modality (audition), even when they arise from different locations, an
effect reflected by a late frontal ERP negativity and enhanced fMRI activity in auditory cortex (Busse et al., 2005). Here, we investigated such
attentional spread when the irrelevant auditory event was either simultaneous with the visual, delayed by 100 ms (inside the temporal window of
integration), or delayed by 300 ms (outside the window). EEG was
recorded from 18 participants, and time-locked averages were obtained
for each of the delay conditions. When the irrelevant auditory stimulus
was synchronous with the attended visual event, the late frontal negativity was enhanced, replicating Busse et al. (2005). When the auditory stimulus was delayed by 100 ms, this late negative wave was slightly
attenuated relative to the simultaneous condition and shifted in time by
100 ms. When the auditory stimulus was delayed by 300 ms, the late negative wave was substantially attenuated and shifted by 300 ms. These
results suggest that attention can only spread effectively between visual
and auditory stimulus events when they occur sufficiently close in time,
presumably thereby facilitating appropriate multisensory integration.
H88
BRAIN ACTIVATION DURING OBSERVATION OF SOCIAL
INTERACTION BETWEEN HUMANS OR DOGS Miiamaaria
Kujala1, Riitta Hari1; 1Brain Research Unit, Low Temperature Laboratory, and
Advanced Magnetic Imaging Centre, Helsinki University of Technology,
Finland — We aimed to find out how brain activations differ when subjects observe interaction between humans or between dogs, and whether
expertise on dog behavior affects the results. Brain activity of 37 healthy
subjects (19 experts and 18 non-experts in dog behavior; half of all
female) was recorded with 3-T fMRI. The subjects viewed color photos
where humans and dogs were either alone (ALONE), friendly interacting
with a conspecific (INTER), or facing away from a conspecific (AWAY).
Altogether 280 stimuli were presented in 25-s blocks (10 stimuli per
block, 2.5 s each). Analysis of variance revealed significant effects of
interaction level (INTER, AWAY, ALONE) in the brain’s "social circuitry", including the posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS), posterior cingulate cortex, posterior intraparietal sulcus, temporal poles, and
fusiform gyri bilaterally. Species (HUMAN, DOG) had an effect bilaterally in the pSTS, posterior cingulate cortex, posterior intraparietal sulcus,
hippocampi, and amygdalae. In both groups, amygdala was activated
more strongly to interacting humans than dogs. The effect of expertise
was marked in the hippocampi, which responded more strongly to dogs
than humans in experts. Moreover, the right lateral occipital cortex
(rLOC) responded similarly to interaction of humans and of dogs in
experts, but only to interaction of humans in control subjects. To conclude, interaction between humans or between dogs activated the
viewer’s social brain circuitry similarly, with some species-dependent
emphasis. Dog expertise modulated activity in the memory-linked hippocampus and in the LOC associated with object (or body) recognition.

Perceptual Processes: Multisensory
Processing
H89
VISUAL MODULATION OF SOMATIC PAIN USING OPTICAL
MEANS Eric Altschuler1,2, Paul McGeoch2, V. S. Ramachandran2;
1
UMDNJ, PM&R, 2UCSD, Center for Brain and Cognition — We
have
shown using a simple optical trick (mirror visual feedback (MVF)) that
visual input can powerfully modulate somatic pain in a clinically useful
manner: Phantom limbs are often reported to be fixed in a painfully awkward position. We had patients view the refection of the normal hand
optically superimposed on the phantom via a parasagittally placed regular plane mirror. Moving the real arm made the phantom APPEAR to
move and reduced the pain in the phantomóthe first demonstration of

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

221

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

visual modulation of somatic pain. Ourselves and others have found that
MVF shows promise in treating complex regional pain syndrome, anesthesia dolorosa, hemiparesis following stroke and hand dysfunction in
orthopaedic patients. McCabe and colleagues and Moseley and colleagues found a perception of change and change of temperature during
MVF. Gawande noted use of MVF in a patient after brain tumor surgery
with an arm that felt painfully "swollen, and found that ensuing shrinkage of the arm also shrank the somatic pain! In normal subjects we
noted that viewing one’s hand through a minifying Fresnel lens caused
the hand to feel shrunken and alienated from one’s body image (Sci Am
Mind 18 (4), 16-19 (2007)). We used this procedure on a patient who had
painful severe neuropathic leg pain. Remarkably, optical shrinkage of the
foot and its optical alienation caused a corresponding shrinkage of associated pain. Taken collectively these results demonstrate powerful modulation of somatic pain using visual feedback observations that dissolve
conventional barriers between vision, pain and skin.

Perceptual processes: Multisensory
processing
H90
MISMATCH NEGATIVITY REVEALS EARLY AUDIOVISUAL
INTEGRATION OF VISUAL LETTERS AND AUDITORY LETTER
NAMES Allison J.D. Andres1, Janis E. Oram Cardy1, Marc F. Joanisse1,2;
1School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, The University of Western
Ontario, 2The University of Western Ontario, Psychology — Reading
involves integrating visual stimuli (letters) with known auditory categories (phonemes). Prior studies have used electrophysiology and neuroimaging to examine the temporal and cortical mechanisms of audiovisual
integration, however it remains unclear at what stage in perception this
process actually occurs. In particular, there is significant debate whether
stimuli are integrated during primary sensory processing, or following
independent processing in their respective sensory cortices. In this study
we recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) in 22 adult participants in
response to visual letters presented simultaneously with auditory letter
names. A key novelty of this study was that auditory stimuli were presented in an unattended fashion, using the mismatch negativity (MMN)
paradigm, simultaneously with a visual letter identification task. It was
hypothesized that if audiovisual integration occurs at an early point in
sensory processing, we should observe modulations to MMN amplitude
when the attended visual stimulus was congruous with the auditory
stimulus (i.e., seeing "E" and hearing ’ee’) compared to when it was not
(seeing "E" and hearing ’oh’). As expected, we observed significant
MMNs for auditory oddball stimuli, at around 200 ms post stimulus
onset. However we also observed that the magnitude of this effect was
greater in congruent trials. A similar effect was also found for the P300
component. The data suggest that audiovisual integration of letters does
occur concurrently with primary sensory processing.
H91
AUDIO-VISUAL SYNCHRONY ENHANCES WORKING MEMORY
UPDATE: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL (ERP) STUDY
Natalya Kaganovich1,2, George Hollich2, Christine Weber-Fox1; 1Purdue
University, Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, 2Purdue University,
Psychological Sciences — Multisensory representation plays an important
role in learning and memory. Behavioral studies in infants show the
importance of audio-visual synchrony for perceptual learning (Bahrick &
Lickliter, 2000) and speech stream segregation (Hollich, Newman, & Jusczyk, 2005). In adults, memory formation is also enhanced by multisensory stimuli (Shams & Seitz, 2008). However, the facilitative effect of
audio-visual synchrony on working memory has not been fully investigated. We hypothesized that a detection of change from audio-visually
synchronous contexts will be easier compared to detection of change
from asynchronous ones even when the degree of change is identical. We

222

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

employed an oddball paradigm with audio-visual stimuli (a 1000 Hz tone
and a lighted circle, 50 ms in duration). The onsets of the two stimuli
were either synchronous or separated by 400 ms in standards. They were
always offset by 200 ms in deviants. The physical change from standard
to deviant was thus identical across conditions (200 ms). Two modality
sequences were used: audio-visual and visual-auditory. Behavioral measures of sensitivity to change (d’) were combined with electrophysiological measures. We compared ERPs in response to the same deviant
stimulus when it was preceded by either a synchronous or an asynchronous standard. We found no differences in early sensory components.
However, regardless of the order of modalities, targets preceded by
audio-visually synchronous standards elicited a significantly larger P300
component compared to targets preceded by asynchronous standards.
These findings indicate that multi-modal synchrony may enhance working memory update processes as indexed by the P300.
H92
SENSORIMOTOR NETWORKS: PREFERENTIAL RELATIONSHIPS
BETWEEN AUDITORY REGIONS AND MOTOR MOUTH
CORTEX Jonathan Power1, Alexander Cohen1, Fran Miezin1, Bradley
Schlaggar1, Steve Petersen1; 1Washington University, Neurology and
Psychology, Saint Louis — Humans are proficient, relative to other species,
in linguistic communication and object manipulation. These proficiencies
may require optimized networks subserving specific sensorimotor combinations, such as audition/speech production and vision/hand movement. Recently developed analytical methods, utilizing functional
connectivity MRI (fcMRI) to examine network relationships between
brain regions, could reveal such optimizations. To investigate these putative networks, we examined 22 fMRI studies involving 523 subjects performing myriad tasks all involving combinations of auditory or visual
input with speech or finger-pressing responses. Ninety-three regions of
interest (ROIs) were defined based on activation in these tasks, and timecourses for each of these ROIs were derived from concatenated restingstate fcMRI data from 40 adults. A 93x93 correlation matrix of correlations between each ROI’s timecourse with all other ROI timecourses was
used to construct a network, which was then subjected to community
detection analysis using edge removal (Girvan & Newman, 2002) and
modularity optimization (Newman, 2006). Both methods revealed communities within the network. Notably, regions of sensorimotor cortex
representing "mouth" and "finger" clustered in separate communities.
The mouth regions were closely related to several temporal (including
auditory) and subcortical regions, while the finger regions were more
closely related to multiple frontal and parietal regions, which then linked
to occipital regions. These specific sensorimotor network relationships
are consistent with human specializations underlying language and
object manipulation, respectively. The extent to which these relationships
represent specializations existing at birth versus the result of years of
conjoint activation could be examined through developmental studies.
H93
ENHANCED CROSS-MODAL PROCESSING IN SYNESTHESIA
David Brang1, Lisa E Williams1, Vilayanur S Ramachandran1; 1University of
CA, San Diego — Synesthesia is a heritable trait in which a sensory stimulus presented in one modality evokes a sensation in a different modality.
Recent research has suggested that neurotransmitter imbalances and
excess neural connections mediate these synesthetic experiences. Crucially, this over-connectivity occurs not only between the sensory cortices
engaged for a particular synesthete’s associations, but also within parietal
structures, known to be critical in binding the senses together in normals.
In typical individuals, there are a number of perceptual effects that highlight the integration of sensory information from multiple modalities.
Given that the proposed overconnectivity in synesthesia occurs in brain
areas thought to mediate multisensory integration in typical individuals,
we hypothesized that general cross-modal integration may also be
enhanced in synesthetes. To test this idea, we ran 9 grapheme-color synesthetes on two classic cross-modal tasks utilizing interactions between

Poster Session H

the visual and auditory domains - the Shams double-flash illusion, and
intersensory facilitation of reaction time. On these tasks, synesthetes'
accuracy and reaction times differed significantly from those of control
subjects, reflecting an overall increase in cross-modal processing in synesthetes. As none of our subjects experienced auditory synesthetic concurrents, these findings reflect generalized differences in cross-modal
processing between groups. These results support, for the first time, that
part of the synesthesia phenotype is an extreme form of normal crossmodal integration, as well as the notion that the overconnectivity in synesthesia is diffusely expressed. Subsequently, these results allow generalization of other findings from synesthesia research, to aid in the
understanding of cross-modal processing in all individuals.
H94
THE UNIVERSALITY OF SENSORY ANALOGIES: A STUDY WITH
THE HIMBA TRIBE OF NAMIBIA Catherine Mulvenna1,2; 1University
College London, 2University of California, Los Angeles — Crossmodal correspondences are an example of basic higher-level cognition. It is a seemingly natural process to align properties of two different sensory
modalities (such as frequency/pitch with reflectance/lightness) resulting
in relative analogies such as ’high pitch=strong light’, and vice versa. This
phenomenon spans several dimensions including reflectance, luminance,
curvature, intensity and frequency. It has long been demonstrated that
cognitive effects of these correspondences include facilitation/interference in speed and accuracy of identifying a stimulus that is presented
with relatively corresponding/non-corresponding stimulus. However,
little is understood about whether this phenomenon is relative (to culture, language) or universal. Here, 45 members of the semi-nomadic
Himba tribes of Kaokoland, northwest Namibia, carried out an audiovisual matching task. This tribe historically live remote from the developing culture of the rest of the country, speaks an ancient tribal language
with no written component, and has minimal exposure to modern African or Western music. Participants heard randomized sequences of high
and low pitches and made a binary forced choice decision between light
and dark images based on what ’goes best with the sound.’ Auditory
stimuli varied in familiarity to the tribes-people: high, medium and low,
represented by human voice, cello, computer-generated beeps. A local
interpreter acting as the naïve instructor enabled a double-blind design,
and minimized implicit information being communicated to participants.
For all stimuli, the tribes-people followed the analogy of ’high pitch=high
light.’ This supports universal over relativist theories of sensory analogies, and hard-wired ’basic correspondences’ in sensory processing.
H95
MODULATIONS OF EARLY VISUAL EVOKED POTENTIAL IN
THE PROFOUNDLY DEAF Davide Bottari1, Anne Caclin2, Marie-Hélèn
Giard2, Francesco Pavani1,3; 1University of Trento, Cognitive Science and
Education, Italy, 2INSERM U821, Lyon, France , 3Centro Mente e Cervello,
University of Trento, Italy — Behavioural studies have revealed enhanced
reactivity to visual events in the deaf. Here we examined the electrophysiological response to visual stimuli in deaf and hearing controls during a speeded simple-detection task. After the appearance of a warningsignal (500ms), a visual target was randomly presented with either a
short (500ms) or long ISI (1800ms), at central (3&deg;) or peripheral
(8&deg;) locations with respect to fixation. Behaviourally, deaf were
faster than hearing controls, particularly for targets appearing at the short
ISI. In addition, controls responded more slowly for peripheral than central targets, whereas this difference did not emerged for the deaf. The
ERPs revealed activation at occipito-parietal sites in the deaf, before any
visual stimulation. Moreover, the C1 component in response to the warning-signal peaked earlier in deaf than controls. Deaf also displayed prolonged and ampler visual analysis in the second phase of the P1
component, which in turn produced a delay of the N1 onset. While the P1
was ampler for central than peripheral targets in the controls, comparable
P1 amplitude emerged in the deaf regardless of target location. Finally,
the CNV preceding targets at short ISI had a larger amplitude range in

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

deaf than controls. These results show quantitative and qualitative
changes in very early visual-evoked potentials (C1, P1). Because modulation of the late P1 complex has been recently linked to exogenous attention capture, these findings point to a key role of this attention
component in enhanced reactivity in the deaf.

Perceptual processes: Somatosensory
processing
H96
SINISTRALS’ UPPER HAND: EVIDENCE FOR HANDEDNESS
DIFFERENCES IN THE REPRESENTATION OF BODY SPACE
Sylvia Hach1, Simone Schuetz-Bosbach1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — A difference in the perception of extrapersonal space has been shown to exist between dextrals
(right-handers) and sinistrals (left-handers). On the classical line bisection
task, this difference is evident in a greater left bias for dextrals compared
to sinistrals. Different modalities and regions of space can be affected.
However, it has not yet been investigated whether a systematic bias also
exists in the perception of personal or body space. We investigated this
with the use of three tasks which assess different aspects of personal
space in both an implicit and explicit way. The results showed that; (i)
dextrals possess an asymmetric estimation of their body, while no such
asymmetry was present for sinistrals, (ii) sinistrals display superior
access to an overall spatial representation of their body and (iii) no handedness differences exist for an explicit measure of body representation.
Possible mechanisms underlying the handedness differences shown for
the implicit tasks are a stronger lateralisation or a greater activation
imbalance for dextrals and/or greater access to right hemispheric functions such as an "up-to-date" body representation by sinistrals. In contrast
to implicit tasks, explicit measures of how body space is represented may
not be affected due to their relying on different processing mechanisms.
These results are the first to describe handedness differences in the maintenance of and access to representations of the body in the neurologically
normal population. Furthermore, they suggest that personal or body
space is processed in a similar way to extrapersonal space and is affected
by the same constraints.
H97
MODULATION OF ROLANDIC ALPHA AND BETA BAND
ACTIVITY DURING VIBROTACTILE WORKING MEMORY
REFLECTS DYNAMIC ADJUSTMENT OF SOMATOSENSORY
CORTEX FUNCTION Claudia Preuschhof1,2, Ruth Schubert3, Torsten
Schubert4, Hauke R. Heekeren1,2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human
Development, Berlin, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 3Neurophysics Group, Charité University Medicine Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany,
4
General and Experimental Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians University,
München, Germany — The role of the primary somatosensory cortex (S1)
for vibrotactile working memory (WM) is still under debate. The rolandic
alpha and beta rhythms indicate the activation level of S1. Using electroencephalography, we investigated the dynamics of the rolandic rhythms
during the encoding and delay period of a vibrotactile WM task. Fourteen participants had to decide which of two sequentially presented
vibrotactile stimuli had the higher frequency. We found enhanced rolandic alpha and beta power during the middle delay indicating functional
inhibition of S1. In contrast, frontal and posterior alpha and beta power
amplitudes were enhanced during the entire delay, which might be
related to the functioning of a fronto-parietal attentional network
involved in WM maintenance. During the early delay, high performers
already exhibited maximum levels of alpha power whereas low performers reached maximum power only in the middle of the delay. This suggests that inconsistent findings regarding the role of S1 during the early
delay are related to encoding efficiency. The most pronounced effect for

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

223

Tuesday, March 24, 8:00 - 10:00 am

the rolandic rhythms was a reduction of baseline power in the pre-trial
period indicating a tonic up-regulation of the contralateral S1 caused by
sustained attention to the stimulated finger. The pattern of results suggests that S1 does not maintain the vibrotactile stimuli. However, the activation level of S1 seems to be dynamically adjusted to optimize task
performance. In addition, there is a dissociation between the rolandic
alpha and beta rhythms related to somtatomotor processing and frontoposterior alpha and beta rhythms involved in top-down control.
H98
A PSYCHOMORPHOMETRIC INVESTIGATION OF THE HUMAN
HAND Matthew Longo1, Patrick Haggard1; 1Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, University College London — Morphometric
techniques,
involving the geometric analysis of landmark data, have become increasingly widespread in the biological sciences as tools for the analysis of biological shape.
This method provides a precise, quantitative
characterization of the veridical structure of a biological form, such as a
body part like the human hand. Here, we apply this method to study the
mental representation of a body part (the hand), by having participants
point to where they believed landmarks on their (occluded) hand to be.
These landmarks provide an implicit map of the structure underlying the
mental representation of the hand, which can then be compared to the
veridical structure of the participant’s hand. Several systematic biases in
the representation of the hand were observed, which corresponded to
characteristic features of primary somatosensory representations. In contrast, when participants were asked to pick from a series of hand templates the one that most closely matched the shape of their own hand,
such biases were not observed. This suggests that the implicit representation of the body is quite different from the explicit, conscious image we
have of ourselves. This implicit body image observed here may reflect a
representation nearer to the ’homuncular’ representation of the body.
H99
MULTIPLE MEDIATORS OF EXPECTANCY EFFECTS ON PAIN
PERCEPTION: INTERACTIONS AMONG HIGHER-ORDER BRAIN
REGIONS AND PAIN MATRIX ACTIVITY Lauren
Atlas1,
Niall
Bolger1, Martin Lindquist1, Tor Wager1; 1Columbia University — A wealth of
cognitive neuroscience research suggests that expectations can have a
powerful influence on perception across multiple sensory modalities. We
focus here on expectancy effects in pain, a phenomenon of both basic and
clinical interest. While studies have shown that expectancies modulate
brain activity in frontal and limbic regions, the brain pathways that mediate expectancy effects on pain experience have not been examined. In
this study, we use whole-brain mediation analysis to address whether:
a)expectancies influence a core set of regions (the "pain matrix") thought
to mediate pain; b)pain matrix activity mediates expectancy effects on
pain reports; and c)frontal and limbic brain mediators influence pain
through connections to the pain matrix, or through other mechanisms.
Auditory cues elicited expectations for low or high noxious thermal stimulation. On a subset of trials, cues were followed by a single temperature
calibrated to elicit moderate pain. Compared with low-pain cues, highpain cues produced robust increases in reported pain (p<.0001) and activity throughout the pain matrix. Mediation analyses revealed that a subset of pain matrix regions (thalamus, anterior insula, dACC, and pons)
formally mediated expectancy effects on pain reports. Other mediator
regions included those supporting value-processing (putamen, ventral
striatum, caudate) and cognitive control (DLPFC, DMPFC, pgACC).
Some higher-order regions (e.g. ventral striatum) affected pain perception through connections to the pain matrix, while others (e.g. DMPFC)
affected pain reports independently. These results contribute to a model
of how brain systems involved in expectancy interact with pain-processing regions to create the pain experience.

224

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

H100
TEMPORAL COURSE IN TACTILE ENCODING: FROM A
SOMATOTOPIC TO AN EXTERNAL FRAME OF REFERENCE
Elena Azañón1,2,3, Matthew R. Longo3, Salvador Soto-Faraco1,2,4, Patrick
Haggard3; 1Departament de Psicologia Bàsica, Universitat de Barcelona, Spain,
2
Parc Científic de Barcelona, Universitat de Barcelona, Spain , 3Insitute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, UK, 4Institució Catalana
de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Spain — Localizing and reacting to
tactile events on our skin requires the coordination between primary
somatotopic projections and an external representation of space. Given
that the primary somatosensory cortex (SI) maps skin location independently of posture, the brain must re-align tactile coordinates in order to
locate events in external space. Here we track the time course of how
these externally-based representations are built. In the first study participants held their arms crossed and performed a discrimination task on lateralised visual targets presented near the hands, after receiving a tactile
cue. During the first hundred milliseconds after the cue, reaction times to
the lights were speeded up for anatomically congruent but spatially
incongruent tactile cues. This pattern reversed after about two hundred
milliseconds so that tactile cues produced a facilitation of targets presented at the same external location. From the time course of the cueing
effects as well as the results of previous studies, we reasoned that some
structures in the posterior parietal cortex may be critical for tactile remapping. Thus, in a second study participants held their arms in a vertical
position and judged the elevation of a tap on their forearm with reference
to a part of their head. Single-pulse TMS was applied, targeting the ventral intraparietal area, in order to disrupt tactile remapping processes.
The results of both studies expose the temporal course in the encoding of
tactile space, from a somatotopic frame of reference, reflecting the neural
organization in SI, to the external representations prevailing in orienting
behaviours.
H101
SERIAL AND PARALLEL PROCESSING OF VISUO-TACTILE
INPUTS AS REVEALED USING MEG Andrea Quintero1, Kim Russo1,
Leighton Hinkley2, Srikantan Nagajaran2, Elizabeth Disbrow1,2,3; 1Center for
Neuroscience University of California Davis, 2University of California,
Radiology, San Francisco, 3University of California, Neurology, Davis —
Manipulation of the world around us requires the interaction of inputs
from somatic, visual and motor systems to make accurate judgments
regarding the physical attributes of an object, the sensory context in
which the object is located and the object’s relation to some internal representation of the body. The temporal dynamics of these interactions are
not fully understood. In this study, we examined the cortical temporal
spatial spectral patterns of processing a simple combination of tactile and
visual stimuli by measuring fluctuations in oscillatory activity using
time-frequency optimized adaptive spatial filtering reconstructions of
magnetoencephalography data. We used a 275 channel CTF omega 2000
whole head MEG system (VSM MedTech, Coquitlam, B.C., Canada) to
compare whole-brain responses to right, left and bilateral stimulation of
the second digit. Tactile stimuli were pneumatic air pulses (30psi, ISI
2sec +/- 200ms) presented simultaneously with either a continuous central red fixation point on a gray background or a reversing checkerboard
synchronized to tactile stimulation. We collected 256 trials/condition
using a sample rate of 1200Hz. Results indicate that combined tactile and
visual inputs are processed by a network consisting of primary and secondary somatosensory cortex (S1 & S2), posterior parietal cortex (PPC)
and pre-motor cortex (PMC). Activity in these regions overlapped in
both time and frequency, with activation progressing from S1 (onset =
50ms) to S2 (onset = 175ms) and PP (onset = 150ms), followed by PM
(onset = 225ms). This spatial-spectral-temporal processing pattern
reflects the known connectivity of putatively homologous regions of
macaque monkey cortex.

Poster Session I
Higher level cognition: Executive
functions
I1
NEURAL EVIDENCE OF A ROLE FOR SPATIAL RESPONSE
SELECTION IN THE LEARNING OF SPATIAL SEQUENCES
Hillary Schwarb1, Nehal Patel1, Carla J. Burrus1, Eric H. Schumacher1; 1Georgia
Institute of Technology — Despite two decades of behavioral research, considerable disagreement remains regarding the locus of the cognitive mechanisms (e.g., stimulus encoding, response selection or response
production) responsible for the learning and expression of spatial
sequences. Functional neuroimaging may offer valuable insights to this
controversy. The cortical mechanisms underlying spatial response selection (i.e., right dorsal prefrontal, dorsal premotor and superior parietal
cortices) are well known. These regions as well as supplementary motor
area, striatum and the hippocampus have also been implicated in sequence
learning. Such neural overlap suggests that spatial response selection may
play an important role in spatial sequence learning. These cognitive mechanisms, however, have not been manipulated in the same experiment so
the true extent of the overlap is unknown. The current study directly
investigates the role of spatial response selection in sequence learning
using the serial reaction time (SRT) task. Both spatial sequence learning
and spatial response-selection difficulty were orthogonally manipulated to
directly identify the neural overlap of these two cognitive mechanisms.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) results demonstrate near
complete overlap in all of the regions investigated (dorsal premotor, supplementary motor, superior parietal and striatum). Only right dorsal prefrontal cortex was selectively influenced by the response selection
difficulty manipulation. The hippocampus was unresponsive to either
manipulation. These findings emphasize the importance of spatial
response selection for successful spatial sequence learning.
I3
ENHANCING GAMMA BAND POWER (36-44HZ) WITH
NEUROFEEDBACK IMPROVES FEATURE BINDING FLEXIBILITY
AND INTELLIGENCE Andre Keizer1,2, Maurice Verschoor, Roland
Verment, Bernhard Hommel1,2; 1Leiden University, Institute for Psychological
Research, 2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition — Neural
synchronization in the gamma band has been associated with feature binding and
intelligence. Using neurofeedback, we aimed at changing the power of the
gamma band and investigated whether these changes would influence
behavioral measures of feature binding and intelligence. The results show
that people are indeed able to alter the power in the gamma band if provided with neurofeedback. Moreover, the increase of gamma band power
was related to a decrease of binding costs and an increase in intelligence,
suggesting that the control of feature binding and intelligence share a common underlying mechanism.
I4
PREFRONTAL DOPAMINE LEVELS PREDICT TRANSIENT
COMMITMENT TO ATTENTIONAL SET Sean James Fallon1, Caroline
Williams-Grey2, Adam Hampshire1, Roger Barker2, Adrian Owen1; 1MRC
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, 2Cambridge Centre for Brain
Repair, University of Cambridge — Dopaminergic stimulation of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) contributes to numerous aspects of cognitive control.
It has been suggested that dopamine facilitates the ability to form and sustain an attentional set. An attentional set is the top down segregation of
certain features in the environment as either relevant or irrelevant. A sin-

gle nucleotide polymorphism (val108/158met) in the gene that codes for
the catechol O-methyltransferase (COMT) enzyme has been shown to lead
to alterations in the levels of PFC dopamine. Individuals, who are
homozygous for the met allele of the COMT gene, will have relatively
higher levels of PFC dopamine compared to val homozygotes as a result of
the differential ability of these two groups to inactivate dopamine. Here
we present an fMRI study investigating the effect of this polymorphism on
the ability to form and shift attentional sets on the basis of positive or negative feedback, in genotyped older adults and patients with Parkinson’s
Disease (PD). Differential levels of hypothesised prefrontal dopamine, as
modulated by disease and COMT genotype, predicted the formation of
attentional sets and increased haemodynamic response in the PFC, in a
manner consistent with an inverted-U shape function. Specifically, there
was an interaction between val158met and disease, in that healthy met
homzygotes displayed greater levels of attentional set formation and
BOLD activity in the right dorsolateral PFC, whilst for PD patients this
pattern was reversed. We suggest that this apparent reversal of the COMT
effect in PD is the result of dopaminergic medication in this patient group.
I5
AGING, EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING AND SELF-REPORTED
MEMORY STRATEGY USE Badiâa Bouazzaoui1, Michel Isingrini1, Severine
Fay1, Lucie Angel1, Sandrine Vanneste1, David Clarys1, Laurence Taconnat1; 1UMR
CNRS 6234 University François-Rabelais of Tours, France — The purpose of this
study was to investigate age differences in self-reported memory strategy
use in relation to the executive functioning decline accompanying aging. A
large sample (n = 315) from 21 to 90 years responded to a strategy use
questionnaire (Metamemory in Adulthood instrument, Dixon and
Hultsch, 1983) allowing to differentiate self-reported internal (e.g.,
rehearsal, imagery...) from external (e.g., making lists for shopping, keeping a calendar to writing down appointments) memory strategy use. Neuropsychological tests of executive functioning (WCST, Verbal fluency,
Category exemplar generation), and fluid intelligence (Cattell cutlture fair
test) were also administered. Results showed that (1) aging increases the
use of external memory strategies when conversely it decreases the use of
internal memory strategies, (2) executive functioning and self-report of
strategy use were related, participants who reported to use more frequently internal strategies were those with high level of executive functioning whereas participants who reported using more frequently external
strategies were those with low level of executive functioning, and (3) executive functioning accounted for a sizeable proportion of the age-related
variance in strategy use, largely for internal strategies and moderately for
external strategies. These findings highlighted that the relationship
observed in previous studies between executive functions and laboratory
memory strategy tasks can be extended to questionnaire self-rating memory strategy use. They also support the proposal that preserved executive
functioning in old age appeared as a relevant protective factor of the
capacity to implement self-initiated internal strategies in order to prevent
age-related memory difficulties.
I6
IF AT FIRST YOU DON’T SUCCEED, TRY, TRY AGAIN: ERRORS
INFLUENCE DECISION-MAKING IN A VOLUNTARY TASK
SWITCHING PARADIGM Joseph Orr1, Wendelin Diab1, Joshua Carp1,
Daniel Weissman1; 1University of Michigan — When performance monitoring processes detect that we are performing poorly at a task (e.g., making
errors, experiencing high levels of response conflict, or responding more
slowly than usual), they are thought to enhance the activation of that task’s
representation in working memory, thereby promoting better performance

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

225

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

in the next trial. However, distinguishing such enhancements from the
priming of specific stimuli, responses, and stimulus-response associations has proven exceptionally difficult. To provide an unambiguous test
of the task-set enhancement hypothesis, we assessed the performance of
32 healthy adults in a number Stroop version of the voluntary task
switching paradigm. Critically, in each trial the decision about which task
to perform (i.e., numerical or physical size comparison, indicated using
one of two fingers on the left hand) utilized different stimulus-response
associations than the subsequent decision about which of two digits was
largest (indicated using one of two fingers on the right hand). Consistent
with the task-set enhancement hypothesis, participants chose to repeat
the same task (rather than switch to a different task) significantly more
often after making an error, experiencing high levels of response conflict,
or responding more slowly than usual. These findings provide novel,
unambiguous support for the task-set enhancement hypothesis that cannot be explained by the priming of specific stimuli, responses, or stimulus-response associations. Moreover, they extend current models of
cognitive control by revealing an important interaction between performance monitoring processes that promote optimal task performance and
decision-making processes that choose one of several possible tasks to
perform in the future.
I7
EEG PHASE SYNCHRONY REVEALS A MEDIAL-LATERAL
FRONTAL COGNITIVE CONTROL NETWORK FOLLOWING
ERRORS James Cavanagh1, Mike Cohen1,2, John Allen1; 1University of
Arizona, 2University of Amsterdam — Error-related activity in the medial
prefrontal cortex (mPFC) is thought to work in conjunction with lateral
prefrontal cortex (lPFC) as a part of an action monitoring network, where
errors signal the need for increased cognitive control. The neural mechanism by which this mPFC-lPFC interaction occurs remains unknown. We
hypothesized that transient synchronous oscillations in the theta range
reflect a mechanism by which these structures interact. To test this
hypothesis, we extracted oscillatory phase and power from currentsource-density-transformed electroencephalographic data recorded during a Flanker task. Theta power in the mPFC was diminished on the trial
preceding an error and increased immediately following an error, consistent with predictions of an action monitoring system. These power
dynamics appeared to take place over a response-related background of
oscillatory theta phase coherence. Theta phase synchronization between
FCz (mPFC) and F5/6 (lPFC) sites was robustly increased during error
trials. The degree of mPFC-lPFC oscillatory synchronization predicted
the degree of mPFC power on error trials, and both of these dynamics
predicted the degree of post-error reaction time slowing. Oscillatory
dynamics in the theta band may in part underlie a mechanism of communication between networks involved in action monitoring and cognitive
control.
I8
DISSOCIATING FRONTAL AND PARIETAL CONTRIBUTIONS
TO EXECUTIVE CONTROL Chris Dodds1, Sharon Morein-Zamir1, Trevor
Robbins1; 1University of Cambridge, Experimental Psychology, UK — A central
debate in cognitive neuroscience concerns the extent to which the prefrontal and parietal cortices can be fractionated according to their differential involvement in specific executive control processes. On the one
hand, compelling evidence has been presented for a high degree of functional localization within these regions. Studies have consistently shown
that the ability to withhold a prepotent response is dependent on the
integrity of the right inferior prefrontal cortex, whilst regions within the
parietal cortex are involved in the flexible shifting and reorienting of
attention. On the other hand, taken as a whole the functional neuroimaging literature shows a remarkably consistent pattern of activity in a frontoparietal network across a wide range of different cognitive demands.
In the present study we investigated whether it was possible to dissociate
frontal and parietal contributions to executive control within a single
task. Twenty healthy participants completed a novel task while undergo-

226

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

ing fMRI scanning. The task required subjects to perform two different
executive functions - inhibition of a prepotent response and attentional
shifting. We found that a network of frontal and parietal regions was
commonly recruited during stop and shift trials. However, direct comparison of activation during stop and shift trials revealed highly localised
activations in the right inferior frontal gyrus during response inhibition
and in the left inferior parietal lobe during attentional shifting. These
results show that process-specific responses in frontal and parietal
regions can be distinguished from a more general pattern of frontoparietal recruitment across different cognitive demands.
I9
EXECUTIVE
FUNCTIONING
IN
RECURRENT
MAJOR
DEPRESSION INVESTIGATED USING THE DELIS KAPLAN
EXECUTIVE FUNCTION SYSTEM Marit Schmid1, Mari Strand1,2,
Guro Årdal1, Åsa Hammar1,2; 1University of Bergen, Biological and Medical
Psychology, Norway, 2Division of Psychiatry, Haukeland University Hospital,
University of Bergen, Norway — Executive functioning in Recurrent Major
Depression investigated using the Delis Kaplan Executive Function System. Marit Schmid a, Mari Strand a,b , Guro Årdal a & Åsa Hammar a, b
a Department of Biological and Medical Psychology, University of Bergen, Norway b Division of Psychiatry, Haukeland University Hospital,
University of Bergen, Norway Abstract Focus on the association between
Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) and cognitive functioning have
increased over the last decade and several neuropsychological tests have
been developed to assess cognitive functioning. The aim of the study was
to examine Executive Function (EF) in patients with MDD using four
tests (Verbal fluency, Color- Word Interference test, Trail making test,
Tower) from the newly developed Delis Kaplan Executive Function System (D-KEFS). D-KEFS is the first set of EF tests designed to check for
underlying causes of observed deficits. We expected that patients with
recurrent MDD would show impairment on tests that measure EF, and
that basic cognitive skills are spared. Executive Functioning (EF) was
investigated in patients with a DSM-IV diagnosis of recurrent Major
Depression (MDD), in the acute phase of illness. Twenty six MDD
patients (age 17-55) with a Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS)
score of > 20 were included in the study. Twenty five healthy control subjects were matched for age, gender, and education. The results demonstrate that the patient group showed a tendency towards lower
performance on most measures of EF compared to the control group. Significant differences were found on tests measuring inhibition, switching,
and category fluency. There were no differences between the two groups
on measures of basic cognitive skills. In conclusion, patients show
impairment on measures of EF, whilst basic cognitive skills are spared.
I10
AN INTERACTION BETWEEN PRIOR PROBABILITY AND
VISUAL NOISE IN VISUAL CORTEX Sarah Hillenbrand1, Kathleen
Hansen1, Leslie Ungerleider1; 1Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, NIMH — In
this study we sought to identify regions of cortical activation associated
with the use of prior probability (PP) during perceptual decisions in
noisy visual conditions. We hypothesized that, in noisy conditions, activity levels in visual cortex would increase with PP. To test this hypothesis,
we acquired fMRI data while subjects performed a perceptual decision
task (deciding whether abstract parametric shapes belonged to distribution A or B, where distribution A was on average smoother than distribution B). Subjects made decisions under two PP conditions (50/50, equal
PP that each shape belonged to A or B, vs. 80/20, higher PP that each
shape belonged to one of the two distributions) and two noise conditions
(noise vs. no noise). Stimulus discriminability was manipulated in the
noisy condition by using varying levels of noise to obscure the shapes,
and in the noise-free condition by overlapping the shape distributions
such that many shapes were somewhat or very ambiguous. In the noisy
condition, cortex near LO (a location where selectivity for visually-presented shapes and objects has been observed) showed a significant interaction with increased activity at high PP and increased visual noise. In

Poster Session I

the noise-free condition, this region did not show an analogous interaction between PP and ambiguity; thus, the observed interaction between
PP and stimulus discriminability is specific to noisy visual conditions.
I11
COMMON AND DISTINCT PREFRONTAL REGIONS FOR
SWITCHING BETWEEN TASK MAPPINGS, TASK RULES, AND
TASK ORDERS Christine Stelzel1,2,3, Ulrike Basten1,2,3, Christian
Fiebach1,2,3; 1University of Heidelberg, Psychology, Germany, 2University of
Heidelberg, Neuroradiology, Germany, 3University of Heidelberg, Neurology,
Germany — Switching between task representations leads to performance
costs (i) when different responses are assigned to identical stimuli ('taskmapping switch'), (ii) when the rules relating stimuli and responses
change ('task-rule switch'), and (iii) when the order of two tasks in a dualtask situation changes ('task-order switch'). All types of switching have
been associated with the lateral prefrontal cortex (lPFC). However, it is
not known yet whether these switching processes involve common or
distinct prefrontal regions. We tested the three switching processes
within one fMRI session. Participants performed choice reactions on
visually presented digits: smaller/greater five or odd/even decisions. In
task-switch blocks, a cue indicated which task rule to perform in the following trial ('task-rule switch'). In dual-task blocks, both cues were presented with a delay and participants responded in the order of cue
presentation to both stimuli ('task-order switch'). Cues appeared to the
left or right of a fixation cross, indicating the response hand for the relevant tasks ('task-mapping switch'). Behaviorally, switching costs were
present for all three manipulations. No brain regions were significantly
active in the conjunction of all three switching contrasts. The left inferior
frontal junction (IFJ) region was commonly activated by switching
between task mappings and task rules but not by task-order switching
which was related to the right IFJ. In addition to this left-right dissociation, task-rule switching and task-order switching commonly activated a
region in the right anterior middle frontal gyrus, supporting a hierarchical lPFC view with more abstract control processes located in more anterior lPFC regions.
I12
EYE MOVEMENT CONTROL AS A PROBE OF IMPULSIVE
DECISION MAKING Robert Adam1,2, Paul Bays1,2, Masud Husain1,2;
1
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2Institute of Neurology, University
College London — Why do some people dash across the street at the last
minute or ’put the pedal to the metal’ almost before the light goes green,
while others are more cautious? Here we introduce a novel oculomotor
task to examine decision making. In our task, a traffic (stop) light dictates
when subjects should make a horizontal saccade as fast as possible in
return for a hyperbolically decaying reward. Subjects are cued by the
onset of an amber light to prepare to make a saccade when the light turns
green. The duration of the amber signal is variable but randomly selected
from a fixed distribution so that subjects build an expectation of the GO
(green) signal. Under these circumstances some subjects generate anticipatory saccades in addition to the reactive distribution that follows GO
onset. Disproportionately rewarding early saccades encourages subjects
to behave ’impulsively’, increasing anticipatory responses. Young participants (n=20) demonstrated increasing anticipatory behaviour with
lengthening amber durations prior to the GO. Anticipations were rare,
however, in older volunteers (n=20). We modelled the two types of
behaviour - anticipatory and reactive - as two linear rise-to-threshold
processes, one triggered by amber onset and the second by the GO stimulus. Using maximum likelihood estimation we found best fit values for
the mean and variance of two recinormal saccade distributions: an early
anticipatory process and a later reactive response. The findings show
how eye movement control can be used as a quantitative probe of impulsivity, with few parameters required to generate a well fitting model.

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I13
GLUCOSE ENHANCEMENT OF EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL
MARKERS ASSOCIATED WITH EPISODIC MEMORY AND
EXECUTIVE FUNCTION Louise Brown1, Leigh Riby2, Andrew Meikle;
1The University of Edinburgh, Psychology, 2Northumbria University, Division
of Psychology — The ingestion of a glucose containing drink has been
shown to improve cognitive performance, particularly for episodic memory functioning. However, it remains unclear the extent to which task
domain moderates the glucose enhancement effect. The aim of this
research was to determine whether facilitation is restricted to known
event-related potential (ERP) components related to episodic memory
(i.e., left-parietal effect; recollection), or if frontal lobe functioning (i.e.,
central-frontal negativity; conflict monitoring) can also benefit. In a
mixed design 35 participants were administered either 25g glucose dissolved in an organge-flavoured drink, or a placebo product (a matched
saccharin drink). Blood glucose monitoring performed at the start, midpoint, and end of each session confirmed that blood glucose levels
increased mid-session for the glucose group only. After consumption of
the drink and a subsequent 15 minute delay period, two tasks traditionally associated with episodic memory (an old/new recognition task) and
frontal lobe functioning (the Stroop task) were carried out in a counterbalanced order. Consistent with previous behavioural research, an analysis of the grand average ERPs revealed facilitation of the left-parietal
episodic memory component. However, glucose also moderated the frontal ERP component related to conflict monitoring. These findings therefore support the idea that glucose impacts on neural mechanisms
involved in episodic memory but, contrary to expectations, glucose was
also found to facilitate frontal lobe function. These data are discussed in
relation to recent fMRI data which also suggest that both the medial-temporal lobes and pre-frontal cortex are sensitive to the action of glucose.
I14
ARE SPECIFIC PREFRONTAL REGIONS NECESSARY FOR SELFORDERED SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY PERFORMANCE?
EVIDENCE FROM A LESION STUDY Ami Tsuchida1, Lesley Fellows1;
1Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University — Executive
components of working memory, such as the ability to monitor information and
implement effective strategy, are critical for goal-directed behaviour, and
thought to depend on prefrontal cortex (PFC). The self-ordered spatial
working memory (SWM) task has been widely used to investigate the
neural substrates of such components across species. Lesion studies in
rats and non-human primates have specifically implicated dorsolateral
PFC in the successful performance of this task, and much of the neuroimaging work in humans has also emphasized a specific role for this area.
However, there is no direct evidence for such specificity from neuropsychological studies in humans. The effect of damage to specific regions
within PFC was examined by administering the SWM task to 36 subjects
with focal frontal lobe damage, and 53 demographically-matched control
subjects. Contributions of prefrontal sub-regions to task performance
were tested with both region-of-interest and voxel-based lesion symptom
mapping (VLSM) methods. Surprisingly, the group with lateral prefrontal damage was the least impaired among the patient groups: groups
with dorsomedial or ventromedial damage made more errors, with the
ventromedial group having notably poor performance. VLSM confirmed
this pattern, indicating significant effects of damage to broad areas within
medial prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortex, but not lateral PFC. The
results suggest the executive processes tapped by the SWM depend on a
network of prefrontal regions, rather than isolated contributions from
dorsolateral PFC.
I15
CHANGES IN ERP COMPONENT AMPLITUDES REFLECT THE
UPDATING OF VALUE FUNCTIONS IN A REINFORCEMENT
LEARNING TASK Olav Krigolson1; 1University of British Columbia,
Psychology — In order to successfully optimize behaviour, we utilise feedback to modify the information on which we have base our decisions. The

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

227

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

error-related negativity (ERN), a component of the event-related brain
potential (ERP), is thought to reflect a reinforcement learning prediction
error elicited by feedback evaluation. To date, only a few studies have
attempted to demonstrate that the ERN is actually followed by improvements in subsequent performance. In other words, if the ERN reflects a
prediction error signal, then on trials following its occurrence there
should be corresponding changes in the ERP which reflect the updating
of the value functions used for response selection. In the present study,
participants performed a two choice n-arm bandit gambling task. Within
each block of trials, gambles were repeated so that participants could use
the outcome of their initial response (win, loss) to improve response
selection on subsequent trials. An analysis of feedback locked waveforms
revealed a difference between initial win and loss trials in line with previous accounts of the ERN. Analysis of waveforms locked to stimulus presentation revealed no differences correlated with response selection on
the initial trial. However, on subsequent trials, increases in lateralised
ERP components were observed which predicted the subsequent
response. In sum, the results of the present experiment support the
hypothesis that the ERN reflects a prediction error. Further, the increases
in lateralised ERP component amplitude observed here are indicative of a
process in which the prediction error modifies value functions in order to
improve future performance.
I16
MECHANISMS FOR RETRIEVAL AND SELECTION DURING
LANGUAGE PRODUCTION Hannah Snyder1, Natalie Hutchison1,
Yuko Munakata1; 1University of Colorado Boulder, Psychology — During
language production, words must constantly be retrieved and selected
for production in the face of multiple possible alternatives. There is broad
consensus that our ability to respond in such underdetermined situations
requires cognitive control and relies on left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
(VLPFC). However, there has been little investigation, or even speculation, as to specific mechanisms that may support retrieval and selection
of responses. Regardless of whether separate areas of VLPFC support
these processes (e.g Badre & Wagner, 2007), the specific mechanisms
could be common or distinct. We present a biologically-plausible neural
network model that implements a language-production task (verb generation). The model reproduces the effects of competition and association
strength found in human participants, taking longer to produce a
response when there are multiple competing responses, and when stimulus-response association strength is low. Recurrent connections in PFC
appear to be essential both for resolving competition, and for boosting
activation of weakly associated responses (’retrieval’), while k-winnerstake-all inhibition is also essential for selection when competition is high.
This model suggests that basic neural properties of PFC, together with
synaptic weights established through Hebbian learning, may be sufficient
to account for effects of both association strength and competition. In
addition, the model predicts that participants with reduced neural inhibition should exhibit difficulty resolving competition. We confirm this prediction, demonstrating increased selection costs in participants high in
trait anxiety (associated with poor GABAergic function). Implications for
understanding cognitive control in both normal populations and those
with anxiety disorders are discussed.
I17
TRAINING WORKING MEMORY AND VISUAL ATTENTION ON
THE INTERNET Gregory Kellett1, Michael Scanlon2, Kunal Sarkar2, David
Drescher2, Mark Geisler1; 1San Francisco State University, 2Lumos Labs,
Inc. — Prior research has shown that cognitive abilities are adaptive and
can be improved via targeted cognitive behavioral training methods;
however, use of these methods is limited outside of the laboratory. We
investigated the efficacy of a web-based cognitive training program
which participants could complete at home, by measuring improvement
of visual attention and working memory in healthy adults. Volunteer
participants (mean age=54) were made up of 14 people receiving the
treatment and 9 receiving the control (no treatment) condition, for a total

228

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

of 23 participants. All participants were given initial cognitive assessments, a training (or control) intervention and then cognitive assessments
again post-training. Both training and testing were conducted online at
each participant's respective home. Trained subjects completed twentyminute sessions of online cognitive exercise once daily for five weeks,
while control participants received no training. Exercises consisted of one
visual attention and three working memory tasks. Results and compliance data were captured online and saved to a secure server automatically. The trained group improved significantly (p<0.01) in measures of
visual attention and working memory while the control group did not.
Training reduced the average error in localization of transient and noncentral visual stimuli while also improving performance on measures of
spatial working memory. There were no significant performance shifts in
the control group. These results provide evidence that web-based cognitive training can transfer to improvement on tests of working memory
and visual attention, and indicate a practical method for home-based cognitive development.
I18
DISSOCIATING
OUTCOME
EXPECTANCY
(P300)
AND
ACCURACY (FRN) IN RELATION TO POST-ERROR SLOWING
Elena Núñez Castellar1, Simone Kuehn2,1, Wim Gevers3, Wim Fias1, Wim
Notebaert1; 1Ghent University, Belgium, 2Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 3Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Belgium — During the last years a growing number of studies have used
event-related potentials (ERPs) to investigate the mechanisms underlying
error processing. However, how these mechanisms are associated with
behavioral adjustments, which follow the commission of an error,
remains unclear. In the present study we investigate how the slowing
down observed in the trial immediately following an error (post-error
slowing) is linked to outcome expectations and error feedback. An adaptive four-choice reaction time task was used to manipulate outcome
expectancy. Subjects performed the task in two conditions: 75% correct
responses (expectancy for correct) and 35% correct responses (expectancy
for error). Behaviorally, the results show post-error slowing in the 75%correct condition and post-correct slowing in the 35%-correct condition,
indicating that outcome expectancy mismatch is crucial for post-error
slowing. Feedback-locked ERP analyses revealed Feedback Related Negativity (FRN) for errors irrespective of outcome expectancy and increased
P300 amplitude for unexpected outcomes irrespective of accuracy. The
results suggest that FRN is unrelated to the slowing after unexpected outcomes while the P300 is. The results support the hypothesis that posterror slowing is caused by attentional orienting to unexpected events.
I19
RESOLUTION OF CONFLICT BY BILINGUALS AND MUSICIANS:
EVIDENCE FROM ERP Sylvain Moreno1, Ellen Bialystok1, Zofia
Wodniecka2, Claude Alain3; 1York University, 2Jagiellonian University,
3
Rotman Research Institute & University of Toronto — Bilinguals and musicians have been shown to perform better than monolinguals in executive
function tasks involving conflict (Bialystok, 2001; Costa et al., 2008; Bialystok & DePape, in press). For bilinguals, these findings have been
attributed to their need to switch constantly between their two languages
and inhibit interference from the other language. The recruitment of executive processes into language processing for bilinguals alters the development and efficiency of these processes for bilinguals. For musicians,
these findings have been attributed to their training requirements which
involve high levels of control, attention, and memorization, again involving executive processes. Here, we recorded ERPs in 42 young adults who
were either English monolinguals, English-Hebrew bilinguals, or monolingual musicians while they performed a visual Go-Nogo task. This paradigm involved two different executive function processes: conflict
detection and response inhibition mechanisms. Our hypothesis was to
observe the effect of different life experiences on specific aspects of executive functioning. Bilingualism is based in language conflict and so should
influence conflict detection processes and not response inhibition mecha-

Poster Session I

nisms; musical training incorporates motor responses into the executive
function system and so should modify response inhibition mechanisms,
but their ear training should also influence conflict detection processes.
Our results supported these hypotheses: Bilingualism influenced the N2
ERPs wave component related to conflict detection and musical training
influenced N2 and P3 ERPs wave components related to conflict detection but also to response inhibition. The results are used to refine conceptions of the effect of experience on executive functioning.
I20
EEG AND FMRI IMAGING OF AN EXPERT MEDITATOR IN
EIGHT JHANAS Michael Hagerty1,2, Julian Isaacs2, Leigh Brasington,
Larry Shupe3, Eberhard Fetz3, Steven Cramer4; 1University of California,
Davis, 2Wellspring Institute, 3University of Washington, 4University of
California, Irvine — We report the first fMRI images and EEG recordings
of an expert in the 8 advanced Buddhist meditations called jhanas, and
test 5 hypotheses on how the jhanas differ from the closed-eye resting
state in 8 different brain regions. We hypothesize simple changes in the
brain regions responsible for each of the 5 principal experiential features
of jhana states. These features are: (1) internal verbalizations fade, (2)
external awareness dims, (3) the sense of personal boundaries is altered,
(4) the experience of evaluations, goals, and "shoulds" diminishes, and (5)
attention is highly focused on the object of meditation. The results
strongly confirm reduced activity in the brain regions related to the first 3
hypotheses, with all 16 of the planned comparisons significant and in the
predicted direction. With respect to Hypothesis 4, results are mixed, with
all 4 predictions significantly confirmed in the alpha1 band, but all 4 disconfirmed in the theta band. However, fMRI shows reduced BOLD signal in predicted areas. Lastly, Hypothesis 5 was mostly confirmed, with 5
of the 6 planned comparisons in the predicted direction. The EEG spectra
show strong, significant, and consistent differences in specific brain
regions when the meditator is in a jhana state compared to normal resting
consciousness, and the fMRI largely confirm these results, with higher
BOLD signal only in executive areas. The strength of these effects
appears to be larger than any other meditation discipline studied so far.
I21
AN ASSOCIATION BETWEEN MALADAPTIVE COPING AND
INHIBITORY DEFICITS IN THE STROOP TASK: PAIN
CATASTROPHIZING
SCORES
CORRELATE
WITH
INCONGRUENT COLOR NAMING TIMES Kristin
Janschewitz1,
Theresa Khoo1, Barbara Knowlton1; 1University of California, Los Angeles — It
has been demonstrated that persistent negative thinking and poor coping
impact health. Since inhibition is normally needed to control thoughts
and actions, inhibitory deficits may underlie emotion regulation deficits
that contribute negatively to health. Specifically, catastrophizing interpretations about health-related information may contribute to the experience of distress in chronic physical disorders. In the current study, 23
undergraduate students completed a Stroop task in which they were
asked to name the ink colors of words that denoted congruent or incongruent colors. Participants' scores on the Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS;
Sullivan, Bishop & Pivik, 1995) were also obtained. It was found that PCS
scores significantly positively correlated with naming times in the incongruent (p=.03) but not congruent conditions. These results suggest that
deficits in relatively high-level (cognitive) inhibition for neutral material
are associated with maladaptive coping styles in otherwise healthy participants. We suggest that basic cognitive control problems may factor
into the experience of distress in clinical populations in which intrusive
thoughts are considered characteristic of impaired emotion regulation.
The current study is part of a larger effort to examine the relationship
between cognitive control, emotion, and health outcomes.
I22
CARDIORESPIRATORY
FITNESS
MODERATES
NEURAL
MECHANISMS OF COGNITIVE CONTROL IN OLDER ADULTS
Ruchika Prakash1, Michelle Voss1, Kirk Erickson2, Jason Lewis1, Laura
Chaddock1, Katherine Morris3, Shawna Doerksen3, Amanda Szabo3, Edward

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

McAuley3, Arthur Kramer1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Beckman Institute and Department of Psychology, 2University of Pittsburgh,
Psychology, 3University of Illinois, Kinesiology and Community Health,
Urbana-Champaign — A growing body of literature provides evidence for
the prophylactic influence of cardiorespiratory fitness on cognitive functioning of older adults. In here, we examined the neural mechanisms
underlying such fitness benefits in the context of theories of healthy
aging. Specifically, employing a modified version of the Stroop task, we
questioned whether higher levels of cardiorespiratory fitness were associated with an increase in cortical regions responsible for imposing attentional control along with a concomitant up-regulation of task-relevant
representations. To isolate regions of the ventral visual cortex involved in
processing task-relevant attributes and task-irrelevant attributes, we presented our participants with localizer scans to identify areas of the brain
that were sensitive to color processing and word processing and subsequently studied modulation of these regions as a function of the Stroop
task. Higher fitness levels were associated with improved behavioral performance on the most demanding incongruent condition of the Stroop
task. This was accompanied with an increase in the recruitment of prefrontal cortices in the most challenging condition for higher-fit individuals, providing evidence that cardiorespiratory fitness can act as a
potential moderator of the age-related neural inflexibility demonstrated
in previous studies. Consistent with models of selective attention, we
found a modulation of both the task-relevant and task-irrelevant
attributes relative to the baseline. However, only activation in the colorsensitive areas was associated with improved behavioral performance,
but not with cardiorespiratory fitness. Our results thus provide insights
for the differential mechanisms by which fitness has a favorable influence
on cognitive control in older adults.
I23
LARGE-SCALE ASSESSMENT OF COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE
AND PLASTICITY Michael Scanlon1, Gregory Kellett1,2, Jacob Rothstein1,
Kunal Sarkar1, David Drescher1; 1Lumos Labs, 2San Francisco State
University — An individual’s cognitive performance can influence their
living or working performance; and a wide range of health conditions
can lead to impairments in cognitive ability. It may be possible, however,
to improve human cognitive performance with appropriately directed
training. We used the data saved by the web-based cognitive training
application "Lumosity" to compare cognitive status and plasticity across
demographics, and to construct a normalized scale that can be used for
future testing. The Lumosity software saves the results of each neuropsychological test and training task completed by each user. Because Lumosity is a popular consumer product, the data is comprised of a diverse and
large number of participants (>40,000 individuals), making it possible to
assess demographic sub-populations with sufficient statistical power to
detect subtle differences. We first established population normalized
score distributions for each task. Using these norms, we measured participants’ baseline abilities in areas including working memory, short-term
memory, reaction time, and cognitive control, as well as real-world skills
such as arithmetic computation and face-name memory. We found significant performance differences between age groups, and these differences
depended on the particular cognitive function examined. Additionally,
by observing changes in scores during and following training, we were
able to compare cognitive plasticity at different ages and across different
cognitive domains. The capability to efficiently evaluate cognitive status,
alter it with appropriate treatments, and then assess changes from baseline has both academic and clinical importance, and this research suggests a viable method to achieve this capability.
I24
NEURAL CORRELATES OF AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN
EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS AND MAGNITUDE PROCESSING
Chih-Mao Huang1, Denise C. Park2; 1University of Illinois, Psychology,
Urbana-Champaign, 2Center for Brain Health, University of Texas at Dallas —
There is increasing evidence that patterns of bilateral neural activation

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

229

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

that occur with age in frontal as well as parietal areas are functional and
supportive of cognition in older adults and are a type of compensatory
neural scaffolding (Park & Reuter-Lorenz, in press). In this fMRI study,
we examined age differences in an executive control task where stimulus
congruity was manipulated, using a numerical Stroop paradigm. Fifteen
young and 13 old participants were instructed to decide which digit of a
digit pair was either numerically (numerical comparison task) or physically (physical comparison task) larger. The physical size of digits and
numerical distance between the digits were varied such that numerical
and physical magnitude of digits could be congruent, neutral or incongruent with each other. Compared to young adults, older adults had a
longer reaction time for both physical and numerical magnitude comparisons and also had a larger incongruency effect (incongruent vs. congruent trials). In addition, older adults, in contrast to young, showed
bilateral recruitment in parietal and frontal areas, with a dissociation of
task type from locus of bilaterality. For incongruous judgments of size
magnitude, bilateral recruitment occurred in frontal areas, but for judgments of distance magnitude, the bilaterality occurred in parietal regions.
The study provides evidence for highly specific compensatory recruitment for different executive processes involving the same physical stimuli, and is supportive of the Park and Reuter-Lorenz STAC (Scaffolding
Theory of Cognitive Aging) model which makes specific predictions
about the loci of compensatory recruitment with age.
I25
THE TIMING TO KNOW THE SIGNIFICANCE OF ERRORS
MODULATES THE ERROR PROCESSING Asuka
Murata1,
2
1
Junichi'Katayama ; Graduate School of Education, Hokkaido University,
2Faculty of Education, Hokkaido University — Previous studies have demonstrated that the error-related negativity (ERN) reflects the mismatch
between the representations of the goal and the outcome of our behavior.
The goal of our behavior varies depending on the environment. As for
time, there are different timings when we know the impact of our behavior. To investigate an effect of the timing to know the significance of
errors on the ERN, an arrowhead version of flankers task was administered. Participants were instructed to press the left or right button in
accordance with the direction of the central target. The first and second
cues appeared approximately 2000 ms and 500 ms before the presentation
of arrowheads, respectively. Either the first or second cue informed
whether or not participants could gain monetary reward for correct in the
present trial. Motivated trials, in which participants were shown the
reward by the first or second cue, were categorized to long notice (LN) or
short notice (SN) trial, and the rest was labeled as not motivated (NM)
trial. Hit rates were higher for LN and SN than for NM trials, indicating
that participants changed their strategy according to the motivational
incentive regardless of the timing. All error trials elicited clear ERN. The
ERN was larger for LM than for SN trials, indicating that the timing to
know the significance of errors changed the degree of mismatch between
the representations of goal and outcome. The finding suggests that the
goal representation is modulated by temporal alterations of motivation
for achieving the goal.
I26
EFFECT OF MOTOR IMAGERY ON BILATERAL TRANSFER,
BEHAVIORAL AND NIRS EXPERIMENT Kaoru
Amemiya1,2,
Tomohiro Ishizu2, Tomoaki Ayabe3, Shozo Kojima2; 1The University of Tokyo,
Graduate School of Medicine , 2Keio University, Faculty of letters , 3National
institute for physiological sciences, Sensory-Motor Integration — The aim of
this experiment was to investigate the imagery effect on the ipsilateral
and transfer training and its correlating brain area using NIRS (Near
Infrared Spectroscopy).?Using finger tapping paradigm, right handers
were randomly distributed to physical training group, imagery training
group or control group. Each group participants typed the predetarmined sequence physically or mentally, or counted numbers (control
group) during NIRS recording. After each training sessions (5 session of
30 seconds), they were tested the old sequence and newly transfer

230

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

sequence. The results showed that physical training led to the improvement of the old sequence. On the other hand, mental training led more
transfer to the new sequence than did the physical training, as well as the
improvement of the old sequence. The NIRS data revealed the imagery
activated the supplementary motor area (SMA), as the same level at the
physical execution. Although the activation level of the SMA correlated
with the improvement of the physical training, there was significant correlation neither with the improvement nor with the transfer in the case of
imagery training. This behavioral and NIRS experiment suggested the
following hypotheses. One is that the imagery training is effective to
achieve the abstract representation more than physical execution. The
imagery training might activated the SMA differently from the case of the
physical training. The last one is that the SMA might not be the predictive factor of the transfer.
I27
USE OF TWO-DIMENSIONAL SURFACE MAPPING TO
DISSOCIATE TWO ADJACENT ACTIVATIONS IN RIGHT
POSTERIOR INFERIOR PREFRONTAL CORTEX ASSOCIATED
WITH DISSIMILAR FUNCTIONS Satoshi Hirose1, Junichi Chikazoe1,
Koji Jimura1, Ken-ichiro Yamashita1, Yasushi Miyashita1, Seiki Konishi1; 1The
University of Tokyo School of Medicine, Physiology — Response inhibition
and negative feedback processing activate similar regions in the right
posterior inferior frontal gyrus (pIFG). The locations of these regions
were determined on the basis of group analysis of recruited subjects, but
the subject groups differed between studies. It is unclear, therefore,
whether these two cognitive requirements increased activity of a single
common focus in the pIFG or they increased activity of two separate foci
in the pIFG. In order to test these two possible patterns of functional
organization of the pIFG, the present functional magnetic resonance
imaging study employed the same subjects to perform the two tasks, one
of which required response inhibition and the other required negative
feedback processing. The region associated with response inhibition was
calculated based on the anti-saccade task used in Chikazoe et al. (2007).
On the other hand, the region associated with negative feedback processing was calculated based on the modified Wisconsin Card Sorting Task
(Konishi et al., 2002). Because of the individual difference in sulcal structures, the pIFG activation in each subject was analyzed using two-dimensional surface mapping based on Caret (Van Essen et al. 2001). By
comparing the coordinates of the two activations of individual subjects, it
was revealed that the two regions were adjacent but separate, and that
the region associated with response inhibition was located caudal to that
associated with negative feedback processing. These results suggest that
the right pIFG is functionally heterogeneous, and that the functional
organization of subregions within the pIFG should be further investigated.
I28
PREFRONTAL BRAIN ACTIVATION DURING THE PROCESSING
OF HIERARCHICAL SEQUENTIAL EVENTS Jörg Bahlmann1, Ricarda
Schubotz2, Jutta Mueller1, Dirk Koester3, Angela Friederici1; 1Max Planck
Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2Max
Planck Institute for Neurological Research, Cologne, Germany, 3Leiden Institute
for Brain and Cognition, and Leiden University, The Netherlands — A number of studies exist that investigated sequence processing in serial reaction time tasks or artificial grammar tasks. However, little is known about
higher order sequence processing (e.g., hierarchical organization of event
sequences). Here, we manipulated the regularities within sequentially
occurring, non-linguistic visual symbols by applying two types of prediction rules. In one rule (the adjacent dependency rule), the sequences consisted of alternating items from two different categories. In the second
rule (the hierarchical dependency rule), a hierarchical structure was generated using the same set of item types. Thus, predictions about non-adjacent elements were required for the latter rule. Functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) was used to investigate the neural correlates
of the application of the two prediction rules. We found that the hierar-

Poster Session I

chical dependency rule correlated with activity in the pre-supplementary
motor area, and the head of the caudate nucleus. In addition, in a hypothesis-driven ROI analysis in Broca’s area (BA 44), we found a significantly
higher hemodynamic response to the hierarchical dependency rule than
to the adjacent dependency rule. These results suggest that this neural
network supports hierarchical sequencing, possibly contributing to the
integration of sequential elements into higher-order structural events.
Importantly, the findings suggest that Broca’s area is also engaged in
hierarchical sequencing in domains other than language.
I29
NEURONAL REPRESENTATIONS OF GOAL PROXIMITY IN A
MULTITRIAL REWARD SCHEDULE Ruth M. Schmitt1,2,3, Andrea
Gaebel1,2,3, Christian J. Fiebach1,2,3; 1University of Heidelberg, Psychology,
Germany, 2University of Heidelberg, Neuroradiology, Germany, 3University of
Heidelberg, Neurology, Germany — Goal-directed behavior is putatively
influenced by motivational aspects of anticipated performance outcomes.
However, in complex environments, these desired effects are typically
not achieved immediately. Rather, several action steps are necessary to
reach a predicted result. Recent monkey studies identified anterior cingulate (ACC) neurons that code the proximity to an anticipated reward. In
humans, to our knowledge, evidence for such stepwise alterations of
reward-related brain activity during a sequence of actions is still missing.
We addressed this question in an fMRI study by integrating Knutson’s
Monetary Incentive Delay (MID) task into a multitrial reward schedule
paradigm, using two different reward contingencies: in the delayed condition, participants received a large amount of money only after successful completion of 4 consecutive trials. In the immediate condition, a small
amount of money was earned after every successful trial. A classical MID
task was furthermore employed to localize reward anticipation signals in
the striatum, rostral cingulate zone (RCZ) of the ACC, and dorsal premotor cortex (dPM). In the multitrial paradigm, all three regions exhibited a
response profile sensitive to progress through the schedule. RCZ and
dPM activation were additionally modulated by contingency condition,
indicating that these areas encode proximity to actual goal attainment.
These findings corroborate the assumption of a performance monitoring
function of the ACC, suggesting that increased reward expectation signals the need for accordant adjustments in cognitive control. Differential
dPM activation points towards an increased motivation in the delayed
contingency condition resulting in augmented motor control as an
expected result approaches.
I30
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY
AND A NEURAL INDEX OF CONTROLLED RECOLLECTION
Rachael Elward1, Edward Wilding1; 1CUBRIC, School of Psychology, Cardiff
University, UK — It is widely assumed that control can be exerted over
conscious recollection, and one possibility is that this occurs via inhibitory mechanisms. According to one account, inhibition is a resource
demanding process and as such is linked to the availability of working
memory capacity. In order to test this account, performance on the Ospan test (an assessment of working memory capacity) was correlated
with a neural index of the control of recollection derived from eventrelated potentials (ERPs). Participants studied a list of items and in a subsequent test phase responded on one key to new (unstudied) items and
on another to studied items (targets). Some of the new items repeated,
and participants responded to these ’non-targets’ on the same key as for
new items. ERPs were acquired during the test phases and the ERP measure of control over recollection was the difference between the size of the
left-parietal ERP old/new effect for targets and for non-targets. This ERP
old/new effect indexes recollection in a graded fashion, and larger parietal old/new effects for targets than for non-targets have been interpreted as an index of the degree to which control over the recollection of
non-targets has been exerted. There was a significant positive relationship between O-span scores and the magnitude of this neural index of
recollection control. This implies that the extent to which cognitive con-

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

trol resources (and possibly inhibition processes) are available influences
the degree to which recollection of some kinds of information can be prioritised over others.
I31
DIFFERENTIAL EMOTIONAL AND COGNITIVE PROCESSES
ELICITED BY CONFLICTS IN THE GO/NOGO AND THE SIMON
TASK Werner Sommer1, Schacht Annekathrin1; 1Humboldt-University,
Berlin, Germany — Conflicts have been suggested to require effortful processing and, therefore may be aversive (Botvinick, 2007). Two classical
experimental paradigms, which are known to elicit cognitive conflicts,
are the Go/NoGo task and the Simon task. Whereas the conflict in NoGo
trials consists in the inhibition of a predominant response tendency, the
Simon conflict is characterized by incompatible response activations.
Nevertheless, similar monitoring processes have been claimed to be
reflected in the N200 component of event-related potentials (ERPs) elicited in both tasks. In the present study, participants performed a Go/
NoGo and Simon task in a within-subject design using the same type of
stimuli, while ERPs, skin conductance responses (SCRs), pupil diameter,
and activity of the facial Corrugator muscle were recorded. Whereas
NoGo trials elicited reduced SCRs and pupillometric responses, but prolonged Corrugator activity as compared with Go trials, incompatible and
compatible Simon trials were indistinguishable in these parameters. Furthermore, the conflict-sensitive N2 and P3 ERP-components in both paradigms were similar in amplitude strength, but showed significantly
different scalp distributions indicating dissociable neural generator systems. The present findings suggest different emotional and cognitive processes to be involved in both types of cognitive conflicts, none being
aversive. In addition, the N200 findings call into question claims of common monitoring systems for all kinds of cognitive conflicts.
I32
ARE AGE EFFECTS IN PERFORMANCE MONITORING
MODULATED BY DECISION UNCERTAINTY? Melanie Schreiber1,
Anne Weigand1, Norbert Kathmann1, Tanja Endrass1; 1Humboldt Universität
zu Berlin — Event-related brain potential (ERP) studies identified the
error related negativity (ERN/Ne) and the correct related negativity
(CRN) to be related to performance monitoring. The CRN has previously
been explained with decision uncertainty. Pailing and Segalowitz (2004)
showed that ERN/Ne and CRN amplitude differences attenuated when
subjects were highly uncertain. Since our previous study revealed pronounced differences between ERN/Ne and CRN amplitudes in younger
adults, but not in older adults, our present study aims to investigate
whether age effects on ERN/Ne and CRN amplitudes are related to
higher decision uncertainty in older adults. Participants performed a
visual discrimination task with four difficulty levels to assess decision
uncertainty while recording event-related potentials. They were asked to
discriminate the volume of two dots and to decide which of the two dots
was larger. Subsequent response accuracy ratings allowed us to compare
aware and unaware correct and incorrect reactions as well as trials classified as uncertain. Results indicate that ERN/Ne and CRN amplitudes
were reduced in older compared to younger adults. Both groups showed
attenuated ERN/Ne amplitudes, while CRN amplitudes increased with
higher task difficulty. The percentage of uncertainty ratings was larger in
younger compared to older adults. Further, the distribution of uncertainty ratings corresponded not to the course of the CRN in the different
task conditions. Therefore, the present findings signal that age effects of
ERN/Ne and CRN amplitudes seem not (only) to be due to decision
uncertainty. Alternative explanations including age-related differences in
strategic adjustments are discussed.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

231

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I33
THE LOCUS OF INTERFERENCE IN PRIMED INHIBITION: AN
ERP STUDY Jonne Oldenburg1, Frederick Verbruggen1, Sara Assecondi,2,
Wim Fias1; 1Ghent University, Ghent, Experimental Psychology, Belgium,
2MEDISP-IBITECH-IBBT, Ghent University, Electronics and Information
Systems, Ghent, Belgium — Recently, it was found that if, in a stop signal
task, participants successfully inhibit their response to a stimulus,
response to a subsequent presentation of that same stimulus is slower
than the response to a different stimulus (Verbruggen et al., 2008). This
delay is thought to be due to conflict between go and stop processes both
activated by the stimulus that was previously associated with inhibition
but to which now a response has to be made. We use ERP to investigate
the nature of this association. Specifically, we were interested in the locus
of the interference between go and stop processes. To this end, we compared response locked and stimulus locked LRP waves of repetition trials
at which a response had to be made (trial N) but which could have either
an inhibition trial or a response trial preceding them (Trial N-1). Results
showed a latency difference between conditions at trial N which was
stimulus locked rather than response locked. Thus, interference at trial N
does not act directly on motor execution, but seems to affect duration of
pre-motoric processes.
I34
NEURAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING RESOURCE DEPLETION
OF EXECUTIVE CONTROL Jonas Persson1, Patricia Reuter-Lorenz1;
1Stockholm University, 2University of Michigan — Executive control coordinates, prioritizes and selects task relevant behaviours especially under
conditions of conflict and competition. Behavioural results indicate that
control efficiency in a second task is diminished when control demands
are high in a first task immediately preceding it in time. This suggests
that executive control is a finite resource that can be temporarily
depleted. For example, performance on semantic retrieval with high
interference is impaired when preceded by a working memory task with
high interference but not a working memory task with low interference
(Persson et al., Neuropsychologia, 2007). Here, we use fMRI to elucidate
the mechanisms associated with resource depletion or "selective fatigue"
of executive control. Participants, randomly assigned to the Depletion
group or the Non-depletion Control group, completed a pre-test and
post-test verb generation task that included a measure of interference resolution. Between pre- and post-test, the Depletion group performed itemrecognition with recent probes (high interference), whereas the Controls
performed item-recognition without recent probes (low interference).
These groups differed neither in pre-test verb generation performance
nor pre-test activations, including left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and
temporal regions. After their respective item recognition tasks, the
groups differed on verb generation behaviorally and neurally. The Depletion group performed less efficiently, showed reduced activation in left
IFG, and increased recruitment in right IFG compared to Controls. Selective depletion of executive control results in reduced performance,
reduced recruitment of task-specific regions, along with homologous
increases activation that may relate to compensation. These results have
implications for process-specific transfer and training.
I35
A
CHRONOMETRIC
ANALYSIS
OF
COGNITION
IN
DEPRESSION Marc Berman1, Derek Nee2,1, Patricia Deldin1, Melynda
Casement1, Hyang Sook Kim1, Susanne Jaeggi1,3, Martin Buschkuehl1,3,
Courtney Behnke1, Patrick Bissett4,1, John Jonides1; 1The University of
Michigan, Psychology, 2Indiana University, Psychology, 3University of Bern,
Psychology, 4Yale University, Psychology — Major Depressive Disorder has
been characterized by an inability to remove negative information from
mind. This inability may be a driver of rumination, a process by which
negative thoughts are recycled recursively and lead to worsened affect.
Here we explore both the ability to remove negative information from
mind with a directed forgetting paradigm, and spontaneous rumination
as associated with major depressive disorder. We find that participants

232

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

with depression have more difficultly removing negative information
from short-term memory and also have a long-term memory recall bias
for negative information compared to age-matched controls who show
the opposite pattern of results. In addition to these behavioral effects, we
find neural differences between the two groups at the time of encoding,
maintenance, and response selection.
These differences include
increased left Ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex activation for controls vs.
depressed and activation differences in the Amygdala and Parahippocampus as a function of stimulus valence (positive or negative) and Group
(Control or Depressed). Lastly, we find that participants with depression, but not controls, activate a neural circuit involved in episodic
retrieval and prospective memory during blank time intervals during our
study, which may be the neural signature of spontaneous depressive
rumination.
I36
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PERFORMANCE VARIABILITY
AND DEGREE OF SELF-REPORTED COGNITIVE DIFFICULTIES
IN TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY PATIENTS Paula M. McLaughlin1,
Susan J. E. Murtha1, Donald T. Stuss2,3, Kelly J. Murphy4; 1York University,
Psychology, 2Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre, 3University of
Toronto, Psychology and Medicine (Neurology, Rehabilitation Sciences),
4
Baycrest Centre, Psychology — Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is associated
with increased variability on cognitive testing and behavioral changes.
We investigated whether self-reported cognitive difficulties were related
to variability in TBI patients using the verbal fluency (word-generation)
paradigm. Verbal fluency is considered a test of executive cognition
because it requires initiation, self-monitoring, cognitive flexibility, strategic search and sustained effort. We examined dispersion (individual variability within a task) and consistency in performance (individual
variability between two test sessions) on verbal fluency to letter (phonemic) and category (semantic) cues in 16 TBI patients and 16 matched controls. Participants also completed the cognitive failures questionnaire
(CFQ), a measure of everyday slips in attention, and the dysexecutive
questionnaire (DEX), a measure of behavioral difficulties related to executive functioning (e.g., impulsivity, distractibility and poor decision making). Performance variability was compared between groups and
correlated with CFQ and DEX scores. Relative to control participants, TBI
patients exhibited greater dispersion, but comparable consistency in verbal fluency performance. The TBI participants also reported more cognitive slips on the CFQ, though overall scores on the DEX were comparable
to controls. Correlation analyses revealed TBI patients who showed
greater dispersion on phonemic fluency trials also report more cognitive
difficulties on the CFQ and DEX. There were no significant correlations
involving the control group. Phonemic fluency typically requires more
frequent switching between subcategories of words as compared to
semantic fluency. The correlation findings indicate variability in cognitive flexibility on objective testing may be related to increased functional
difficulties in everyday tasks requiring executive cognitive control.
I37
EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY EVIDENCE FOR A RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN SPATIAL RESPONSE SELECTION AND SPATIAL
SEQUENCE LEARNING Temilade Adelore1, Hilary Schwarb1, Eric H.
Schumacher1; 1Gerogia Institute of Technology — Behavioral and neuroimaging research has demonstrated that spatial response selection plays an
important role in spatial sequence learning (Schwarb & Schumacher, in
press). Univariate analyses of orthogonal manipulations of both
response-selection difficulty and sequence structure revealed significant
activity in bilateral dorsal premotor cortex (dPMC), bilateral superior
parietal cortex (SPC), supplementary motor area (SMA) and the right
dorsal prefrontal cortex (dPFC). Univariate analyses of these data reveal
that both spatial sequence learning and spatial response selection are
mediated by dPMC, SPC and SMA; while response selection alone is
mediated by right dPFC. Multivariate analyses of these data, however,
may provide further understanding of the interaction between these two

Poster Session I

cognitive processes. Here we use dynamic causal modeling (DCM) to
analyze the effective connectivity in the regions identified above. DCM
and Bayes factors provide a means to test and compare hypothesized
models that outline the various regions and their interactions with each
other and the experimental conditions. These models are developed
using both anatomical and functional evidence of connections between
regions-of-interest. Model fit comparisons allow us to determine which
model best explains the functional data, and provide insight into the
nature of processing in the frontal-parietal network controlling goaldirected behavior.
I38
TESTING HIERARCHICAL INTERACTIONS IN FRONTAL
CORTEX DURING COGNITIVE CONTROL Nicole M. Long1, David
Badre1; 1Brown University — The frontal lobes broadly support cognitive
control, which refers to our ability to control our behavior based on internal representations of goals, plans, and context. Understanding the functional organization of the frontal cortex remains a fundamental goal for
cognitive neuroscience. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging
to test the hypothesis that regions along the rostro-caudal axis of frontal
cortex are arranged hierarchically with respect to one another, such that
more posterior regions are subordinate to anterior regions during selection of a response. Within a hierarchically organized system, superordinate processors will influence subordinate processors but not vice versa.
In our experiment, subjects made a decision about task to perform (task
selection), and then a decision about which response to make given the
task being performed (response selection). We manipulated demands on
task selection by varying the number of alternative tasks (one or two). We
manipulated demands on response selection by arranging for more frequent encounters with certain response cues during a pre-test training
phase. Those stimuli encountered more often during training are better
learned and so should elicit faster responses relative to less frequently
encountered items. Crossing selection level (response/task) with frequency (more/less) permitted a probe of whether changes in the ease of
selection at a lower level (response) affects the ease of selection at the
higher level (task). Initial results appear broadly consistent with asymmetric hierarchical interactions between adjacent regions of frontal cortex.
I39
SHARED
CONTROL
MECHANISMS
OF
CONFLICT
ADAPTATION AND SWITCHING IN THE INTRA-PARIETAL
SULCUS Derek Nee1,2, Joshua Brown1; 1Indiana University, 2University of
Michigan — Previous research has demonstrated that when faced with
conflicting demands, control processes up-regulate relevant information
in order to facilitate performance. In other situations, control processes
are involved in switching between different tasks. Hence, on the one
hand, cognitive control involves reinforcing the present task, whereas on
the other hand, cognitive control involves switching between tasks. It is
unclear whether distinct neural substrates are involved in both reinforcing and flexible control, or whether a single collection of neural regions is
involved in both. We investigated this issue using a Stroop-like task
where subjects were required to switch between stimulus dimensions.
Replicating previous results, when stimulus dimensions conflicted
(incongruent trials), subjects demonstrated improved performance on
subsequent incongruent trials (conflict adaptation). This performance
enhancement was accompanied by increased activation in lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) and the intra-parietal sulcus (IPS), as well as increased
activation in posterior regions representing the currently relevant stimulus dimension (e.g. fusiform face area (FFA)). Switching between stimulus dimensions also recruited the IPS, and activation in posterior
representational cortices reflected the locus of the subjects’ attention.
Using multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA), we demonstrated that the
IPS distinguished the relevant task dimensions even when no univariate
signal differences were present. These results suggest that the IPS acts as
the focus of attention, highlighting relevant information in the face of

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

conflict, and switching among different sources of information when flexible control is required.
I40
AGE-ASSOCIATED DIFFERENCES BETWEEN HIGH AND LOW
PERFORMERS IN EFFICIENCY OF WORKING MEMORY
PROCESSING Kirk R Daffner1, Jenna L Riis2, Hyemi Chong3, Scott M
McGinnis1, Phillip J Holcomb4, Xue Sun1, Elise Tarbi1; 1Neurology, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 2Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, 3University of Texas Southwestern Medical School,
4
Tufts University, Psychology — We investigated age-related differences in
efficiency of neural processing between high and low performers on a
working memory (WM) task. Event-related potentials were recorded in
23 young (mean age 23) and 18 old (mean age 73) subjects, matched for
education and IQ, on a visual n-back WM paradigm with 3 levels of difficulty (0-back, 1-back, 2-back). Each age group was divided into high and
low performers based on 2-back task accuracy. P3 amplitude served as
an index of processing resources allocated to updating WM. Although
high and low performers in both age groups did not differ in accuracy on
the 0-back and 1-back tasks, high performers generated a much smaller
P3 to n-back targets, suggesting that they manage relatively easy working
memory demands more efficiently than age-matched low performers. As
the WM demands increased under the 2-back condition, high, but not
low performers, appropriated additional resources, as measured by P3
amplitude. This resulted in high performers having greater accuracy
than low performers. Despite an augmentation in P3 amplitude, across
young subjects, high performers still generated a smaller P3 to 2-back targets than low performers. In contrast, across old subjects, high performers now generated a larger P3 to 2-back targets than low performers.
These results suggest that among old subjects, high performers meet the
requirements of the 2-back condition by allocating more resources than
low performers, a pattern that we anticipate finding in young subjects
under WM conditions that are even more demanding.
I41
INVESTIGATING CONTROL MECHANISMS WITHIN AND
BETWEEN MODALITY WITH A TEMPORAL FLANKER TASK
Erin Lightman1, Hillary Schwarb1, Eliot Hazeltine2, Nehal Patel1, Eric
Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2University of Iowa — The
architecture of executive control is uncertain. Some theorists suggest that
it is mediated by an amodal central executive mechanism (e.g., Baddeley,
1986; 1996), whereas others propose a set of independent control mechanisms (e.g., Miller & Cohen, 2001). In a series of behavioral and fMRI
experiments, we investigated whether control mechanisms are unitary or
independent by examining conflict adaptation within and between stimulus modalities. We used a modified flanker task, in which the target and
flanker stimuli differed in time rather than space, making it accessible for
both visual and auditory stimuli. As in a traditional flanker task, larger
congruency effects were observed after compatible trials than after
incompatible trials. However, this sequential effect only occurred when
modality remained constant between the consecutive trials. Participants
showed no adaptive control when the stimulus modality switched, even
when the stimulus modalities used identical stimulus-response (SR)
mappings. These data suggest that sequential effects are restricted to an
input modality; that a set of independent mechanisms mediate executive
control; and that modalities rather than SR mappings constrain conflict
resolution. The neural implications of separate modality-specific executive control mechanisms were investigated using fMRI.
I42
RISK-TAKING
IN
A
GAMBLING
TASK
INCREASES
OSCILLATORY THETA-BAND ACTIVITY IN RIGHT MEDIAL
FRONTAL CORTEX Greg Christie1, Andrew Butcher1, Matthew Tata1;
1
University of Lethbridge — When participants in a gambling game receive
feedback as to whether they won or lost, a stereotypical series of neural
responses can be observed in the electroencephalogram (EEG) and the
stimulus-locked Event-Related Potential (ERP). These include the Feed-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

233

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

back-Related Mediofrontal Negativity (FRN), the feedback-related P300,
and increases in induced theta-band (4 - 7 Hz) power over frontal scalp.
This study used a modified version of the Iowa Gambling Task to investigate how risk modifies these responses. We found the FRN was not modulated by the riskiness of a bet, but both the P300 and induced theta-band
activity were of greater amplitude following high-risk/high-reward bets
relative to low-risk/low-reward bets. Using a bilateral Beamformer
approach, we localized this induced theta-band activity to partially overlapping sources in right medial frontal cortex, possibly including Anterior Cingulate.
I43
EXECUTIVE FUNCTION AND PAIN RELY ON SHARED
ATTENTIONAL RESOURCES Jason Buhle1, Tor D. Wager1; 1Columbia
University — It is widely assumed that distraction reduces pain. Similarly, it is assumed that pain distracts from concurrent, unrelated mental
processing, reducing performance on difficult tasks. Taken together,
these assumptions suggest a shared resources model for pain processing
and cognitive executive functions. However, experimental tests of this
model have yielded mixed results, leading to the recent proposal of alternative models in which pain and cognitive processes are relatively independent. We tested these contrasting positions using a novel concurrent
pain and executive working memory paradigm. Both task difficulty and
three levels of pain were individually calibrated for each participant. Participants reported less pain during working memory performance than
during a visually matched control condition. Conversely, increasing levels of heat incrementally reduced task performance. We next used mediation analysis to test whether trial-by-trial fluctuations in pain predicted
performance decrements within a given temperature. The effects of
increasing levels of heat on task performance were completely mediated
by subjective pain reports. In addition, causal effects analysis supported
the existence of independent causal effects of both pain on performance
and performance on pain. Taken together, these findings argue for shared
resources between pain processing and executive working memory.
Future studies could use this paradigm to understand more precisely
which components of executive function are integral to pain processing.
I44
THE NEURAL BASES OF MESSAGE PROPAGATION Emily Falk1,
Sylvia Morelli1, Locke Welborn1, Karl Dambacher1, Matthew Lieberman1;
1UCLA — Information exchange between individuals is at the heart of
social interaction, and can result in the spread of important attitudes and
behaviors (e.g. health behaviors, product trends, political attitudes).
Research suggests that individuals are more likely to pass information to
similar than to dissimilar others, however, the mechanisms that support
the decision about which information to pass on have not been investigated. Recent studies have, however, explored the neural bases of understanding the mind of others; considering the contents of another
individual’s thoughts and intentions from a general "theory of mind" and
considering their psychological characteristics is associated with activity
in dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC), while self-reflective processing and mentalizing about similar others is associated with activity in
medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC). Here we present the results of two
studies in which we explore the decision to pass information to a close
other (study1) and a more distant other (study2). Results indicate that
passing information on (relative to not passing information on) to both
close others and more distant others is associated with increased activity
in MPFC. Passing information on to distant others (relative to not passing information on) is further associated with activity in DMPFC. Thus,
we find a common neural mechanism relating decisions to pass information on to both close and distant others, as well as a component that may
be more specific to the effortful process of mentalizing about less familiar
others in the context of deciding which information is worthy of social
exchange.

234

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

I45
STRATEGIC MODULATION OF DECISION-MAKING UNDER
RISK Tal Yarkoni1, Todd Braver1; 1Washington University in St. Louis —
When making decisions involving risk, people often deviate markedly
from the predictions of normative choice models, and show a systematic
tendency to minimize risk rather than maximizing expected value (EV).
This bias is widely attributed to a tendency to assign greater emotional
weight to negative prospects relative to positive prospects. However, it
remains unclear to what extent such emotional responses are controllable
and subject to strategic modulation. In the present study, participants
were scanned with fMRI while engaging in a standard gambling paradigm involving repeated choice between two probabilistic rewards (e.g.,
70% of 400 vs. 30% of 1000). We experimentally manipulated the manner
in which rewards were computed as well as the nature of the feedback
participants received. Results provided strong evidence that strategy
choice is a critical determinant of decision-making under risk. Behaviorally, participants consistently maximized EV under some reward schedules while exhibiting robust risk aversion under others. Moreover, these
differences persisted even when participants received no feedback about
the outcome of their choices and stimuli were perceptually identical in all
conditions. FMRI analyses identified qualitatively different patterns of
activation associated with different decision-making strategies. Specifically, EV maximization strategies were associated with increased activation in frontoparietal regions implicated in numerical computation and
visuospatial manipulation, whereas probability-maximizing heuristics
were associated with increased activation in dorsal ACC and anterior
insula when participants made risky choices. Collectively, these results
suggest that risk aversion is a strategy-dependent phenomenon that can
often be eliminated with little difficulty given appropriate environmental
cues.
I46
NEURAL
CORRELATES
OF
LOCAL
AND
GLOBAL
EXPECTATIONS: A TEST OF THE JANUS MODEL Joseph
Dien1,
Aminda OHare'2; 1University of Louisville, 2University of Kansas — A core
feature of the Janus model of hemispheric lateralization (Dien, 2008) is
the hypothesis that the left hemisphere focuses on making specific predictions about future events (local expectations) whereas the right hemisphere focuses on using base rates from past events to detect and respond
to unexpected events (global expectations). In a key test of the Janus
model, neural correlates of local and global expectations were examined.
It has been noted in past event-related potential (ERP) studies that the
P300 component following violations of sequences appears more frontally than the classic P300 seen in oddball paradigms (Jentzsch & Sommer, 2001; Kotchoubey, et al., 1997; Squires, et al., 1976). It was
hypothesized that this distinction reflects the elicitation of local versus
global expectancies. Participants (n=21) completed a visual oddball task
and a visual sequence task, with colored circles as stimuli, while ERPs
were recorded from a high-density, 128 channel system. In the sequence
task red and green circles appeared equally. As hypothesized, one ERP
component was more sensitive to local expectations and another was
more sensitive to global expectations. Crucially, the local expectancy
component was clearly left-lateralized and the global expectancy component was clearly right-lateralized, yielding positive support for the Janus
Model.
I47
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN RISKTAKING AND CORTICAL ACTIVATION DURING A DECEPTION
TASK: AN FMRI STUDY Michelle C. Phillips1, Scott W. Meek1, Laura
Bradshaw-Baucom1, Jennifer M. C. Vendemia1; 1University of South
Carolina — The goal was to examine the relationship of individual differences in decision-making and risk-taking to brain activation during a task
where one switched between truthful and deceptive responding. Undergraduates (M =20.7 years) completed a sentence verification task with
two stimuli and were randomly assigned to one of two deception per-

Poster Session I

centage conditions: 50% (n=19) or 80% (n=21). BOLD responses were
measured in an event-related design during truthful and deceptive
responses. Decision-making and risk-taking were assessed with the Cambridge Gambling Task. Results revealed greater activation in regions of
the left inferior and middle prefrontal cortex (BA 47,10) during deceptive
responses (p<.001) in the 50% condition. In the 50% condition, deceptive
responses were associated with greater activation in regions of the left
inferior and superior parietal cortex (BA 40,7) (p=.0356), while in the 80%
condition, truthful responses were associated with greater activation in
right temporal and parietal lobes (BA 37,39,7) (p=.000613). Activation in
regions of the prefrontal cortex (BA 10) was also greater during truthful
responses (p=.038) in the 80% condition. Frontal activation in the 50%
condition points to the role of workload while activation to infrequent
truthful stimuli in the 80% condition points to the role of salience. The
measure of decision-making (M=.941, SE=.009) was associated with individual differences in limbic system activation during deceptive responding (p=.0213). The measure of risk-taking (M=.573, SE=.012) was
associated with differences in limbic system activation during truthful
responding (p=.0419). These results point to a role for individual differences in response uncertainty during the task.
I48
DISRUPTED FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY DURING WORKING
MEMORY PERFORMANCE IN INDIVIDUALS WITH PREFRONTAL
DYSFUNCTION RELATED TO PHENYLKETONURIA Shawn
Christ1, Amanda Moffitt1, Dawn Peck1; 1University of Missouri — Phenylketonuria (PKU) is rare genetic disorder characterized by an inability to
metabolize phenylalanine, a common amino acid and precursor of
tyrosine and dopamine. Prior research indicates that the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is particularly susceptible to dysregulation of dopamine. Also,
past studies have documented white abnormalities in individuals with
PKU. In the present study, we utilized functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) to evaluate potential PKU-related differences in functional connectivity between PFC and more distal brain regions during
performance of a working memory task which relies heavily on PFC. Six
individuals with early-treated PKU (mean age = 18.3 years) and six neurologically intact individuals (mean age = 18.4 years) were imaged while
performing a 2-back working memory task. To evaluate functional connectivity, the correlation in activity between brain regions during task
performance was calculated. Analysis of z-transformed data revealed
significantly decreased connectivity (p < .05 corrected) among PFC
regions (e.g., anterior cingulate, inferior frontal gyrus) as well as between
PFC and other brain regions (e.g., inferior parietal lobule) in individuals
with PKU as compared to their control counterparts. Taken together
with prior behavioral findings, the present results provide converging
evidence of prefrontal dysfunction in individuals with early-treated PKU.
Results are discussed within the context of our current understanding of
PKU, PFC, and working memory.
I49
REWARD-DEPENDENT MODULATION OF WORKING MEMORY
IN LATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX Jon
Wallis1,2,
Steven
Kennerley1,2; 1University of California at Berkeley, Psychology, 2Helen Wills
Neuroscience Institute, University of California at Berkeley — Despite much
research implicating lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) in the process of spatial working memory, it is still unclear how this representation contributes to executive control and goal-directed behavior. One possibility is
that PFC integrates reward information with spatial working memory to
construct a reward map that can guide behavior towards rewarding stimuli in our environment. Past studies investigating this focused on dorsolateral PFC, but this area only weakly connects with areas processing
reward. Ventrolateral PFC has better connections in this regard. Thus, we
contrasted the functional properties of single neurons in ventrolateral
and dorsolateral PFC as two subjects performed a task that required them
to hold spatial information in working memory under different expectancies of reward for correct performance. We balanced the order of presen-

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

tation of spatial and reward information so we could assess the neuronal
encoding of the two pieces of information independently and conjointly.
Neurons in ventrolateral PFC encoded both spatial and reward information earlier, stronger and in a more sustained manner than neurons in
dorsolateral PFC. In addition, when reward increased spatial selectivity,
behavioral performance improved, whereas when reward decreased spatial selectivity, behavioral performance worsened. This pattern of integration is consistent with a role for ventrolateral PFC in attentional control.
Our results provide further neurophysiological evidence that the cortex
above and below the principal sulcus of the macaque is functionally distinct, and are consistent with the notion that ventrolateral PFC serves as a
sensory gateway into PFC, ensuring the maintenance of task relevant
information across delays.
I50
NEURONS IN THE FRONTAL LOBE ENCODE THE VALUE OF
MULTIPLE DECISION VARIABLES Steven Kennerley1, Antonio Lara1,
Jonathan Wallis1,2; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute-UC Berkeley, 2UC
Berkeley, Psychology — Damage to the frontal lobe, particularly to anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC), lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) and orbital frontal cortex (OFC), impairs decision-making in a variety of contexts. A possible explanation for these impairments is that neurons here represent
decision value across multiple decision variables. To explore how these
areas contribute to decision-making, we trained two rhesus macaques
(Macaca mulatta) to make choices between pictures associated with different values varied along three physically different valuation scales.
Each picture was associated with a specific probability of obtaining a
fixed amount of juice (probability trials), a specific amount of juice (payoff trials) or a specific number of lever presses required to obtain a fixed
amount of juice (cost trials). We simultaneously recorded the activity of
610 neurons (257 from LPFC, 213 from ACC and 140 from OFC) while
subjects made choices based on these three decision variables. The most
prevalent selectivity was in ACC, where 84% of the neurons encoded
value for at least one decision variable, followed by OFC (56%) and LPFC
(49%). Neurons that encoded multiple decision variables were more common in ACC (57%) and OFC (30%) than in LPFC (19%). Time-course analyses revealed that decision value was encoded ~200ms before the
upcoming motor response. Our results indicate that many frontal neurons encode an abstract value signal in the sense that choice value is
encoded irrespective of the physical manner in which value is manipulated. The encoding of value across multiple decision variables by ACC
emphasizes its role in efficient decision-making.

Motor control
I51
ANTERIOR
CINGULATE
CORTEX
ENCODES
ACTIONOUTCOME ASSOCIATIONS IN WORKING MEMORY Chung-Hay
Luk1, Jonathan Wallis1; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of
California, Berkeley — In a dynamic environment an action that satisfies a
particular goal can often change. Hence, to select the most appropriate
action, it becomes necessary to actively update remembered contingencies between actions and outcomes (AO associations). Two regions implicated in action selection are lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) and anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC). While both regions connect to motor areas, only
ACC receives strong inputs from areas processing reward, placing it in a
better anatomical position to control outcome-guided action. To examine
this, we trained a monkey to perform a task that required him to monitor
AO contingencies on a trial-by-trial basis. The monkey performed two
sequential movements, separated by a delay, each of which was
rewarded with a specific juice (apple, orange or quinine) and then had to
repeat the movement that was previously paired with his preferred juice.
Thus, during the first delay, the monkey had to remember both the movement he made as well as the juice he received. We recorded the activity of

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

235

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

77 LPFC neurons and 84 ACC neurons during the performance of the
task. In ACC, 24% of the neurons encoded which movement the monkey
had made and 33% of the neurons encoded what juice the monkey had
received. In contrast, in LPFC 40% of the neurons encoded the movement
and 13% encoded the juice. These findings support the hypothesis that
ACC rather than LPFC is important for the control of outcome-guided
action.
I52
TRANSFER OF MOTOR MOVEMENTS Sien Hu1, Charles Wright1;
1
University of California, Irvine — Transfer of motor learning was investigated in a series of experiments using 4 different motor tasks that make
different demands on the motor system and motor-learning mechanisms:
Experiment 1 studied transfer of explicitly-learned, short, spatially
defined, discrete movement sequences; Experiment 2 studied transfer of
explicitly-learned, long, spatially defined, discrete movement sequences;
Experiment 3 studied transfer of implicitly-learned regularities of long,
spatially defined, discrete movement sequences; Experiment 4 studied
transfer of explicitly-learned, long movement trajectories, defined in both
space and time. Results suggest that, first of all, participants were able to
transfer the learned, effector-independent knowledge in all experiments.
Second, the degree of transfer was altered by differences in tasks but not
by differences in the learning mechanism, i.e. implicit vs. explicit learning. Tasks that emphasized spatial knowledge had better transfer to the
left side of the body contralateral to the spatial representation in the right
hemisphere; the task that emphasized statistical regularities, generated
from a finite-state grammar network, had better transfer to the right side
of the body contralateral to the grammatical processing in the left hemisphere. Finally, acquisition of effector-specific knowledge also depended
on tasks. In the task using simple sequences, participants optimized
motoric coordination with the learned effector which created interference
when they transferred to a different effector on the same side of the body.
This motoric coordination also dominated cognitive strategies that could
only be transferred to homologous body parts. In the tasks using long
sequences or trajectories, the dominance of the motoric coordination was
reduced.
I53
EVIDENCE FOR A LATERALIZED CONTINGENT NEGATIVE
VARIATION DURING MANUAL BUT NOT MENTAL MOTOR
PRACTICE Sean Guillory1, C. Chad Woodruff2, Erica Wohldmann3; 1Texas
State University-San Marcos, 2Northern Arizona University, 3California State
University-Northridge — In the current study, we used event-related
potentials (ERP) in an attempt to determine whether manual and mental
practice can be dissociated electrophysiologically, as would be predicted
from the work of Wohldmann, Healy, and Bourne (2007, 2008). More specifically, the results of Wohldmann et al. (2008) suggested that mental
practice leads to the development and strengthening of an effector-independent mental representation, whereas physical practice leads to the
development and strengthening of an effector-dependent representation.
The present experiment examined an ERP component known as the Contingent Negative Variation (CNV) while subjects performed the data
entry task used by Wohldmann et al. (2007, 2008). The CNV is taken to
reflect cognitive and motor expectations of an upcoming stimulus (e.g.
Brunia & van Boxtel, 2001). We hypothesized that the CNV would show
significant laterality effects during an expectancy period for manual practice reflecting effector-dependence while no such laterality would be evident for mental practice, reflecting effector-independence. Consistent
with our hypothesis, we found that CNV amplitudes showed hemispheric asymmetry under conditions of manual but not mental practice.
Specifically, CNV amplitude was greater over the left hemisphere (electrode C3) than the right hemisphere (electrode C4) for manual practice,
yet no hemispheric differences in CNV amplitude obtained for the mental practice condition. These results provide support for the claim made
by Wohldmann et al. (2008) that motor representations established by
mental practice do not include effector-dependent information.

236

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

I54
THE ROLE OF THE SUPERIOR TEMPORAL SULCUS AND THE
MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM IN IMITATION Pascal
Molenberghs1,
1
1
1
1
Christopher Brander , Jason Mattingley , Ross Cunnington ; The University
of Queensland, Queensland Brain Institute & School of Psychology — It
has
been suggested that the mirror neuron system is on the basis of imitation
but the relative contributions of different brain regions involved in imitating actions is still a matter of debate. To investigate the role of the mirror neuron system in imitation we used fMRI to examine patterns of
neural activity under four different conditions: passive observation of a
pantomimed action (e.g., hammering a nail); (2) imitatation of an
observed action; (3) execution of an action in response to a word cue; and
(4) self-selected execution of an action. A network of cortical areas,
including the left supramarginal gyrus, left superior parietal lobule, left
dorsal premotor area and bilateral superior temporal sulcus (STS), was
significantly active across all four conditions. Crucially, within this network the STS bilaterally was the only region in which activity was significantly greater for action imitation than for the passive observation and
execution conditions. Our results suggest that the STS does not only
respond passively to biological motion but actively maps visual representation with motor responses during imitation.
I55
DOES THE MIRROR SYSTEM INFLUENCE THE PERCEPTION OF
OBJECT PROPERTIES? Maurizio Gentilucci1, Giovanna Cristina
Campione1, Riccardo Dalla Volta1, Claudio Secchi1, Ivilin Stoianov1;
1Dipartimento di Neuroscienze University of Parma, Parma, Italy — Can the
implicit imitation, due to activity of the mirror system, influence the estimation of object intrinsic properties? Participants observed different
types of grasp presented by video-clips showing an arm reaching-grasping either a small or a large sphere, using both a power and precision
grasp. After the presentation, participants reproduced the sphere size,
but the type of reproduction varied in the five experiments. In experiment 1 they opened their index finger and thumb, in experiment 2 they
enlarged their index and middle fingers, similarly to a cutting pantomime, and in experiment 3 they opened their mouth; that is. the participants used the same effector and executed a movement similar to the
grasp in experiment 1, used the same effector and executed a movement
different from the grasp in experiment 2, and used a different effector
and executed a movement similar to the grasp in experiment 3. In experiments 1 and 3 the kinematics of the reproduction was mainly influenced
by the type-of-grasp observation; specifically object size was overestimated and underestimated after observation of power grasp and precision grasp, respectively, according to the fact that the power and
precision grasps are used to interact with large and small objects, respectively. In experiments 4 and 5, in which the type of reproduction did not
require any fingers’ use nor had any relation with the grasp, the type of
grasp did not affect the reproduction. The results of the present study
suggest that the mirror system influences the perception of target properties.
I56
ACTION PREPARATION HELPS AND HINDERS PERCEPTION OF
ACTION Clare Press1,2, Cecilia Heyes2,3, Martin Eimer1; 1Birkbeck College,
University of London, 2University College London, 3University of Oxford —
Several theories of the mechanisms linking action and perception require
that the links are bidirectional, but there is a lack of consensus on the
effects that action has on perception. We investigated this by measuring
visual event-related brain potentials to observed hand actions while participants prepared responses that were spatially compatible (e.g. both
were on the left side of the body) or incompatible, and action type compatible (e.g. both were finger taps) or incompatible, with observed
actions. An early enhanced processing of spatially compatible stimuli
was observed, which is likely due to spatial attention. This was followed
by an attenuation of processing for both spatially and action type compatible stimuli, likely to be driven by efference copy signals that attenuate

Poster Session I

processing of predicted sensory consequences of actions. Attenuation
was not response-modality specific; it was found when participants prepared manual and vocal responses, in line with the hypothesis that action
control is hierarchically organised. These results indicate that spatial
attention and forward model mechanisms have opposite, but temporally
distinct, effects on perception. This hypothesis can explain the inconsistency of recent findings on action-perception links, and thereby supports
the view that sensorimotor links are bidirectional. Such effects of action
on perception are likely to be crucial, not only for the control of our own
actions, but also in sociocultural interaction; allowing us to predict the
reactions of others to our own actions.
I57
MOTOR
CORTEX
ACTIVATION
PRIOR
TO
ACTION
OBSERVATION DEPENDS ON THE TASK-INDUCED SOCIAL
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ACTOR AND OBSERVER Dimitrios
Kourtis1, Natalie Sebanz1, Günther Knoblich1; 1Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behavior, Centre for Cognition, Radboud University, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands — Neurophysiological studies suggest that in joint
action tasks, one represents the action of one’s partner, even prior to a
prompted response. Interestingly, motor areas are activated during
action observation and action anticipation in a qualitatively similar way
as during motor execution. Our aim was to determine whether there are
differences in motor activation when people anticipate observing an
action performed by an interaction partner compared to an action performed by a person whom they never interact with. Electroencephalograms were recorded simultaneously from two persons sitting in front of
a table facing each other ("partners"), while a third person ("outsider")
was sitting at right angles with them. A small object was placed in the
middle of the table, on top of which visual stimuli were projected, consisting of a cue, instructing the participant(s) to prepare an action, followed 1sec later by a go/no-go signal (go: 83.3% probability). "Partners"
had either to swiftly lift the object and place it back or alternatively to
pass it to their "partner". The "outsider" was only performing the lifting
action individually. Pre-movement motor cortex activation, reflected in
the Contingent Negative Variation (CNV) and the beta Event Related
Desynchronization (ERD) amplitudes, was similar when participants prepared to act or anticipated to observe their "partner"’s action. Importantly, both CNV and beta ERD amplitudes were significantly smaller
when anticipating the "outsider’s action. This suggests that pre-movement motor cortex activation depends on the "social" relationship
between two persons established through the frequency of interaction
and/or the actors’ spatial arrangement.
I58
INTERHEMISPHERIC INTERACTION IN SIMPLE RESPONSE
TIME: A COMBINED FUNCTIONAL- AND DIFFUSION-TENSOR
IMAGING STUDY Matthew
Roser1,
Jon
Fulford2,
Abdelmalek
Benattayallah2; 1School of Psychology, University of Plymouth, 2MR Research
Centre, Peninsula Medical School, Exeter — Behavioral studies suggest that
the speeding of reaction times to bilateral-redundant targets relative to
unilateral targets (the redundant-targets effect or RTE) involves the hemispheric interaction of response preparation processes. Studies of patients
who have undergone partial callosotomy suggest that the posterior corpus callosum, connecting occipital cortices, mediates the size of the
redundancy gain. To examine which callosal channels support the RTE,
diffusion-tensor weighted (DTI) images, and functional images, were
acquired for a group of 34 neurologically-normal subjects who performed
a simple-response task. DTI data were analyzed using Tract-based Spatial
Statistics (TBSS). Results showed that individual differences in redundancy gain were associated with variation in fractional anisotropy in distinct callosal regions and with the degree of functional activation in
regions processing visual information and motor responses. These results
suggest that structural connectivity in the brain mediates individual differences in rapid responding to visual stimulation.

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I59
CORTICAL EXCITABILITY BETWEEN DOMINANT AND NONDOMINANT HEMISPHERES IN HEALTHY ADULTS Matthew
Malcolm1, Wen-Pin Chang2; 1Colorado State University, 2University of
Indianapolis — Neurological studies demonstrate a hemispheric asymmetry in the primary motor cortex (MI). The dominant MI acquires larger
and more richly connected neural representations for movement than the
non-dominant MI. One factor that could impact the neuron recruitment
for movement is cortical excitability. However, a paucity of studies investigates whether hemispheric asymmetry will result in different cortical
excitability between two hemispheres. The purpose, therefore, of this
study was to determine any difference in the cortical excitability, indexed
by recruitment curve (RC), between the two hemispheres in healthy
adults with right-hand dominance using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). Ten right-handed healthy volunteers (age= 23.5±3.1) without
any neurological and psychiatric disorders participated in this study. We
provided magnetic stimulation over both left and right MIs and recorded
the electromyographic (EMG) activity over the first dorsal interosseous
(FDI) and extensor digitorum communis (EDC) muscles in both left and
right upper limbs. The results revealed that there was no difference in
motor evoked potential (MEP) between left and right FDI. Similarly,
there was no difference in the MEP between left and right EDC. The RC
slope, obtained from the MEP, revealed no difference between left and
right FDI as well as no difference between left and right EDC. Our results
did not support the hypothesis that the dominant MI may have stronger
cortical excitability than non-dominant MI. Our results indicate that the
baseline cortical excitability between two MIs could be similar.
I60
AN INVESTIGATION OF BRAIN MECHANISMS UNDERLYING
PARALLEL PROGRAMMING OF SACCADE SEQUENCES Yanbo
Hu1, Robin Walker1, Andrew T. Smith1; 1Royal Holloway, University of
London — This event-related fMRI study investigated the brain mechanisms underlying parallel programming of saccade sequences. Participants made either a single saccade or a sequence of two saccades. There
were four conditions: (i) a single voluntary saccade (a symbolic cue elicited the saccade) (SV), (ii) a single stimulus-elicited (reflexive) saccade
(SR), (iii) a two-step (parallel programming) saccade condition in which
advance knowledge of the second saccade target location was provided
prior to stimulus onset (PP), and (iv) a two-step saccade condition without advance knowledge of the second target location (SP - serial programming condition). Behavioural measures were obtained outside the
scanner and showed a significant latency reduction of the second saccade
in the parallel programming condition compared to the serial programming condition. Fifteen subjects were then tested on the paradigm in an
event-related functional imaging study using a 3-Tesla scanner. A region
of interest analysis was carried out using MarsBaR-0.14 and SPM. Activity was observed during the response preparation period bilaterally in
the frontal eye fields (FEFs) and parietal eye fields (PEFs). This was
greater in the two-step parallel programming condition, relative to the
two-step serial programming condition. Activity was seen in the supplementary eye field (SEF) (left only) when contrasting the two-step conditions with the single-step condition, but not when contrasting the parallel
and serial two-step conditions. The findings support a role of the FEF and
PEF, but not the SEF, in the parallel programming of saccade sequences.
I61
DIRECTIONAL TUNING IN HUMAN MOTOR CORTEX Chris
Cowper-Smith1, Esther Lau2, Eskes Gail1,3, McMullen Patricia1, Carl Helmick3,
Schmidt Matthias3,4,5, Kirby Lee6, David Westwood1,2,3, Chris Cowper-Smith,
1Dalhousie
Chris
Cowper-Smith;
University,
Psychology
and
Neuroscience,2University of Hong Kong , Psychology, 3Dalhousie University,
Psychiatry, 4Dalhousie University, Radiology, 5IWK Health Centre, Diagnostic
Imaging, 6Dalhousie University, Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation — Here
we explore Georgopoulos’ (1986) model of movement direction coding in
human motor cortex using an fMRI adaptation design. Based on evidence

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

237

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

from monkey neurophysiology showing that motor neurons in the primary motor cortex (M1) exhibit preferred direction tuning curves where
neural activity is strongest in the preferred direction and weakest for
movements 180 degrees opposite, we examined the blood oxygen-level
dependent (BOLD) response as a function of the directional similarity of
repeated arm movements. In separate 18-second blocks, participants
responded to arrows presented at fixation by making repeated joystick
movements that called for movements that were offset by 0, ±90, or 180
degrees. Drawing on the logic of fMRI adaptation, if there are distinct
regions in motor cortex with directional tuning preferences, then over the
time course of each block, we should find a reduction of BOLD signal that
is proportional to the degree of offset between successive reaching movements. That is, we predicted the greatest reduction of BOLD signal when
repeated movements were made in the same direction relative to blocks
of movements that were offset by ±90 or 180 degrees. Our results demonstrate adaptation of the motor system in M1, pre-motor cortex (PMC),
and cerebellum during the 0&deg; condition relative to the ±90&deg; and
180&deg; conditions. Interestingly, the results do not show adaptation of
the ±90&deg; relative to the 180&deg; condition. The similarity of activation in the ±90&deg; and 180&deg; conditions is consistent with narrow
(i.e. less than 90&deg;) directional tuning curves in motor cortex.
I62
FACTORS
MEDIATING
MOTOR
CORTICAL
REPRESENTATIONS Jessica Bernard1, Rachael Seidler1,2,3,4; 1University
of Michigan, Psychology, 2University of Michigan, Division of Kinesiology,
3University of Michigan, Neuroscience Program, 4University of Michigan,
Institute of Gerontology — The somatotopic organization of the primary
motor cortex (M1) is subject to changes due to a variety of factors including practice, experience, age, and disease. Another variable that has been
suggested to mediate motor cortical representations is an individual’s
handedness (Volkmann et al., 1998). This study sought to clarify relationships between handedness, interhemispheric communication, and the
organization of M1 representations. We used a TMS motor mapping
procedure (Sparing et al., 2008) to investigate motor cortical representations. Additionally, subjects completed several different handedness
evaluations and the Poffenberger Paradigm (Poffenberger, 1912) to assess
interhemispheric communication. Results indicate that less strongly
handed individuals have faster interhemispheric transfer times (IHTT;
p<.05) and more symmetrical motor cortical representations (p<.05). We
also found that those with faster IHTT show more ipsilateral motor activity (p=.06). These data indicate that experiential factors result in differences in motor cortical representations that are related to degree of
handedness, and presumably hand use. Furthermore, these results
extend correlational findings from the fMRI literature showing more
symmetrical motor cortical activation in less strongly handed individuals
(Dassonville et al., 1997). Additional data collection and analyses are
ongoing.
I63
TASK SHARING WITH INTENTIONAL VS. UNINTENTIONAL
AGENTS Silke Atmaca1, Antje Hollaender1, Dorit Wenke1, Wolfgang Prinz;
1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences — The
present study investigated environmental conditions eliciting or hampering task sharing in a turn taking paradigm. More specifically, collecting
both behavioral and EEG data, we examined how the 'nature' of a coactor (intentional vs. unintentional agent) influences effects of task sharing. Pairs of participants performed a go-nogo Flanker task (Eriksen &
Eriksen, 1974) in response to target letters arbitrarily linked to two
responses. Each participant was assigned to one response key and a distinctive set of targets. The results of this 'joint condition' differed from
results of participants performing the same go-nogo task on their own
(individual condition). In a third condition, we tested whether the coactor's actions needed to be intentional in order to evoke task sharing
effects. That is, we compared the joint condition with a passive movement condition in which the co-actor’s finger was pulled down by an

238

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

automatic key, controlled by a computer. The results of this 'unintentional condition' also significantly differed from results of the joint condition, indicating that taking turns with an unintentional agent resembles a
situation where one is acting in isolation (individual condition). We
understand the type of task sharing effects described in this study as a
forward system, anticipating other agents' future actions and thereby
extending the temporal limits of ones own action planning. Considering
the present results, we conclude that task sharing mechanisms are only
applied when the acting individual can attribute intentionality to a coactor's actions.
I64
MOTOR
INITIATION
AND
INHIBITION
:
A
MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY STUDY Kimberly
Russo1,
Leighton Hinkley2, Andrea Quintero1, Karen Sigvardt1, Srikantan Nagarajan2,
Elizabeth Disbrow1,2; 1UC Davis, 2UC San Francisco — We
investigated
response initiation and inhibition, two subprocess of motor planning.
Subjects were shown a visual cue followed by a response target that
instructed them to respond with a right, left, or bilateral button press. A
mismatch between the cue and the target would either require the subject
to activate a previously uncued response (uncued initiation) or suppress
a prepared movement (response inhibition). We investigated the cortical
response to initiation and inhibition by measuring fluctuations in oscillatory activity using time-frequency optimized adaptive spatial filtering
reconstructions of magnetoencephalography (MEG) data. For uncued
initiation, we observed activity in the left middle frontal gyrus (MFG) at
37.5 ms following the target, then the right and left posterior parietal cortex (PPC) at 287.5 ms and 387.5 ms respectively. In contrast, inhibition
resulted in activity in the right MFG at 112.5 ms post target, followed by
activity in the left and right superior temporal gyrus (STG) at 562.5 and
612.5 ms respectively, and activity in the precuneus at 632.5 ms. In initiation, the left MFG is known to play a role in establishing a task set, and
PPC has been implicated in rapid activation of an uncued response (Aron
et al., 2004; Gaveau et al., 2008). Inhibition results are consistent with a
right cortical network responsive to unexpected stimuli (Corbetta et al.
2000; 2002; Arrington et al. 2000), which includes the right STG, MFG,
and precuneus. The right MFG and precuneus have also been shown to
be involved in inhibition of finger movement (Brass, 2001).
I65
IS INHIBITION INVOLVED IN THE STOP-SIGNAL AND GO/NOGO TASKS? Chelan Weaver1, Michael Anderson1; 1University of St.
Andrews — Stop-signal and go/no-go paradigms have been used extensively to measure the ability to stop motor responses across myriad populations and species. Although both tasks clearly quantify aspects of
stopping performance, it is unclear to what degree they share common
processes or neural substrates. Further, it has not been shown that either
task necessitates inhibitory control as defined by cognitive psychologists,
in which stopping is accomplished by attenuating the response itself. To
ascertain the involvement of inhibition in these paradigms, each was
adapted to incorporate the independent probe method, a technique
developed to isolate the aftereffects of inhibition from other sources of
memory impairment. In the current work, novel stimuli were used to
elicit recently-stopped motor responses, enabling the measurement of
performance decrements localized to responses. This revealed a dissociation between the two types of motor-stopping. Robust aftereffects of inhibition were found in the adapted stop-signal task, but no evidence of
inhibition was found in the adapted go/no-go task, suggesting that
inhibitory control is recruited for revoking actions, but might not be utilized to prevent movements. These results provide a novel measure of
inhibitory control in motor-stopping, measuring the functional consequences of inhibition rather than stopping speed or error rate.

Poster Session I

I66
NEURAL CORRELATES OF MULTI-STEP ACTION PLANNING
Mattia Marangon1,2, Stephane Jacobs1,2, Scott Frey1,2; 1University of Oregon,
2University of Oregon, Psychology, Lewis Center of Neuroimaging — The
way we grasp objects (e.g., over- vs. under-hand) depends on sensory
information concerning the state of the body (e.g., posture) and the target
object (e.g., location, orientation, form), as well as prediction of forthcoming task demands (e.g., intended rotation of the target object). This ability
to predict the consequences of our own multi-step actions relies on the
use of internal models and reflects the temporally-extended nature of
internal action representations (Johnson-Frey et al., 2004). Previous work
showed that a parieto-frontal circuit is involved in the transformation of
sensory information into a motor plan for grasping (Johnson et al., 2002).
Are these same circuits involved in grip selection decisions influenced by
predicted demands of a forthcoming object rotation? Event-related fMRI
was used to ask this question in 15 healthy, right-handed adults. Participants were asked to select the most comfortable way (over- vs. underhand) to grasp a handle using either hand with the intention of rotating it
in a cued direction or to only grasp the handle. Even if movement execution was not required, grip preferences were significantly affected by the
predicted demands of handle rotation. Preparation for an imagined anticipatory grip selection activates the same parieto-frontal networks
involved in both the rotation and no-rotation conditions. Specifically,
brain regions involved are bilateral dorsal premotor cortex (dPMC), bilateral intraparietal sulcus (IPS) and cerebellum. Further, fMRI data suggest
that prediction of these demands is accomplished in the very same neural
structures as grip selection based on available sensory information.
I67
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL COGNITION IN CONTROLLING SHARED
REPRESENTATIONS OF ACTION Stephanie Spengler1, D. Yves von
Cramon2,4, Marcel Brass2,3; 1Max Planck Insitute for Human Cognitive and
Brain Sciences, Independent Junior Research Group Body and Self, Leipzig,
Germany, 2Max Planck Insitute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences,
Cognitive Neurology, Leipzig, Germany, 3Ghent University, Experimental
Psychology, Ghent, Belgium, 4Max Planck Institute for Neurological Research,
Cologne, Germany — In this neuroimaging study we argue that the control
of shared representations of action shares common underlying computational mechanisms (the capacity for self-other differentiation and building of intentional states) with social cognitive abilities such as
mentalizing and agency processing. Recent research showed that action
observation leads to the automatic activation of the corresponding motor
representation in the observer, constituting a ’shared representational
system’ for observed and executed action. However, this raises the fundamental question about the functional mechanisms underlying the control and distinction of shared representations. Brain imaging suggests
that control of shared representations, indexed by the ability to control
automatic imitative responses, activates anterior-fronto-median-cortex
(aFMC) and temporo-parietal-junction (TPJ). Crucially, these regions are
also consistently implicated in social-cognitive processing suggesting
that the control of shared representations involves similar functional processes. In a within-subject, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
study, we directly tested whether the control of shared representations
activates overlapping brain circuits with social-cognitive processes. As
predicted, commonly activated regions occurred selectively in aFMC and
TPJ. Controlling imitation recruited a region in aFMC, overlapping with
activations during mentalizing and self-referential thoughts. In the TPJ
an area overlapped between imitative control, mentalizing and agency
processing. Individual ability for controlling imitation was further
related to behavioral and neural correlates of mentalizing. Our findings
support the idea of shared key processes, including the ability for representing one’s own or others’ intentions and for differentiating between
self- and other-related actions or perspectives.

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I68
ATTENTION AND THE READINESS FOR VOLUNTARY
ACTION Ross Cunnington1, Julie Keegel1, Marta Bortoletto1; 1The
University of Queensland, School of Psychology and Queensland Brain
Institute, Brisbane, Australia — Voluntary action is preceded by a readiness potential, a slowly increasing negative potential arising from activity
of premotor and supplementary motor areas. Recent studies have suggested that attention directed towards the intention to initiate action
selectively increases activity of the pre-supplementary motor area during
voluntary action. The readiness potential, however, is generally thought
to represent motor processes that are specifically related to the action to
be produced, and the influence of more general attentional or motivational factors has rarely been examined. In this study, we examined the
effect of attention on the readiness potential within a paradigm that
focused participants’ attention on their intentional decision to initiate
action. We manipulated the degree to which participants could allocate
attention to the voluntary movement task by giving a secondary working
memory n-back task at high and low levels of attentional load. 64-channel
EEG was recorded from 16 participants as they performed voluntary finger movements and judged their times of intentions within a standard
Libet paradigm. The readiness potential amplitude was significantly
reduced under conditions of high attentional load, when attentional
resources available for the voluntary movement task were limited. Crucially, this effect was evident even in the earliest component of premovement activity, up to 1000 ms prior to movement. Results suggest that
neural activity contributing to the early readiness potential represents
cognitive processes that are dependent on attention, possibly including
the intentional decision of the time to initiate action.
I69
ATTENTION TO TIMING AND SEQUENCING MODULATES
ACTIVITY ASSOCIATED WITH THE PREPARATION FOR
ACTION Marta Bortoletto1, Ross Cunnington1; 1The University of
Queensland, School of Psychology and Queensland Brain Institute, Brisbane,
Australia — Voluntary actions are preceded by cortical activity for 1-2
seconds, as indicated by the Readiness Potential (RP). The function of this
long lasting activity is still poorly understood, whether it is related to
preparation of single movements and movement order in a sequence or
to processing of timing for movement initiation. The aim of this study is
to directly compare RP and cortical activity related to movements with
complex sequencing demands and movements with complex timing
demands. 18 participants took part in the study. They were asked to perform self-paced sequences of 6 consecutive movements and to interpose
intervals of a few seconds between sequences. The task involved three
conditions in which participants paid attention to movement order in the
sequence, to timing of sequence initiation or they performed simple
sequences with low demands. 64 channels ERPs and fMRI were recorded.
A second experiment was run to verify attentional demand and difficulty
in each condition. Both attention to timing of sequence initiation and
attention to sequencing induced a change in the brain activity during
movement preparation. With complex timing, greater activity was found
in the right prefrontal cortex and ERPs increased during the early part of
RP. With complex sequencing, greater activity was found in parietal and
premotor areas and activity increased only during the late RP. Therefore
processes related to organising the content of actions and deciding the
time to initiate actions arise from different brain regions and contribute to
different times during the preparation and readiness for action.
I70
AN FMRI STUDY ON SENSORIMOTOR AND MOTORSENSORY
CONTRIBUTIONS TO SPEECH PRODUCTION Pascale Tremblay1,2,
Vincent Gracco1,2,3; 1School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, McGill
University, Montreal, Canada, 2Center for Research on Language, Mind and
Brain, 3Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, CT — The control of a wide range
of human motor behaviors rely on both feedforward and feedback control schemes. Because of the inherent delays and potential instability in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

239

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

the feedback loop, it has been suggested that the motor system may use
feedforward projections to predict the consequences of motor actions.
Specifically, it has been suggested that cortical signals are projected in
parallel to brainstem motor nuclei and cortical sensory regions, the latter
acting as an "efference copy" command. The sensory area most often
associated with speech production, both as a target for a motor to sensory
discharge and as a sensorimotor interface area, is a portion of the temporal cortex in and around the planum temporale (PT). For overt speech
production, evidence for this mechanism is indirect and limited. The purpose of the present study was to examine, using fMRI, the extent to which
speech production uses predictive, feedforward (motor to sensory) and
reactive, feedback (sensory) processes during speech and non-speech oral
sensorimotor actions. Results suggest that, if present, feedforward (motor
to sensory) projections are minimal, and that feedback processes are predominately responsible for activation in PT. Moreover, the feedback is
mostly from the auditory rather than the somatosensory system. The significance of these results is discussed in the context of feedback and feedforward motor control mechanisms and the potential role of sensory and
motor systems in speech production and perception.
I71
NEURAL EFFECTS OF MOBILITY TRAINING IN STROKE
PATIENTS Julie A. Conder1, Stacy L. Fritz2, Debra E. Krotish3, Gordon C.
Baylis1; 1University of South Carolina, Psychology, 2University of South
Carolina, Exercise Science,3University of South Carolina, Division of
Geriatrics — This study used functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) to explore the neural effects of a novel mobility therapy on stroke
patients. Although many strokes result in death, there are over 3.5 million stroke survivors in the United States alone who experience disability
caused by cell death from stroke. Intensive Mobility Training (IMT) is a
novel method of challenging rehabilitation therapy that attempts to "retrain" intact neurons. IMT includes repetitive motion of the affected side
of the body with a focus on gait training, range of motion, and balance. It
is an intensive therapy that requires three hours of therapy each day for
ten consecutive days. Participants performed three mobility tasks while
in the scanner, which were designed to elicit neural activity related to
movement of the affected lower extremity and the affected hand. Participants were required to perform flexion, extension and grip movements in
response to visual cues indicating whether the left or right side should be
moved. Two scanning sessions were conducted to capture neural activation before and after IMT. Scans included functional imaging during the
mobility tasks and diffusion tensor imaging during rest. Results from
functional scans indicate that intact regions of the brain may show differential activation as a result of the 10-day IMT treatment, and that these
changes may be reflected in physical mobility gains.
I72
DEFICITS
IN
TARGET
SELECTION
FOR
REACHING
MOVEMENTS AFTER SUPERIOR COLLICULUS INACTIVATION
Joo-Hyun Song1, Robert D. Rafal2, Robert M. McPeek1; 1The Smith-Kettlewell
Eye Research Institute, 2Bangor University — The primate superior colliculus (SC) is important for the execution of saccadic eye movements, but
recent evidence suggests that it also plays a role in the higher-level process of target selection for saccadic and pursuit eye movements, as well as
in covert attention shifts. Thus, we speculated that SC activity may participate in a generalized salience map used for target selection for a variety
of purposes. Consistent with this, we have found that in a task in which
monkeys must reach to a target among distractors, SC activity discriminates the target of the reaching movement even when no eye movement
is made. To determine if this SC activity plays a causal role in reach target
selection, we tested the effects of temporary focal SC inactivation on
monkeys' performance in two reach target selection tasks. In one task, a
target was followed after a variable SOA by a distactor, and monkeys
were rewarded for reaching to the target. In the second task, two potential targets were shown and a cue at the fovea indicated which was the
target. Monkeys were required to maintain eye fixation throughout each

240

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

trial. In both tasks, after SC inactivation, when the target appeared in the
inactivated part of the visual field, monkeys made more reaching errors
to the distractor. In contrast, monkeys were unimpaired when the target
was presented without distractors. These results establish that, in addition to its role in saccades, the SC plays a causal role in target selection for
reaching movements.
I73
NEURAL CORRELATES OF TARGET SELECTION FOR
REACHING MOVEMENTS IN SUPERIOR COLLICULUS Robert M
McPeek1, Joo-Hyun Song1; 1The Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Institute —
The primate superior colliculus (SC) has long been regarded as a structure important for the execution of saccadic eye movements. However,
recent studies have suggested that the SC also plays a role in the higherlevel process of target selection. Specifically, SC activity is correlated with
the selection of targets for saccadic and pursuit eye movements, as well
as with covert shifts of attention. We speculated that the SC may contribute to a generalized salience map which is used to select targets not only
for eye movements and attention, but also for other visually-guided
actions such as reaching movements. To test this hypothesis, we recorded
the activity of isolated intermediate-layer SC neurons in monkeys trained
to perform a reach target selection task. The monkeys were rewarded for
maintaining fixation and reaching to touch an odd-colored target presented in an array of distractors. Even though no eye movements were
made in this task, SC activity robustly signaled the goal of the reaching
movement. Many SC neurons discriminated the target before the onset of
the reach, and this activity typically persisted throughout the trial, consistent with SC involvement in target selection for reaching movements. On
the other hand, SC activity was poorly correlated with the detailed kinematics of the movements, suggesting that it is not involved in the lowlevel control of reaching movements. Overall, the pattern of results is
consistent with SC involvement in a generalized salience map used for
visually-guided actions and attention.
I74
COMPARING OVERT AND COVERT MOVEMENT WITH
MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY Xing Tian1, David Poeppel1;
1University of Maryland — What neural structures are active during real
movement versus motor imagery is debated. Furthermore, the functional
roles and temporal response profile of cortical regions engaged in overt
versus imagined movement remain unclear. We ran two magnetoencephalography (MEG) experiments to pursue both questions. In the first
experiment, participants were asked to either press or imagine pressing a
button using the right thumb, immediately after a tone cue. The activation pattern in execution of thumb movement appeared above contra-lateral primary motor cortex (M1), whereas the topographic map in the
imagery task was different, including more frontal areas, approximately
in supplementary motor area (SMA) and premotor area (PM), and more
posterior fields, approximately in parietal cortex. To monitor the motor
preparation process, in the second experiment, a sequence of three tones
with constant interstimulus interval of 1s was presented to participants,
who were asked to either press or imagine pressing a button when the
fourth tone was predicted to onset. This experiment replicated the observation that the activity pattern over M1 was only presented in motor execution. Moreover, activity approximately around SMA was activated in
the overt task around 200ms before the actual movement. These results
support the hypothesis that a subset of neural systems engaged in real
movement is active during motor imagery. Moreover, SMA appears to be
involved in both movement imagery and motor preparation. These
results suggest that activation in SMA might serve as an indicator before
real movement for brain-computer interface applications.
I75
FRONTAL AND PARIETAL CORTEX DECIDE WHERE TO
LOOK Kyeong-Jin Tark1, Clayton Curtis1; 1Psychology & Neural Science,
New York University — Neurons in the frontal and parietal cortex are
thought to transform incoming visual signals into saccade goals, a pro-

Poster Session I

cess known as target or saccade selection. Here, we used fMRI to test the
degree to which those areas are involved when non-visual information is
used for selection. First, we asked if the same portions of the frontal and
parietal cortex that are active during visual-guided saccades are also
active during saccades made to the locations of sounds. Second, we compared the activity when subjects made externally-guided (i.e., visual/
auditory) and internally-guided saccades. We scanned subjects while
they made saccades to one of four differently colored dots. Selection was
based on a visual cue (i.e., one of the dots blinked), an auditory cue (i.e., a
white noise burst was emitted at one of the dot’s location), or a semantic
cue (i.e., the color of one of the dot’s was spoken). We found that activity
in the superior parietal lobule and inferior frontal gyrus was greater during aurally-guided and semantically-guided saccades compared to a
visually-guided saccades. Moreover, we found robust responses in frontal and parietal cortex, in the putative frontal eye field and lateral intraparietal areas, but these responses did not differ according to the type of
information used to guide saccades. Therefore, prioritized maps of space
formed by the activity of populations of neurons in frontal and parietal
cortex that are thought to guide where we look may be agnostic about
what led to the priority.
I76
PREPARING TO STOP SELECTIVELY IS REFLECTED IN
REDUCED CORTICOSPINAL EXCITABILITY Michael
Claffey1,
Frederick Verbruggen2, Adam Aron1; 1University of California, Psychology,
San Diego, 2University of Ghent, Psychology, Belgium — Behavioral studies
show that participants can selectively stop responses if given foreknowledge of which response to stop. Foreknowledge may be effective because
it generates proactive inhibitory control over a response representation. If
so, this should be reflected in reductions in corticospinal excitability after
the foreknowledge instruction. To test this, we delivered transcranial
magnetic stimulation to the left motor cortex and recorded motor evoked
potentials (MEPs) from the right hand while participants performed a
modified stop-signal task. On each trial, a cue was presented (’maybe
stop left’, MSL, ’maybe stop right’, MSR or ’maybe stop XXX’, MSX), followed 2 seconds later by a Go stimulus requiring simultaneous responses
with both hands. On a minority of trials a stop signal was presented,
requiring participants to stop one initiated hand but not the other - something for which they could prepare in MSL and MSR conditions, but not
the MSX condition. Magnetic stimuli were delivered 1200, 1500 and 1800
ms post-cue. An ANOVA performed on MEPs from the right hand
showed a marginally significant effect of cue (F(2,12)=3.51, p=0.063), with
corticospinal excitability least for MSR, more for MSX and greatest for
MSL. Behavioral performance was similar in MSL and MSR conditions.
The muscle of interest was equally at rest in all conditions prior to magnetic stimulation (mean RMS 0.004 mV.s, SD = 0.001). We interpret the
smaller MEPs in the foreknowledge period for the MSR condition as evidence of proactive inhibitory control when the right hand may need to be
subsequently stopped.
I77
MOTOR ABNORMALITIES IN ADHD ADULTS Eve Valera1,2, Jeremy
Schmahmann1, Thomas Zeffiro3, Stephen Faraone4, Thomas Spencer1, Joseph
Biederman1, Larry Seidman5; 1Harvard Medical School/Massachusetts General
Hospital, 2HST Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
3Massachusetts General Hospital, 4SUNY Upstate Medical University,
5
Harvard Medical School/Massachusetts Mental Health Center/Beth Israel
Deacones Medical Center — Attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder
(ADHD) is characterized by age inappropriate symptoms of inattention,
and/or hyperactivity or impulsivity, and is estimated to affect approximately 5% of adults. Interestingly, a large number of ADHD individuals
have been found to have motor abnormalities in both fine and gross
motor tasks including, but not limited to, tapping, dynamic balance,
handwriting, and manual dexterity skills. These difficulties have a detrimental impact on the lives of children with ADHD. Although there
appears to be a growing literature for ADHD children, there do not

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

appear to be any analogous reports regarding "fine or gross" motor
assessment or coordination in ADHD adults. Thus, we used the International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale (ICARS) to provide an objective
assessment of ataxia severity in 24 ADHD adults and 22 matched controls. The ICARS is a 100-point semiquantitative validated scale comprising 19 items in 4 subscales: posture and gait disturbances, limb/kinetic
functions, speech disorders and oculomotor disorders. The ICARS provides an assessment and score of the clinical signs of the cerebellar motor
syndrome. Subjects were judged on facets of walking, standing, sitting,
coordinated limb movement, tracing a pattern, speech, and oculomotor
abilities. ADHD adults showed significantly higher scores for the total
ataxia scale as well as for the posture and gait disturbances and limb/
kinetic functions subscales. These data show that motor abnormalities in
ADHD persist into adulthood and can be detected by clinical examination of the cerebellar motor system. These data also provide additional
evidence of cerebellar abnormalities in ADHD adults.
I78
A TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION STUDY OF
BRAKING A MOTOR RESPONSE Ian Greenhouse1, Adam Aron1,
Frederick Verbruggen2; 1University of California, Psychology, San Diego,
2University of Ghent, Psychology, Belgium — When people anticipate stopping a response, they slow their respondingósomething we refer to as
’braking.’ We hypothesized that braking may be reflected in pro-active
inhibition of the motor system. To test this, we delivered transcranial
magnetic stimulation to the left motor cortex and recorded motor evoked
potentials (MEPs) from the right hand while participants performed a
stop-signal task. Participants were instructed to respond to a choice stimulus, but to withhold the response when the choice stimulus was followed by a stop signal. On each trial, a cue was presented (’maybe stop’,
MS, or ’no stop’, NS), followed 1 second later by a choice stimulus. Stop
signals only occurred on MS trials. Magnetic stimuli were delivered at
baseline (before the cue), 600 ms post-cue, 800 ms post-cue and 80 ms
post-choice-stimulus. RT for MS trials was significantly slower than NS
trials (t = 5.36). MEP amplitude was significantly greater at all test times
compared to baseline (p < .01). Importantly, there was no difference
between MS and NS conditions. Pre-magnetic-stimulus EMG showed the
muscle of interest was equally at rest in all conditions (mean RMS 0.003
mV, SD = 0.001). Thus, while participants use the ’maybe stop’ cue to
brake their responses, this braking effect is not reflected prior to response
selection. We speculate that, in this version of a braking paradigm at
least, the control cue is encoded at a purely cognitive level during the
foreperiod, and braking of the motor system only occurs once a particular
motor affordance exists.
I79
GENERALIZED CORTICAL MECHANISMS SERVING MOTOR
SEQUENCE LEARNING Leighton Hinkley1, John Houde2, Rebecca
Webster3, Anne Findlay1, Nancy Byl3, Srikantan Nagarajan1; 1University of
2University of California,
California, Radiology, San Francisco,
Otolaryngology, San Francisco, 3University of California, Physical Therapy and
Rehabilitation Science, San Francisco — Implicit and explicit manual
sequence learning is controlled by a well-defined network of brain
regions that integrate motor and sensory information from the hand with
cognitive parameters that generate associations between the movement
elements (Ashe et al., 2006). The temporal dynamics and timing of activity between areas within this network have yet to be defined, and the
extent to which functional modifications in this network generalize to
other response modalities used to learn a motor sequence (e.g. vocal) is
presently unclear. If movement sequences are encoded in a supramodal
manner (Keele et al., 1995), learning a pattern with one body structure
will result in performance improvements when repeating the sequence in
an untrained effector and such transfer should remain symmetric. We
examined changes in cortical activity that occur over the course of
sequence learning using magnetoencephalography (MEG) while subjects
performed a modified serial reaction time task (SRTT; Nissen & Bullemer,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

241

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

1987). Data was acquired using a 275-channel whole-head biomagnetometer (CTF Systems, Vancouver BC) and analyzed in the time-frequency
domain using Nutmeg (bil.ucsf.edu/nutmeg). Subjects were trained in
the SRTT to learn an eight-step movement sequence in the manual (button press) and vocal (short vowels) response modalities. During movement sequence learning, we observed significant changes in beta (1530Hz) and high-gamma (65-90Hz) power over the motor cortices as subjects implicitly learned the motor pattern. These findings expand upon
the known role of the motor cortices in sequence learning by demonstrating that acquiring a movement sequence is associated with oscillatory
changes over these areas.

Higher level cognition: Other
I80
WHERE IS "WHERE" IN THE BRAIN? Ruth Seurinck1, Wim Gevers1,2,
Simone Kühn1,3, Filip Van Opstal1, Wim Fias1; 1Ghent University,
Experimental Psychology, Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences,
Ghent, Belgium, 2Unité de Recherche en Neurosciences Cognitives (UNeSCog),
Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium, 3Max Planck Institute
for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Cognitive Neurology, Leipzig,
Germany — Spatial information can be conveyed to our brain in two
ways. First, directly as perceptual information (i.e. as a location in the
physical world), and second, indirectly, in a symbolic way such as
arrows, words etc. The current fMRI-study aimed to identify the commonalities and differences between the neural coding of perceptual and
symbolic spatial information. Spatial and non-spatial information (i.c.
color) was presented in a symbolic or a non-symbolic perceptual format.
Sixteen male, right-handed and Dutch-speaking subjects performed a
verbal semantic and non-symbolic perceptual same-different task. In the
verbal conditions two words were sequentially represented. To ensure
that subjects accessed the meanings of the words, the words always originated from different languages (French and English). The words were
translations of either the spatial concepts "right" or "left" (spatial task), or
the color names "purple" or "green" (non-spatial task). Subjects decided if
the words had the same meaning. In the non-symbolic conditions two
colored circles were sequentially presented with openings on the left or
right side. Subjects decided either if the openings were on the same side
(spatial task), or the circles had the same color (non-spatial task). Areas
within bilateral posterior parietal cortex were more involved in processing of spatial information than non-spatial information, irrespective of
stimulus format. The symbolic format additionally recruited inferior
frontal gyrus, while the non-symbolic format relied more on lateral premotor and occipital cortex.
I81
SENSORIMOTOR
FORWARD
MODELS
ACCOMMODATE
DIFFERENT LEVELS OF PREDICTION SPECIFICITY Andreja
Bubic1,3, D. Yves von Cramon1,2, Ricarda I. Schubotz1,2; 1Max Planck Institute
for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2Max Planck
Institute for Neurological Research, Cologne, Germany, 3University of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany — Prediction of external events relies on our motor system which is able to simulate the dynamics of our environment by developing internal representations of those events (i.e., forward models) and
using them for prediction of incoming stimuli. Results from previous
studies suggest that this process is subserved by a basic premotor-parietal network not only when subjects predict the exact identity of the
upcoming stimulus, but also when they predict only one of its features.
The present study investigates whether the involvement of this network
is restricted only to the level of individual stimulus features or if it can
generalize to a higher class of abstraction, namely a categorical one based
on arbitrary rule-based conjunctions of those features. We directly compared the processing of external events of different specificity, namely
perceptual sequences in which prediction of incoming stimuli could be

242

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

made on the level of individual stimuli ("token") with those in which predictions were restricted to the level of stimulus categories ("type"). The
obtained results confirm that prediction across different levels of abstraction is supported by the same premotor-parietal network without significant modulation of activation within any of its key regions. Furthermore,
the processing of two sequence classes could be differentiated by the
engagement of additional lateral prefrontal, occipital and posterior temporal regions supporting categorization in "type" sequences. These findings suggest that forward models in perception can be defined on a
higher level of abstraction in contrast to those within the motor domain
which require high degree of precision and accuracy.
I82
IMPLEMENTING
INSTRUCTED
STIMULUS
RESPONSE
ASSOCIATIONS: AN FMRI STUDY Egbert Hartstra1, Simone Kuhn1,2,
Marcel Brass1; 1Ghent University, Experimental Psychology - Ghent Institute
for Functional and Metabolic Imaging of the brain, Ghent, Belgium , 2Max
Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany —
In everyday life our actions are often guided by verbal instructions. Usually we can implement such instructions immediately without trial and
error learning. This raises the fundamental question how verbal instructions are transformed into efficient motor behavior? While we know a lot
about the linguistic and the motor side of this problem, our understanding of the implementation process is rather poor. The aim of the current
study was to gain deeper insights into this implementation of verbal
instructions both on a neural and a cognitive level. To this end we
devised an fMRI experiment in which participants were required to permanently learn and implement new stimulus response associations. Preliminary results suggest that a fronto-parietal network is involved in
setting up S-R mappings from verbal instructions. Furthermore, we compared repeated exposure to verbal instructions without implementation
with repeated implementation of the S-R mapping.
I83
SYNCHRONIZED TAPPING AS A MODEL OF MINIMAL SOCIAL
INTERACTION Ivana Konvalinka1, Peter Vuust1,2, Andreas Roepstorff1,3,
Chris D. Frith1; 1Center of Functionally Integrative Neuroscience, University of
Aarhus, 2Royal Academy of Music, Aarhus, 3Institute of Anthropology,
Archeology and Linguistics, University of Aarhus — Human beings have an
extraordinary ability to synchronize their actions, goals, and intentions in
order to accomplish goal-directed tasks. In order to study the dynamics
and mechanisms involved in entrainment in social interaction, a finger
tapping experiment was carried out, where pairs of subjects were asked
to tap on their respective keyboards following an 8-beat stimulus sent
through their headphones. The subjects were instructed to keep the
given beat as well as synchronize with the ’other’. They were in scenarios
where they could either hear themselves tapping, the other, or the computer metronome. Analysis of their inter-tap intervals (ITI) suggests that
dyads are unable to achieve full synchrony but rather adopt oscillatory
behaviour, such that each member attempts to lock in phase with the
other, thereby error-correcting their tapping onsets in opposite directions. Windowed cross-correlograms showed that there was no leader/
follower in the interactive condition, revealing high correlation in both
lag +1 and -1, which suggested shared continuous adaptation to the
other’s output. A dynamical systems approach was taken to model this
behaviour, using a system of two oscillators coupled in both phase and
frequency, corresponding to phase and period error correction.
I84
COGNITIVE AND NEURAL FOUNDATIONS OF RELIGIOUS
BELIEF Dimitrios Kapogiannis1, Aron Barbey1, Michael Su1, Giovanna
Zamboni1, Frank Krueger1, Jordan Grafman1; 1Cognitive Neuroscience Section,
NINDS/NIH — We propose an integrative cognitive neuroscience framework for understanding the cognitive and neural foundations of religious
belief. We performed multidimensional scaling (MDS) analysis to ratings
of dissimilarities between statements regarding religious beliefs, provided by 23 participants with varying degrees of religiosity. MDS

Poster Session I

revealed three psychological dimensions of religious belief: God’s perceived level of involvement, God’s perceived emotion, and a continuum
of doctrinal/experiential religious knowledge. We then performed functional magnetic resonance imaging to reveal the neural correlates of these
dimensions. We scanned 40 demographically and religiosity-wise
matched new participants. We discovered corresponding activation
within networks processing Theory of Mind regarding intent and emotion, abstract semantics, episodic memory and imagery. Our results demonstrate, for the first time, that specific components of religious belief are
mediated by well-known brain networks and support contemporary psychological theories that ground religious belief within evolutionary adaptive cognitive functions.
I85
LATERALISATION OF SELF-ESTEEM: AN INVESTIGATION
USING
A
DICHOTICALLY
PRESENTED
AUDITORY
ADAPTATION OF THE IMPLICIT ASSOCIATION TEST Ryan
McKay1, Joanne Arciuli2, Alikki Atkinson3, Elaine Bennett3, Elisabeth Pheils3;
1Institute for Empirical Research in Economics, University of Zurich, 2Faculty
of Health Sciences, University of Sydney, 3School of Social Sciences and Liberal
Studies, Charles Sturt University — Self-esteem is one of the most prominent and influential constructs in psychological science, yet very few neuropsychological/neuroscientific investigations have been undertaken in
this area of research. The current study investigated the possibility of
hemispheric lateralisation of self-esteem. By creating an auditory version
of the Implicit Association Test (IAT) for self-esteem, we were able to
present stimuli dichotically and thereby compare left- versus right-hemispheric measurements of self-esteem in 46 healthy adults. Although leftand right-hemispheric self-esteem measurements were correlated,
within-participant analysis revealed that self-esteem levels (as reflected
by IAT score) were significantly greater when elicited under right-ear
dichotic presentation (reflecting left hemispheric processing). We interpret this asymmetry with reference to the approach-withdrawal model of
emotion processing and suggest avenues for future research.
I86
CREATIVITY: THE OTHER WHITE MATTER Robert
Chavez1,
Arvind Caprihan1, Shirley Smith3,1, Alison Marshall1, Ranee Barrow1, Rachael
Grazioplene1, Rex Jung1,2,3,4; 1Mind Research Network, 2University of New
Mexico, Neurosurgery, 3University of New Mexico, Psychology, 4University of
New Mexico, Neurology — A consensus definition of creativity refers to
the production of something novel and useful within a given social context (Flaherty, 2005). The construct of creativity is comprised of numerous
cognitive abilities, including convergent reasoning, divergent reasoning,
focused attention, and insight, among others (Dietrich, 2007). The most
researched of these, divergent reasoning (DR), refers to the capacity to
produce multiple answers to a set problem (Guilford, 1957). Using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) at 3 Tesla, we hypothesized that fractional
anisotropy (FA) within association fiber tracts would relate to measures
of DR. DTI and measures of creativity (Miller & Tal, 2007) were obtained
from a cohort of 37 neurologically and psychiatrically healthy adults
ranging in age from 18 to 29. Five independent judges rated creative
products of each subject, with high inter-rater reliability (?= 0.89), from
which a "Creativity IQ" (CIQ) was calculated. DTI data was processed
using Tract-Based Spatial Statistics (Smith, et al. 2006) from which each
subject’s FA image was registered to a group "skeletonized" FA image.
Applying a white matter atlas to obtain regions of interest, FA values
were average across each voxel within each subject’s particular fiber tract
to calculate the mean FA of that tract. Using a partial correlation analysis
controlling for age, we found mean FA within the left superior longitudinal fasciculus was related positively to CIQ (r= .38, p= .021). This report
further demonstrates (Chavez et al., 2008) important relationships
between white matter tract integrity and creativity in a cohort of healthy
subjects.

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I87
NEURAL RESPONSE TO FOOD CUES DURING HUNGER AND
SATIATION IN HEALTHY-WEIGHT PARTICIPANTS Anastasia
Dimitropoulos1, Jean Tkach2,3; 1Case Western Reserve University, Psychology,
2Case Western Reserve University, Radiology, 3Case Western Reserve
University, Case Center for Imaging Research — Neural response to food
cues differs as a function of hunger and satiety, yet the influence of food
reward on hunger state may be critical to understanding mechanisms of
overeating. The purpose of this research is to delineate differences in neural response to food stimuli of varying caloric value during fasting and
satiation. Eleven lean adults (mean body mass index=22.37; 5 male) completed an fMRI block-design task with 3 conditions: high-calorie food
(HI), low-calorie food (LO), and nonfood objects pre- and postmeal. In
addition to T1-weighted and high-resolution 3D images, functional
images were acquired on a 4.0T MR scanner (TR=1950, TE=22ms, flip
angle=90). Group data sets were examined using GLM analysis contrasting the experimental conditions. Findings indicated greater activation to
HI vs. LO during fasting in the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), superior frontal gyrus, and amygdala (p<.01 corrected). Postmeal activations to HI vs.
LO include the anterior cingulate and middle frontal gyrus (p<.05 corrected). Direct comparison of motivational salience (HI vs. LO) by hunger
state (fasting vs. satiation) indicates greater activation in the OFC and
amygdala to high-calorie foods during hunger. These results indicate
increased activation in regions involved in food motivation, taste information processing and reward learning during hunger, when rewarding
foods are most salient. These preliminary findings give insight into the
effect of rewarding foods on the underlying neural mechanisms of food
regulation during different hunger states. Understanding the effect of
food reward during hunger and satiety may inform mechanisms of overeating and obesity in the general population.
I88
GENERAL VERSUS TASK-SPECIFIC ASSESSMENT OF ONE’S
COGNITIVE ABILITIES. A MULTIDIMENSIONAL APPROACH OF
THE METACOGNITIVE MONITORING Audrey Perrotin1, Amynta
Hayenga1, William Jagust1,2; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of
California, Berkeley, CA, 2Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Molecular
Imaging and Neuroscience, Berkeley, CA — Metacognitive
monitoring
encompasses two broad dimensions: assessment of one’s general cognitive abilities (off-line monitoring), and assessment of one’s performance
at a cognitive task (on-line monitoring). Moreover, metacognitive judgments can also be assessed in terms of accuracy relative to actual performance. Objectives- (1) To explore processes underlying the two
monitoring forms, by observing their association with depressive affect,
and global and more specific cognitive processes (episodic memory and
executive functioning). (2) To examine the relationships between the two
monitoring forms. Method- Healthy older adults (192 subjects) were
assessed on metacognitive measures: general memory self-reports (offline monitoring), and judgment of performance after different cognitive
tasks (on-line monitoring). Subjects were also tested on a depression measure, and on neuropsychological measures evaluating global cognition,
memory and executive functioning. Results- Correlations revealed that
both off- and on-line monitoring judgments were specifically related to
the depression measure, whereas both accuracy indexes were related to
the global cognition measure. Regression analyses showed that memory
abilities were the main determinant for the off-line monitoring accuracy,
and executive abilities the best predictor for the on-line monitoring accuracy. Strong correlations were observed between the off- and on-line
monitoring measures. Conclusion- Whatever the monitoring form, it
appeared that metacognitive judgments and accuracy may rely on distinct factors. The accuracy index may nevertheless depend on different
cognitive processes according the monitoring form. Moreover, the overlap between off- and on-line monitoring supports the view of a general
monitoring ability. These results are considered in light of neuroanatomical data.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

243

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I89
USING FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY TO MAP CONCEPTUAL
CIRCUITS IN THE BRAIN W. Kyle Simmons1, Mark Reddish1, Alex
Martin1; 1Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, NIMH/NIH — Thinking about
people or tools elicits activity in distinct neural circuits. Evidence indicates that the constituent regions in these circuits represent properties
that are salient in social- and tool-interactions. It remains unclear, however, whether the co-activation of regions within each circuit reflects
accessing property-related information due to task demands, or their
intrinsic connectivity. To address this question, we identified social- and
tool-related activations in the posterior superior temporal sulcus and
middle temporal gyrus respectively by scanning subjects while they
learned facts about people and tools. Next we used the functionally
localized regions as seeds in functional connectivity analyses of data collected while subjects engaged in a separate vigilance task scan. Importantly, regions within the social and tool-use networks maintained their
connectivity with one another even though subjects were engaged in the
vigilance task, and so were not thinking about people or tools. Thus, the
social- and tool-property circuits identified in earlier research are not
simply manifested during social or tool information processing tasks.
Rather, they are "hard circuits" that are continuously present in the brain,
irrespective of whether a person is thinking about others, or tools, at a
given moment.
I90
THE DEFAULT NETWORK CONTRIBUTES TO INFERENCES
ABOUT THOSE CLOSEST TO US Fenna M. Krienen1,2, Jessica R.
Andrews-Hanna1,2, Randy L. Buckner1,2,3; 1Harvard University, Psychology,
2
Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Charlestown, MA,
3Howard Hughes Medical Institute at Harvard University, Cambridge, MA —
The ability to consciously represent our own mental states and the mental
states of other agents is one of the most intriguing human capacities
(Frith & Frith, 2006). Many have noted the striking overlap of brain
regions involved in social cognition and self-relevant mentation with
regions comprising the "default network," a brain system that is found to
be active during passive or "resting" task states (Gusnard and Raichle,
2001; Buckner et al, 2008; Schilbach et al., 2008). Here we investigate networks involved in mental state inference about others. "Others" varied on
the dimension of familiarity (friends, strangers) as well as perceived similarity to the self, a dimension previously found to dissociate neural contributions to social inference (Mitchell et al, 2006). Healthy young adults
(n = 28; 11 male) were scanned using fMRI while making inferences
about targets’ beliefs and preferences. Whole-brain analyses revealed dissociations between self, familiar, and unfamiliar others. Core default network regions were recruited when considering the self and familiar
others. Making inferences about unfamiliar others resulted in an overall
reduction in default network activation, with an increase in activation in
additional regions. A region of interest analysis using default network
regions derived from an independent dataset revealed that self and
familiar others dissociated from unfamiliar others in a subset of regions,
including posterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex. Our results
suggest that the default network supports mentalizing about others in a
manner sensitive to the target’s relevance to the self.
I91
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF VISUAL AND VERBAL
COGNITIVE STYLES David Kraemer1, Lauren Rosenberg1, Sharon
Thompson-Schill1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Cognitive styles, thought
to reflect an individual’s preferred mode of processing information, are
believed to affect the way individuals learn, recollect, and reason. However, little direct evidence currently exists to link cognitive styles to specific neural systems. In the present study, visual and verbal cognitive
styles were measured both by objectively quantifiable tests of cognitive
abilities and self-report measures of processing style preference. During
fMRI scanning, participants took part in a novel task involving both
word-based and picture-based feature matching conditions. Results dem-

244

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

onstrate neural correlates of visual and verbal cognitive styles in brain
areas that process visual and phonological information. Specifically,
activity in a region that preferentially responded to viewing pictorial
stimuli (R fusiform gyrus) correlated with self-reported Visualizer ratings. Likewise, activity in a phonology-related brain region (L supramarginal gyrus) correlated with self-reported Verbalizer ratings. These
findings suggest that domain-specific cortical activity underlies processing in visual and verbal cognitive styles.
I92
OUT OF HAND: HOW EXPERIENCE AND RACE MODULATE
NEURAL CORRELATES OF GESTURE OBSERVATION Sook-Lei
Liew1,2, Lisa Aziz-Zadeh1,2, Shihui Han3; 1Brain and Creativity Institute,
University of Southern California, 2Division of Occupational Science and
Occupational Therapy, USC, 3Peking University, Psychology, China — What
are the neural correlates of gesture? How are they modulated by the race
of the actor or by one's familiarity with the gesture? Recent neuroimaging
findings suggest that gestures are processed in part by a mirror system
that is active both when we observe and execute a given action. This system may be modulated by experience and beliefs about the other person.
In this study, we used fMRI to examine the neural activation associated
with observing both familiar and unfamiliar intransitive cultural gestures, such as a thumbs up or the word apple in American Sign Language. Due to the modulatory role of experience, we hypothesized that
observing familiar gestures would generate distinct neural patterns from
unfamiliar gestures in premotor and parietal regions important for action
observation. Additionally, we asked whether physical similarity (i.e.
same vs. different race) with the observed actor would affect activity in
these regions. Eighteen Chinese participants viewed Chinese or Caucasian actors performing familiar or unfamiliar gestures while in the MR
scanner. Our results suggest that while both familiar and unfamiliar gestures show activity in sensorimotor regions, familiar gestures activate
areas associated with semantic processing (anterior temporal lobe) and
emotional processing (insula), while unfamiliar gestures activate areas
associated with action monitoring (superior parietal lobe, cerebellum).
Additionally, we found a significant interaction between race of actor
and familiarity of gesture, which suggests the importance of social context on simulation mechanisms and action understanding for Chinese
subjects.
I93
IS NEURAL ENCODING OF RACE MANDATORY? AN
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION Yina Ma1, Shihui
Han1; 1Peking University, Psychology, China — Previous behavioral studies suggest that, although race encoding is independent of task demands,
it is not inevitable and can be erased by manipulating coalition. The current work investigated whether alliance-related social attitudes modulate
neural encoding of race by recording event-related potentials (ERPs) to
racial ingroup and outgroup faces in a face orientation identification task.
We found that an early frontal negativity (N100) differentiated outgroup
and ingroup faces of the models when they had behaved aggressively but
not when they had behaved amicably towards the observer. Moreover,
the N100 amplitude correlated with participants’ attitudes toward the
models. The long-latency ERP components (N200 and P300) differentiated outgroup and ingroup faces of the models only when they had
behaved amicably towards the observer. The ERP results indicate that
neural encoding of race depends on observers’ alliance-related social attitudes rather than occurring mandatorily.
I94
NEURAL OSCILLATIONS IN ASSOCIATION WITH SELFREFLEXIVE THINKING Yan Mu1, Shihui Han1; 1Peking University,
Psychology, China — Previous behavioral studies indicate that self-related
trait words are better remembered than those related to others. However,
the neural mechanisms underlying this self-referential effect remain
undefined. The current study explored whether the neural activity
involved in encoding self-related trait may predict the individual differ-

Poster Session I

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

ence in the self-referential effect during memory retrieval. The electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded from 14 healthy adults while they
made judgments of personality traits referenced to the self or to a public
person. Subjects were given a memory test after the EEG recording session. To examine the relation between the non-phase-locked neural activity linked to encoding of self/other traits and the behavioral
performances during the memory test, the time-frequency power of theta
band (5-7Hz) and alpha band (8-13 Hz) neural activity was calculated
within each 100-ms time window using Wavelet transform analysis
method. We found that, relative to other-referential traits, self-referential
traits induced reduced theta band power at 300-400ms but increased
theta band power at 700-800ms. Alpha band (8-10Hz) power was stronger in the self- than other-referential conditions at 400-600ms. Moreover,
we found that the frontal theta band activity at 700-800ms increased to
negative than positive traits when referenced to the self. Most importantly, the frontal theta band activity at 700-800ms positively correlated
with individuals’ self-advantage in the recognition scores in the memory
test. Our findings indicate that both theta and alpha neural oscillations
differentiate the encoding of self- and other-referenced traits and theta
band activity contributes to the individually differences in self-referential
effect.

either mentalistic or mechanistic descriptions of targets’ actions
(Vallacher & Wegner, 1985). Although action identification overlaps conceptually with Theory of Mind, little is known about the neural or genetic
correlates of action identification. We conducted an action identification
paradigm with 15 healthy adults during fMRI scanning in a three-run
event-related task. These adults completed the Autism Quotient scale
upon completion of the task. We also assessed the relationship between
action identification patterns and oxytocin receptor (OXTR) genotype in a
separate group of adults. FMRI results revealed, consistent with prior
findings, that mentalization was associated with higher level action identifications. The amygdala and extrastriate body area played a role in
making higher level action identifications, particularly for more highly
mentalized actors. Other structures involved in action identification
included ventral premotor cortex, a region of the mirror neuron network,
and the temporo-parietal junction. Autism Quotient results and genotyping results supported the link between action identification and Theory
of Mind. A reduced tendency to make higher level identifications was
associated with higher scores on the Autism Quotient and with the OXTR
allele previously associated with autism. In conclusion, the current data
provide evidence for neural and genetic correlates of action identification.

I96
THE EMOTIONAL EMBODIMENT DURING EXPERIENCING
PROTAGONISTS' PHYSICAL ACTIVITIES IN NARRATIVE
COMPREHENSION Hidetsugu Komeda1,2, Norihiro Sadato1,3; 1National
Institute for Physiological Sciences, 2Japan Society for the Promotion of Science,
3Japan Science and Technology Agency — Readers construct mental representations associated with their experiential traces, such as motor and
emotional representations in narrative comprehension. According to
embodied cognition framework (Barsalou, 1999; Zwaan, 2004), understanding words about actions activates action-related brain areas. We
used functional magnetic resonance imaging to test our hypothesis that
reader’s motor representation is activated when judging the increase of
protagonists’ physical activities. We constructed story-reading tasks, in
which situation-sentences describing degree of protagonists’ physical
activities (low, middle, or high) were presented, followed by the targetsentences with high physical activities, with emotional valences (positive
or negative). In high increasing stories about protagonist’s physical activities, situation-sentences describe low activities and target-sentences do
high activities. Low increasing stories starts from middle activities and
result in high activities. Non-increasing stories are high activities consistently. Thus, the task was a 3 x 2 factorial design: the effect of degree of
physical activities (high, low, and non-increase) and the effect of stories’
emotional valences (positive vs. negative). The activation related to the
target-sentence was positively correlated with the degree of increases in
physical activities in the supplementary motor area, premotor cortex, primary motor area, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, and supramarginal
gyrus. As the supplementary motor and premotor cortex represents
motor imaginary, they were activated in all stories about protagonists’
physical activities. In the case of positive stories, medial orbitofrontal cortex and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex were activated. In conclusion,
understanding protagonist’s physical states activates reader’s motor representation. In addition, medial orbitofrontal cortex is involved in the
embodiment of emotions (Kringelbach, 2005).

I98
COGNITIVE PROCESSES IN OLDER ADULTS: POTENTIAL
IMPACT OF STRESS AND PHYSIOLOGICAL FUNCTIONING
Irina Fonareva1,2, Daniel Zajdel2, Megan Herting1, Whitney McGee1, Barry
Oken1,2; 1Oregon Health & Science University, Behavioral Neuroscience,
2Oregon Health & Science University, Neurology — The degree of cognitive deficits varies considerably among older adults, suggesting factors
other than age might influence cognitive well-being. Stress level, sleep
quality, and cardiovascular autonomic function, have been suggested as
mediators of cognitive performance. We explored how these factors
influence performance on tasks from different cognitive domains in a
sample of older adults. Two groups of healthy seniors of both genders,
caregivers for people with dementia and peers without caregiving
responsibilities, completed cognitive battery including tests of episodic
memory (Word Recall Task), processing speed (Attentional Network
Task, ANT), and executive function (Stroop). Participants completed selfreports of stress level, sleep quality, and health status. Additionally, we
objectively assessed sleep quality and autonomic physiologic measures
including heart rate variability (HRV) using a novel ambulatory device
allowing continuous recording of several EEG, ECG, and EOG channels
for prolonged periods. Preliminary results revealed no differences in
sleep quality parameters or HRV between the groups, but significantly
increased self-perceived stress level in the caregiver group, p=.002. Using
ANCOVA and controlling for age and stress level, we assessed differences in performance on the cognitive tasks between the groups. The
analyses revealed that caregivers performed as well as controls on ANT
but showed significantly more forgetting on the word recall task, p < .03,
and made more errors during Stroop Color Interference test than controls, p= .01. Our results indicate that in older adults increased stress
might mediate performance on critical cognitive domains such as episodic memory and executive function.

I97
ACTION IDENTIFICATION: ITS NEURAL AND GENETIC
CORRELATES Abigail Marsh1,2, Megan Kozak3, Maggie Reid2, Henry
Yu2, Daniel Wegner4, R.J.R. Blair2; 1Georgetown University, Psychology,
2
National Institute of Mental Health, Mood & Anxiety Program, 3Pace
University, Psychology, 4Harvard University, Psychology — Mentalization is
the process by which an observer views a target as possessing higher cognitive faculties such as goals, intentions, and desires. The extent to which
observers attribute these cognitive faculties to other actors can be
assessed using action identification paradigms, in which observers select

I99
AN FMRI STUDY OF SOCIAL COGNITION IN MEMBERS OF
CONFLICT GROUPS Emile Bruneau1, Rebecca Saxe1; 1MIT, Brain and
Cognitive Sciences — The majority of previous neuroimaging studies
investigating cross-cultural social cognition have focused on groups that
are not actively involved in conflict (e.g. Black and White Americans,
Asians and White Americans). Psychological differences that may be contributing to inter-group conflicts around the world today, however, exist
between groups that are both actively involved in conflict and not generally socialized to reconcile. To investigate differences in social cognition
within individuals of conflict groups, we presented Arab, Israeli and control individuals with Arab and Israeli partisan statements about the Mid-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

245

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

dle East, and control emotional/unreasonable and nonemotional/
reasonable control statements unrelated to the Middle East. Subjects
rated the ’reasonableness’ of each statement during fMRI imaging. Random effects analysis revealed activation in the posterior cingulate/precuneus (PC) and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC) for unreasonable reasonable control statements. Using these regions for ROI analysis of all
subject groups, we found that activation in the dmPFC for Israeli partisan
- Arab partisan statements correlated strongly with both individual
response differences in ’reasonableness’ of partisan statements and performance on an Israeli-Arab Implicit Association (IAT) test. PC activation
was also significantly correlated with the difference in ’reasonableness’ of
partisan statements. These results suggest that discrete brain regions are
involved in the processing of emotionally laden statements, and that
these regions are called upon more when emotionally salient partisan
statements from an antagonistic out-group are being considered, relative
to in-group partisan statements.
I100
HUMAN BRAIN DYNAMICS ACCOMPANYING THE USE OF
EGOCENTRIC AND ALLOCENTRIC REFERENCE FRAMES
DURING SPATIAL NAVIGATION Klaus Gramann1, Julie Onton1, Scott
Makeig1; 1Swartz Center for Comptational Neuroscience, UC San Diego — To
maintain spatial orientation during navigation, spatial information
encountered from a first-person perspective is integrated into an egocentric reference frame. Concurrent development of an allocentric or maplike reference frame requires translation of this egocentric spatial information into a viewpoint-independent representation. We recorded highdensity electroencephalographic (EEG) data during a virtual tunnel passage task in which near-equal numbers of subjects respond to a subsequent homing challenge in ways compatible with their predominant use
of an egocentric or allocentric reference frame. Approaching and during
tunnel turns, brain dynamics in temporal, parietal, and occipital cortex
exhibited alpha band power decreases, while upper alpha and beta band
power increased in somatomotor and theta band power increased in
medial frontal cortex. Subjects responding in a way compatible with
adoption of an egocentric reference frame exhibited stronger alpha blocking in or near right primary visual cortex, while subjects whose responses
were compatible with maintenance of an allocentric reference frame
exhibited stronger alpha blocking, implying more intense activation, in
occipitotemporal, parietal, and retrosplenial cortical areas known to support visuospatial orienting. Differences in EEG dynamics associated with
the use of distinct reference frames during path integration thus include
early visual, visual motion, and parietal areas, with additional activation
in or near retrosplenial cortex associated with translating egocentric and
allocentric information into complementary reference frames. The results
confirm and extend results of functional brain imaging studies and demonstrate use of EEG imaging to track brain dynamics during navigation.
I101
EEG DYNAMICS OF LEARNING IN SOCIAL CONTEXT Ying
Wu1, Scott Makeig; 1Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience, UCSD —
Learning is both an individual and social process. This study investigates
distributed EEG brain dynamics associated with the effects of social interaction on cognitive processes that are critical for learning. High density
EEG (133 channels per subject) was recorded simultaneously from pairs
of healthy adults as they played a computerized version of the card
game, "Concentration," which involves finding matching pairs of hidden
values by touching a card image in a grid displayed on a touch-sensitive
screen. Players participated in four types of games: competitive, collaborative (versus the computer), and solo (playing or observing). Artifactfree EEG data were submitted to independent component analysis (ICA).
Epochs were extracted from component activations time-locked to critical
events, such as the appearance of a hidden card value. Event-related
spectral perturbation (ERSP) transforms of each epoch were computed.
In addition, a context vector was defined for each epoch to characterize
socially and cognitively relevant features of the trial context, such as

246

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

whether an uncovered hidden value yielded a matched or non-matching
pair, whether it was selected by the player or partner, or whether it was
selected in a competitive or collaborative game. Single-trial ERSPs and
context vectors were combined, then concatenated, and then further
decomposed by ICA into a set of independent context factors. We will
discuss effects of social context (collaborative, competitive, and solo) on
EEG dynamics accompanying performance and performance feedback
during working memory and spatial learning.
I102
CAN IMAGINING OBSERVED BODY MOVEMENTS ENHANCE A
NEUROMARKER OF SOCIAL COORDINATION: THE PHI
COMPLEX? Stanley Lunde1, Anthony Carnevale Bonilla2, Chloe Boyle3,
Mayra Estrada3, Zachary Bogorad3, Jennifer Torres3, Raphael Bernier4;
1Lanterman Developmental Center, Pomona, 2University of California, Irvine,
3California
State Polytechnic University, Pomona, 4University of
Washington — There is increasing evidence for a shared neural substrate
(mirror neuron system) involving observed, imagined and executed
motor activity. The "phi complex", a possible neural marker of human
social coordination (Tognoli et al, 2007), purportedly interacts with the
mirror neuron system and has been identified as two narrowband components oscillating in the 9-12 Hz range. This EEG study aimed to determine whether observing body movements can induce phi oscillations,
whether imagining while observing might enhance phi, and the relation
of phi with alpha and mu. Participants were presented forty 30s video
clips of gross motor (swimming) and fine motor (piano playing) body
movements as well as control video clips during 10 ~six minute blocks.
They were instructed to imagine performing the movements during half
of the trials. High-resolution spectral analysis (0.1 Hz steps) of electrical
brain activity was necessary to detect the different spectral peaks of
alpha, mu and phi. Phi is a lateralized centro-parietal component and
thus was analyzed as the power difference between electrode pairs. As
expected, both alpha and mu amplitudes decreased during the clips with
body movements. Phi tended to increase. It was difficult to detect phi in a
number of participants. Participants that played piano exhibited the largest phi, which was enhanced during their imagine condition. Elaborating
the roles of mu and phi as components of the mirror neuron system may
increase our understanding of social behavior and of neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism.
I103
NEURAL CORRELATES OF INCONGRUITY-RESOLUTION AND
NONSENSE HUMOR Andrea C. Samson1, Christian F. Hempelmann2,
Oswald Huber1, Stefan Zysset3; 1University of Fribourg, Psychology, 2Hakia,
Inc., New York, NY, 3NordicNeuroLab AS, Bergen, Norway — Cognitive
processes of humor comprehension and appreciation are influenced by
stimulus characteristics. The resolvability of the incongruity is an important structural stimulus characteristic of humor as it correlates strongly
with certain personality characteristics whether incongruity-resolution or
nonsense humor is preferred. By means of functional magnetic resonance
imaging the present paper analyzes the neural correlates of processing
and appreciating incongruity-resolution and nonsense cartoons. In the
processing of incongruity-resolution stimuli the incongruity of the joke is
largely resolvable, whereas in nonsense stimuli it is only partially resolvable and more incongruity remains. 30 incongruity-resolution and 30
nonsense cartoons were presented to 17 participants in the scanner. The
results revealed that the anterior medial prefrontal cortex, bilateral superior frontal gyrus and temporo-parietal junction (TPJ) show more activation during processing of incongruity-resolution than of nonsense
cartoons. These differences indicate that processing of incongruity-resolution cartoons requires more integration of multi-sensory information
and coherence building, as well as more mental manipulation and organization of information. In addition, less self-reference might be established in nonsense cartoons as it is more absurd and more often deals
with impossible situations.

Poster Session I

Tuesday, March 24, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I104
POWER FUNCTIONS DESCRIBE DYSFUNCTIONS OF AN
INTERNAL CLOCK Elaine Wencil1,2,3, H. Branch Coslett1,2,4, Anjan
Chatterjee1,2,4; 1University of Pennsylvania, Center for Functional
Neuroimaging, 2University of Pennsylvania, Center for Cognitive
Neuroscience, 3University of Pennsylvania, Psychology, 4University of
Pennsylvania, Neurology — Power function relationships describe normal
psychophysical judgments of magnitude estimates, including duration
judgments. Such functions can be used to quantify deficits precisely,
exemplified by reduced exponents observed in neglect patients’ judgments of spatial extent. Since similar networks have been implicated for
spatial and temporal processing, we use power function analyses to test
the hypothesis that damage to cortical regions such as posterior parietal
cortex would impair temporal judgments. Changes in the pulse width
within a putative clock mechanism would alter the constant and dysregulation of the accumulator would alter the exponent of these judgments.
Sixteen patients with right middle cerebral artery distribution lesions
performed a temporal production task. Each trial began with the presentation of a blue square containing a number ranging from 4-15. Participants indicated when the duration (in seconds) corresponding to that
number had elapsed. Patients’ performances were described by a range
of functions; constants varied from 0.43-3.27 and exponents varied from
0.43-1.12. Voxel lesion symptom mapping revealed that changes in each
component of these power functions had distinct anatomical correlates.
Specifically, 1) a lesion in the posterior superior temporal gyrus correlated with increased constants; 2) lesions in posterior superior temporal
and angular gyri correlated with decreased exponents and 3) lesions in
posterior and anterior superior temporal, middle and inferior frontal and
angular gyri correlated with increased variability. Damage to posterior
superior temporal gyrus appears to disrupt the pulse width while damage to the posterior temporal and inferior parietal cortex appears to dysregulate the accumulator in interval timing.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

247

Author Index

Index

A
A. Hirshorn, E 194
Abada, S 192
Abada, SH 191
Abdel Rahman, R 142
Abduljalil, A 165
Abdulsabur, N 120
Abe, J-i 189
Abe, R 110
Aboitiz, F 89
Abraham, AJ 60
Acevedo, B 50
Achaibou, A 45
Acheson, D 144
Adam, R 227
Adamo, M 149
Adams, C 184
Adcock, A 169
Adcock, RA 46, 156
Addante, RJ 57, 58
Addis, DR 135
Adelore, T 176, 232
Adolphs, R 111, 166
Agnihotri, S 59
Agosta, F 123
Aguirre, GK 14, 16
Ahissar, M 136
Ahneman, K 141
Aicher, K 193
Akiva-Kabiri, L 152
Alain, C 31, 216, 228
Albert, NB 125
Albouy, G 61
Albrecht, A 85
Alcocer, PM 155
Aldebot, S 148, 217
Aldrich, L 176
Aleman, A 94, 96
Alku, P 150
Allen, C 134
Allen, J 226
Almeida, D 120, 177
Almor, A 197
Althaus, N 64
Altschuler, E 34, 221
Alvarez, B 85
Amemiya, K 230
Amin, H 211
Aminoff, E 54
Amit, E 175
Amunts, K 64, 82
Andersen, SK 29, 30
Anderson, A 185
Anderson, AK 47
Anderson, L 181

248

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Anderson, M 126, 215, 238
Anderson, S 33
Anderson, SW 17
Andersson, F 174
Ando, H 172
Andreano, J 48
Andreatta, M 47
Andres, AJD 222
Andrews-Hanna, JR 244
Angel, L 126, 127, 225
Annekathrin, S 231
Anthony, AJ 156
Anticevic, A 49
Anzellotti, S 32
Aoyama, A 193
Appollonio, I 35
Aragon, OR 201
Archila, P 151
Arciuli, J 243
Årdal, G 163, 226
Arduino, LS 172
Aron, A 50, 241
Arturo, H 67
Asano, E 43
Ashby, FG 58, 98, 111, 139
Ashkenazi, S 40
Ashley, V 104
Askren, M 20, 21
Assecondi, S 232
Astur, R 129, 134
At, A 84
Atherton, K 86
Atkins, AS 103
Atkinson, A 243
Atlas, L 27, 224
Atmaca, S 238
Attali, E 133
Aung, S 94
Avidan, G 43
Awh, E 161
Awuah, E 162
Axelson, E 105
Ayabe, T 230
Ayotte, P 133
Azañón, E 224
Aziz-Zadeh, L 50, 107, 244
B
Backer, KC 154
Bäckman, L 21, 127, 143
Baczwaski, B 176
Badgaiyan, R 205
Badre, D 41, 148, 207, 233
Baeuml, K-H 212
Bagley, S 47

Bahadur, K 44
Bahlmann, J 230
Bai, J-M 201
Bain, P 163
Baines, S 157
Baldeweg, T 221
Baldo, J 79
Balkin, T 216
Baller, EB 73
Balota, D 133
Bandettini, P 178
Bangert, A 133
Banich, M 171
Baniqued, P 106
Barber, H 124
Barbey, A 242
Barch, D 49, 165
Barch, DM 148
Bardouille, T 23
Bargatze, D 24
Bargh, J 75
Bar-Haim, Y 180
Barker, R 225
Barnes, G 128
Baron-Cohen, S 97, 162
Barrett, F 182
Barrow, R 243
Barry, J 146
Barsalou, L 96
Bartolo, A 35
Bartolomeo, P 159, 160, 205
Basilakos, A 68
Bassetti, C 51
Bassok, M 114
Basten, U 145, 227
Bastiaansen, M 19
Batla, A 151
Batterink, L 195
Baum, S 79, 153, 187, 192
Baum, SR 191
Baumann, O 140
Bäuml, K-H 213
Bavelier, D 194
Bay, E 64
Baylis, GC 240
Baym, C 133
Baynes, K 124
Bays, P 43, 143, 227
Bays, PM 144
Bean, S 181
Beaton, EA 87, 88
Bebko, G 48
Bechara, A 105
Bedny, M 17, 19
Beer, J 49
Beevers, CG 49

Author Index

Beglinger, L 167
Behnke, C 105, 232
beim Graben, P 121, 203
Bekkering, H 101, 110
Bell, T 68
Bellebaum, C 110, 127
Bellugi, U 48, 170
Benasich, AA 65
Benattayallah, A 237
Benavides, C 49
Benavides, J 215
Bender, J 164
Benesch, T 49
Bengson, JJ 99
Benjamin, A 211
Bennett, C 207
Bennett, E 243
Bennett, IJ 143
Benovoy, M 183
Bens, M 170
Ben-Shachar, M 69, 114
Ben-Simhon, T 213
Bente, G 36, 109
Bentin, S 96
Berens, MS 66, 118
Berg, J 105
Berger, C 111
Bergstroem, Z 212
Berman, K 118
Berman, KF 73, 128
Berman, M 105, 232
Berman, MG 103
Bernard, J 238
Bernier, R 246
Berry, A 165
Berry, AS 147
Berryhill, M 71
Berryhill, ME 53
Bertrand, O 162
Beste, C 86
Beversdorf, D 165
Bhanji, J 49
Bialystok, E 228
Bidelman, GM 203
Bidet-Caulet, A 39, 162
Biederman, J 241
Biedermann, H 63
Bien, H 152
Biga, RE 49
Billington, M 63
Binder, M 43
Binney, R 77
Bishop, S 92
Bissett, P 232
Biswal, B 75
Black, J 86
Black, JM 196
Black, SE 164
Blackford, T 205
Blair, RJR 245
Blais, C 66, 103
Blanchard, M 205
Blangero, A 30
Blank, MP 49

Blanton, Z 176
Blobaum, L 168
Blokland, Y 190
Blumenfeld, R 135
Blumenthal, J 197
Blumstein, S 195
Bocanegra, BR 51
Bockholt, J 109, 210
Bodammer, N 45
Bodurka, J 178
Boehler, C 45
Boehm, SG 131
Boes, AD 93
Boes, C 109
Boesiger, P 51
Bogdan, R 90
Bögels, S 188
Bogorad, Z 246
Boiteau, T 197
Bolger, N 28, 224
Boly, M 61
Bombari, D 172
Boot, I 44
Boreson, C 126
Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, I 80
Borofsky, L 197
Borowsky, R 192
Bortoletto, M 239
Bottari, D 223
Botzung, A 130
Bouazzaoui, B 126, 127, 225
Bouchet, P 162
Boudelaa, S 189
Boudewyn, M 82
Bowles, B 137
Boyle, C 246
Bozic, M 17
Bradley, B 180
Bradley, C 124
Bradley, E 124
Bradley, L 115
Bradshaw-Baucom, L 73, 143, 234
Brady, C 65
Brander, C 236
Brandt, SA 159
Brang, D 202, 222
Brannon, E 203
Brasington, L 229
Brass, M 239, 242
Brattico, E 150
Brauer, J 146, 163
Braun, A 120, 216
Braun, M 117, 139
Braver, T 49, 100, 165, 234
Braver, TS 95, 186
Breheny, R 190
Brehmer, Y 21, 143
Bresciani, MC 112
Breslawski, H 129
Breuer, F 92, 186
Bridge, DJ 114
Brier, M 60, 204
Bright, P 139
Britton, J 180

Britz, J 72
Broderick, C 111
Bromberger, B 200
Bronner, J 83
Brooks, D 129
Brooks, J 85
Brosch, S 150
Brown, G 167
Brown, J 233
Brown, K 168, 209
Brown, L 50, 227
Brown, T 118, 206
Browne, R 37
Brozinsky, C 148
Bruck, M 26
Bruggink, K 110
Brumback, C 105
Bruneau, E 245
Bruno, R 63
Bryck, R 149
Bubic, A 242
Buchanan, T 47
Büchel, C 51
Buchler, N 56, 83
Buchsbaum, B 41
Buckner, RL 244
Budriesi, C 35
Buerger, C 63
Bugg, J 100
Bugg, JM 156
Buhle, J 187, 234
Buitelaar, J 19, 95
Bukowski, H 107
Bullmore, E 162
Bultitude, J 43
Bunge, S 20, 36, 65, 68, 216
Bunge, SA 66, 103, 108
Bunzeck, N 163
Burden, M 133
Burgess, G 171
Burgund, ED 173
Burianova, H 131, 137
Burrus, CJ 225
Burton, PC 153
Busch, M 176
Buschkuehl, M 105, 232
Butcher, A 233
Butler, A 23, 24
Butt, M 93
Butterworth, B 114
Buxbaum, LJ 170
Buxton, S 169
Byl, N 241
Byrapureddy, R 218
C
C. Hauser, P 194
Cabaral, M 87
Cabeza, R 23, 54, 56, 83, 91, 139
Caclin, A 223
Cahill, L 48
Cahn, BR 40, 201
Calder, A 163, 182
Calder, AJ 175

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

249

Author Index

Calley, C 60
Callicott, JH 8, 9
Camargo, G 131
Camblin, C 82
Camerer, C 109, 166
Campbell, A 109
Campbell, K 154
Campeanu, S 216
Campellone, T 97
Campione, GC 236
Cantlon, J 31, 33
Capek, CM 195
Capelle, L 26
Cappelletti, M 34, 35
Caprihan, A 105, 109, 243
Capuana, L 102
Caputy, AJ 201
Caramazza, A 19, 32
Cardillo, E 81, 193
Carlin, JD 112
Carlson, J 52, 87, 209
Carnevale Bonilla, A 246
Carolan, P 89
Carp, J 225
Carr, W 216
Carrasco, H 122, 123
Carreiras, M 119, 120, 124
Carter, C 58, 70, 97, 135, 162
Carter, O 173
Carter, RM 46
Casement, M 232
Casey, BJ 29
Cashdollar, N 146
Catalao, R 143
Cate, A 59, 178
Cattaneo, L 202
Cattapan-Ludewig, K 86
Cavanagh, J 226
Ceballos, N 91
Cesari, P 112
Chaddock, L 229
Chai, XJ 53
Chakrabarti, B 97, 162
Chakroff, AG 181
Chambers, R 73
Chan, E 140
Chan, J 47
Chan, S-h 134
Chang, AY-C 113
Chang, L 183
Chang, W-P 164, 237
Chang, Y 160
Chang, Y-C 44
Chapman, S 22, 184
Charman, T 221
Charras, P 160
Chater, N 103
Chatterjee, A 76, 81, 193, 200, 247
Chauncey, K 147, 205
Chavez, R 75, 109, 167, 210, 243
Checa, P 65
Chen, C-Y 50
Chen, E 74
Chen, H 166, 191

250

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Chen, M 164
Chen, R-S 182
Chen, Y 116
Cheng, S-k 128, 212
Cheon, BK 47, 180
Cheung, T 21
Chiao, J 48, 141
Chiao, JY 26, 47, 114, 180
Chiarello, C 209, 210
Chica, A 159
Chiew, KS 95
Chikazoe, J 230
Cho, YS 159
Choe, M-s 65
Choi, M 156
Chojnowska, CK 65
Chong, H 233
Chou, I-C 100
Chou, T-L 76
Christ, S 235
Christie, G 233
Christodoulou, JA 62
Christoff, K 34
Chuang, C-H 182
Chubb, C 219
Chun, D 108
Chung, H-K 100
Chwilla, D 96
Chwilla, DJ 76, 188
Ciaraffa, F 205
Cincotta, C 60
Cisneros-Esparza, A 131
Claffey, M 241
Clapham, ES 74, 84
Clapp, WC 147
Clare, L 134
Clark, A 42
Clark, C 103
Clark, L 92
Clarke, A 174
Clarys, D 225
Clasen, L 197
Clasen, PC 49
Cleary, A 126
Clement, N 55, 56
Cloutier, J 72
Coffey-Corina, S 157, 165
Cohen Kadosh, K 62
Cohen Kadosh, R 62
Cohen, A 222
Cohen, J 160
Cohen, M 35, 226
Cohen, MS 186
Cohen, N 138
Cohen, Y 136
Cohn, M 23, 24
Collier, A 108
Collins, P 70
Colson, L 176
Conder, JA 80, 240
Conklin, K 117
Connors, NC 41
Consortium, MA 162
Constantinescu, I 45

Conzelmann, A 92
Cook, E 65
Cook, L 22
Cooperstock, J 183
Corballis, P 29
Corbett, B 157
Corbett, BA 165
Corbett, J 220
Corina, D 118, 177, 189
Corral, J 124
Coslett, HB 201, 247
Cosley, B 55
Cosman, S 123
Coulson, S 82, 202
Couperus, J 29, 30
Courage, M 70
Courtney, K 204
Coutlee, C 117
Couture, M-E 59
Cowper-Smith, C 237
Cox, A 182
Cox, CL 59
Cox, L 73
Craik, F 216
Cramer, S 229
Cristancho, V 133
Crockett, M 92
Croft, K 74
Crone, E 67, 68
Crone, EA 65
Cross, ES 31, 32
Crossley, MJ 139
Crump, C 95
Cruse, D 214
Csibra, G 178
Cui, X 208
Cuijpers, RH 110
Cummine, J 192
Cunnington, R 199, 236, 239
Curran, M 206
Curran, T 25
Currin, J 68, 69
Curtis, C 89, 160, 240
Czernecki, V 26
D
Daffner, KR 233
Dagher, A 183, 213
Daikhin, L 136
Dailey, N 53
Daini, R 172
Dal Molin, A 45
Dale, C 40
Dale, CL 104, 156
Dalla Barba, G 130, 133
Dalla Volta, R 236
Dalvit, S 158
Damasio, A 107
Damasio, H 33, 107
Dambacher, K 234
Dambacher, M 117
Danckert, J 45, 111, 200
Danckert, S 214
Dang-Vu, T 61, 76

Author Index

Daniele, A 168
Daniolos, P 102
Dapretto, M 197
Darsaud, A 61
Darvas, F 40
Daum, I 110, 127, 137, 199, 211
Davachi, L 24, 138
Davalos, D 109
David, A 97
Davidson, M 183
Davidson, ML 182
Davidson, RJ 185
Davies, P 164
Davis, B 31
Davis, CH 124
Davis, FC 185
Davis, JD 85
Davis, M 83, 152
Davis, MH 116
Davis, S 83
Davis, T 23
de Bruijn, E 101
de C. Hamilton, AF 32
de Chastelaine, M 129, 212
de Gelder, B 94
de Goede, D 190
de Haan, E 113
de Haan, M 221
de Kieviet, J 97
de Leonni Stanonik, M 201
de Lussanet, M 174
De Macks, ZO 36
de Zubicaray, G 82
Debruille, JB 72, 80
Deldin, P 232
Delgado, MR 180
Dell, G 116
Delorme, A 40
Delplanque, S 26
Demeter, E 21, 87
Demiral, SB 80
Demiralp, E 112
Denburg, N 105, 166
Denckla, M 164
Deng, Y 191
Denkova, E 91
Dennis, E 164
Denny, B 183
Deschamps, I 187
DeShetler, N 65
Desmarais, G 170
DEsposito, M’ 41
DEsposito,M' 106, 148, 158
Desseilles, M 76
Deubel, H 30
Deutsch, G 114
Devereux, B 124
Devine, A 45
Devlin, JT 17, 116, 195, 205
Dewailly, E 133
DeYoung, C 35
DeYoung, CG 8, 9, 186
Di Lollo, V 87
Diab, W 225

Diana, RA 137
Dick, F 62
Didehbani, N 184
Dien, J 234
Dierks, T 84
Dietrich, C 64
Dijksterhuis, A 101
Dillon, B 155
Dillon, D 90
Dimigen, O 117
Dimitropoulos, A 243
Ding, G 124, 191, 192
Disbrow, E 224, 238
Dixon, M 220
Doallo, S 51
Dobbins, I 56, 215
Dobel, C 18, 152
Dodd, M 72
Dodds, C 226
Doerksen, S 229
Doesburg, S 20, 21, 32
Doi, H 202
Dolan, R 13
Dolan, RJ 103
Dolcos, F 91, 92
Dolcos, S 91, 92
Donaldson, DI 131, 216, 217
Donnelly, J 73
Donohue, SE 221
Donovan, C-L 57
Doricchi, F 159
Doty, TJ 90
Dougherty, R 114
Dow, M 121
Downing, P 199
Drake, R 159
Drenhaus, H 203
Drescher, D 228, 229
Drew, T 88, 161
Driscoll, D 17
Driver, J 43, 89
Dronkers, N 79
Dronkers, NF 123
Drowos, D 71
Drucker, D 83
Drury, JE 78, 79, 191
Dubins, M 66, 118
Dubois, B 26, 130
Duchaine, B 175
Dudai, Y 54
Dudschig, C 98
Duff, K 167
Duff, M 138
Dufwenberg, M 183
Dumas, J 215
Duñabeitia, JA 119
Dunbar, R 37
Duncan, C 196
Duncan, J 29
Duncan, JS 146
Duncan, K 138
Duncan, KJ 17, 116, 205
Duong, H 88
Duyn, J 216

Duzel, E 45, 146, 163
Dwivedi, VD 79
Dwyer, D 199
Dywan, J 102
E
Eddy, M 177
Edens, J 84
Edlinger, G 158
Edwards, B 27, 100, 165
Edwards, BG 95
Edwards, C 134
Egeth, H 164
Eichenlaub, J-B 153, 154
Eickhoff, S 36, 109
Eickhoff, SB 64, 82
Eimer, M 51, 85, 158, 159, 236
Elam, K 87
Elizabeth, O 67
Ell, S 53, 55
Elman, J 118, 206
Elwan, D 88
Elward, R 231
Elwell, CE 114
Emberson, L 219
Endrass, T 231
Engelmann, R 87
Enke, H 71
Erbe, J 46
Erbe, JK 46
Erdozia, K 122
Erhart, M 118
Erickson, K 229
Ernst, M 26, 180
Esopenko, C 80, 192
Espy, K 72
Ester, E 161
Esterman, M 85
Estrada, M 246
Ethofer, T 48
Ewbank, M 163
Ewen, J 164
Ezzyat, Y 23, 24
F
Fabiani, M 105
Fagerness, J 90
Fahrenfort, J 20
Fahrenfort, JJ 171
Fair, D 63
Fair, J 161
Falk, E 234
Fallgatter, A 96
Fallon, SJ 225
Fan, J 102
Fan, L-Y 76
Fang, S-Y 120, 191, 193
Fanning, JL 69
Fantini, S 147
Faraone, S 241
Farb, N 185
Farde, L 21
Faretta, M 124

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

251

Author Index

Farroni, T 62
Farzin, F 179
Favreau, L 53
Fay, S 126, 127, 225
Faye Chua, H 112
Federmeier, K 81, 211
Federmeier, KD 78, 83
Federspiel, A 84, 86
Fedio, P 201
Fedota, JR 85
Fegen, D 41
Fehr, E 185
Feldman Barrett, L 96
Feldman, H 69
Feldman, R 97
Fellows, L 52, 213, 227
Fellows, LK 103
Fera, F 168
Ferber, S 149
Ferguson, HJ 190
Fernandes, M 61, 214
Ferraro, AM 35
Ferree, T 60, 204
Ferrer, E 36, 68
Festa, EK 41, 85
Fetz, E 229
Fias, W 132, 228, 232, 242
Fiaschi, A 112
Fiebach, C 145, 227
Fiebach, CJ 145, 158, 231
Filik, R 78
Fillmore, P 69
Filoteo, JV 100
Findlay, A 169, 241
Findlay, AM 156
Fineberg, N 93
Fink, G 36, 109
Finke, C 139
Fiorio, M 112
Firl, A 162
Fischer, C 154, 162
Fischer, H 21, 127
Fischer, J 178, 220
Fisher, H 50
Fisher, K 114
Fisher, M 148, 166, 168, 170, 217
Fishman, I 170
Fisler, M 84
Fitzgerald, D 76, 96
FitzPatrick, I 119
Flax, J 65
Fletcher, P 97
Flevaris, A 85
Flitton, A 221
Florczak, SM 135
Flores, R 75, 167, 210
Foerde, K 55, 56
Fonareva, I 245
Ford, H 160
Ford, J 167
Fortenbaugh, F 85
Fossella, JA 8
Foss-Feig, J 63
Fossum, K 167

252

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Fox, AS 185
Franco, A 75
Franconeri, S 48
Frank, M 213
Franke, B 95
Frankland, SM 142, 177
Franklin, M 42
Freeman, E 219
Freeman, ED 35
Frenck-Mestre, C 122, 123, 153
Freude, G 144
Frey, M 186
Frey, S 239
Freyman, RL 150
Friederici, A 146, 230
Friederici, AD 9, 10, 121, 163
Friedman, B 197
Friedman, RB 196
Frisch, S 203
Frith, CD 242
Frithsen, A 56
Fritz, SL 240
Froeliger, B 72
Frost, S 120, 166, 191, 193
Froud, K 86, 189
Fukuda, K 161
Fukuda, M 43
Fukunaga, M 216
Fukushima, H 93
Fulford, J 237
Funayama, R 99
Furman, D 73
Furman, O 54
G
Gaab, N 62
Gabay, S 43
Gabrieli, J 175
Gabrieli, JDE 53, 62, 123, 196
Gaebel, A 231
Gage, N 69
Gail, E 237
Gaillard, WD 102
Galea, JM 125
Gambarin, M 112
Gamble, ML 39
Gamino, J 20, 22
Gandour, JT 203
Ganis, G 174
Garnero, L 130
Garnham, A 84
Garrett, C 217
Garza Villarreal, EA 150
Garza, J 64
Gaskell, MG 116
Gaspar, J 178
Gasparovic, C 105
Gavazzeni, J 127
Gavin, W 164
Gayane, M 67
Gayzur, N 162
Gazzaley, A 138, 147
Gebuis, T 113
Geeseman, J 147

Gefen, TD 196
Geisler, M 228
Gelman, Y 60
Genesee, F 188
Genevsky, A 156, 170
Gentilucci, M 236
George, N 130
George, T 204
Georgescu, A 109
Georgs, M 96
Gerdes, A 92, 186
Germine, L 175
Gerrits, T 111, 212
Gerth, S 121
Gertner, L 112
Geurts, H 210
Gevers, W 228, 242
Geyer, M 40, 201
Gharapetian, L 118
Ghazanfar, AA 9, 10
Ghebreab, S 218
Gherri, E 159
Gheysen, F 132
Gheytanchi, A 50
Ghosh, SS 123
Ghuman, A 204
Giard, M-H 223
Gibbs, A 97
Giedd, J 67, 197
Giesbrecht, B 90
Gilbert, J 128
Gilboa, A 58
Girouard, A 147
Giuliano, R 91
Glass, BD 100
Glasscock, I 180
Glenberg, A 202
Glimcher, P 13, 14
Glover, G 69
Gluck, M 134, 168
Gnagy, E 169
Göbel, SM 112
Goebel, R 210
Goel, V 35
Goerlich, K 94
Goh, J 200
Goldberg, L 111
Golkar, A 95
Göllner, K 117
Golob, E 149
Gonsalves, B 131, 133
Gonzalez, C 115
Gonzalez, R 28
Gord, S 80
Gordon, B 105
Gordon, E 63
Gordon, M 137
Gordon, P 17, 18, 82
Gordon, PC 125
Gorgoraptis, N 143, 144
Gorno Tempini, ML 79
Gorno-Tempini, ML 123
Gotlib, I 164
Gottlieb, LJ 137

Author Index

Gotts, SJ 23
Gotwald, T 64
Gould, IC 86
Grabowecky, M 89, 184
Grabowski, T 33
Gracco, V 166, 187, 239
Gradstein, L 43
Grady, C 61, 137
Grady, CL 131
Grafman, J 242
Grafton, S 75, 209
Grafton, ST 60
Graham, K 199
Graham, R 31, 91, 171
Graham, S 191
Grainger, J 117, 190
Gramann, K 246
Grande, M 64
Grandjean, D 26, 46
Granjon, L 126
Grant, PE 65
Gratton, G 105
Gray, J 35, 75
Gray, JR 186
Grazioplene, R 167, 210, 243
Green, A 8, 34, 35, 76
Green, AE 186
Green, J 32, 42
Greenberg, D 126
Greenberg, T 52
Greene, JD 36
Greenhouse, I 241
Greicius, M 211
Grent-’t-Jong, T 90, 221
Grichanik, M 170
Griessenberger, H 61
Grodzinsky, Y 82, 123
Groenegress, C 158
Grönemeyer, D 176
Groppe, D 156
Gross, C 47
Gross, JJ 27
Grossman, M 140
Grosvald, M 189
Grunau, R 21
Gründer, G 28, 52
Grunewald, K 204
Gruno, M 136
Guajardo, L 115
Guala, F 71
Guénot, M 162
Guentuerkuen, O 63, 109
Guerin, S 56, 207
Guerreschi, M 199
Guger, C 158
Guggisberg, A 169
Gugler, M 119
Guillory, S 236
Guise, KG 102
Gujar, N 127, 213
Gunter, T 82
Gunther Moor, B 68
Guo, B-C 175
Guo, C 192

Guo, R 191
Guo, Y 173
Gur, R 97
Guroglu, B 67
Guthrie, SK 87
H
Haarmann, H 204
Haberman, J 177
Habets, P 210
Habib, R 139
Hach, S 223
Hadden, AE 139
Haegerstrom-Portnoy, G 218
Hagendorf, H 159
Hagerman, P 170
Hagerman, R 134, 170
Hagerty, M 229
Haggard, P 224
Hagoort, P 19, 78
Hajcak, G 200
Hakim, L 35
Hald, L 84
Halgren, E 118, 206
Hall, JL 26, 28
Hamann, S 186
Hamidi, M 208
Hamilton, A 71
Hamilton, AC 153
Hamilton, P 164
Hammar, Å 163, 226
Hampshire, A 225
Hampton, D 105
Han, S 48, 244
Han, Y-J 175
Handy, T 89
Handy, TC 42
Hänel-Faulhaber, B 122, 194
Hansen, K 226
Hanslmayr, S 213
Harada, T 26, 47, 180
Hardy, JL 147
Hare, T 109
Harenski, C 171
Harenski, CL 181
Hari, R 221
Hariri, AR 26
Harle, K 184
Harlow, IM 131
Harp, T 220
Hart de Ruijter, E 165
Hart, J 22, 60, 204
Hartmann, T 39, 152
Hartstra, E 242
Hartsuiker, R 188
Hartsuiker, RJ 80
Harvey, DY 173
Hasegawa, T 102
Hauert, C-A 72
Hauner, K 98
Hauswald, A 142, 217
Hautvast, S 82
Haxby, JV 14, 15
Hayenga, A 243

Hayes, A 180
Hayes, SM 56
Hazeltine, E 233
Head, D 148
Hearst, A 148, 217
Heatherton, T 72
Heatherton, TF 73
Hebert, D 164
Heekeren, H 177
Heekeren, HR 223
Heim, S 64, 82
Heindel, WC 41, 85
Heinemann, D 86
Heinen, K 171
Heinze, H-J 45, 212
Heitz, R 160
Helenius, P 101
Helie, S 111
Heller, AS 185
Helmick, C 237
Helskog, E 216
Hempelmann, CF 246
Henik, A 40, 43, 112, 152
Henson, R 125, 217
Henson, RN 206
Henson, RNA 62
Herdman, A 21, 178
Herdman, AT 23
Herman, A 198
Hernandez, A 119, 151
Hernandez, L 131
Hernandez, R 94
Hernandez-Garcia, L 87
Herrmann, M 96
Herron, T 178, 206
Herschensohn, J 125
Herting, M 245
Herting, MM 63
Hervais-Adelman, A 152
Heslenfeld, D 29
Hessl, D 170
Hestvik, A 124
Heusser, A 58
Heyes, C 236
Hibbinig, J 72
Hickok, G 17, 154, 189, 192
Hilimire, M 29
Hill, KT 154
Hill, S 65
Hillenbrand, S 226
Hillis, GA 207
Hillyard, S 40
Hilti, C 86
Hindi Attar, C 51
Hines, T 113
Hinkley, L 169, 198, 224, 238, 241
Hiraki, K 106
Hirose, S 230
Hirschfeld, G 17, 18
Hirshberg, L 41
Hirshfield, L 147
Hirshhorn, M 140
Hoang Duc, AK 161
Hocking, J 82

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

253

Author Index

Hodgson, T 71
Hoedlmoser, K 61, 76
Hoeft, F 48, 68, 196
Hofelich, A 52
Hoffmann, A 61
Hofstaetter, A 109
Hohmann, A 34, 155
Hokkanen, L 101
Holcomb, P 117, 177
Holcomb, PJ 80, 117, 190, 205, 233
Holder, D 148
Holeckova, I 154
Hollaender, A 238
Holland, C 168
Hollich, G 222
Holmes, A 90, 221
Holmes, KJ 113
Holtz, S 88
Holzner, C 158
Hommel, B 225
Hon, V 94
Honey, R 199
Hooge, I 219
Hopf, J-M 45
Hopkins, R 134
Horie, K 99
Horn, H 84
Horner, A 125
Horovitz, S 216
Hotton, G 129
Hou, C 70
Houde, J 241
Hoven, C 180
Howard, DV 55, 143
Howard, Jr., JH 55, 143
Hrncir, Z 204
Hsieh, L 31, 104
Hsieh, L-T 212
Hsieh, M-E 76
Hsu, NS 142
Hsu, T-Y 144
Hu, P 127, 192
Hu, S 236
Hu, Y 237
Huang, C 175
Huang, C-M 229
Huang, S-C 128
Huang, S-L 44
Huang, Y-Z 182
Huber, J 77
Huber, O 246
Huddleston, E 215
Hudry, J 172
Huettel, S 46
Hughes, B 183, 187
Hughes, BL 182
Huh, E 110
Hulbert, J 126
Hull, E 22
Hung, D 144, 212
Hung, DL 113, 128, 174
Hung, J 89, 182
Hurwitz, M 200
Husain, M 43, 143, 144, 163, 227

254

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Hussain, P 94
Hutcherson, C 53
Hutchins, S 214
Hutchinson, JB 140
Hutchison, J 207
Hutchison, N 228
Hwang, S-O 195
I
Idsardi, W 155, 195
Iidaka, T 26
Ikeda, K 102
Im, D-M 180
Imada, T 193
Immordino-Yang, MH 186
Indefrey, P 119
Ingvar, M 90
Irlbacher, K 159
Irmak, A 28, 52
Irwin, J 46
Irwin, JR 46
Isaacs, J 229
Ischebeck, A 64
Isella, V 35
Isenberg, AL 69
Ishai, A 172
Ishizu, T 230
Isingrini, M 126, 127, 225
Isom, M 156
Itagaki, S 106
Itoh, H 189
Itthipanyanan, S 41
Itzhak, I 187, 192
Iuculano, T 114
Iwahashi, C 170
J
Jacko, J 176
Jacob, CP 92
Jacob, R 147
Jacobs, A 117
Jacobs, S 239
Jacobsen, T 71
Jacobson, J 133
Jacobson, S 133
Jacqueline, C 80
Jaeggi, S 105, 232
Jagust, W 243
Jahanshahi, M 129
Jakupov, SM 187
James, CE 72
James, K 24, 110
Janata, P 51, 182
Jankowksi, KF 102
Jann, K 86
Janschewitz, K 229
Janssens, I 188
Janzing, J 95
Japee, S 90, 102
Jarick, M 220
Jatla, S 135
Javitt, D 97
Jefferies, E 77

Jeneson, A 57
Jenner, W 43
Jensen, U 138
Jenson, MJ 186
Jentzsch, I 98
Jeong, H 99
Jepma, M 110
Jerde, T 89
Jha, A 22, 106
Jha, AP 106
Jimura, K 230
Joanisse, MF 222
Johns, CL 125
Johnson, B 36, 68
Johnson, DC 181
Johnson, J 87, 88
Johnson, JD 130, 141
Johnson, JS 208
Johnson, M 176
Johnson, MH 62, 178
Johnsrude, I 152
Johnstone, T 185
Jolicoeur, P 161
Jonathan, E 124
Jones, C 221
Jones, S 110
Jonides, J 103, 105, 159, 232
Joormann, J 164
Jost, K 136, 149
Juan, C-H 144, 174
Juhasz, C 43
Jung, R 75, 109, 167, 210, 243
Jung-Beeman, M 74, 108
K
Kaan, E 155
Kacinik, N 18
Kadosh, RC 34
Kaganovich, N 222
Kalin, NH 185
Kalra, P 190
Kam, JWY 42
Kaminski, JA 208
Kan, IP 167
Kanam, F 151
Kandalaft, M 184
Kandhadai, P 81
Kang, X 178, 206
Kang, Y 75
Kao, C-H 100
Kapogiannis, D 242
Karachi, C 26
Karlsson, P 21
Karlsson, S 20, 21
Karns, C 195
Karst, AT 74, 84
Katayama, J 149, 157, 230
Kathmann, N 136, 159, 164, 231
Kaufmann, C 164
Kaufmann, L 64
Kaufmann, M 124
Kaveh, A 40, 104
Kawakatsu, M 193
Kawashima, R 99

Author Index

Keane, M 126
Keegel, J 239
Keen, RE 150
Kehrer, S 159
Keizer, A 225
Kellett, G 228, 229
Kelley, W 72, 93
Kelley, WM 73
Kemmerer, D 77
Kendler, K 67
Kenealy, L 65
Kenemans, L 113
Kennedy, D 208
Kennedy, K 206, 211
Kennerley, S 20, 235
Kenworthy, L 102
Kerkhofs, R 188
Kerlin, JR 39
Kerstholt, J 190
Kesavabhotla, K 102
Ketz, N 138
Keune, P 199
Khader, P 136
Khamis-Dakwar, R 189
Khan, A 29, 30
Khatami, R 51
Khatibi, K 169
Khodaparast, N 135
Khoo, T 229
Kiefer, M 150
Kiehl, K 171
Kiehl, KA 181
Kim, HT 159
Kim, J 35, 175
Kim, J-J 71
Kim, JU 186
Kim, P 97
Kim, S-H 198
King, DR 57
King, L-W 175
King, R 206
King, S 214
Kingsley, K 169
Kinzel, E 176
Kippenhan, S 117
Kircher, T 28, 52, 76
Kirk, G 168
Kirsch, HE 181
Kirwan, CB 57
Kiss, M 51, 85
Kissler, J 142, 217
Kitajo, K 219
Kittredge, A 116
Kiyonaga, A 22, 106
Klein, C 131
Klein, SR 69
Kliegl, R 117
Klimesch, W 61
Knebel, J-F 172
Knezevic, A 168
Knierim, I 205
Knierim, IN 116
Knight, RT 39
Knoblich, G 237

Knowlton, B 229
Kober, H 46, 187
Koch, SP 159
Koester, D 116, 230
Koga, S-i 43
Koh, HC 219
Koh, PH 114
Köhler, S 59, 137
Kohls, G 28, 52
Kohn, P 118
Kohn, PD 73
Kojima, S 230
Koldewyn, K 170
Komárek, V 204
Komeda, H 26, 245
Kometer, M 201
Kondos, L 114
Konishi, S 230
Konkle, T 19
Konrad, K 52
Kontra, CE 201
Konvalinka, I 242
Kopec, A 104
Kopelman, M 139
Kopp, F 64
Koppelstaetter, F 64
Korb, FM 208
Korb, S 46
Kornysheva, K 71
Kos, M 78
Koscik, T 183
Kotz, SA 122, 152, 155, 189
Kourtis, D 237
Kovelman, I 62, 66, 118, 123
Koyama, S 198
Kozak, M 245
Kozink, R 72
Krabbendam, L 203
Krach, S 28, 52
Kraemer, D 244
Kraft, A 159
Kragel, J 56
Kragel, P 130, 139
Krägeloh-Mann, I 199
Krajbich, I 111, 166
Kral, TRA 186
Kramer, A 229
Kranjec, A 81, 193
Kraut, M 60, 204
Krawczyk, D 84, 108, 135, 150, 184
Krawzoff, M 126
Krebs, R 45
Kreczko, AU 102
Kreither, J 89
Kreps, A 220
Kresse, A 64, 160
Kriegeskorte, N 14, 15, 178
Krienen, FM 244
Krigolson, O 227
Krishnan, A 203
Kritikos, A 199
Kross, E 46, 187
Krotish, DE 240
Krott, A 121

Krueger, F 242
Kuehn, S 228
Kügow, M 122, 194
Kuhlmann, S 174
Kuhn, S 242
Kühn, S 242
Kujala, M 221
Kukolja, J 64
Kumar, N 136
Kuo, B-C 145, 146
Kuperberg, G 81
Kuperberg, GR 205
Kuratomi, K 158
Kurby, C 17, 19
Kurniawan, IT 103
Kustubayeva, A 187
Kutas, M 83, 156
Kutz, A 215
Kuzmanovic, B 109
L
L. Reiss, A 48
La Corte, V 130
Laasonen, M 101
LaBar, KS 54, 130
Lacey, EH 196
Lacey, S 220
Lachaud, C 189
LaConte, S 186
Lagemann, L 152
Lahat, A 24
Laird, K 134
Laka, I 122
Lakshmanan, B 164
LaMarche, J 117
Lambon Ralph, M 165
Lambon Ralph, MA 77
Lamme, V 20, 218
Lamme, VAF 142, 171
Landau, A 85, 88
Landi, N 46, 141, 191
Langbehn, D 167
Langford, M 75
Langley, L 162
Lanska, M 212
Lappe, M 174
Lara, A 20, 235
Lasaponara, S 159
Lau, E 120, 237
Laverdure, N 30
Lawson, G 105
Lawson, RP 175
Le Coutre, J 172
Lebib, R 121
Leckman, J 97
LeDoux, JE 181
Lee, A 166
Lee, A-R 44
Lee, C-l 78
Lee, E 213
Lee, HL 35
Lee, K 159, 167, 220, 237
Lee, NR 197
Lee, P 63, 65, 177

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

255

Author Index

Lee, PS 102
Lee, S-H 76
Lee, T 41
Leino, S 150
Leitman, D 97
Lenroot, R 67, 197
Leonard, C 209
Leonard, CM 210
Leonard, M 118, 206
Leotti, L 27, 100
Lepsien, J 145
Letourneau, SM 44
Leuthold, H 78
Levine, B 136
Levy, J 221
Lewis, J 229
Lewis, P 34, 37
Lewis-Peacock, J 147
Leyba, L 75
Leyton, M 103
Li, C 34
Li, R 116
Li, Y 192
Li, YH 50
Libertus, K 67
Libertus, M 203
Lieberman, DA 62
Lieberman, M 234
Liew, L 107
Liew, S-L 244
Lighthall, N 74
Lightman, E 233
Lim, K 70
Limmer, W 168
Lin, C-Y 59
Lin, H-Y 50
Linden, DEJ 131, 134
Lindenbach, D 68
Lindenberger, U 20, 64
Lindquist, M 224
Lindsay, S 116
Lindstrom, K 180
Liotti, M 21
List, A 42, 43, 85
Litcofsky, K 190
Liu, C-H 174
Liu, R 155, 198
Liu, X 102
Liu-Ambrose, T 89
Loeper-Jeny, C 205
Loewy, R 166
Loharuka, S 106
Lombardo, M 162
London, S 94
Long, DL 125
Long, NM 207, 233
Longo, G 183
Longo, M 224
Longo, MR 224
Lonsdorf, TB 95
Lopez, B 147
Lopez-Calderon, J 89
Lopez-Mobilia, G 202
Lopez-Paniagua, D 60, 99

256

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Lorenz, I 39
Lott, SN 196
Loughead, J 97
Loui, P 31, 34, 155
Lourenco, SF 113
Lovas, J 66
Lövdén, M 20
Love, BC 23
Love, T 197
Lu, C-S 182
Lu, H 207
Lu, Z-L 194
Luaute, J 30
Lubin, Y 136
Lucas, H 141
Luciana, M 69, 70
Luck, S 148
Luck, SJ 39
Luetje, M 187
Luk, C-H 235
Luks, T 40, 148, 217
Luks, TL 104, 156
Luna, B 169
Lund, TE 79
Lunde, S 246
Lupianez, J 159
Lupiáñez, J 160
Lustig, C 21, 87
Lutz, A 72
Lutzenberger, W 199
Lv, Y 192
Ly, S 23, 70
Lymberis, J 62, 123
Lyons, J 42
Lysne, P 105
M
M. Schnyer, D 157
Ma, Y 244
Macdonald, L 169
MacDonald, S 127
Machado, L 45
MacInnes, J 46
MacKenzie, G 131
Mackey, A 65, 136
Mackie, EC 32
MacLean, S 40
MacLeod, C 214
MacLeod, CA 217
MacPherson, M 77
Madden, DJ 143
Maddock, R 94
Maddox, WT 75, 100, 209
Maher, S 55
Mahon, B 31, 32
Mahone, M 164
Main, K 176
Maisog, J 63
Makeig, S 99, 101, 246
Malcolm, M 237
Malecki, U 146
Maley, CJ 148
Mancini, F 166
Mander, BA 135

Mangun, G 157
Mangun, GR 30, 99, 165
Manis, F 194
Manning, J 171
Manning, L 149
Maquet, P 61, 76
Mar, RA 58
Marangon, M 239
Marcelis, M 210
Marchant, N 214
Mareschal, D 64
Marín, A 119, 120
Marìn-Gutièrrez, A 119
Markman, AB 100
Markopoulos, G 212
Marquez de la Plata, C 150
Marsh, A 245
Marshall, A 75, 167, 210, 243
Marshall, J-A 84
Marslen-Wilson, W 83
Marslen-Wilson, WD 9, 11, 17, 119
Marsolek, C 141
Marsolek, CJ 49
Martelli, M 172
Martens, S 94
Martin, A 23, 204, 244
Martin, L 73
Martin, LN 180
Martin, R 134
Martin, RC 153
Masataka, N 202
Mast, FW 172
Matchin, W 192
Mathalon, D 167
Mather, M 74
Mathur, VA 47, 180
Matthews, G 187
Matthias, S 237
Mattingley, J 236
Mattingley, JB 140
Matveychuk, D 91
Matzen, L 211
May, J 197
Mayer, A 75
Mayer, E 174
Mayes, L 46, 97
Mayes, LC 46
Mayr, U 149
Mazaheri, A 165
Mazziotta, J 197
McAndrews, M 24
McAuley, D 151
McAuley, E 229
McBeath, M 202
McCandliss, B 155, 198
McCandliss, BD 194
McChargue, D 168
McClelland, J 165
McClelland, M 108, 184
McClernon, FJ 72
McCollough, A 88
McCoy, S 55
McDaniel, J 204
McDonald, CG 85

Author Index

McDonald, J 32, 40, 42, 87
McFarlin, DM 186
McGeary, JE 49
McGee, W 245
McGeoch, P 221
McGinnis, SM 233
McIlroy, W 164
McKay, R 243
McLaughlin, PM 232
McLaughlin, SA 151
McLean, S 72
McMahon, K 82
McNealy, K 197
McPeek, RM 240
McQuiggan, DA 47
McRae, K 26, 27
Meegan, D 182
Meek, S 73
Meek, SW 143, 234
Megnin, O 221
Mehta, S 33
Meikle, A 227
Ménard, L 153
Mencl, E 166
Mencl, WE 46, 120, 191, 193
Mende-Siedlecki, P 46, 187
Menon, V 114, 211
Merrifield, C 45
Mervis, C 117
Meschino, LM 88
Mesulam, M-M 135
Metcalfe, J 140
Metcalfe, L 176
Mettley, K 197
Metzak, P 60, 207
Meunier, C 153
Meyer-Lindenberg, A 118
Meys, M 178
Miall, RC 125
Michel, CM 72
Midgley, K 117
Midgley, KJ 190
Miezin, F 222
Mikyska, C 39
Milad, MR 11
Miles, A 130
Miller, BL 123
Miller, L 77
Miller, LA 85
Miller, LM 39, 154, 220
Miller, M 54, 56, 207
Miller, MB 57
Miller, S 151, 154, 193
Miller, T 71
Milleville, SC 23
Mills, D 170
Milne, E 219
Min, B-K 71
Mineka, S 98
Minnebusch, D 176, 199
Minnema, M 41
Minton, B 129, 212
Minzenberg, M 135, 162
Mirous, H 74

Misra, M 197
Misra, S 27
Missuk, J 133
Mitchell, TV 44
Miyashita, Y 230
Modinos, G 96
Moffitt, A 235
Mogg, K 180
Moher, J 164
Molenberghs, P 236
Molfese, D 161
Molina, B 169
Molina, I 167
Molinaro, N 119
Molnar, M 153
Moloney, K 176
Monahan, P 195
Monfils, M-H 11, 12, 181
Monk, C 26
Monnig, M 105
Montag, C 145
Moore, A 187
Morein-Zamir, S 93, 226
Morelli, S 234
Moreno, S 228
Morgan-Short, K 124
Morizot, F 43
Morlet, D 153, 154
Morris, C 117
Morris, K 229
Morrison, R 140
Morsella, E 111, 212
Morton, JB 99
Moscovitch, M 24, 59, 140, 212
Moser, D 167
Mostofsky, S 26, 162
Mota, MB 120
Motes, M 75, 108, 218
Mouchlianitis, E 217
Mouridsen, K 79
Moustafa, A 168
Moxey, L 78
Mozer, M 61
Mu, Y 244
Mucha, RF 92
Muckle, G 133
Muelberger, A 47
Mueller, J 230
Muetzel, R 70
Muggleton, N 34, 144
Mühlberger, A 92, 96, 186
Muijica-Parodi, L 52
Mujica-Parodi, L 200
Mukai, I 44
Mulder, E 190
Müller, MM 51
Müller, N 39
Mullins, P 105
Mulvenna, C 223
Munakata, Y 228
Mundy, M 199
Munneke, J 29
Mur, M 178
Murata, A 230

Murohashi, H 145, 198
Murphy, ER 55
Murphy, KJ 232
Murray, A 146
Murray, MM 172
Murtha, SJE 232
Musicaro, RM 135
Myers, C 134, 168
Myers, E 195
N
N’Diaye, K 48
Nadel, L 59
Nader, K 11, 12
Nagajaran, S 224
Nagamatsu, L 89
Nagamine, M 196
Nagarajan, S 148, 169, 198, 217, 238, 241
Nagarajan, SS 156, 181
Nagel, BJ 63
Nahabet, EH 103
Nahum, M 136
Nair, V 149, 168, 197
Nakano, H 193
Nakayama, K 175
Naliboff, B 142
Nanakul, R 134
Naparstek, S 112
Narayanan, A 165
Nash, T 117
Nawa, NE 172
Nayakankuppam, D 105
Neale, M 67
Nee, D 232, 233
Needham, A 67
Nehru, R 151
Nelson, C 133
Nelson, E 26
Nelson, T 26, 162
Nemoto, I 193
Neosselt, T 45
Neta, M 93
Neuschlová, L 204
Neville, H 68, 121, 195
Neville, HJ 69
Newhouse, P 215
Newman, L 66, 140
Newman, M-A 97
Newman-Norlund, RD 110
Ng, P 191
Ngan, E 60
Nguyen, D 211
Nguyen, N 160
Nichelli, P 35
Nickels, S 196
Nielsen, M 221
Niemivirta, M 101
Niese, A 134
Nieuwenhuis, S 110
Nijboer, T 179
Niki, K 180
Ninova, E 92
Nishida, M 43
Nishimura, R 158

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

257

Author Index

Nitschke, JB 186
Niu, K 29, 31
Nobre, AC 29, 45, 51, 86, 145, 146, 157
Noemí, A-B 67
Nomi, J 126
Noonan, KA 77
Nopoulos, P 63, 93
Norcia, A 70
Nordahl, T 86
Norman, KA 141
Norton, ES 62, 123
Notebaert, W 228
Novick, J 204
Nozari, N 116
Nummenmaa, L 163
Núñez Castellar, E 228
Nyalakanti, P 171
Nyberg, L 21
Nyhus, E 23, 25
O
O’Connor, A 215
O’Hare, A 234
O’Hare, E 34, 36, 68
O’Leary, D 167
O’Loughlin, PK 123
O’Neil, E 59
Oathes, DJ 186
Obleser, J 152
Ocampo, B 199
Ochsner, K 26, 28, 46, 48, 183, 187
Ochsner, KN 182
Ocklenburg, S 63, 109
Oeren, B 109
Ofen, N 53
Ogar, J 79
Ogar, JM 123
Oh, T 191
Öhman, A 95
Okada, K 128, 154, 192
Oken, B 245
Oldenburg, J 232
Oleksiak, A 146
Olichney, J 134
Olivares, M 53
Olson, E 70
Olson, I 71
Olson, IR 53
Olson, M 141
Onton, J 99, 101, 246
Op de Beeck, H 14, 15
Op de Macks, Z 68
Oram Cardy, JE 222
Orel-Bixler, D 218
Ormel, J 96
Orr, J 225
Ortigue, S 75, 209
Ortiz-Mantilla, S 65
Osann, K 69
Ostendorf, F 139
Ostergaard, L 150
Osterhout, L 114, 125, 196
Ostrovskaya, I 123
Ott, BR 41, 85

258

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Ott, DVM 208
Owen, A 225
Oziel, E 23
Öztekin, I 207
P
Pacheco, J 53, 66, 75, 209
Paczynski, M 81
Paetau, R 101
Paffen, C 219
Page, J 176
Pakulak, E 121, 195
Paller, K 98, 103, 128, 140, 141
Paller, KA 23, 25, 135, 184
Palmer, C 214
Palomares, M 70
Palombo, D 136
Palti, D 175
Palvia, V 176
Pan, E 47
Pan, L 135
Panizzutti, R 168
Pannekamp, A 188
Papassotiropoulos, A 8
Pappas, M 220
Parasuraman, R 75, 85
Park, D 200, 206
Park, DC 229
Park, H 129
Park, H-J 71
Park, H-W 180
Park, J 207
Parks, N 29
Parrish, TB 26
Pascalis, O 219
Pasco, G 162
Pascual-Leone, A 19
Pashler, H 61
Pasinski, A 151, 173
Pastötter, B 213
Patai, EZ 157
Patel, N 225, 233
Patel, R 60
Patricia, M 237
Pattamadilok, C 17, 116
Pattamalidok, C 205
Pauker, E 192
Paul, EJ 98
Paul, I 112
Pauli, P 47, 92, 96, 186
Paulsen, JS 167
Paulus, M 187
Pavani, F 223
Pavese, N 129
Pavlova, M 173, 199
Pavlova, MA 221
Paz-Alonso, P 216
Paz-Alonso, PM 66
Pecher, D 44
Peck, D 235
Pelham, W 169
Pelphrey, K 33
Peng, D 191, 192
Peng, K 216

Penny, T 91
Pepperell, R 172
Perea, M 119, 175
Pereira, SC 27
Peri, P 153
Perlis, R 90
Perrachione, TK 123
Perrotin, A 243
Perry, A 96
Perry, R 163
Perschler, P 139
Persson, J 232
Pertzov, Y 43
Peterburs, J 220
Petersen, S 222
Peterson, E 60, 215
Petitto, L-A 66, 118
Pettet, M 70
Pfeifer, S 203
Pheils, E 243
Phelps, EA 181
Philbeck, JW 201
Philiastides, M 177
Phillips, C 61
Phillips, M 73
Phillips, MC 143, 234
Phillips, NA 79
Picchioni, D 216
Pine, D 26, 180
Pineda, JA 201
Pisella, L 30
Pivec, M 43
Piven, J 68
Pizzagalli, D 90
Ploner, CJ 139
Poeppel, D 120, 177, 240
Poirier, J 197
Poldrack, R 142
Polich, J 40, 49, 147, 201, 204
Polk, T 66, 159, 207
Polka, L 153
Polse, L 82
Pommy, J 105
Ponz, A 51
Poonian, S 195
Popken, M 109
Poppe, C 194
Poppenk, J 59, 212
Porcheron, A 43
Poryazova, R 51
Postle, B 144, 147
Postle, BR 208
Postma, A 146
Potenza, M 46
Potenza, MN 46
Potkin, S 167
Potolicchio, SJ 201
Power, J 222
Prabhakaran, V 149, 168
Prakash, R 229
Prasad, AK 27
Pratt, N 161
Prebianca, GV 120
Prescott, T 124

Author Index

Press, C 236
Preston, A 129
Preston, AR 23, 54
Preston, S 52
Preuschhof, C 223
Prévost, M 72
Price, CJ 35
Prime, D 161
Primo, S 176
Prinz, W 202, 238
Pripfl, J 43
Pugh, K 120, 191, 193
Pun, C 149
Puri, A 179
Purmann, S 158
Pustina, D 137
Q
Quehl, N 45
Queller, S 167
Quintero, A 224, 238
R
Rabin, JS 58
Race, E 105
Rademacher, L 28, 52
Radermacher, K 176
Raemaekers, M 146
Rafal, R 43
Rafal, RD 42, 240
Ragland, D 58, 97, 162
Ragland, JD 135
Raio, CM 181
Rakitin, BC 200
Ramachandran, V 221
Ramachandran, VS 31, 34, 202, 222
Ramchandran, K 105
Ramos, A 102
Ramsay, I 58, 135
Ramsey, R 71
Randall, B 124
Ranganath, C 57, 58, 135, 137, 141
Rangel, A 13, 53, 109
Rao, A 145, 154, 157
Rao, S 167
Raskin, S 134
Ravizza, S 86
Raymond, JE 51
Raz, N 206, 211
Reber, P 140
Rebhan, A 96
Reddish, M 244
Redick, T 120
Reese, L 166
Regel, S 82
Reid, M 245
Reiss, A 68, 208
Reiss, AL 196
Rellecke, J 97
Renoult, L 80
Repovs, G 49
Reuter, B 164
Reuter, M 145

Reuter-Lorenz, P 232
Reuter-Lorenz, PA 103
Revelle, W 89, 98
Reynolds, G 70
Reynolds, MG 88
Rezaie, R 37
Ribary, U 21
Riby, L 227
Richards, A 94
Richards, J 68, 70
Richardson-Klavehn, A 212
Richter, F 58
Ridderinkhof, R 20
Riddle, T 111
Rieckmann, A 21, 127, 143
Riedel, W 203
Rigato, S 62
Rigby, T 111, 212
Riggall, A 89, 160
Riggs, L 23, 47
Righart, R 174
Riis, JL 233
Rilling, JK 9, 10
Rinker, T 150
Risse, S 117
Rissman, J 41
Ristic, J 90
Ritchey, M 54
Rivera, S 170
Rizzo, A 129
Roach, B 167
Roarty, M 57
Robbins, T 92, 93, 226
Roberts, KC 221
Roberts, N 37
Robertson, L 85, 86
Robison McDuff, SG 141
Rocklage, M 66
Rode, G 30
Röder, B 122, 194
Rodi, G 112
Rodrigue, K 206
Roe, K 117
Roe, KV 128
Roeder, J 58
Roehm, D 78
Roeltgen, DP 196
Roepstorff, A 79, 242
Rogalsky, C 17
Rogers, J 83
Roggeman, C 132
Rohenkohl, G 45
Romanzetti, S 36
Rombouts, S 67, 68
Rombouts, SARB 65
Ron, B 80
Rooney, J 126
Rorden, C 31
Rose, J 72
Rose, M 51
Rosen, S 152
Rosenbaum, RS 58, 59
Rosenberg, L 244
Roser, M 237

Rösler, F 136
Rosner, Z 216
Ross, LA 71
Rossetti, Y 30
Rothermel, R 43
Rothermich, K 122
Rothstein, J 229
Rowe, K 167
Rowlings, B 155
Roy, E 42
Roy, EA 164
Rozenkrants, B 49
Ruberry, E 93
Rubin, D 200
Rubin, DC 130, 139
Ruby, P 153, 154
Rudisill, S 54
Rudoy, J 128
Rudrauf, D 33
Rueckl, J 120, 191, 193
Rueda, MR 65
Rugg, M 128, 129
Rugg, MD 130, 137, 141, 212
Rugg-Gunn, FJ 146
Ruhl, D 105, 202
Ruppell, E 81
Russo, K 224, 238
Rusted, J 214
Rutman, AM 147
Ruzic, L 171
Ryals, A 126
Ryan, JD 23, 47, 59
Ryan, L 59, 126
Ryan, R 141
Rykhlevskaia, E 114
Rypma, B 75, 108, 207, 218
S
S. Dailey, N 157
S. Tenison, C 157
Saberi, K 192
Sabisch, B 146, 163
Sabourin, K 92
Sadato, N 26, 245
Sadek, S 162
Safron, A 103
Sahakian, B 93
Saini, KAS 196
Saj, A 145
Sajda, P 177
Sakaki, M 74, 180
Saklayen, S 165
Salden, U 122, 194
Salemme, R 30
Salillas, E 115
Salimpoor, VN 183
Salinas, J 63
Salo, R 86
Samson, AC 246
Sanchez, C 68
Sander, D 45
Sanders, LD 150
Sandoval, T 207
Sanfey, A 183, 184

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

259

Author Index

Sanford, A 78
Sanford, AJ 190
Santi, A 123
Santos, L 13
Sanz, C 124
Sarinopoulos, I 186
Sarkar, K 228, 229
Sarter, M 21, 87
Sarty, G 192
Sassa, Y 99
Sassaroli, A 147
Sathian, K 220
Sato, M 202
Sato, S 99
Satpute, A 142
Savage, C 73
Savazzi, S 166
Saville, A 162
Sawada, R 202
Sawaki, R 157
Saxe, R 19, 245
Scanlon, M 228, 229
Scatudo, M 165
Schabus, M 61, 76
Schacht, A 97
Schacter, DL 135
Schall, J 160
Schalling, M 95
Schapiro, A 165
Schapkin, SA 144
Scheepers, C 190
Schellenberger, M 58
Schendan, H 55, 174
Scherer, K 46
Schilbach, L 34, 36
Schiller, D 11, 12, 181
Schiller, N 194, 203
Schiller, NO 116
Schlaggar, B 222
Schlaug, G 34, 155
Schlee, W 39, 152
Schleisman, K 141
Schlesewsky, M 80
Schlesinger, M 147
Schmahmann, J 209, 241
Schmalbrock, P 165
Schmandt, N 129
Schmandt, NT 54
Schmid, M 226
Schmidt, GL 81
Schmidt, PJ 73
Schmidt-Kassow, M 122, 155, 189
Schmiedek, F 20
Schmitt, E 67
Schmitt, RM 231
Schneider, A 134, 170
Schneider, D 63
Schneider, F 185
Schneider, W 30
Schnyer, D 66, 209
Schnyer, DM 49, 53, 75
Schoenfeld, A 45
Scholte, HS 142, 171, 218
Scholte, S 20, 101, 210, 218

260

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Schooler, J 42
Schoonbaert, S 80
Schreiber, H 64
Schreiber, M 231
Schriefers, H 188
Schubert, R 223
Schubert, T 223
Schubotz, R 230
Schubotz, RI 71, 202, 242
Schuetz-Bosbach, S 223
Schulte, D 176
Schultheiss, OC 28
Schumacher, E 176, 233
Schumacher, EH 225, 232
Schumacher, P 78
Schwarb, H 225, 232, 233
Schwartz, S 45, 51, 174
Schwartze, M 155
Schwarzbach, J 32
Scimeca, J 47, 180
Scott, L 62
Scott, SK 152
Sculthorpe, L 154
Seaman, S 31, 104
Sebanz, N 237
Secchi, C 236
Segal, Z 185
Segall, J 167, 210
Segalowitz, S 79, 102
Seger, C 60, 99
Seidler, R 238
Seidman, L 241
Seifritz, E 86
Seigel, S 129
Selmeczy, D 170
Serences, J 154
Serences, JT 192
Set, S 85
Seurinck, R 242
Severens, E 188
Seymour, B 103
Shafer, A 91
Shah, N 36, 109
Shah, NJ 64
Shahin, AJ 39, 220
Shalinsky, M 66, 118
Shane, M 171
Shane, MS 181
Shapiro, HM 88
Shapiro, KL 51
Shapiro, L 128, 197
Sharot, T 13
Shaw, P 67
Sheng, T 50, 107
Shenhav, A 34, 36
Shestokova, A 124
Shibata, M 189
Shimada, S 110
Shimamura, A 216
Shin, L 185
Shing, YL 20
Shinkareva, SV 80
Shipman, S 129
Shohamy, D 55, 56

Shokri Kojori, E 108
Shook, D 65
Shtyrov, Y 119
Shu, H 81, 120
Shupe, L 229
Sibuma, B 86
Sicking, K 171
Signoff, ED 60
Sigvardt, K 238
Silas, J 221
Silvanto, J 34
Silvers, JA 182
Simioni, A 52
Simmons, WK 96, 244
Simon, JR 55, 143
Simon, TJ 87, 88
Simon-Dack, S 162
Simpson, C 150
Simpson, G 40
Simpson, GV 104, 148, 156, 217
Singer, T 185
Singh-Curry, V 43, 163
Siyanova, A 117
Skavhaug, I-M 216
Skinner, E 61
Skipper, J 155, 198
Skipper, JI 194
Skogsberg, K 89
Skotara, N 122, 194
Slade, L 221
Slater, M 158
Slevc, LR 153
Sligte, IG 142
Smaliy, A 204
Smallwood, J 42
Smeulders, A 218
Smilek, D 42, 88
Smith II, WB 200
Smith, A 183
Smith, AT 237
Smith, D 98
Smith, E 159
Smith, EE 140
Smith, K 72
Smith, M 159
Smith, S 75, 167, 210, 243
Snider, SF 196
Snozzi, R 185
Snyder, H 228
Snyder, J 151, 173
Snyder, K 64, 160
Söderlund, H 136
Soei, EX-C 127
Sokolov, AN 173
Solman, G 88
Solomon, M 70, 135
Solovey, E 147
Somayajula, S 74
Somerville, L 93, 185
Sommer, W 97, 231
Song, J-H 240
Sood, S 43
Sook Kim, H 232
Soria-Fregoso, J 131

Author Index

Soto-Faraco, S 224
Souza, M 216
Sowell, E 209
Sparacino, L 124
Speckens, A 96
Speckens, AEM 76
Spence, MA 69
Spencer, T 241
Spengler, S 239
Spinelli, P 168
Spotswood, N 118
Spreckelmeyer, K 26, 28, 52
Springer, A 202
Squire, LR 57
Sreenivasan, K 106
St. Jacques, PL 139
Stadler, W 202
Stamenova, V 164
Staplins, J 49
Staresina, B 138
Stecker, GC 151
Stein, M 65
Steinhauer, K 78, 79, 124, 153, 188, 191, 192,
196, 214
Stelmack, R 154
Stelzel, C 145, 227
Sternschein, R 200
Sterpenich, V 61
Stevens, C 68
Stevenson, R 24
Stickgold, R 215, 218
Stienen, BMC 94
St-Laurent, M 137
Stoianov, I 236
Stokes, M 29, 146
Stokes, MG 86
Stollstorff, M 181
Stone, D 202
Stoodley, C 209
Störmer, V 40
Stout, J 167
Stoyanova, R 182
Strand, M 226
Straube, B 76
Strecher, V 112
Stuss, DT 58, 232
Su, M 242
Subramaniam, K 148, 217
Suchan, B 137, 176, 199, 211
Suckling, J 162
Suess, F 121
Sugiura, M 99
Sullwold, K 70
Summerfield, J 157
Summers, I 71
Sun, H-C 44
Sun, W 120
Sun, X 233
Sun, Y 191
Sung, K 91, 92
Supekar, K 211
Suzuki, A 200
Suzuki, M 130
Suzuki, S 89, 184

Swaab 17
Swaab, T 17, 18, 82
Swaab, TY 125
Swain, J 97
Swallow, KM 148
Sweeny, T 184
Swick, D 104
Szabo, A 229
Szeto, M 56
Szlachta`, Z 97
Szymanowski, F 152
T
T. Trujillo, L 157
Tabet, N 214
Taconnat, L 126, 127, 225
Tai, Y 129
Takarae, Y 88
Takeichi, H 198
Takeuchi, F 198
Talmi, D 103
Tam, J 197
Tamaoka, K 194
Tamminen, J 116
Tamura, R 102
Tan, K 191
Tanaka, A 94
Tanaka, K 193
Tanner, D 125
Tarbi, E 233
Tark, K-J 240
Tassone, F 134, 170
Tata, M 233
Tate, SG 193
Taylor, JG 51
Taylor, JR 206
Taylor, K 174
Taylor, P 158
Taylor, S 21
Taylor, SF 87
Tays, W 102
te Pas, S 179
Teder-Salejarvi, W 162
Tempelmann, C 45
Tendolkar, I 76, 96
Tenison, C 53
Tepest, R 36
Terao, A 198
Tesche, C 202
Teuscher, U 202
Thangavel, A 148, 217
Theeuwes, J 29
Thiebaut de Schotten, M 205
Thiele, S 110
Thilers, P 21
Thoma, R 105
Thomas, B 74
Thompson, J 75
Thompson, P 209
Thompson, R 29
Thompson-Schill, S 244
Thompson-Schill, SL 83, 142, 177
Thorstensen, T 109
Thummala, K 105

Tian, X 240
Tillman, G 60
Tinazzi, M 112
Tippett, L 169
Tkach, J 243
Toba, M 205
Todorov, A 176
Toepel, U 172, 188
Tolegenova, A 187
Toma, M 202
Tomalski, P 178
Tononi, G 208
Toon, T 184
Topf, J 46
Topf, JL 46
Topkins, B 156
Torquati, K 89
Torres, J 246
Towler, SD 210
Toyomura, A 189
Toyosawa, Y 198
Tranel, D 33, 74, 105, 138, 166, 183
Travis, K 118, 206
Tremblay, P 239
Troje, NF 96
Trope, Y 175
Tsang, J 114
Tschachler, E 43
Tseng, P 144
Tsuchida, A 227
Tsuchida, Y 145
Tsuchiya, N 111
Tucker, M 218
Tuková, J 204
Turetsky, B 97
Turkeltaub, P 201
Turken, A 104
Turner, BO 98
Turner, J 167
Tyler, LK 17, 124, 174
Tzeng, O 144, 212
Tzeng, OJ-L 113, 128
Tzeng, OJL 174
U
Uddin, L 114, 211
Ullal, A 181
Ullman, M 124
Umeda, S 93
Uncapher, M 130
Uncapher, MR 140
Unger, K 142
Ungerleider, L 44, 90, 102, 226
Ursu, S 135
V
Vaden, K 189
Vaidya, C 63, 65, 181
Vaidya, CJ 55, 102, 143
Valdez, J 97
Valentine, G 196
Valera, E 209, 241
van ’t Wout, M 184

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

261

Author Index

van Alphen, P 77, 190
van Berkum, J 19, 77, 190
van Dantzig, S 44
Van den Boom, W 137
van den Bos, W 65, 67
van den Brink, D 17, 19
Van den Stock, J 94
van der Ham, I 146
van der Helm, E 213
Van der Leij, A 101
van der Meer, E 188
Van der Meij, A 95
van der Meij, M 124
van der Plas, EAA 93
van der Smagt, M 113, 179
van Dijk, E 65
van Gaal, S 20, 171
van Heuven, WJB 117
van Koningsbruggen, MG 42
Van Leijenhorst, L 68
van Oosterwijck, A 95
Van Oostrom, I 96
van Oostrom, I 95
Van Opstal, F 132, 242
van Os, J 203, 210
van Paasschen, J 134
Van Snellenberg, JX 140
Van Veen, V 106
Van Vleet, T 161
van Vugt, M 20, 22
Van Waelvelde, H 132
van Wezel, R 146
Vanegas, S 22
VanMeter, J 63, 65, 102
Vanneste, S 225
VanVleet, T 85
Vartanian, O 34, 35
Vasa, R 26, 162
Vasishth, S 121
Vasunilashorn, S 74
Velanova, K 169
Vendemia, J 73
Vendemia, JMC 143, 234
Venezia, J 82, 192
Ventura, MI 181
Venugopalan, VV 103
Verbruggen, F 232, 241
Verdonschot, R 194
Verfaellie, M 126, 167
Vergara, M 119
Vergara-Martínez, M 120
Verghese, P 219
Verhagen, M 95
Verma, A 138
Verment, R 225
Verosky, S 176
Verschoor, M 225
Vertinski, M 156
Vertinsky, M 198
Vilberg, K 128
Vildavski, V 70
Villate, C 23
Villringer, A 208

262

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Vinogradov, S 148, 156, 166, 168, 169, 170,
198, 217
Virgillito, D 76, 96
Vissers, C 95, 96
Vissers, CTWM 76
Vocks, S 176
Voelker, P 65
Vogel, E 88
Vogel, EK 149, 161
Vogeley, K 36, 109
Vollenweider, F 40, 201
von Cramon, DY 71, 239, 242
von dem Hagen, E 163
von Rhein, D 101
Vonk, W 188
Voss, JL 25, 211
Voss, M 229
Vosse, T 78
Vuilleumier, P 45, 48, 72, 145, 174
Vuust, P 79, 150, 242
Vuvan, D 31
Vytal, K 186
W
W. Haas, B 48
W.G. Dye, M 194
Wager, T 26, 27, 100, 183, 187, 224
Wager, TD 182, 234
Wagner, A 105, 130
Wagner, AD 140
Wagner, DD 73
Wagner, U 48
Wahlstrom, D 69
Wai, Y-Y 182
Wais, P 138
Wakusawa, K 99
Waldschmidt, JG 58
Walker, M 127
Walker, MP 213
Walker, R 237
Wallace, G 67, 197
Wallentin, M 79
Wallis, J 20, 235
Walsh, V 34, 89, 158
Walter, E 68
Wamsley, E 215
Wandell, B 114
Wang, C 167
Wang, H 102
Wang, J 80, 170
Wang, J-J 182
Wang, L 60, 207
Wang, M-Y 175
Wang, S 111
Wang, S-w 50
Wang, TH 129, 212
Wang, W-c 141
Wang, X 120
Ward, L 31, 32, 40, 219
Warren, C 42, 182
Warren, D 138
Wartenburger, I 119
Wascher, E 86
Watrous, A 162

Watrous, AJ 57
Watson, T 218
Watts, C 213
Waxer, M 99
Wayland, R 155
Weaver, C 238
Weber, D 40
Weber, J 28, 182, 183
Weber-Fox, C 222
Webster, R 241
Wegner, D 245
Wei, S-M 73
Weigand, A 231
Weiler, JA 211
Weinberg, H 21
Weintraub, S 135
Weissman, D 225
Weisz, N 39, 152
Welborn, L 234
Welbourne, S 165
Welcome, S 209, 210
Wemmie, J 93
Wencil, E 247
Wendelken, C 65, 108, 216
Wenke, D 238
Werheid, K 136
Werth, E 51
Wessinger, CM 74, 84
Westenberg, M 65, 68
Westerberg, CE 135
Westerberg, H 143
Westerlund, A 133
Westermann, C 63
Westwood, D 237
Wexler, K 123
Weyers, P 47, 92, 186
Whalen, P 93, 185
Wheeler, ME 60, 217
Wheelwright, S 162
Whitaker, K 36, 68
White, C 165
White, E 188
White, EJ 78
White, L 78
White, T 69
Whitfield-Gabrieli, S 62
Whiting, CM 119
Whitman, J 60, 108, 207
Whitney, D 177, 178, 179, 220
Wible, C 167
Wicha, N 91, 115, 171
Widick, P 200
Wiebe, S 72, 168
Wiener, M 201
Wieser, M 92, 186
Wiesmann, M 172
Wijnen, J 44
Wilckens, KA 60
Wild, C 152
Wilding, E 214, 231
Wilding, EL 216
Wilhelm, S 136
Wilkinson, L 129
Willcutt, E 171

Author Index

William, P 88
Williams, F 126
Williams, L 75
Williams, LE 222
Williams, V 66
Williams-Grey, C 225
Wills, AJ 134
Wilms, M 36
Wilson, C 96
Wilson, J 186
Wilson, SM 123
Wilson, T 169
Wilt, J 89
Wimber, M 212
Wimmer, GE 56
Winkler, A 219
Winocur, G 59
Wirth, M 84
Wisnowski, J 31, 33
Wisnowski, JL 17
Wixted, JT 57
Wlotko, EW 83
Wodniecka, Z 228
Wohldmann, E 236
Woidich, E 92
Woldorff, M 41, 45, 203
Woldorff, MG 90, 221
Wolf, C 109
Wolf, D 97
Wolf, M 62
Wolford, G 32
Wolfson, J 116
Wolk, DA 60
Wolosin, SM 54
Wong, G 91, 92
Wong, L 22, 106
Wong, LM 106
Wong, SWH 186
Wood, G 64
Woodman, G 160
Woodruff, CC 236
Woods, D 178, 206
Woods, RT 134
Woodward, T 60, 108, 207
Woroch, B 131

Worthy, D 209
Wright, C 236
Wright, CE 219
Wright, M 187
Wu, C-Y 131
Wu, DH 113
Wu, L 192
Wu, Y 246
Wulff, S 168
Wyatt, N 45
Wydell, T 190
Wymbs, NF 60
X
Xavier, P 164
Y
Yadon, C 126
Yadon, CA 156
Yam, A 170
Yamada, Y 195
Yamamoto, N 201
Yamashita, K-i 230
Yamazaki, K 149
Yang, F 135
Yang, F-PG 150
Yang, F-pG 84
Yang, J 81, 194
Yang, X-F 186
Yang, Y 191
Yarkoni, T 234
Ye, X 162
Yeatman, J 69
Yee, E 83
Yee, R 49
Yeh, B 191
Yen, N-S 50, 100
Yerys, BE 102
Yick, Y-Y 214
Yonelinas, AP 57, 58, 137, 141
Yoo, S-S 127
Yoon, J 135, 162
Yoshida, W 103

Yoshizaki, K 158
Young, R 29, 31, 104
Young, RA 104
Younglove, D 47
Yovel, G 175
Yu, H 245
Yu, R 163
Yum, YN 117
Z
Zacks, J 19
Zacks, JM 148
Zaidel, E 41, 50, 95
Zajdel, D 245
Zakeri, K 135, 150
Zaki, J 26, 28
Zamboni, G 242
Zampini, M 32
Zang, Y 192
Zanolie, K 44
Zanto, TP 147
Zatorre, R 40
Zatorre, RJ 183
Zawiszewski, A 122
Zee, PC 135
Zeelenberg, R 51
Zeffiro, T 241
Zeithamova, D 54, 129
Zevin, J 151, 155, 198
Zevin, JD 194
Zhang, W 148
Zhang, Y 151, 154, 193
Zhao, J 120
Zheng, X 79
Zhu, B 75, 209
Zhu, J 207
Zimmer, U 41
Zolot, L 64
Zumberge, A 194
Zvirblis, B 197
Zwissler, B 142
Zwitserlood, P 18, 152
Zysset, S 246

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

263

Author Index

264

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

NEW & FORTHCOMING TITLES IN COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

FROM PSYCHOLOGY PRESS
SPECIAL

20%OFF CNS SHOW DISCOUNT

NEW

FORTHCOMING

Emotional Memory Across the Adult Lifespan

Principles of Memory

Elizabeth A. Kensinger
Hb: 978-1-84169-483-2 $49.95 $39.96

Aimée M. Surprenant, Ian Neath
Hb: 978-1-84169-422-1 $44.95 $35.96

Infant Pathways to Language

Methods, Models, and Research Directions
John Colombo, Peggy McCardle, Lisa Freund (Eds.)
Hb: 978-0-8058-6063-4 $84.95 $67.96

Routes to Language

Studies in Honor of Melissa Bowerman
Virginia C. Mueller-Gathercole (Ed.)
Hb: 978-1-84169-716-1 $90.00 $72.00

Crosslinguistic Approaches to the Psychology of
Language
Research in the Tradition of Dan Isaac Slobin

Elena Lieven, Jiansheng Guo, Nancy Budwig, Susan Ervin-Tripp, Keiko
Nakamura, Seyda Ozcaliskan (Eds.)
Hb: 978-0-8058-5998-0 $195.00 $156.00
Pb: 978-0-8058-5999-7 $89.95 $71.96

Handbook of Imagination and Mental Simulation
Keith D. Markman, William M. P. Klein, Julie A. Suhr (Eds.)
Hb: 978-1-84169-887-8 $90.00 $72.00

The Visual World in Memory
James R. Brockmole (Ed.)
Hb: 978-1-84169-684-3 $70.00 $56.00

Flashbulb Memories

New Issues and New Perspectives
Olivier Luminet, Antonietta Curci (Eds.)
Hb: 978-1-84169-672-0 $62.95 $50.36

The Mirror Neuron System

A Special Issue of Social Neuroscience
Christian Keysers, Luciano Fadiga (Eds.)
Hb: 978-1-84169-866-3 $89.95 $71.96

The Development of Memory in Infancy and
Childhood

TEXTBOOKS
NEW

Memory

Alan Baddeley, Michael W. Eysenck, Michael C. Anderson
Hb: 978-1-84872-000-8 $89.95 $71.96
Pb: 978-1-84872-001-5 $49.95 $39.96

NEW

Foundations of Sensation and Perception, 2nd
Edition
George Mather
Hb: 978-1-84169-698-0 $110.00 $88.00
Pb: 978-1-84169-699-7 $59.95 $47.97

NEW

Fundamentals of Psychology
Michael W. Eysenck
Hb: 978-1-84169-371-2 $90.00 $72.00
Pb: 978-1-84169-372-9 $49.95 $39.96

The Student’s Guide to Cognitive Neuroscience
Jamie Ward
Hb: 978-1-84169-534-1 $90.00 $72.00
Pb: 978-1-84169-535-8 $39.95 $31.96

ORDER TODAY. Visit our booth at the exhibit,
or Call (800) 634-7064, Mon - Fri 9:00AM - 5:30 PM EST
or visit www.psypress.com

When ordering, use code AYH82 to receive the 20% CNS show
discount. (Discount offer ends April 24, 2009)

Mary Courage, Nelson Cowan (Eds.)
Hb: 978-1-84169-642-3 $71.95 $57.56
Pb: 978-1-84169-643-0 $48.00 $38.40

www.cognitiveneurosciencearena.com

The MIT Press

Visit our booth for a 30% discount

What We Know about
Emotional Intelligence

Sexualized Brains

How It Affects Learning, Work, Relationships,
and Our Mental Health
Moshe Zeidner, Gerald Matthews,
and Richard D. Roberts
“The idea of emotional intelligence has been both
useful and popular. Amid all the attention it has
received, [the authors] have been essential in helping
us to distinguish what is known scientifically about it
from what is hoped for and what is hyped.”
— Keith Oatley, University of Toronto, author of
Emotions: A Brief History
456 pp., 44 illus., $29.95 cloth

The Social Neuroscience of Empathy
edited by Jean Decety and William Ickes
“The Social Neuroscience of Empathy embraces the
complexity of empathy rather than shrinking away
from or ignoring it. I anticipate this book to be one
that I will frequently consult, as well as one to which I
will refer many current and future students.”
— Sara D. Hodges, University of Oregon
Social Neuroscience series • 264 pp., 7 illus., $40 cloth

Honest Signals

How They Shape Our World
Alex (Sandy) Pentland
How understanding the signaling within social networks can change the way we make decisions, work
with others, and manage organizations.
Visit our website to hear a podcast featuring this author
192 pp., $22.95 cloth

Michel Jouvet
translated by Laurence Garey
“In a vivid historical setting devoid of lab coats and
high technology, Jouvet demonstrates that scientific
discovery is the love child of relentless curiosity, a
seed that can flower at any time, in any mind.”
— Dan Lloyd, author of Radiant Cool
344 pp., $24.95 cloth

Handbook of Developmental
Cognitive Neuroscience

Second Edition
edited by Charles A. Nelson and Monica Luciana
“The second edition of the handbook addresses
critical developmental issues across levels from the
fundamentals of basic neuroscience to higher-level
cognition. This is essential reading for students and
researchers across all levels of expertise.”
— Debra Mills, Emory University
Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience series
956 pp., 153 illus. in color and b&w, $165 cloth

Creating Scientific Concepts

Nancy Nersessian
“In research of major importance, Nancy Nersessian
has shown how mental models underlie the creative
reasoning of scientists. At the heart of her book is
a unique and imaginative use of cognitive science
to explain how an incremental series of models
led James Clerk Maxwell to his field equations for
electromagnetism.” — Philip Johnson-Laird,
Princeton University

Language, Consciousness, Culture
Essays on Mental Structure
Ray Jackendoff
“I wish that other linguists, both generative and
cognitive, had [Jackendoff’s] scope and intellectual
ambition.” — George Lakoff, American Scientist
Jean Nicod Lectures • 376 pp., 21 illus., $19 paper

NOW IN PAPER

Neurophilosophy of Free Will

From Libertarian Illusions to a Concept
of Natural Autonomy
Henrik Walter
translated by Cynthia Klohr
“Walter uses contemporary findings in neurobiology
and new understandings in the foundations of nature
to explore ‘free will.’ The result is a fresh thesis well
worth considering. “ — Kevin T. French, Academia
408 pp., 7 illus., $27 paper

A Bradford Book • 272 pp., 54 figures, $32 cloth

NOW IN PAPER

On the Origins of Cognitive Science

Does Consciousness
Cause Behavior?

The Mechanization of Mind
Jean-Pierre Dupuy
with a new preface for this edition
An examination of the fundamental role cybernetics
played in the birth of cognitive science and the light
this sheds on current controversies.
224 pp., $25 paper

Michael Tomasello
A leading expert on evolution and communication presents an empirically based theory of the
evolutionary origins of human communication that
challenges the dominant Chomskian view.
Jean Nicod Lectures • A Bradford Book • 400 pp., $36 cloth

The Boundaries of Babel

The Brain and the Enigma of Impossible Languages
Andrea Moro
foreword by Noam Chomsky
“Andrea Moro has gained a unique position in formulating and implementing constructive approaches
to difficult and demanding tasks. He is able to
address them with a deep understanding of modern
linguistics… and mastery of the relevant technology
and its potential. His new book is a lucid introduction to these exciting areas, superbly informed and
imaginatively presented, with intriguing implications
well beyond biolinguistics. A rare achievement.“
— Noam Chomsky, from the foreword
Current Studies in Linguistics 45 • 248 pp., 14 illus., $35 cloth

Better Than Conscious?

Keith Stenning and Michiel van Lambalgen
“This deep and stimulating book, by a leading
psychologist and a leading logician, is about the
choice of logical formalisms for representing actual
reasoning. This may be the first book in cognitive science that logicians can learn some new logic from.”
— Wilfrid Hodges, Queen Mary, University of London
A Bradford Book • 392 pp., 38 illus., $42 cloth

A Bradford Book • 416 pp., 11 color illus., $50 cloth

Origins of Human Communication

The Castle of Dreams

Human Reasoning
and Cognitive Science

Scientific Modeling of Emotional Intelligence
from a Cultural Perspective
edited by Nicole C. Karafyllis and Gotlind Ulshöfer
“In this scintillating collection of essays, experts drawn
from five different countries and nine different academic fields turn their sights and their insights on one
of the hottest topics in neuroscience today—emotional intelligence. A must-read for anyone interested
in people.” — Janet Kourany, University of Notre Dame

NOW IN PAPER

Decision Making, the Human Mind,
and Implications For Institutions
edited by Christoph Engel and Wolf Singer
“An impressive, fascinating, and even amazing book.
Among scholars and the general public, there is
mounting interest in the unconscious mind and its
implications for private and public institutions; this
is the state-of-the-art treatment.” — Cass R. Sunstein,
University of Chicago

edited by Susan Pockett, William P. Banks,
and Shaun Gallagher
“Overall, this is an excellent volume that brings
together an impressive cast of commentators on
the key question for consciousness studies: does the
c word actually do anything.” — Jonjoe McFadden,
Journal of Consciousness Studies
376 pp., 14 illus., $26 paper

NOW IN PAPER

Brain and Culture

Neurobiology, Ideology, and Social Change
Bruce E. Wexler
“Bruce Wexler’s Brain and Culture is a major achievement, touching the deepest biological and human
issues and framing them in verifiable terms. A very
powerful and very important book.” — Oliver Sacks,
author of The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat
320 pp., 2 illus., $18 paper

NOW IN PAPER

Hot Thought

Mechanisms and Applications of Emotional Cognition
Paul Thagard
“Impressively comprehensive, unfailingly sensible,
and made all the more appealing by its hip-pocket
readability, Hot Thought will be a godsend to instructors in philosophy and cognitive science.”
— Patricia S. Churchland, University of California,
San Diego
A Bradford Book • 320 pp., 34 illus., $21 paper

NOW IN PAPER

Sweet Anticipation

Music and the Psychology of Expectation
David Huron
“A richly detailed theory of how and why the audience
has particular expectations and emotions… A fascinating journey into the inner workings of music and
how it tickles the human mind.” — Petr Janata, Nature
A Bradford Book • 480 pp., 108 illus., $20 paper

Strüngmann Forum Reports • 456 pp., $40 cloth

The MIT Press

To order call 800-405-1619 • http://mitpress.mit.edu

